@@@@@


doc= 67949


David Willaume (1693-1761) was born on 5 March 1693 and apprenticed to his father at the age of fourteen, but did not take up his freedom by patrimony for a further sixteen years. On 17 April 1721 he married Marianna, daughter of Samuel le Febvre, a refugee merchant from Haarlem, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Crommelin. Following in his father's footsteps, he was promoted to the livery of the Goldsmiths' Company on 8 March 1727 and about 1728 took over the family business, when he entered his own hallmarks. 


@@@@@


doc= 67951


Adson, John (bap. 1587?, d. 1640), musician and composer, may have been the Johannes Adson baptized at Watford, Northamptonshire, on 24 January 1587. Nothing else is known of his origins. By 1604, well before the usual age to finish an apprenticeship (which was about twenty-four), he was employed as a cornetto player at the court of Duke Charles III of Lorraine, having been recruited in England by the French cornetto player Jean Presse. When the duke died in 1608, an engraving of his funeral showed players of five cornettos, two sackbuts, and two bass shawms alongside a group of singers. By 1613 Adson had returned to England. On 23 May 1614 he was appointed to the London waits and paid for serving from the previous Christmas. He kept this place until his death. 
In 1621 Adson published 'Courtly Masking Ayres for Violins, Consorts and Cornetts', which contains twenty-one anonymous pieces in five parts and ten in six parts, largely taken from the court masque repertory. The music for masques was often provided by composers outside the court, so it is not surprising that a wait like Adson had access to it. His collection was dedicated to George Villiers, marquess of Buckingham (the unpopular favourite of James I and Charles I), who was a frequent participant in masques and may have sponsored the publication. A few pieces of Adson's own have survived in manuscript. 
On 4 November 1633 Adson was sworn into a court place as a musician 'for the flute and cornet' (Ashbee, 73), being paid from the previous Michaelmas. A warrant dated 13 January 1636 to pay Adson 'for a treble cornett and a treble recorder by him provided and bought for his Majesty's service' (ibid., 85) shows that he was required to play the recorder and perhaps other wind instruments beyond those that his nominal place warranted. 
Adson had ten children with at least two wives: on 26 February 1614 he was licensed to marry Jane Lanerie, and by 1629, after her death, he had taken his second wife, Anne. It was presumably on behalf of his eldest son, Islay or Islip ('bap'. 1615), that he petitioned the City of London's court of aldermen on 15 September 1634 'in regard of his charge in breeding up a son to perfection in voice, song and music for the City's service' (repertories of the court of aldermen, fol. 235) and was granted the proceeds of making someone a freeman of the city by redemption ($2 6's'. 8died). Another son, Roger ('bap'. 1621), was apprenticed to Ambrose Beeland, a fellow London wait and later a fellow royal musician. 
Soon after he joined the court Adson ran into a conflict of loyalties. Many of the royal musicians and some independent musicians took part in James Shirley's masque 'The Triumph of Peace', presented jointly by the inns of court on 3 February 1634 at Whitehall and ten days later at Merchant Taylors' Hall. For the second performance Bulstrode Whitelocke, in overall charge of the music, chose the wind musicians ('loud music') from the Blackfriars and Cockpit theatres to fill two chariots for processions before and after the masque. The Blackfriars musicians consisted of six of the London waits, including Adson. In a letter to Whitelocke dated 12 February, the younger Nicholas Lanier, the master of the king's musick, claimed that the royal musicians had been excluded at the suggestion of Adson, whom he dubbed 'an unworthy fellow' (Sabol, 18-19). Whitelocke replied that he had 'thought the service was too mean' for the royal musicians and begged Lanier to 'take no dislike to Mr Adson upon this occasion'. In the event, Adson was one of the twelve court wind musicians who played in the processions. 
Adson's association with the King's Company, who played at both the Blackfriars Theatre and the Globe Theatre, is confirmed by two references to him in the company's plays. He took the minor role of an invisible spirit in 'The Late Lancashire Witches' by Thomas Heywood and Richard Brome (1634); and his music is referred to, in a playfully derogatory manner, in William Cavendish's 'The Country Captain' (1639-40). 
Adson died in London on 29 June 1640 and was buried the following day at St Giles Cripplegate, London, the church of the parish in which he had lived (on Redcross Street) since about 1615. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 67952


Attey, John (d. 1640?), composer, may have been the John Attey born about 1590 at Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire ('IGI'). Attey's 'The first booke of ayres of foure parts, with tableture for the lute: so made, that all the parts, may be plaide together with the lute, or one voice with the lute and base-viol' appeared in 1622. This was the last of some thirty such publications, beginning with John Dowland's 'First Booke' of 1597, which envisaged performance either by four singers, or by one voice, with lute and (optional?) bass viol, though later books favoured the solo style. Attey, using almost identical title-page wording, seems deliberately to have harked back to Dowland's initial concept. Describing himself as 'Gentleman and Practitioner in Music', Attey claimed in dedicating his 'Ayres' to the earl and countess of Bridgewater that 'the best part thereof were composed under your roofe, while I had the happiness to attend the Service of those worthy and incomparable young Ladies your daughters'. The earl, John Egerton (1579-1649), and his family had their seat at Ashridge, near Little Gaddesden in Hertfordshire. 
Apart from the final piece, 'Sweet was the song the Virgin sung', Attey's music has not found favour in the modern revival of the English lute song. His 'In a grove of trees of myrtle' has the distinction of being the only English four-part ayre with an instrumental introduction. Fellowes stated that Attey died in 1640 at Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire, without evidence, although the above-mentioned birth entry makes this not unlikely. 


@@@@@


doc= 67953


Ayleward, Richard (1626-1669), composer and organist, was born at Winchester, the son of Richard Ayleward, a minor canon at the cathedral. He sang there as a chorister under Christopher Gibbons in 1638 and 1639. Nothing is known of his whereabouts during the interregnum. At the Restoration he was appointed organist and master of the choristers at Norwich Cathedral (12 March 1661). 
Ayleward wrote at least three services (the one in D is complete with responses and litany) and twenty-five anthems, including 'The king shall rejoice' to mark the coronation of Charles II in 1661. All are preserved in a set of partbooks from Norwich Cathedral (now housed at King's College, Cambridge). Taken together they are remarkable, showing no obvious models in the music of the previous generation or similarities with that of his contemporaries -- other than perhaps George Jeffreys and Matthew Locke. Some of the anthems are on a large scale and make considerable demands on resources. Thus, 'I was glad', for example, is for three trebles, three countertenors, two tenors, and four basses, and 'Blow up the trumpet' -- in some respects recalling Monteverdi or Carissimi -- would have taxed any cathedral choir in the land. Unusually, a number are set to poetic rather than biblical texts, and this suggests that they may have been written as devotional sacred music for some private household during the Commonwealth rather than the cathedral service after the Restoration. Among these is a cycle of four anthems, respectively for the nativity, circumcision, purification, and resurrection. Their metaphysical intensity suggests a poet such as Crashaw or Herbert; that on the circumcision ('Gently, o gently, father, do not bruise') is actually by William Cartwright. 
For some reason Ayleward relinquished his position both as organist and as choirmaster between mid-1664 and 5 December 1665; a cryptic reference in one of the chapter books to 'sending for Mr Ayleward at the Assizes' in 1664 leaves one none the wiser. Following his reinstatement in 1665 he continued to serve until his death at Norwich on 15 October 1669. He was buried in the north aisle of Norwich Cathedral on 18 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 67954


Bartlett, John (fl. 1605-1610), lutenist and composer, took a BMus degree at Oxford in 1610, four years after publishing a volume of lute songs whose full title is 'A booke of ayres with a triplicitie of musicke, whereof the first part is for the lute or orpharion, and the viole de gambo, and 4. partes to sing, the second part is for 2. trebles to sing to the lute and viole, the third part is for the lute and one voyce, and the viole de gambo'. The metal-strung orpharion was a frequent alternative to the gut-strung lute, and the 'viole de gambo' (bass viol) was the usual (optional) reinforcement for the musical bass line. The 'triplicitie of musicke' followed a pattern established by Robert Jones in his 'Ultimum vale' the previous year, with specific songs in each category. Jones and Bartlett were unusual in including duets for two treble voices, and Bartlett's 'Whither runneth my sweetheart?' is one of the best. His somewhat risque solo song 'Of all the birds that I do know' finds a place in modern performance, but the rest of his songs are infrequently heard. 
The 'Booke of Ayres' is dedicated to Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, addressing him as his 'singular good and Maister', and indeed Bartlett was one of several musicians who accompanied the earl on an embassy to Archduke Albert in Brussels in 1605. Bartlett would probably have been too young to have been already in Seymour's service when he famously entertained Queen Elizabeth I with lavish spectacle and music at Elvetham, Hampshire, in September 1591. Without more clues it is impossible to pick out the right John Bartlett from among the many recorded in the 'International Genealogical Index' and to give any further detail of his birth, life, or death. 


@@@@@


doc= 67955


Bressan, Peter (1663-1731), musical instrument maker, was born Pierre Jaillard in Bourg-en-Bresse, France, on 27 May 1663, the son of Claude Jaillard (died 1667), carrier, and his wife, Philibert (died 1694), daughter of Louis Mercier, joiner. Bressan probably received his early education at the Jesuit-run college in Bourg. On 13 May 1678 he was apprenticed to Jean Boysser, master turner of Bourg, for two years. He then probably undertook some (further) training in woodwind instrument making as well as performing in Paris from one of the Hotteterres. Jaillard settled in England about 1688. His name doubtless proving awkward for English tongues, he began calling himself Peter Bressan, signifying 'from Bresse'. He was one of five oboists who went to Holland with William III in April 1691, but did not join the royal musical establishment. 
About 1702 Bressan lodged with Claude Mignon, a French apothecary, in Duchy House, Duchy Lane, Somerset House Yard, London, part of the estate of the duchy of Lancaster, whose red rose (in stylized form) became part of Bressan's maker's mark. The house was situated by Somerset watergate stairs, a main thoroughfare from the Thames. Upon Mignon's death (1714) Bressan took over his lease. About 1703 Bressan married Mignon's daughter Mary Margaret (died 1738), a sponsor of exhibitions, and he lived happily with her until his change of fortune, when he experienced domestic strife. According to several witnesses in the suit he filed against her in 1721-4, she had a tempestuous disposition, threatening his life, concealing money, and incurring large debts. She confessed to marrying him 'only because he was in a way of getting a great deal of money' (Byrne, 'More on Bressan', 105). Witnesses described Bressan as industrious, sober, and good-tempered. He became a denizen on 12 September 1723. Yet in 1730 he left his wife and fled to Tournai in Flanders, where he died on 21 April 1731, probably at the house of the celebrated woodwind player Francois la Riche. Bressan's death abroad, his debts, and his marital difficulties complicated the settlement of his will. 
James Talbot chose to give measurements for five instruments by Bressan -- flute, treble, and tenor oboe, and tenor and bass recorder -- showing that Bressan's reputation for woodwind instrument making had already been established. In 1721 he testified that he had acquired fame and fortune 'in making of musicall instruments and particularly of flutes [recorders]' (Byrne, 'More on Bressan', 102), but since 1715 his trade had fallen off sharply. His great success with the gentleman amateur market for almost thirty years presumably accounts for the survival of no fewer than forty-eight of his recorders -- far more than from any other early maker. They are prized among modern players for their mellow, vibrant, and slightly 'edgy' timbre and flexible playing technique; some fifty modern makers have produced copies of one or more sizes. Three of Bressan's flutes have also survived, unfortunately not in their original condition, but no oboes or bassoons. 


@@@@@


doc= 67957


Butler, Henry (d. 1652), composer and viol player, was identified by Spanish court documents as a native of Sussex and a gentleman of quality in England before taking service as a musician in the royal court of Spain from 7 September 1623; his life prior to this is otherwise unknown. His employment began while the prince of Wales was in Madrid seeking to marry the Infanta Maria, but no connection has been established between the prince's arrival at the court and Butler's position there. In 1625 James Wadsworth the younger described Butler among English fugitives in the Spanish court, stating: 'Moreover there is one M. 'Henry Butler', which teacheth his Catholike Maiesty to play on the Violl, a man very fantasticall, but one who hath his pension truely payd him for his fingers sake' (Wadsworth, 63). 
Philip IV elevated Butler to the position of 'gentilhombre de casa' on 28 February 1637. This honour entitled him to a more generous clothing allowance than that of many other musicians or of the painter Diego Velazquez. Trips to England were approved in 1632 and 1636. On one occasion the king sent Butler to Portugal to escort some Irishmen, and in 1644 Butler travelled to Rome, possibly on diplomatic business (Subira, 223). 
Confirmation of Butler's musical accomplishments came from the seventeenth-century writers Christopher Simpson and Jean Rousseau. His twenty known works include two preludes and thirteen sets of divisions on grounds for bass viol (viola da gamba) and basso continuo, and an aria and three sonatas for violin, bass viol, and basso continuo. (A set of divisions and one sonata are also ascribed to other composers.) The remaining work, an untitled sonata-like composition for bass viol and basso continuo, may be the earliest 'sonata' for solo instrument and basso continuo written by an English composer. Other distinguishing aspects of Butler's music are its demand for a virtuoso bass viol technique and its use of features of both English and Italian musical styles. Details surrounding Butler's death at the end of March 1652 remain unknown. He left an heir and executor, Don Juan Isidro de Butler. 


@@@@@


doc= 67958


Cosyn, Benjamin (c.1580-1653), organist and composer, about whose family, birth, and education nothing is known, married Margett Rowley on 16 December 1603 at St Julian's, Shrewsbury, suggesting origins in Shropshire. He is described in these records as 'musitian' (Shropshire County RO, register of marriages, 1603) and could by that date already have had contact with John Bull in Hereford. He was organist at St Laurence's, Ludlow, from 1621 to 1622, and had moved to London by 1622, when he was appointed fellow and organist at Dulwich College with a salary of about $10 per year. He left this post in 1624. Two years later he was appointed first organist of the Charterhouse. The House of Commons eliminated his post in 1643, anticipating the order a year later banning organs in churches. Cosyn petitioned successfully to receive a pension in consideration of 'poverty, ould age and misperfeccons of body' (LMA, MS G3/2A, fol. 48'v'). He lived in the nearby ward of Aldersgate at least from 1641 and was buried in St Botolph's on 14 September 1653. 
Cosyn copied keyboard music into two manuscripts, in 1620 and 1652, preserving not only the majority of his own works but also music by Tallis, Byrd, Bull, and Gibbons as well as pre-Restoration composers (BL, royal music MS 23.1.4; Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, reserve 1185). His output of over fifty keyboard works chronicles the shift in taste during the first half of the century from plainsong settings and pavane-galliard pairs to suites of allemandes, courantes, and sarabands. Musicologists have criticized Cosyn for his heavy-handed approach to ornamentation. At its best, his music for virginals demonstrates skill in elaborating popular tunes with brilliant passage work. He was dependent on inspiration found in the music of fellow composers, upon which he drew to create lively settings in the fashionable genres of his day. 


@@@@@


doc= 67959


Cranford, William (d. c.1645), composer, is of unknown origins. He is known as a proficient, minor musician of the pre-Commonwealth period, though little is recorded about his life. He was active as a composer at least from the second decade of the seventeenth century and appears to have been based in London throughout his career. On the death of Prince Henry in 1612 he wrote an elegy for six voices, 'Weep, Brittaynes, weep', and he contributed the psalm tune 'Ely' to Thomas Ravenscroft's 'The Whole Booke of Psalmes' of 1621. At this time he was probably associated with St Paul's Cathedral; certainly by 1624 he was a lay vicar there, and he continued to hold that post until the 1640s. Little of Cranford's church music survives, and much of this is incompletely preserved. His verse anthems include the simple 'O Lord, make thy servant Charles', which dates probably from the early years of Charles I's reign. The text of one of his anthems was included at the Restoration in James Clifford's 'The Divine Services and Anthems' (1663). 
Cranford's secular music consists mainly of catches and instrumental works. The former, of which John Hawkins thought highly, include 'Boy come back', which appears in some of John Playford's anthologies with a companion piece, 'Boy go down', by Simon Ives, a fellow singer at St Paul's. Another catch, 'Let's live good honest lives', was later adapted by Henry Purcell (Hawkins claimed that Purcell added the words). Although he held no position at court, Cranford wrote much music for viol consort; the twenty surviving examples include fantasias, dances, and variations, most of them composed in or before the 1630s. Later writers have noted in these works a distinctive harmonic style and interesting textural effects, and in these respects his consort music has much in common with that of one of the major composers in the field, William Lawes. Cranford died probably about 1645, in which year his name was not recorded with those of other vicars-choral at St Paul's. 


@@@@@


doc= 67960


Farrant, Daniel (d. 1651), musician and musical instrument maker, may have been related to other musicians named Farrant -- Richard (died 1580) or any one of several Johns, all of whom were variously employed as church musicians. Both Richard and Daniel are known to have lived at Greenwich; on his death Richard left a widow, Ann, and nine children, perhaps including Daniel. The lack of a baptism record for Daniel may be due to the fact that the Greenwich registers before 1615 are lost. He was appointed to serve as a musician at court from Lady day 1607. Although listed among both violins and lutes, he is noted especially as a viol player. 
Farrant seems to have been involved with the development of new stringed instruments, including some with sympathetic strings, but John Playford's claim that he 'invented' them is not borne out by the evidence: 'Daniel Farrant... was a person of much ingenuity for his several rare inventions of instruments, as the 'Polyphant' and the 'Stump', which were strung with wire [and a] ''Lyra Viol', to be strung with Lute Strings and Wire strings, the one above the other'. ('Musick's Recreation on the Lyra Viol', 1661)' A warrant dated 27 February 1626 authorized $109 to be paid to Farrant 'for 6 Artificiall Instruments which were made and finished for his Mats service' (TNA: PRO, E351/544). These must have been of special quality to command such a high value. Only three verified compositions by Farrant are known, but others are attributed to him: a pavan for lute, four pieces for solo lyra viol, and perhaps a fine five-part pavan on a repeating four-note figure. 
On 28 February 1621 Farrant married Katherine Lanier, daughter of Nicholas Lanier (died 1612) and his second wife, Lucretia, at St Botolph without Bishopsgate; she inherited land at Greenwich adjacent to their home. He was appointed one of the first assistants of the reconstituted Corporation of Musick in Westminster in 1635 and served at court until it was disbanded in 1642. By 1647 he had apparently become ill, and he was buried at St Alfege, Greenwich, on 24 July 1651. Farrant had made his will on 20 March 1643, bequeathing his whole estate to his wife, Katherine. 


@@@@@


doc= 67961


Grabu, Louis (fl. 1665-1694), composer and musician, was described as 'of Shalon [possibly Cape Salou] in Catalunnia', though he always seems to have been regarded as a Frenchman. He was appointed composer to Charles II on 31 March 1665, soon after his arrival in England. Three days later he was married in St James's Palace to Catherine de Loes 'of Paris'. Almost a year later (25 March 1666) he was made master of the king's musick at the usual salary of $200 a year, and successively displaced John Banister, first as leader of the king's band of twenty-four violins (24 December 1666), then as leader of the select band of twelve violins (14 March 1667). The reason for this rapid advancement is not clear, but it may have had something to do with complaints (which were upheld) that Banister had held back money due to the band and, according to Anthony Wood, 'for some saucy words spoken to his maj[esty], viz. when he [the king] called for the Italian violins, he made answer that he had better have the English' (Ashbee and Lasocki, 502). Not surprisingly Banister was peeved, and Pelham Humfrey gave his opinion to Samuel Pepys on 15 November 1667 that Grabu 'understands nothing nor can play on any instrument and so cannot compose' (Pepys, 8.530). Pepys was in two minds about him. The previous month, having heard an English song by Grabu he 'was never so little pleased with a consort of music in my life -- the manner of setting of words and repeating them out of order... makes me sick'. On the other hand he had to admit that 'the instrumental music he had brought by practice to play very just' (ibid., 8.458). 
For the marriage of the duke of York and Mary of Modena on 30 March 1674, Grabu seems to have rewritten and expanded the music for 'Ariadne, or, The Marriage of Bacchus', originally composed by Pierre Perrin; this was acted by the Royal Academy of Music at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden. The opera, however, was not a success, though whether this had anything to do with the quality of the music cannot be said since the music does not survive. For whatever reason (possibly as a result of the 'Test Act'), Grabu was replaced as master of the king's musick by Nicholas Staggins on 29 September 1675. He successfully petitioned the king for $627 9's'. 6died arrears of salary (5 May 1677), and, together with his wife and three small children, was granted a pass to go to France on 31 March 1679. 
With the support of the duke of York, Grabu was back in England in the autumn of 1683, and wrote music for 'A Pastoral in French', engraved and published in 1684. He was also engaged to provide the music for John Dryden's opera 'Albion and Albanius', written to celebrate twenty-five years of the Restoration but thwarted by Charles II's death in February 1685, three months short of the anniversary. The fact that its performance in early June coincided with the duke of Monmouth's rebellion took some of the shine off the occasion; nor could the quality of the music -- or Dryden's treatment of the subject for that matter -- prolong the run beyond six nights. The music (published in 1687) is thoroughly French and outside the musical traditions of the English stage. At different times, however, Grabu did contribute songs and instrumental pieces to various plays, including Shadwell's 'Timon of Athens' (1678), Lee's 'Mithridates' (1678), 'Oedipus' (1678) by Dryden and Lee, and Rochester's 'Valentinian' (1684). Grabu remained in London until 3 December 1685, when he returned to Paris, but he was back in England again in 1687. His name appears in advertisements for a concert at 'Mr Smith's in Charles-Street, Covent Garden' in 1694, but on 4 December that year he and his family were given passes to travel to either Holland or Flanders. Thereafter nothing is known about him. 
Most writers, echoing Edward J. Dent, have been dismissive of Grabu as a composer, and although he came in for some public ridicule in his own time he was probably, all things considered, not so incompetent as has been suggested. Indeed, given that Locke was dead and Purcell had yet to prove himself as an opera composer, Dryden was perhaps no more than fair when he said: 'When any of our countrymen excel him, I shall be glad, for the sake of old England, to be shown my error; in the meantime, let virtue be commended, though in the person of a stranger' ('Albion and Albanius', 1685, preface). 


@@@@@


doc= 67962


Haward, Charles (fl. 1668-1689), musical instrument maker, was part of a family of harpsichord, spinet, and virginal makers living and working in the City of London. Nothing is known of his parents, or of his early life, but his earliest surviving instrument, a single-manual harpsichord, is signed and dated 'Carolus Haward 1683', while the latest is a wing spinet signed 'Carolus Haward fecit 1689'. The one harpsichord noted above plus seven wing spinets have survived, and a further four surviving spinets are probably from his workshop. He lived in Aldgate Street, London, as is evidenced by a well-known excerpt from the diary of Samuel Pepys for 4 April 1668: 'Up betimes, and by coach to White-hall, took Aldgate street in my way, and there called upon one Hayward that makes virginalls, and did there like of a little Espinettes and will have him finish them for me: for I had a mind to a small Harpsicon, but this takes up less room and will do my business as to finding out of Chords -- and I am very well pleased that I have found it.' It seems that Pepys called again on Haward on 13 July 1668, and on 15 July he took delivery of the spinet: the cost was $5. In 1672 Haward was referred to by Thomas Salmon in his 'Vindication of an Essay to the Advancement of Music' (1672) in the statement: 'A curious pair of Phanatical Harpsichords made by that Arch Heretick Charles Haward' (p. 68). The exact meaning of a pair of 'Phanatical Harpsichords' is unclear, as is the reason for Salmon's description of Haward as an 'Arch Heretick'. 
However, the esteem in which Haward's work was held can be judged from the fact that Queen Anne was said to have highly prized a virginal by him -- but the loose way in which the terms 'spinet' and 'virginal' were applied to the smaller domestic instruments in the seventeenth century makes it unclear whether the instrument was a wing-shaped spinet as bought by Pepys, or the rectangular coffer-shaped instrument built in England in the period 1641-84, of which only nineteen survive. 
A transcript from the lord chamberlain's accounts relating to music and musicians records a payment in 1674 of $6 10's'. 'for mending the harpsichords and pedalls in the Great Hall in the Privy Lodgings and for the private musick, for 2 whole years', and in the next year $2 was paid to 'Mr. Haward, the virginall-maker, for mending the harpsichords' (Lafontaine). The mention of 'pedalls' may indicate that it is John Haward ('fl'. 1649-1667) to whom the payment was made, for Thomas Mace, 'Musick's Monument' (1676) has a long and interesting section (pages 235-6) on 'the Pedal' (for changing the registration of a harpsichord) 'contriv'd... by one Mr. 'John Hayward' of London'. So far as is known, Charles Haward did not make such pedals. This John Haward was almost certainly a relative of Charles Haward, as was also probably a third member of the family, Thomas Haward ('fl'. 1656-1663). 


@@@@@


doc= 67963


Hudson, George (d. 1672/3), composer and musician, first appears when he was sworn by warrant of 3 December 1641 into the next but one vacancy among the lutes and voices at the royal court, but the dissolution of the establishment in 1642 foiled this opportunity. He is named among 'able masters for voyce or viol' in John Playford's 'A Musicall Banquet' (1651). In 1656 he composed some of the music for William Davenant's 'The First Dayes Entertainment at Rutland House' and his 'Siege of Rhodes'. Either George or Richard Hudson ('c'.1617-1668) -- probably his brother, a court violinist -- was the Mr Hudson who made music with Samuel Pepys in January 1660. In midsummer that year George was appointed to two posts as composer for and practice of (i.e. rehearser of) the violins at $200 and $42 15's'. 10died respectively. He shared direction of the group with Matthew Locke, although John Banister later creamed off a select band of twelve players. 
Records show that late payments of his salary caused Hudson financial difficulties in the 1660s, although he always supported Richard Hudson's family, who were poor. Hudson played a full part in the affairs of the Corporation of Musick of Westminster, acting as warden on occasion. The reversion of his court places was promised to Pelham Humfrey and Thomas Purcell in January 1672, perhaps an indication that he was then in poor health. 
Anthony Wood remarked that Hudson was 'excellent at the lyra-viol and hath improved it by his excellent inventions' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood D 19(4), fol. 71'r'). A consort featuring the instrument and twenty-three solos are extant, together with more than fifty light dances in two and three parts arranged as suites. Presumably these are skeleton versions of music written for the court violin band. Hudson died having made his nuncupative will (describing himself as of St Martin-in-the-Fields) at Greenwich on 10 December 1672; the will was proved on 17 February 1673. 


@@@@@


doc= 67964


Jaye, Henry (b. in or before 1580, d. in or before 1641), musical instrument maker, came from an unknown family. He would have had to finish an apprenticeship, begun at the age of about fourteen, in order to advertise his name on an instrument's label. Such labels, which show that Jaye lived and worked in Southwark, London, survive in viols dated between 1611 and 1667; Francis Galpin reported one from 1610. Since few manual workers of this period would still have been active at the age of eighty-seven, since there is a consistency of style between the earliest and the latest instruments, and since the latest work shows no evidence of being the work of an old man, there may have been two Henry Jayes, possibly father and son. This would echo their distinguished predecessors, John Rose, father and son, who worked in nearby Bridewell. 
Thomas Mace listed Jaye in 1676 among the five most admired viol makers. More instruments by, or attributed to, Jaye survive than for any other English luthier of his time or earlier. His reputation is currently sustained by both this large quantity and its high quality. A bass viol of 1619 (priv. coll., London) is probably the best-preserved English stringed instrument from before the Restoration. All surviving Jaye instruments are viols but he may also have made violins and, as some authors have claimed, lutes, though none is known. No death date for Henry Jaye has come to light, although he was dead by 1641. 


@@@@@


doc= 67965


Kinloch, William (fl. 1582), composer, is of unknown parentage. Nothing certain is known of his life, although he has been plausibly identified as a musician within the circle of James Lauder, himself a musician in the service of Mary, queen of Scots, and later of James VI. Lauder retained a pension from the imprisoned queen, for whom his son John also worked. In a letter dated 2 October 1582 Lauder reports to his son that his daggers and knives will be sent by 'Mr. William Kynlowgch' on his next journey from Scotland to London. None of Kinloch's extant music, all of which is for keyboard instruments, bears any indication of Catholic sympathies, but the letter conveniently documents a pattern of life that would explain its preservation in an English as well as in a Scottish manuscript. 
The Scottish manuscript is that known as Duncan Burnett's manuscript (NL Scot., MS 9447, formerly Panmure 10 in the collection of the earl of Dalhousie), copied about 1600-10. Five out of twenty-three keyboard pieces are here attributed to Kinloch (or Kinloche, with the first name variously spelt), though it seems certain that he wrote several of the others as well. It is clear from these that Kinloch was something of a virtuoso player. 'The Batell of Pavie' is a technically demanding setting of a tune long popular on the continent. The 'fantassie', which is mainly an exercise in complex rhythms in the manner of some of William Byrd's fantasias, opens with a lengthy passage for crossed hands. 
The English source of Kinloch's music is BL, Add. MS 30485 ('c'.1600), a manuscript associated with and partly written by the composer Thomas Weelkes. Here he is identified simply as 'kinloughe', the composer of a pavan and galliard. There can be no doubt that this is the work of the same composer: the general style is very similar, and, moreover, there exists in the London manuscript an anonymous 'Quadran' pavan and galliard which bears a close musical relationship with 'the quadrant paven' and its associated 'gaillart' in the Duncan Burnett manuscript. 
Unfortunately Kinloch's music has none of the distinctive features that might otherwise identify it as Scottish: its principles of composition are those of the Elizabethan and Jacobean virginalists, several of whom wrote music of equal or greater difficulty. It has been conjectured that he also composed some of the anonymous secular vocal music that survives in Scottish sources of the time, but this remains to be demonstrated convincingly. 


@@@@@


doc= 67966


Lugge, John (bap. 1580, d. 1647x55?), organist and composer, was baptized at Barnstaple on 24 October 1580, the second son of Thomas Lugge, a prominent citizen and shoemaker there, and his wife, Joan Downe, and not, as has often been stated, of Thomas Lugge, a vicar-choral at Exeter Cathedral from 1570. Nothing is known of his early musical education; he may have served as a cathedral chorister at Exeter, though there is no evidence for this. By 1602, when his first child was born, he had married. 
Lugge spent his adult life in the service of Exeter Cathedral. The date of his arrival is not recorded; but he was certainly organist there during the quarter ending on 25 March 1603, when he signed in receipt of the salary for this post. On 24 June 1605 Lugge was admitted a lay vicar-choral, having enjoyed the profits of the vicar's stall of one Upcott (whom he had presumably replaced) for half of the previous quarter. Up until June 1608 Lugge received the $10 annual salary attached to the joint office of organist and master of the choristers, but by Michaelmas of that year he was sharing the salary (and therefore probably also some of the duties) with Edward Gibbons. This division of salary persisted up until the mid-1640s. 
On 10 December 1617 Lugge's brother, Peter, 'a Spanish sympathizer' (Shaw, 109), wrote Lugge a letter, which was intercepted by Bishop William Cotton of Exeter. Cotton duly examined John Lugge but found that he had no popish sympathies, though his religion was 'as the market goes' (ibid.). According to Cotton's report, dated 14 January 1618, Lugge had had nothing to do with his brother for seven years and had never promised to become a Catholic. Cotton continued: 'though I fear, and by conference do suspect that he hath eaten a little bit, or mumbled a piece of this forbidden fruit, yet I verily believe he hath spit it all out again' (Steele, 310). His vicar-choral colleagues certified his innocence, and a search of his house three years later turned up no evidence against him. None the less, the fact that John's youngest son, Robert (organist of St John's College, Oxford, since 1635), some time prior to April 1639 'went beyond the seas and changed his religion for that of Rome' ('John Lugge', iv) must raise the distinct probability that John may also have harboured Catholic views. 
Lugge apparently served Exeter Cathedral well. The dean and chapter granted to him and his family permission to live in his house in Kallendarhay (as the vicars' close was called) until their deaths and, on 18 October 1617, the profits of a vacant clerkship of the second form to supplement his income. There is also evidence that he was allowed a deputy organist, for on 21 March 1618 it was decreed that Hugh Facy, one of the lay clerks, 'should sometimes play on the organs at service tyme' (Payne, 234). On 12 August 1644 Lugge's wife, Rebecca, died, having borne six children between 1606 and 1622. By the summer of 1646 choral services had been abandoned: Lugge is mentioned for the last time in a vicars-choral account book for 1647, and in the same year he transferred the lease of his house to his daughter, Mary. He may have died before 1655. 
Lugge was one of the most talented English provincial composers of the period and is remembered for his outstanding organ music, especially the three voluntaries for double organ, which is well written, imaginative, and technically demanding. He also left three short keyboard dances, and a small quantity of church music comprising three service-settings (one of which was praised by the eighteenth-century music historian Charles Burney) and four anthems. 


@@@@@


doc= 67967


Matteis, Nicola (fl. c.1670-c.1698), violinist and composer, came from Naples; nothing else is known about his origins. His contemporary Roger North related that 'his circumstances were low, and it was say'd that he travelled thro' Germany on foot with his violin under a full coat at his back' (BL, Add. MS 32536). Matteis arrived in England 'c'.1670. The earliest account of his playing comes from John Evelyn, who first heard him at a private music meeting in November 1674. Evelyn's reaction (recorded in his diary) was to be echoed by many others: 'I heard that stupendious Violin Signor 'Nicholao' (with other rare Musitians) whom certainly never mortal man Exceeded on that Instrument: he had a stroak so sweete, & made it speake like the Voice of a man; & when he pleased, like a Consort of severall Instruments: he did wonders upon a Note: was an excellent Composer also... nothing approch'd the 'Violin' in 'Nicholas' hand: he seem'd to be 'spiritato'd' & plaied such ravishing things on a ground as astonish'd us all.' Matteis was supported (and persuaded out of what were considered arrogant Italian manners) by Roger L'Estrange, William Waldegrave, and William Bridgeman, all of whom had strong interests in music and were sympathetic to Roman Catholics. 
In 1676 Matteis published his 'Arie diverse per il violino', a collection of 120 pieces for solo violin and continuo bass. A second edition with an English title-page together with a second part containing a further seventy pieces ('Other Ayrs') appeared about two years later. These publications were important for various reasons, not least the fact that they helped establish in Britain the technology of engraving music (which had been little utilized since one landmark publication in 1613). Like all Matteis's subsequent publications, they seem to have been produced with pupils in mind. An advertisement in the 'London Gazette' announcing the 1676 publication indicated his willingness to teach 'such as desire to learn Composition, or to Play upon the Violin' and mentioned the availability in manuscript of second treble and tenor (viola) parts. 
In November 1678 Matteis applied to go to France (perhaps because London seemed unsafe for Catholics while hysteria about the Popish Plot was at its height). He was, however, back in England within a year (Evelyn heard him play again in November 1679). About this time he published an important treatise on thoroughbass realization for the five-course guitar, an instrument on which he was also (according to North) a 'consummate master'. This treatise ('Le false consonanse della musica') appeared in an expanded English-language edition ('The False Consonances of Music') in 1682. Three years later he published the third and fourth parts of the 'Ayres for the Violin', and as before this was followed by an expanded second edition (1687). Three features stand out in the edition of 1687. First, it includes a concerto for three trumpets with strings and/or recorders partly based on a violin piece in the 'Ayres' of 1685. Second, Matteis's pedagogical interests are again to the fore: the table of contents is categorized according to difficulty, and pieces requiring the violinist to use multiple stops (that is, to play on more than one string at a time) have lower parts indicated with a dotted-outline notation enabling less skilled violinists to omit them. Third, Matteis published a companion volume, 'The Second Treble of the Third and Fourth Parts', thus turning what were essentially solo violin pieces into trio sonatas. 
Matteis appears to have married in or before about 1678, and had a son, Nicola, whom, according to North, he had 'taught upon the violin from his cradle'. By the early 1690s the younger Nicola was coming to prominence as a performer. His age is uncertain: his will of 1737 (in Vienna) suggests that he was born 'c'.1677, while a marriage licence issued in 1692 describes him as 'abt 25' at that time. This, as Simon Jones has pointed out, makes it difficult to know whether references to Nicola Matteis after 'c'.1695 denote father or son. 
A Matteis was listed in 1695 (together with Henry Purcell) as a teacher for a planned royal academy. Two volumes of 'A Collection of New Songs' appeared under the same name, the first (1696) 'made purposely for the use of his Scholers' and the second (1699) 'being all teaching Songs, made for his Scholars'. Nicola Matteis is named in advertisements in the 'London Gazette' (and on a broadsheet copy of the poem) as the composer of the now lost St Cecilia's day ode 'Assist, assist! You mighty sons of art' of 1696. This ode was first performed on 23 November 'being the sequel of St. Cecilia's day' and was repeated a few days later at a St Cecilia's day celebration in Oxford (for which Matteis was named as a steward) and again at a public concert in the York Buildings in January 1697. In May 1698 the 'London Gazette' reported another concert in the York Buildings featuring 'Mr Nicholas's Consort of Vocal and Instrumental Musick'. It is possible that all of these refer to the younger Nicola Matteis. 
Roger North claimed that Matteis lived with a woman 'as one that was marryed' and that they had a child and moved to a great house where the violinist dissipated his by-now considerable wealth and undermined his health in extravagant living. It has been assumed that North was alluding to a marriage in 1700 to Susanna Timperley ('fl'. 1685-1715). But the younger Matteis's will proves that it was he who had married this widow. The confusion may have arisen very early, since the 'London Post' reported in January 1700 that 'Signor Nicolao, the famous Italian Musician, is married to one Madam Timperley...'. (Despite the younger Matteis's growing reputation, it seems unlikely that he would be described then as a famous Italian musician.) The elder Matteis may well have been dead by this time. He features as one of the imagined writers in the third edition of Thomas Brown's 'Letters from the Dead to the Living' (1707). 
Matteis's works were still very much in demand. Roger published five books of 'Les solos de Nicolas Mathys' in 1702, and in the following year Walsh brought out a new edition of the first two parts of the 'Arie' together with second treble parts (presumably those mentioned in the advertisement for the original publication of 1676) to complement those published earlier for volumes 3 and 4. 
Matteis made an extraordinary contribution to violin playing in England. He was technically innovative and set new standards of virtuosity and expressiveness performing his own music, which in North's words in 'The Musicall Grammarian' 'shewed him a very exquisite harmonist, and of a boundless fancy, and invention'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67968


Mico, Richard (c.1590-1661), musician and composer, was the eldest of four sons and five daughters of Walter Mico of Taunton in Somerset, who was probably involved in the cloth trade, and his wife, Margery (died 1616), from an Oxfordshire family named Awdrey. His younger brother Walter Mico (1595-1647) described their parents, in a statement made on his admission to the Jesuit English College in Rome, as protestants of the middling sort, but not unlearned. Although there are no surviving records of Mico's early life, it is likely that he was, like Walter, educated at the grammar school in Taunton. 
Mico's first known employment began in 1608, when he was appointed resident musician at Thorndon Hall in Essex, the seat of John, first Lord Petre. His immediate employer was John Petre's son, Sir William Petre, and his principal responsibility seems to have been the musical education of the family's children. He also took charge of all the musical instruments: an inventory dated 1608, and signed by Mico, lists five viols, lutes, virginals, and an organ, as well as printed music and manuscript partbooks. No resident musician had been employed at Thorndon Hall since 1593, but at about that time William Byrd had taken up residence nearby and had begun a long and close association with the Petres; another inventory for 1608 lists 'Mr Birds chamber'. There is no evidence that Byrd actually taught Mico, but he must have been very closely involved in the choice of a new resident musician. Mico's wages on first appointment were $10 per annum, somewhat above average for this type of post, implying that, although probably still under twenty, he was already seen as an exceptionally able musician. The Petre family, like William Byrd, were Catholics: Mico was to convert to Catholicism by 1614. In 1628 he married Ann Lambe, a maid. 
It is likely that all of Mico's surviving compositions date from his period at Thorndon Hall. A total of forty-one pieces survive, all for consorts of between two and five viols, with or without organ. The majority are fantasias (or 'fancies') and pavans, and are stylistically very conservative for this period. His fantasias, for example, are almost consistently contrapuntal, with scarcely any element of chordal texture. Moreover they contain no triple-time writing, which the more madrigalian composers often used to provide passages of homophonic relief. Apart from fantasias and pavans, Mico also wrote one 'In nomine' and a piece entitled 'Latral'. This latter work, a musical response to part of a madrigal by Monteverdi ('Vattene pur, crudel'), demonstrates great technical and imaginative resource, and seems to have no direct parallel among English consort music of this period. 
Mico was evidently a highly accomplished organist, for in 1630, on the death of Richard Dering, he was appointed organist to Queen Henrietta Maria. His musical activities in this post would have been very different from those at the Petre residence, with a greater emphasis on sacred music, both at the chapel of St James's Palace and at the chapel of Somerset House. In 1634 he registered a coat of arms, and in 1639 was referred to as 'Richard Mico of London gent'. He held his post in the queen's household until her flight to the Netherlands in 1642. No record of him during the civil war period has been found, but he probably remained in London, where the next reference to him is in 1651. In 1658 he was in receipt of a life annuity of $20 from the Petre family. He survived to see the Restoration but died the following year, and was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 10 April 1661. 


@@@@@


doc= 67969


Nau, Stephen (d. 1647), violinist and composer, was probably born in Orleans, France. A manuscript now in Berlin describes him as the dancing-master of the princess of Heidelberg. He was a violinist at the English court from Michaelmas 1626 at the unprecedented fee of $200 p.a. and replaced Thomas Lupo senior as composer for the violins from the latter's death early in 1628. He seems to have spent a brief period at Leiden University, where a document of 11 June 1627 calls him 'Gallus Aureliensis' ('Frenchman from Orleans'). Nau apparently acted as director of Charles I's violins, receiving payment for provision of instruments and music books. He assisted in the rehearsal and composition of dances for the inns of court masque 'The Triumph of Peace' and played in it on 3 and 13 February 1634. Similar duties accompanied a performance of William Cartwright's play 'The Royal Slave' at Hampton Court on 12 January 1637. Nau was among those who reconstituted the Corporation of Musick of Westminster in 1635. 
Relatively few compositions by Nau are known, but they are highly regarded. Apart from a virtuoso solo violin 'fantasia', most are dances. Full five-part versions show the composer exploiting skilled use of cross-rhythms and intricate counterpoint, transcending routine dance idioms. 
Nau remained in England after the court was disbanded in 1642. He was ill in 1644 and was examined by the famous court physician Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne; the case notes survive (BL, Sloane MS 1991). Nau died on 13 March 1647 and was buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, on the 16th, having requested a ceremony according to the usage of the Reformed church. A wife, Cornelia, and nine children were named in his will. On 14 July 1660 his son Stephen was sworn as lutenist at court, but did not receive a salaried place. 


@@@@@


doc= 67970


Notari, Angelo (1566-1663), composer, was born in Padua, Italy, on 14 January 1566 (according to his horoscope in BL, Sloane MS 1707). All that is known of his life in Italy is that he was a member of the Accademia degli Sprovisti of Venice (which had the nickname Il Negligente) and contributed a piece to Nicolo Legname's 'Libro dei canzonette' (1608). Notari arrived in England some time before 1612, when he was listed as one of Prince Henry's musicians at the time of his death; from 1618 he was likewise in the service of Prince Charles. 
Notari must have played an important part in introducing Italian music to England in the early years of the seventeenth century. His 'Prime musiche nuove', engraved by William Hole in London and dedicated to the earl of Somerset (dated 24 November 1613), contains examples of the various advanced styles current in Italy at the time, such as monody, strophic variation, canzonetta, and chamber duet, but not madrigal. The preface (in English) refers to the 'trillo' as 'a kinde of sweetnes in your voice', which suggests tremolo or vibrato. Over and above his work as a composer, he was also an important copyist of Italian music by Monteverdi and others (BL, Add. MS 31440; parts of Christ Church, Oxford, MSS 878-880). Some of the anonymous pieces in these manuscripts may be by Notari himself; otherwise virtually nothing by him is known other than his published work. 
Notari's name crops up in the state papers between 1621 and 1623 as a suspected spy for Gondomar, the Spanish ambassador. He was a known Catholic and sang at mass in the ambassador's chapel on Christmas day 1622. Following Charles's accession in 1625 he was named among the king's 'lutes and voices', and continued as such until 1639, when his name no longer appears on the list. 
During the interregnum Notari may have travelled on the continent, but at the Restoration he was reappointed to his old position, assisted by Henry Purcell the elder, who eventually succeeded him. He died a few weeks short of his ninety-eighth birthday and was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields on 26 December 1663. 


@@@@@


doc= 67972


Smith, Robert (d. 1674/5), composer and singer, was probably one of the first boys appointed to the Chapel Royal following the Restoration in 1660, but there seems to be no record of this or of his subsequent dismissal. James Clifford includes the texts of six anthems by Smith in his 1664 edition of 'The Divine Services and Anthems', describing him as 'one of the Children of his Majesties Chappel'. There his contemporaries included Pelham Humfrey and John Blow. Smith seems to have turned his back on church music after leaving the Chapel Royal and by 1672 was writing music for the theatre. Clearly his talent was noted at court, for on 20 June 1673 he was admitted as a musician-in-ordinary without fee at the behest of 'Mr. [Thomas] Purcell'. Such a move frequently led to a permanent salaried place and on 3 August 1674 Smith was sworn among the lutes and voices in place of Pelham Humfrey, who had died on 14 July. By 22 November 1675, he himself was dead. 
In spite of his short career Smith was highly regarded as a composer. His precocious anthems for the chapel have not survived, but many songs from his theatre work of 1672 and 1673 were published by John Playford in 'Choice Songs and Ayres' (1673), revised as 'Choice Ayres, Songs, & Dialogues' (1676). Three keyboard pieces by Smith were included by Matthew Locke in 'Melothesia' (1673), but much of his instrumental music remains in manuscript (often in fragmentary state). At least one suite by Thomas Farmer and Smith was 'made in Oxford' according to a note on the cover; others were probably intended for performance in the theatre or at court. Smith's suite entitled 'New Year's Day' was perhaps written for the annual concert (with ode) given on 1 January in 1674 or 1675. His songs have a 'popular' idiom which no doubt made them attractive to audiences of his day. In D'Urfey's 'The Fool Turn'd Critick' (1678) a song is admired as the work of 'one Mr. Smith, and late Composer to the King's Play-house... a very Excellent Fellow... and one the Town Misses very much'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67973


Stoeffken, Dietrich (c.1600-1673), viol player and composer, was born probably in northern Germany. Nothing is known of his parentage. His name may originally have been Stoffchen. He signed himself 'Ditrich Stoeffken', but in later years the surname was Anglicized as Steffkin or Steffkins and he was often called Theodore. Some authorities have stated that Dietrich and Theodore were brothers (eg. Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 14.257-8); but official records, which describe his widow, Sarah Steffkin, variously as the relict and administratrix of Dietrich and of Theodore, prove that Westrup was right to treat these as variant names of the same man (Westrup, 81-2; Ashbee, 5.127, 146). 
In 1622 Stoeffken was employed at the court of Christian IV of Denmark, probably in a viol consort led by the English musician William Brade. From there he may have moved to the ducal court at Gottorf. By 1628 he was in England as a musician to Queen Henrietta Maria, and in 1634 he took part in the court masque 'The Triumph of Peace'; from 1636 he was also a 'musician for the consort' to Charles I. Shortly before the civil war Stoeffken left England, and in May 1642 he was appointed violist to Friedrich Wilhelm, elector of Brandenburg. He was married to Sarah by 1646; two sons, Frederick William (1646-1709) and Christian Leopold (died 1714), became eminent violists at the English court. During 1647-8, following the elector's marriage to the princess of Orange, Stoeffken was seconded to the stadholder's service in The Hague. Constantijn Huygens, the stadholder's secretary, remarked on his outstanding skill in a letter to Mersenne of 14 January 1647, and later engaged in friendly correspondence with the musician himself (Crawford, 46-51). By 1653 Stoeffken was living in Hamburg. He performed for Archduke Leopold Wilhelm at Regensburg in 1654, and in 1659 he appears to have been in Rome. At the Restoration he returned to the English court as a member of Charles II's private musick and a musician to the queen mother. In 1673 he accompanied the king's ambassadors to the council of Cologne; his death there, probably in December, is recorded in a probate administration of February 1674. His widow continued to receive arrears of his court pay at least until 1677. 
Pepys described Stoeffken as 'a temperate sober man' (Pepys, 17 July 1663). Roger North remembered the 'particular friendship cultivated' between Stoeffken and the composer John Jenkins ('Roger North on Music', 21, 298, 347). Knowledge of Stoeffken's own compositions has been greatly enriched through the discovery of four manuscripts of Dutch provenance: three belonging to the Goess family at Schloss Ebenthal, near Klagenfurt, the other bought by the British Library in 1995 (MS Mus. Dep. 9562). Most are pieces for unaccompanied lyra viol, using various string tunings -- an area of performance in which he seems to have been regarded as peerless by those who heard him play. 


@@@@@


doc= 67974


Tollet, Thomas (d. 1696?), musician and composer, is first known in 1669 when, along with two men who were perhaps his brothers, John Tollet (possibly the John 'Tallat' who had married an Ann Bates in Dublin in 1665, the earliest reference to the family name in Dublin) and George Tollet (d. 1719), he is listed as one of the ten Dublin city musicians; a Charles Tollet was also appointed to the city musicians in 1677. Thomas, John, and Charles were again named as Dublin city musicians in 1688. Between 1673 and 1687 Christ Church, Dublin, purchased violins and music (unspecified except in one reference to '3 anthems') on a number of occasions from 'Mr Tollett' or 'the Tolletts', indicating that they ran a family music business alongside their activities as musicians. Richard, a son of 'Thomas Tallet, gent. and his wife Esther', was buried at St Michan's Church, Dublin, in 1680, and a second, unnamed child in 1684. 
Some instrumental music by both Thomas and George Tollet, included in a manuscript collection dating from the 1660s and 1670s and associated with the twenty-four violins of the English royal court, indicates professional links with England at this period. Thomas Tollet moved to London probably in 1688 or 1689 and there composed incidental music for the theatre including 'Love or Money' (January 1690?), 'The Marriage-Hater Match'd' (1692), and 'The Virtuous Wife' (1694?), all by Thomas D'Urfey and given at Drury Lane. Tollet also wrote music for 'Henry the Second' (by J. Bancroft, 1692), 'The Volunteers' (T. Shadwell, 1692), 'The Cheats' (J. Wilson, 'c'.1693), 'The Lover's Luck' (T. Dilke, 1695), and 'The Generous Enemies' (J. Corye, 1696?). As a composer Tollet has been described as 'a reasonably competent follower of Purcell, though his music is unenterprising' (Holman, 'Tollett, Thomas'). 
Tollet published an instruction book, 'Directions to Play on the French Flageolet' (now lost), in London in 1694. A number of shorter instrumental pieces by him survive, including 'The queen's farewell' written on the death of Queen Mary in 1694. It is likely that George Tollet composed some of the music attributed to Thomas Tollet including 'Tollett's ground', which first appeared in John Playford's 'The Division Viol' (10th edn, 1685, and later edns) and remained popular into the eighteenth century. The fact that, unlike Thomas, John, and Charles Tollet, he was no longer a Dublin city musician in 1688 may be explained by his having developed his interest in mathematics if, as seems probable, he can be identified with the George Tollet who later became a commissioner of the navy and died in 1719. Tollet was sworn in as a member of the royal private musick in March 1695 but must have died (presumably in London) not long before 2 September 1696, when his place was taken by John Eccles. 


@@@@@


doc= 67975


Tucker, William (bap. 1622?, d. 1679), musician and composer, may have been the son of Edmund Tucker, organist of Salisbury Cathedral, baptized there on 24 June 1622. Details of his education are unknown, although it is possible he may have been a chorister. After the Restoration William Tucker became a minor canon at Westminster Abbey, receiving instructions on 11 December 1660 to 'take the order of Priesthood the next ordination day being the 23rd of December' so that he was eligible for the post (chapter act book 3, fol. 27'v'). By April 1661 he was also a gentleman of the Chapel Royal. As a minor canon of Westminster he was entitled to a house in the abbey precincts: his wife was named Elizabeth, and four children were baptized or buried at the abbey between 1662 and 1670. 
Tucker's surviving compositions, consisting of three services and a number of full and verse anthems, are competently written, straightforward works which circulated beyond London and Westminster to provincial cathedrals, but he is most important for the light his music copying casts on the wider history of Restoration sacred music, in particular the development of the major composers John Blow and Henry Purcell. In the year ending at Michaelmas 1677 he received $20 'for Coppying out some Musick bookes' at Westminster Abbey (Westminster Abbey muniments, 33712, fol. 5'v') and on 15 February 1685 his widow, Elizabeth, was belatedly paid $15 'for her husband's writing in 15 Books the Anthems wth Symphonies for King Charles 2nds use in his Chappell Royall' (Ashbee, 5.272). Comparison of the ascriptions of Tucker's own works with his signature in the abbey precentor's book allows identification of his copying, in which he was sometimes assisted by two other scribes who wrote only words. The abbey payment was almost certainly for his contribution to the partbooks of the now incomplete Triforium set I; that at the Chapel Royal was for a set represented by two extant bass partbooks (BL, Add. MS 50860; Nanki Library, Tokyo, N-5/10). Further examples of Tucker's hand appear in the earliest layers of the Chapel Royal partbooks (BL, Royal Music 27.a.1-8) and a Chapel Royal organ book (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, MU MS 152): he is also known to have made copies for Peterborough Cathedral in 1669-70. 
Tucker's death on 28 February 1679 provides a latest possible date for music in his hand, often limited still further by attributions to 'Mr' John Blow, which must precede his doctorate, conferred on 10 December 1677, or by the probable completion of Tucker's work in Triforium set I by Michaelmas 1677. Several anthems by Purcell are thereby shown to be products of the composer's teenage years, most notably the symphony anthem 'My beloved spake'. Tucker was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey on 1 March 1679, and administration of his estate was granted to Elizabeth by the court of the dean and chapter on 29 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 67976


McIan, Frances Matilda (c.1814-1897), painter and design school superintendent, was born at 20 Westgate Street, Bath, and baptized on 21 June 1820 at St Mary's Chapel, Queen Square, Bath. She was the third of five children of William Whitaker (died 1836) and Sarah Hawkins (died 1849), cabinet-makers. Nothing is known of her education. 
Whitaker eloped with Robert Ronald McIan ['see below'] on 21 February 1831 and married him (as Robert Jones, his stage name), at Sts Philip and Jacob, Bristol. She subsequently taught him to paint, and they often mirrored each other's subjects: for instance her 'Slave's Dream' (exh. RA, 1847) depicted a 'vision' as did his 'Scene in Lochaber', exhibited at the British Institution the same year. W. P. Frith also records watching Fanny teach John Leech to paint in oils in their studio. She first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1836, a portrait, 'Red Star of the Evening and Diving Mouse', co-performers in the play 'Rifle-Shot' with her husband. But her first success came in 1837 with 'The Escape of Alaster Macdonald', exhibited at the Society of British Artists. In 1842 she presented Charles Dickens with 'Nell and the Widow', a watercolour. He thanked her with a bound copy of 'The Old Curiosity Shop', writing that she had 'beautifully perpetuated' it ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 3.4). She also illustrated F. B. C.'s 'Quadruped's Picnic' for Dickens's son. Other illustrations were made for 'The Book of British Ballads' (1842) and 'Sketches of Irish Character' (1844), edited and written by her friends Mr and Mrs S. C. Hall. 
In October 1842 Fanny McIan became the first superintendent of the Female School of Design, Somerset House: her 'qualifications as an artist, and fitness in every respect for the situation' were considered 'very satisfactory', despite possible objections as to her husband's connections with the stage ('Minutes of the Council of the Government School of Design, 1836-1847', 1.120). The 'Art Union' praised her for her 'energy of mind', 'amiability of temper', and 'uprightness of conduct', and felt her eminently suited to teach middle-class girls to design for industry and thus enlarge the field of employment for women ('Art Union', 4, 1842, 82). 
In the summers of 1843 and 1844 Fanny McIan visited Sevres, 'to improve her knowledge of ornamental art in order to teach porcelain painting to her students', and subsequently reported in detail to the school's council ('Minutes of the Council of the Government School of Design, 1836-1847', 2.73-5). Ill health caused frequent absences from school: on one such occasion in 1843 William Macready, the actor, was touched to find her at home painting 'The Empty Cradle' (exh. RA, 1843). She had no children. Despite turmoil at the Male School, Somerset House, and frustrations at the Female School, McIan determinedly pursued her way, successfully encouraging her students to win prizes against their male counterparts. Sarah King Peter, when founding the first American Female School of Design in Philadelphia in 1848, consulted her. That year the London Female School was 'unceremoniously' moved to a soap manufacturers' premises in the Strand; Dickens criticized the poor conditions. Fanny gave a spirited account of these, and her aims for the school, to the select committee of 1849. Under her leadership the Female School gained several prizes at the Great Exhibition of 1851 (Great Exhibition, 'Reports of the Juries', section III, class 18, exhibits 85, 86, 94, 97) and in 1852 the students embroidered the duke of Wellington's funeral pall. 
Throughout her time at the school McIan continued to exhibit. 'Soldiers' Wives Awaiting the Results of Battle' (priv. coll.) was shown at the 'Free exhibition', Hyde Park, in 1849 and Henry Cole, in his capacity as head of the department of practical art, noticed her ambitious last work, 'Highland Emigration, 1852' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1852) while visiting the relocated Female School at Gower Street. On 7 April 1854 Fanny was elected an honorary associate of the Royal Scottish Academy (proposed by Robert Scott Lauder, seconded by J. Noel Paton). With members of her school she made an important contribution to the first exhibition of the Society of Female Artists in 1857. 
From 1853 on, Fanny's husband Robert McIan began to suffer a painful mental illness. Despite school duties she nursed him with such devotion that at his death in December 1856 friends feared for her own life. In May 1857 she retired, with a state pension of $100 per annum, but remained a lifelong patron of the school. She was married, briefly, to Richard James Unwin (died 1864), a man of independent means, of London and Argyll, and instead of painting collected objets d'art. She died, intestate, at 14 Cambridge Street, Edgware Road, London, on 7 April 1897 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


On moving to London in 1834 'Jones' claimed the name Ronald McIan, and descent from the McIans of Glencoe. A passionate highlander and member of the Club of True Highlanders, he pursued careers in acting and painting with equal energy and enthusiasm, making his London debut as Lo Zingaro at the English Opera House on 6 October 1834 and following it with 'Rifle-Shot'. On the stage he was noted for his agility and swordsmanship. 
Between 1835 and 1842 McIan divided his acting career between the English Opera House, Theatre Royal Covent Garden, and Drury Lane. The summers of 1841-3 were spent directing and acting at the Adelphi, Edinburgh. Dickens, seeing him there as Robin Oig in 'Twa' Drovers', thought him 'quite wonderful, and most affecting' (letter to John Forster, 30 June 1841, 'Letters of Charles Dickens', ed. Dexter, 2.316). The end of McIan's stage career in 1843 coincided with the death by drowning of his fellow actor, Elton. Through McIan's intervention Dickens became chairman of the Elton Fund for his orphans, though Dickens considered McIan as secretary as 'unfurnished in two commodities: judgment and discretion' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', ed. Dexter, 1.561). 
From 1835 to 1856 McIan was a frequent exhibitor at the Royal Academy and elsewhere. He was an exquisite colourist, and an early painter of scenes from highland history, 'A Highland Feud' (exh. British Institution, 1843; Tatton Park, Cheshire), and 'A Highland Coronach' (exh. Royal Scottish Academy, 1850) being two examples. His illustrations for 'Clans of the Scottish Highlands', and 'Gaelic Gatherings, or, The Highlanders at Home', by James Logan (first published in parts, 1843-7 and 1847-9, and later bound) are his best-known work. He also illustrated Eliza Ogilvy's 'Highland Minstrelsy' and books by Mr and Mrs S. C. Hall. S. C. Hall gave an entertaining account of McIan's enthusiastic guiding during tours of the highlands (Hall, 'Retrospect of a Long Life'). McIan assisted his wife at the Female School of Design between 1847 and 1852. Though he was made an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1852, rules of residence thwarted his hopes of becoming a full academician. 
McIan's last paintings were military in character: four major ones showing the 79th Cameron Highlanders on duty in Edinburgh, 1852, were commissioned by Colonel the Hon. Lauderdale Maule (Regimental Museum, Fort George, Inverness-shire). Maule's death in the Crimea before their exhibition at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1855 coincided with the onset of McIan's own painful mental illness. Despite it, in 1855 he successfully designed new uniforms for the Ross-shire militia (Regimental Museum, Fort George, Inverness-shire). He died at his home, 4 Heath Mount, Hampstead, London, on 13 December 1856, leaving estate of $1000, and was buried at Highgate cemetery. His friends mourned a 'warm-hearted honourable man' ('Literary Gazette', 20 Dec 1856, 1025). 


@@@@@


doc= 67977


Webster, Maurice (d. 1635), lutenist and composer, was probably the son of George Webster, lutenist at the Buckeburg court near Hanover, perhaps taking his unusual first name from Landgrave Moritz of Hesse-Cassel. A George Webster was among Robert Browne's company of English actors and musicians at Kassel between at least 1596 and 1603. Maurice in turn worked at the Holstein-Schaumburg court of Count Ernst III in Buckeburg until the count's death in 1622. He contributed four dances to Thomas Simpson's 'Taffel Consort' (published in Hamburg in 1621; most of the composers featured in the collection were working at Buckeburg). 
Following Count Ernst's death Webster travelled to England and was appointed as 'musician for the Consort' to James I, serving among the lutes from 25 March 1623. He was allowed regular supplies of strings for the bass lute, but may also have played the bass viol since all his extant compositions are for string consort; two bass viol 'divisions on a ground' also survive. His importance as a composer was in apparently introducing to England a consort style already prevalent in Germany, in which the two upper parts engage in dialogue through short phrases, freely exchanging places within the texture. The inner parts were simplified or even omitted as the textures were reduced to three or four parts only. Five sets of music and papers belonging to the composer were listed on 9 November 1636 among 'Severall... Setts of bookes' in the possession of William Cavendish, duke of Newcastle (1593-1676), suggesting he had been employed by the duke. He was a member of the Corporation of Musick of Westminster, reconstituted by charter of 15 July 1635, but Maurice Webster, described as gentleman, was buried at St Peter's, Nottingham, on 22 December that year, presumably while in service with Cavendish. 


@@@@@


doc= 67978


Webb, William (d. 1657), composer and musician, is first heard of as a singing-master employed between April 1627 and October 1628 at $3 a quarter to teach 'division' to the daughter of Judith Edwards and the late Thomas Edwards (died 1625), a London mercer who had a country house near Wadhurst in Sussex. Some years later, on 3 and 13 February 1634, Webb was listed among the performers in James Shirley's masque 'The Triumph of Peace'. He became one of the waits of the City of London in 1637 and was still serving in 1645; in the meantime he had acquired a probationer's place in the Chapel Royal (17 June 1640). According to Anthony Wood he had a house in Charterhouse Yard soon after the outbreak of the civil war where he taught singing to maintain himself. John Playford listed him among teachers 'For the Voyce or Viole' in 1651, and he was one of the band in the first English opera, William Davenant's 'The Siege of Rhodes' (1656). 
Webb is known principally as a songwriter, though not a very prolific one. About fifteen songs are extant, some in early sources dating from the 1620s, such as Christ Church, Oxford, MS 87, and New York Public Library, Drexel MS 4175. Generally they are simpler and more tuneful than those of his most famous contemporary, Henry Lawes. Several were either written or arranged as partsongs and later published by Playford in 'Select [Musical] Ayres and Dialogues' (1652-9). There are a few catches by him in 'Catch that Catch Can' (1653-67). Webb was buried on 16 March 1657 at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 67979


Throckmorton, Rose (1526-1613), businesswoman and protestant exile, was born on 26 December 1526 in London, the third of eleven children of Sir William Lok (1480-1550), great-great-great-grandfather of the philosopher John Locke (1632-1704), London mercer, sheriff, and alderman, and gentleman usher of the chamber to Henry VIII, and his second wife, Katherine (died 1537), daughter of Sir Thomas Cook of Wiltshire. The mercer, merchant adventurer, and traveller Michael Lok (c.1532-1620x22) was her brother. Her parents were early English protestants and supporters of the royal divorce between Henry VIII and Katherine of Aragon, and her father and several brothers sometimes served as agents of the king in Flanders and France in the 1540s. In 1536 the Lok family lived in Cheapside 'at the sign of the Padlock'. Rose's father served as sheriff of London in 1548 and was knighted by Edward VI the following year. 
Rose's first husband, Anthony Hickman (died 1573), whom she married on 28 November 1543, was the son of Walter Hickman of Woodford, and was also a London merchant. They had at least two children. Her second husband, Simon Throckmorton (1526?-1585), of Brampton, was the third son of Richard Throckmorton of Higham Ferrers, and Joan Beaufort of Whilton, the nephew of Sir George Throckmorton of Coughton Court, and MP for Huntingdon in 1554 and 1559. 
In 1610, aged eighty-four, Rose wrote an account of her life that began with her father's removal of the pope's bull against the king posted in Dunkirk in 1534. Rose claimed her father brought back religious books from overseas for the new queen, Anne Boleyn. Rose became a strong protestant through her mother's reading evangelical books to her and her sisters in secret at about this time. Her mother died after giving birth while in the country during a bout of the plague. Rose's husband, Anthony, was a merchant adventurer in partnership with her brother, Thomas Locke. They owned a number of ships and Richard Hakluyt wrote about several of their voyages 'to the south and southern parts of the world'. One of these ships, the 'Mary Rose', was named after their wives. The Hickmans entertained eminent clergymen such as John Hooper, John Foxe, and John Knox, the last of whom made mention of them several times in his letters to his friend and Rose's sister-in-law, Anne Locke, between 1556 and 1561. 
During the reign of Mary I Anthony and Thomas were charged with giving assistance to imprisoned protestants and for maintaining their heresy. They were committed to the Fleet prison and continued to be examined. After being remitted to confinement at the home of the lord treasurer, the marquess of Winchester, the two men were set free. Anthony thereafter travelled to Antwerp while Rose went to a remote area of Oxfordshire to give birth. In her account Rose talked to the bishops in prison in Oxford (Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley), who agreed that she might have her child baptized according to the Catholic rite. 
Out of conscience, Rose then left her homes in London and Rumford to join her husband in Antwerp. Rose chastised her sister-in-law Mary for her love of luxury and for not letting her husband, Thomas Locke, leave England. Rose preferred Antwerp because few attempts were made there to monitor attendance at Catholic services. While there she gave birth again and, this time, being part of a secret protestant congregation, had her child baptized by a protestant minister. She left Antwerp to return to England after Queen Mary's death (1558). Her account ends at this point so little is known about the later years of her life. She died on 21 November 1613 at the age of eighty-six, and an epitaph was written for her in 1637. While her recollections reflect a devoted protestant of evangelical theology and piety, she was also very caught up with business and material concerns, and with the impact of religious changes on her standard of living. Her interactions with many people of known repute testify to the high profile her family enjoyed in mid-Tudor politics and society. 


@@@@@


doc= 67980


Tyler, John (1640-1724), bishop of Llandaff, was born in Westhide, Herefordshire, on 16 August 1640, according to his memorial in Hereford Cathedral, the son of John Tyler of Kington, Herefordshire. He had at least two brothers and one sister. He was apparently educated at Lady Hawkins's School, Kington, as a John Tyler appears in the visitation lists there for 1648, 1649, and 1650. He was not the John Tyler who was rector of Shobden, Herefordshire, from 1664 to his death in 1696, but may have been rector of Letton Cheney, Dorset, from 1680 to 1690. He married Sarah, daughter of John Scudamore, of Trecelly, Herefordshire, and Dorothy, daughter of Sir William Cooke, of Highnam, Gloucestershire, but the date of their marriage is not known; they appear to have had no children. He was created BA and MA from Magdalen College, Oxford, by decree on 14 April 1686, and proceeded BD on 15 May 1686. He held the living of Kentchurch, Herefordshire, until 1688, possibly in the gift of the Scudamore family. He was made a canon of Hereford in 1688, and became vicar of Brinsop, Herefordshire, in 1689 and vicar of St Peter's, Hereford, in 1690. He was also a chaplain-in-ordinary to William and Mary. He was installed as dean of Hereford on 27 September 1692, a position he continued to hold until his death, even after his elevation to the episcopal bench. He was elected to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) on 3 February 1700. 
Tyler was consecrated as bishop of Llandaff on 30 June 1706, describing his new see in September 1706 as 'one of the poorest bishoprics in Christendom' ('London Diaries of William Nicolson', 54), it being worth about $300 p.a. He took the oaths of allegiance and supremacy on 3 December 1706 and preached 'a very good' sermon to the House of Lords on 30 January 1707 (ibid., p. 413). He was created DD by diploma on 25 June 1707. His visitation of the diocese that year saw him distribute books sent to him by the SPCK. He supported the extension of Thomas Bray's parochial library scheme to the diocese, initially recommending that a library be established in Cardiff, but after consulting his clergy and leading laymen he instead decided upon Cowbridge, where a library was established in 1711. 
Tyler also involved himself in national politics. By 1708 he was living in a house in Crutched Friars in London. He seems to have been a moderate whig churchman, supporting an amendment to the 'General Naturalization Bill' in March 1709 which made the taking of communion in a parochial church rather than a reformed congregation a necessary condition for using the act. However, with the advent of a tory ministry under Robert Harley in 1710 his political position became more overtly whig. Harley thought him unlikely to support the ministry in an analysis made in early October 1710 and Tyler voted against the earl of Peterborough in January 1711 when the verdict on his conduct of the war in Spain became a trial of strength between his tory supporters and the whigs. He was seen by Harley, by then earl of Oxford, as an opponent of the court in the spring of 1713, and he voted against the French commercial treaty in June 1713. In the 1714 parliament he opposed the high-church 'Schism Bill'. That year he obtained an act of parliament annexing the treasurership of Llandaff Cathedral to the bishopric from its next vacancy, raising the episcopal revenue by $12 2's'. 10died per annum. 
Following the Hanoverian succession Tyler voted against the earl of Oxford when the latter was impeached by the whig ministry in June 1717. He opposed the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts' in December 1718. In 1721, after much criticism from Browne Willis, who accused him of neglecting the fabric of the cathedral, Tyler wrote to William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, explaining that the diocese and the chapter did not have the revenue to repair it. He supported the petitions by the chapter to George I, the prince of Wales, and the nobility and gentry of the diocese that year for funds to repair the cathedral, but was too infirm to present the petitions in person. The king gave $1000. 
Tyler died on 8 July 1724 at 'a very advanced age' ('Remarks', 242), and was buried in Hereford Cathedral. His wife was still alive in June 1726 when the SPCK agreed to send her a copy of the 'New Testament' in Arabic which her husband had subscribed to, but she died on 10 November 1726. Tyler's will bequeathed his lands in Radnorshire, Herefordshire, and Monmouthshire to John Tyler, the son of his nephew William Tyler. His stock in the Bank of England and South Sea Company was to be used to fund legacies to a host of relatives, many of them clerics. He also left $100 to the school he established in Hereford for the benefit of the poor. 


@@@@@


doc= 67981


Beaw, William (1616-1706), bishop of Llandaff, was born in December 1616 in Hagbourne, Berkshire, the son of William Beaw, a beneficed clergyman, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Twisse, who was of German descent and the daughter of William Twisse, clothier. Raised under the influence of his uncle, the puritan theologian William Twisse, who was later to be prolocutor of the Westminster assembly, William was educated, from 1629, at Winchester College, and at New College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 6 November 1635. He graduated BA on 13 June 1637 and was elected to the fellowship on 19 September 1638; he proceeded MA in 1643. Oxford had by now become the king's headquarters in the armed struggle against parliament and Beaw, like some other scholars, joined royalist forces. 
However, unlike other future leaders of the Church of England -- and after being ejected from his position as proctor in the university by the parliamentary visitors in 1647 -- Beaw became a mercenary overseas. A portrait of Beaw dating to the late 1690s, and now in the possession of the National Trust at Croft Castle, Herefordshire, reveals a missing right index finger and facial scar, both sustained in his years in the military. Much of what is known of Beaw derives from two autobiographical works written in old age: the first is an often outspoken letter, written to Archbishop Thomas Tenison and dated 21 August 1699, which charts his life since university and the many slights he had received (LPL, MS 930, fol. 49); the second takes the form of two manuscript statements, written in 1702 in the third person and identified by Sweet-Escott as 'almost certainly composed by Beaw himself' (Willis MSS 2 and 3, cited in Sweet-Escott, 397). During the 1650s he served as a secret agent for Charles II in Copenhagen, where he served Edward Hyde, the future earl of Clarendon, who was the chief secretary of state to the king in exile. 
At the Restoration, Beaw resumed his fellowship at New College, Oxford, and entered holy orders in August 1660 on the advice of Clarendon's kinsman Alexander Hyde, the future bishop of Salisbury. He was instituted into the Oxfordshire vicarage of Adderbury in February of the following year and retained the living until his death in 1706. He proceeded BD on 6 July 1666. Beaw regarded his ambitions as unfulfilled, being convinced that he deserved better reward for his political loyalty to the crown during the civil wars, but he does appear to have received some patronage from Clarendon's son Laurence Hyde, created earl of Rochester in 1682 and brother-in-law of James, duke of York. In the mid-1660s he married Frances Bourchier (died in or after 1706), daughter of Alexander Bourchier, of Southampton; the couple had eight children of whom the eldest, William, was born in 1666. 
On 15 May 1679 a royal directive was issued for Beaw's election to Llandaff, a poor and isolated Welsh bishopric. His consecration in Lambeth Palace chapel on 22 June at the height of the Popish Plot -- a period of acute political discord surrounding the eventual succession to the throne of the Roman Catholic duke of York -- heralded the start of a vexing career in the episcopate. Beaw fully expected imminent translation to a more prosperous bishopric, claiming in old age earlier assurances that accepting Llandaff would place him 'in order to a better' (BL, Add. MS 4292, fols. 65-6). In November 1680 Beaw took his seat in the House of Lords in the second Exclusion Parliament, so called because the attempt by whigs to secure the exclusion of the duke of York from succession to the crown dominated business. He attended that parliament regularly, his voting behaviour consistent with his support for the king and his fellow bishops: in November 1680 he voted against the exclusion of the future James II. In 1683 Beaw suffered a broken ankle which rendered him permanently disabled and added to the problems of travel throughout his diocese and to Westminster. 
Beaw was also keen to promote members of his family and was known to be litigious, almost certainly encouraged by his son William, a future MP and diocesan chancellor. His controversial appointment of his son to office resulted in a lengthy chancery case which, by 1692, went to appeal in the House of Lords. The house upheld the chancery decree against the younger William, but the Beaws contested the ruling and lodged an appeal against costs, only for the Lords to dismiss Beaw's appeal as 'frivolous' ('Fourteenth Report', HMC, pt 6, 16). Beaw's nepotism did not help his wayward son whose unremarkable career as an MP was marked by debt and eventual death in the Fleet in January 1738. With a large family to maintain, Beaw was also active in chasing additional income. The crown had allowed him to retain 'in commendam' his living at Adderbury together with the Welsh rectories of Bedwas in Monmouthshire and St Andrew's in Glamorgan. The income from Adderbury was $330 per annum, $100 more than his diocesan revenue, but even so Beaw was in permanent straits, admitting that he had lived beyond his means as 'answerable to my dignity' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner, 146, fol. 161). He refused to attend the coronation of James II in April 1685 but did continue to attend the House of Lords during every session between 1680 and 1691. During James's reign he opposed the repeal of the 'Test Acts' and supported the actions of the seven bishops who had been imprisoned, and in June 1688 acquitted, for refusing to obey the king's demand that his declaration of indulgence, granting religious toleration, be read from Anglican pulpits. Beaw did not join the non-jurors after the accession of William and Mary, but in the first session of the Convention Parliament he supported a regency and voted against the motion that James II had abdicated. He made his political feelings clear by failing to attend the Lords for seven sessions during the reign of William III. Less than two months after the death of the king in March 1702, Beaw resumed his seat in the Lords. He attended the house twice in December 1702, but did not reappear until a final visit on 12 November 1705. After prayers that day he took the oath to abjure James Francis Edward Stuart, the Jacobite claimant to the throne. 
Beaw's career was characterized by his fruitless pursuit of preferment; his failed bid to transfer to the long vacant see of Hereford was followed by successful attempts for Lichfield and St Asaph in 1692. In 1697 he moved permanently to his vicarage at Adderbury, the upkeep of the medieval bishops' residence at Mathern having been the final straw for Beaw's finances. Overseeing his bishopric from a distance, diocesan oversight suffered severe neglect. In old age he complained bitterly that his meagre episcopal income left him seeking charity (BL, Add. MS 4292, fols. 64-5). Hoping that the accession of Anne in 1702 would finally reverse his fortunes, he attended her coronation and delivered a lengthy memorandum, dated 23 April 1702, detailing his plight (Willis MSS 2 and 3, cited in Sweet-Escott, 409). The queen referred his request for a grant of tenths from his diocese to the attorney-general. William Beaw died on 10 February 1706 at Adderbury, where he was buried in the chancel of St Mary's Church. He was survived by his wife to whom was granted an annual pension of $40 in acknowledgment of her husband's services. 


@@@@@


doc= 67982


Thomas Robert Way (1861-1913), artist and printmaker, was born at 13 Wellington Street, Strand, London, on 13 August 1861. He was educated at St John's College, Hurstpierpoint, Hassocks, Sussex, Archbishop Tenison's Grammar School, London, and King's College School, London. Later he studied at the Government Art School in South Kensington and, briefly, at the Academie Julian in Paris. On 10 July 1888 he married Amy Ellen ('b'. 1865), the daughter of Cornelius Cox, a stockbroker and collector; they had eight children, two of whom died in infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 67983


Aungier, Gerald (1635x40-1677), administrator in India, was born in Ireland, probably in Dublin, the second son of Ambrose Aungier ('c'.1597-1654), at various times prebendary, treasurer, and chancellor of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, and Griselda or Grizel (died 1666), daughter of Launcelot Bulkeley, archbishop of Dublin and primate of Ireland, and brother of Francis Aungier, later first earl of Longford (c.1632-1700). 
Aungier was admitted to the East India Company (1 November 1661) as a factor for Surat, on a salary of $30 per year. He arrived in India (18 September 1662) with the third earl of Marlborough, who had been sent out to claim Bombay on behalf of King Charles II. The king had been given Bombay in the marriage settlement with Catherine of Braganza (23 June 1661) and it was leased to the East India Company in 1668. The Portuguese in India refused to surrender Bombay to the English, despite constant English demands, until 1665. The events around this refusal and their continuing repercussions added to the difficulties Aungier was to face when he became president at Surat and governor of Bombay on the death at Surat of Sir George Oxenden (14 July 1669). 
Aungier's outstanding abilities and his recognized and acknowledged personal qualities -- energy, initiative, tact, firmness under pressure, a deep sense of justice and impartiality, and his grasp of wider issues not only of commerce, but also of strategy -- quickly recommended him to his superiors. His rise through the ranks in the factory at Surat, from a factor to second in council (1668), was rapid. 
On becoming president and governor Aungier confronted a number of grave and continuing problems. The remnants of the king's forces in Bombay had split into two hostile factions, and still resented the company's authority; the king's and the company's administrations were in constant disagreement; the Portuguese and Indian inhabitants were in constant contention with each other and with the British administrations; the Mughal governors of Surat made continual demands on the British settlement in the town; the Mughal admiral, the Sidi, harassed Bombay and the surrounding territories; the Marathas under Sivaji attacked the Mughals and the European settlements; the Malabar pirates roamed at will around Bombay; the Dutch wars resulted in fleets harrying English settlements and shipping; alliances and agreements were continually made and broken at whim. The company's trade languished. 
In the face of all these problems, Aungier's achievements were extraordinary by any reckoning. In the three years he resided permanently at Bombay (June 1672-September 1675) he established the framework for the settlement's future success. He established an impartial English legal system with courts operating in various jurisdictions; Indians, Portuguese, and Englishmen were treated alike. Although this action created some dissension among some English and Portuguese inhabitants, who lost their privileged positions, he managed to create markedly harmonious relationships between previously opposed groups. His famous convention established a firm system of land tenures for all the groups. It involved the return of some lands seized by a previous English governor in return for fixed rents, governed by the same rules as for English landholders. He set in train the building of much stronger fortifications and the creation of a more flexible marine force. He was strong in his negotiations with the Indian rulers, and formed much more peaceful relationships during his lifetime. His activities attracted a rapidly growing population to the island and its contiguous territories. He initiated a town plan, with a building programme to house the immigrants, started to drain the inundated lands, established the mint, and reformed the revenue system. He also organized a hospital, developed George Oxenden's idea for the first protestant church on the island, calmed two mutinies in the Bombay garrison, and promoted trade and attracted weavers to the island. He established procedures for autonomy among the different local communities, and ensured their formal representation to the Bombay administration. 
Aungier achieved all this despite his comparative youth and the regular conflict which surrounded the island during this period. The quality of character and personality in his administration was clearly demonstrated by the inability of his immediate successors to continue his management of the contending forces around Bombay. His successful approach to sophisticated political negotiation on the one hand while carrying a sword in the other died with him. For several years Bombay could only watch the mayhem in its region and suffer humiliation at the hands of the Indian powers. For a while it appeared that Bombay would be lost to the British. 
Aungier was held in high regard by most of his contemporaries, including some of those with whom he experienced early difficulties. One of these, Henry Gary, in a letter to Lord Arlington (23 January 1670) remarked on Aungier's 'wise and prudential counsels' that 'all this island are happy in', and that Aungier was a 'worthy gentleman, who is above any character I am able to give him and will by his merits surmount the malice of his enemies' (TNA: PRO, CO 71, vol. xi, fol. 185). On hearing of Aungier's death (in Surat, early on Saturday morning, 30 June 1677) the council at Bombay wrote to Surat (11 July 1677) that 'multiplicity of words may multiply the sense of our loss, but cannot depict his greatness' (Forrest, 1.133). The Surat council informed the company's directors (31 August 1677) of Aungier's death with expressions of great sorrow, not only among his colleagues but also in 'all those parts of India that know him'. The council remarked that 'his wisdom, eminent perfections and care of your affairs will better commend his worth than we can tell how to describe him' (Fawcett, 'English Factories', 1.279). He was buried in the English section of the cemetery at Surat (presumably on Monday 2 July 1677). 
Notwithstanding local impressions, malice and enmity found ready ears among the directors in the East India House, where the costs of Aungier's activities had become a matter of concern. The directors forgot the need in India for diplomacy to be carried out in some state by the senior British officials, whether with Indian rulers or Portuguese, Dutch, or French officials, and they took issue with what they termed Aungier's weakness for vanity and grandeur, and his reported success as a private trader. Despite his extraordinary achievements, he was very shabbily treated by the directors of the East India Company. They criticized him for the unavoidable expense of making Bombay a secure and comparatively tranquil English settlement; they ignored, until 1684, his proposal to move the seat of English administration in India to Bombay; they obstructed the finalization of his estate after his death; and they sought for him none of the honours and rewards they obtained for far less worthy employees. 
Gerald Aungier lives in history as the visionary who saw the potential, and worked assiduously -- against numerous difficulties -- to establish the foundations for the English settlement of Bombay. He achieved this with a clear commitment to equity between the various contending interests in and around Bombay in the middle of the seventeenth century. His personal views and his actions realized the fundamental principles and procedures of government and law which were developed over time to make Bombay one of the great cities of India. 


@@@@@


doc= 67984


Jearsey, William (d. 1690), merchant and East India Company servant, was the younger son of John Jearsey (died 1653), brewer of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1661). 
Little is known about Jearsey's early career. In 1650 he served on board a privately owned ship on a voyage from the Indian port of Masulipatam to Pegu in Burma. That there is no mention of him in the East India Company's records suggests that Jearsey was not a company servant at his departure, but probably worked his way out to Asia. Furthermore he is not mentioned in his father's will (15 October 1652), indicating a possible break between father and son. 
Between 1653 and 1655 Jearsey served the East India Company at Siriam in Burma and was probably head of the English factory there. When the directors decided to close the factory and recall its personnel, he refused to leave. He delayed his departure until 1657, apparently using the company's money in his private trading ventures. His conduct led to conflicts with the directors in London as well as with the council at Fort St George. He was dismissed and lived for some time as a free merchant in Madras. About 1658 Jearsey married Catherine (died 1688), a Dutchwoman about whom further details are unknown aside from her abilities as a merchant in her own right. 
In 1662 Jearsey was reconciled with the East India Company and was appointed chief of the factory in Masulipatam, at that time the second most important English settlement on the Coromandel coast after Madras. Devoting himself to his work, Jearsey became a prominent merchant in Masulipatam and a leading figure in the promotion of English private trade in Asia. His mercantile adventures were extensive and directed towards markets in the Bay of Bengal and Persia. Hitherto, historians have claimed that Jearsey obtained his investment capital from embezzling the company's funds, but he had an additional source of income. Between 1662 and 1669 he played an important part in establishing the Anglo-Indian diamond trade. As the leading English commissioner in India, he administered substantial amounts of money and bought diamonds on behalf of merchants in the City of London, charging a 7 per cent commission. In the late 1660s he appears to have run into financial difficulties, prompting him to cheat the London merchants by using their money in his private trade before purchasing diamonds and taking 12 per cent in commission instead of the normal 7 per cent (letter-book of John Chomley, 31 January 1668). Owing to their ensuing mistrust, the diamond merchants stopped using him as commissioner in 1669. The same year he was dismissed from the company's service and charged with embezzlement. Both were fatal blows to his private situation and substantially reduced his private trading activities. On the arrival of his successor Richard Mohun in July 1670, Jearsey refused to hand over the factory's account books. In November, suspecting that Jearsey was attempting to conceal his embezzlement, Mohun warned him to produce the accounts immediately or have his estate seized in order to meet the company's claims. When he did not comply, some of his ships were seized and goods confiscated. In March 1671 he left Masulipatam and began his journey towards Madras, 'with his Colours flying, Drum, Trumpets, Pipes and Horns sounding' as if he still had the esteem of the company. Although he lived in Madras as a free merchant for the following twenty years and was regarded as a man of substance, he never recovered his leading position among the English private merchants. In spite of ongoing requests from London, Jearsey never furnished the accounts from Masulipatam; instead, he sued the company for having illegally seized his property. This case lasted several years and ended in October 1685, when the council at Madras, unable to prove his embezzlement, offered him a compensation of 3000 pagodas. 
During his life in India William Jearsey acquired a mixed reputation. He was a skilful merchant, but also insubordinate with a fiery temperament, capable of any action in order to protect his position. Upon his being appointed chief of the factory in Masulipatam in 1662, the directors praised his honesty and abilities, but the diamond merchant John Chomley claimed 'by Mr. Jearsey's own friends' to have learned that 'he will promise you faire but perform little' (letter-book of John Chomley, 27 Dec 1665). During Sir Edward Winter's usurpation of the government in Madras in 1665, Jearsey actively supported the rightfully appointed agent George Foxcroft. His actions impressed the directors and probably contributed to Jearsey's being allowed to remain in India after his dismissal. His wife, Catherine, died in September 1688 and was buried in St Mary's churchyard in Madras. Jearsey died a little over two years later, in December 1690, and was buried beside her. The couple had no children and there is no record of a will. He left no fortune although he lived more than forty years in India. 


@@@@@


doc= 67985


Marshall, John (1642-1677), Indian scholar, was the third son of Ralph Marshall and of his wife, Abigail, daughter of Robert Rogers of Netherthorpe, Yorkshire. He was baptized at East Theddlethorpe, Lincolnshire, on 1 March 1642, and was educated at Louth, also in Lincolnshire, at the school of a Mr Skelton. He matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, in December 1660, taking his BA in 1664. Although a person of scholarly inclination, he left Cambridge in January 1668, being unable to hold a fellowship at Christ's because the college could not appoint two fellows from the same county and already had one from Essex, where Marshall's family now lived. Having 'a great desire to travell', he applied to enter the service of the East India Company ('John Marshall in India', 39). Through the influence of his elder brother he was appointed a factor in the company's service on the Coromandel coast of south-eastern India, where he arrived in September 1668 after a nine-month voyage on one of the company's ships. The following year he moved up the coast to Balasore in Orissa, one of the company's trading posts in what was then called The Bay, that is the region round the Bay of Bengal. He was to live out the rest of his life in the company's Bay settlements, serving mainly at Balasore, at Patna in Bihar, and at Hooghly and the silk-producing centre of Cossimbazar in lower Bengal. 
In all his postings Marshall seems generally to have earned the respect of his colleagues for the manner in which he managed the company's commercial business in obtaining cotton cloth, silk, and saltpetre to be shipped to England or dealt on its behalf with local officials, although his 'naturall modesty, calme disposition, and soft (though quick) utterance of speech' (Foster, 306) meant that he was thought to lack the necessary 'audacity' (ibid.) to hold his own in a major Indian court. He was clearly a fine linguist, proficient in Persian, Arabic, and 'Hindostand' (presumably Hindi or Urdu). He was at least aware of Sanskrit and able to give a specimen of its script, which he 'writ from the Bramin Doctor in Pattana' ('John Marshall in India', 423). 
Marshall was not only a conscientious servant of the company, but he was also intensely interested in the surroundings in which he lived, and his linguistic abilities were such that he was able to communicate easily with Indians in order to elicit information from them and obtain texts. The legacy of his interests is a deposit of manuscripts, consisting of translations and of 'notes and observations', apparently intended for his old friends at Cambridge. Nothing of Marshall's, apart from an essay in the form of a letter later published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', appeared in print before the twentieth century, and thus what was the most significant body of material about India to be brought to Britain before James Fraser's collection was acquired by Oxford in the mid-eighteenth century remained largely unknown to contemporaries. 
Marshall was especially interested in religion. Whereas knowledge of other religions shook the faith of some of his contemporaries, Marshall wrote that he had always had 'a profound Veneration for the Dictates of Nature, and the universal Traditions of Nations, for thereby are infinite things to be learned for the establishing of our Glorious Religion against Atheists, and the more easie propagation of the same amongst Infidels and Heathens' ('Letter from the East Indies', 729). He records a number of discussions with Muslims, but his main efforts were to elucidate Hinduism. Here his principal informant seems to have been a Brahman at Cossimbazar called 'Muddoosoodun Raure' (Madhusudhana Radha), who gave him a Persian version of the 'Bhagavad purana', one of the most revered texts of Vaishnavite Hinduism, which Marshall translated in six instalments between 1674 and 1677. Madhusudhana also gave him a version of the 'Sama Veda' or 'Epicomie of the sum of the four Beads [Vedas] or the most materiall things in them' to translate. Also surviving is Marshall's English version of 'A familiar and free Dialogue' with Madhusudhana about Hindu beliefs and such questions as 'How shall I know that before the world was, God was?' (BL, Harleian MS 4253, fol. 3). Marshall concluded from his inquiries that Hindus were monotheists who acknowledge 'the being of a mighty God' and did not deserve condemnation as 'Barbarians, Heathens and Idolaters' ('Letter from the East Indies', 729-32). 
Marshall's two manuscript books of 'notes and observations' are extremely diverse. They include more about religious beliefs and much else besides, such as natural history, topography, customs, astrology, and medical practices. He set down without comment 'a great many Secrets in Physick' and 'many Traditions and Stories' that he had learned from his informants. He was, however, unimpressed by Indian 'Learning and Knowledge', which he dismissed as 'but little' and full of 'Absurdities and Cabalistick Complications of Figures' ('Letter from the East Indies', 737). Marshall died at Balasore, where he was in charge of the company's affairs, on 31 August 1677 after a short illness. Evidently he never married and had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 67986


Nicks, Catherine (d. 1709), merchant, arrived in India in 1678 as Catherine Barker, 'a participant in one of the early nuptial sweepstakes sponsored by the company' (Saxe, 136). In England Catherine had at least one sister, Dionysia, and one brother, Ted. Nothing is known of Catherine's life prior to her arrival in India, though on the evidence of her autograph letters she does not appear to have had an especially good education. On 4 November 1680 she married John Nicks (died 1711), secretary to the Fort St George (Madras) council, who had arrived in India in 1668. 
Both Catherine and John developed extensive private trading interests during the 1680s and prospered thereby. In 1688 John was made chief of the new 'Conimeer' factory situated north of Pondicherry, an appointment only confirmed by the court on the condition that the company's position was not prejudiced 'by his Wife's crafty trading... [who] makes her gains of our loss' ('Diary of William Hedges', 2.cclviii). Indeed, Catherine was certainly notorious, and possibly unique at the time, for trading under her own name rather than that of her husband. In 1691 John was dismissed his position because of a debt he owed the company, and in May 1692 was imprisoned at Fort St George. In that same year Catherine and Elihu Yale (1649-1721), president of Fort St George, allegedly conspired to steal a quantity of fine cloth from the company's Conimeer warehouse. A warrant was issued for Catherine's arrest but she appears not to have been imprisoned. 
Catherine also attained notoriety as a result of her alleged romance with Yale. Rumours of an affair, the veracity of which has since been disproved by Yale's biographer Hiram Bingham, were circulated by Yale's critics who claimed the relationship had begun by the time of their collusion in the Conimeer theft, when Catherine lived with Yale and a second woman, Hieronima de Paiva, during several visits to Madras. Yale's opponents also maintained that he was father to three of Catherine's children, an allegation likewise since discredited. Catherine had ten children in total. These included eight daughters (Anne, Isabella, Jane, Katherine (or Catherine), Mary, Sibella, Betty, and Ursa) and two sons (John, who died at Madras on 6 December 1686, and Elihu, who went to England). In 1699 John Nicks went to England with Betty and Ursa, where he was able to clear his name with the company. He returned to Madras as a free merchant but lived estranged from Catherine until his death on 14 March 1711. 
During this time Catherine expanded her trading interests, many of which were clearly illicit. She owned two country ships and had shares in various others, and traded extensively in a variety of English and East Indian goods including diamonds. She appears to have been highly motivated in her trading to provide for the education and social advancement of her children in England, where they were under the supervision of Yale, their godfather, and Dionysia and Henry Toombs, Catherine's sister and brother-in-law. Periodically Catherine remitted portions of her estate to Yale, who, however, proved to be an unreliable agent. 
Catherine died in Madras on 9 December 1709 and was buried in the compound of St Mary's Church, Fort St George. Her son-in-law William Warre acted as executor of her modest estate of about 20,000 pagodas (about $7000), over which there was some wrangling. A substantial portion of Catherine's funds in England, designed for the use of her children, was lost in 1711 following the bankruptcy of Sir Steven Evance, with whom Yale had deposited the money. As a summary, Colonel Henry Yule's assessment of Catherine as a 'crafty and ill-conducted... but warm-hearted woman' ('Diary of William Hedges', 2.cclx) seems fair. 


@@@@@


doc= 67987


James, Edward (1569-1610?), Church of England clergyman and translator, was born in Glamorgan and proceeded to St Edmund Hall, Oxford, where he matriculated on 11 March 1586, when he was sixteen years old. He graduated bachelor of arts from Jesus College, Oxford, on 16 June 1589 and master of arts on 8 July 1592. He was elected a fellow of Jesus College, 'c'.1589-90, and continued to hold his fellowship until 'c'.1596. He appears to have benefited greatly from the patronage of that distinguished scholar, William Morgan, who arrived as bishop of Llandaff in 1595. During Morgan's episcopate James was quickly advanced to become vicar of Caerleon, Monmouthshire, on 2 February 1596, rector of Shirenewton, Monmouthshire, on 8 August 1597, rector of Llangattock-juxta-Usk, Monmouthshire, on 15 April 1598, and vicar of Llangattock Feibion Afel, Monmouthshire, on 12 July 1599. Later, after Morgan had been translated from Llandaff to St Asaph in 1601, James became vicar of Llangattock-juxta-Neath, Glamorgan, on 23 July 1603 and chancellor of the diocese of Llandaff in 1606. There is no certainty as to the year of his death. J. C. Morrice gave it as 1610; but D. R. Phillips maintained that no successor was appointed until 1620. 
The achievement for which James is best remembered is his translation into Welsh of the 'Book of Homilies', a sequence of twelve set English sermons intended to explain the basics of the Christian faith to congregations lacking a licensed preacher. James published his translation in 1606 under the title, 'Pregethau a osodwyd allan trwy awdurdod i 'w darllein ymhob eglwys blwyf a phob capel er adailadaeth i 'r bobl annyscedig. Gwedi eu troi i 'r iaith Gymraeg trwy waith Edward James' ('Sermons set forth by authority to be read in every parish church and chapel for the edification of the unlearned people. Translated into the Welsh language by the work of Edward James'). He derived the inspiration for undertaking this task from his association with Bishop Morgan. The latter gathered about him at his episcopal palace in Matharn a small but industrious group of Welsh litterateurs, of whom the most prominent were Dr John Davies (later of Mallwyd) and Edward James. Although Morgan had left Llandaff in 1601, and was dead (1604) by the time the Welsh version of the homilies was published in 1606, the example of his classic biblical expression exercised a profound influence on James's own style. The latter seems to have owed nothing to the writings of the prolific school of prose authors of medieval Glamorgan. But his own elegant and idiomatic Welsh created a considerable impact not only on worshippers in Welsh churches but also on contemporary poets like Vicar Rhys Prichard. In spite of this, curiously enough, no new edition of the work appeared before 1817, when John Roberts, vicar of Tremeirchion, Flintshire (1775-1829), published his version. Later, in 1847, Morris Williams 
(Nicander; 1809-1874)
ventured on a further edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 67988


Katheryn of Berain (c.1540-1591), gentlewoman, was born at Berain, Llanefydd, Denbighshire, the only child of the soldier and courtier Tudur ap Robert Fychan (died 1564) and his wife, Jane, daughter of Sir Roland de Veleville (died 1535) and his wife, Agnes, daughter of William Gruffudd of Penrhyn, Llandygai, chamberlain of Gwynedd. It was firmly, if incorrectly, believed that Sir Roland was the son of Henry Tudor (later Henry VII) and a Breton lady; he was knighted at the coronation of Henry VIII in 1509, appointed constable of Beaumaris Castle, and given the king's moiety of the Tudor property in Penmynydd together with other lands in Anglesey. These he bequeathed to his wife, all of which later devolved to Katheryn. 
Folk-story motifs and unfounded malicious rumours became attached to Katheryn's history; equally unfounded is the supposition that she was the ward of Elizabeth I. She is remarkable for having married four times, and her descendants became connected with so many families of north Wales that later generations called her Mam Cymru ('Mother of Wales'). The final arrangement of her child-marriage to John Salisbury ('c'.1542-1566), eldest son and heir to Sir John Salisbury of Lleweni, Denbighshire, and his wife, Dame Jane, made on 5 February 1558, proves that Katheryn had been living at Lleweni for some time; they were to go together as man and wife between then and Christmas. Their elder son, Thomas Salisbury, was born at Lleweni in 1561 and the second son, John, in 1566. Katheryn's first husband died of a sudden illness, at Berain, in the early summer of 1566. By the arrangements made on 12 July and 14 September 1566 all her lands were secured to descend to her son Thomas and his heirs, with remainder to his brother John. Sir John Salisbury was to have the custody of her two sons. 
Katheryn's second marriage, to Sir Richard Clough (died 1570), a native of Denbigh and a knight of the Holy Sepulchre, factor to Sir Thomas Gresham at Antwerp, had taken place before 6 May 1567. They lived at Antwerp, then the centre of world trade; they visited Spain and Denmark; and they moved to Hamburg because of the disturbed conditions in Flanders. Two daughters were born of this marriage: Ann (1568) who married Roger Salisbury, her mother's brother-in-law, and Mary (1570) who married William of Melai, Denbighshire. Clough died of a lingering sickness, in 1570, and his widow and young daughters returned to Berain. It was then that Katheryn commissioned the poet Wiliam Cynwal to compile all the poems composed to members of her family and others connected by marriage (Oxford, Christ Church, MS 184). 
The attempt made by John Vaughan of Golden Grove, Carmarthenshire, the following year to secure Katheryn as wife for his son Walter came to nothing. Before the end of January 1573 she had married Maurice Wynn (died 1580) of Gwydir, Caernarvonshire. Like so many marriages, this was a dual arrangement. On 20 September 1574 a settlement was drawn up between Sir John Salisbury and his wife, Dame Jane, and Maurice Wynn of Gwydir before the marriage of Thomas Salisbury, Katheryn's son from her first marriage and heir apparent to Sir John, to Margaret, daughter of Maurice Wynn from his first marriage. A son, Edward Wynn, and a daughter, Jane Wynn, were born of Katheryn's third marriage. Maurice Wynn died on 10 August 1580, and Katheryn returned once more to Berain. 
Katheryn married fourthly Edward Thelwall (died 1610) of Plas-y-Ward, Denbighshire. A draft of the arrangement of a double marriage, whereby Katheryn was to marry Edward Thelwall, while Simon, Edward's son from a previous marriage, was to marry Jane Wynn, was drawn up at Berain on 5 January 1583. The family resided at Berain until Edward's father died in April 1586, when they moved to Plas-y-Ward. The following September Katheryn's eldest child, Thomas Salisbury, was executed for high treason for his involvement in the Babington plot. There were no children from the fourth marriage. Edward died on 29 July 1610, having survived his wife by nineteen years. 
Undoubtedly amassing a great landed estate was a consideration in all four marriages. The Salisburys, Wynns, and Thelwalls were well-established landed gentry. Their eagerness to obtain more land becomes obvious in all the marriage settlements, particularly so in the dual arrangements where detailed alternative provisions were made to ensure the union of the two families in the case of death on either side before the marriage was solemnized. Clough came of a mercer family, and was immensely rich, but his great ambition was to own a landed estate; Sir John Salisbury had 'conveyed or morgaged' some of his lands to him. The Berain estate consisted of some 3000 acres with about a further 1000 acres in Anglesey; rentals from the Berain estate totalled $300 per annum. Katheryn was a much desired heiress. 
Katheryn of Berain died at Plas-y-Ward on 27 August 1591 and was buried on 1 September at Llanefydd. 


@@@@@


doc= 67989


Mansel, Sir Rice (1487-1559), soldier and administrator, was born in Oxwich in the Gower peninsula, Glamorgan, on 25 January 1487. His father was Jenkin Mansel, known as 'the Valiant' ('fl'. 1450-1510), and his mother was Edith ('fl'. 1450-1510), daughter of Sir George Kene, a knight of Kent. The family estate, in west Gower, had been built up over two centuries by careful management and prudent marriages. It had been forfeited in 1464 when an act of attainder was passed against Philip Mansel (Rice's grandfather) for conspiring with Jasper Tudor against the Yorkist cause. Jenkin (Rice's father) recovered the estate soon after the battle of Bosworth which suggests that he had fought for Henry Tudor at that battle. Jenkin was a client of the powerful Rhys ap Thomas of Dinefwr and may have named his son after him. 
In his youth Rice Mansel was placed under the guardianship of his uncle Sir Mathew Cradock, a naval commander and prosperous Swansea merchant, and from 1509 was entrusted with the charge of a number of ships bearing the Cradock family name. Rice received seisin of his estates from his guardian in 1510 and on 17 May in the following year married Eleanor, daughter of James Bassett of Beaupre, the first of his three wives, who died in or just before 1520. 
The record of Mansel's career between 1513 and 1526 is virtually a blank, apart from a mention of his service with the earl of Worcester in Flanders in 1517. His knighthood, however, granted in 1526, when he was still comparatively young, points to his having served with distinction as a soldier and administrator in the royal pay. His private life at this period is better documented. In 1520 he married his second wife, Anne Brydges, who bore two daughters. His third marriage, in 1527, to Cecily (died 1558), daughter of John Daubridgecourt of Solihull, forged an intimate link with the court, for Cecily was a lady-in-waiting to Princess Mary (the future queen) and the friendly connection between them continued after Cecily's marriage and Mary's accession. 
Mansel played a conspicuous part in suppressing the rebellion of Thomas Fitzgerald, Lord Offaly, in Ireland in 1534-5. The English commander, Sir William Skeffington, wrote that 'Sir Rice Mansel with his band... has done right good exploits and acceptable service' (Maunsell and Statham, 1.299). Mansel was among the first to enter the fortress of Maynooth after a five-day bombardment had breached the walls, probably the first time heavy artillery had been used for such purposes in Ireland. His wife pleaded with Thomas Cromwell to allow him to return, on the grounds that 'most of his living is encumbered with jointures and other charges, so that if God should take him, I and my children are undone' (Maunsell and Statham, 1.302). Mansel's successes in Ireland brought him to the favourable notice of the king and his ministers, for in 1536 he was made chamberlain of Chester. He also became a member of the council in the marches of Wales, and was placed on the commission of the peace for a number of counties and pricked as sheriff of Glamorgan. 
Mansell, though a religious conservative, was probably not over-concerned with the niceties of theology and had no compunction about profiting from the dissolution of the monasteries. He obtained a lease of the site of the abbey of Margam in 1537, and between 1540 and 1557 he purchased the site of the abbey and much of its estate in four instalments for a total sum of $2482 13's'. 1died His investment tripled the acreage of his estate and secured him a place in the first rank of the landed society of south Wales. Leaving his new residence at Oxwich Castle for his son and heir, Edward, to complete, he set about converting the domestic buildings of the abbey, together with its fine chapter house, into a mansion which became his principal home and survived until its demolition in 1792-3. He dismantled the monks' choir and presbytery, leaving the former lay brothers' nave to function as the parish church. 
When war with France and Scotland was resumed in 1542, Mansel as vice-admiral engaged the French rather unsuccessfully in the channel; and in 1544 as knight marshal he led a commando-style raid against Rothesay Castle on the Isle of Bute. His wife's friendship with the Catholic Princess Mary may have prompted Mansel to keep a low profile during the radically protestant reign of Edward VI, but when Mary succeeded to the throne he was rewarded for his services and loyalty with the offices of chamberlain and chancellor of south Wales and the counties of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire, as well as the stewardships of many manors and lordships. These offices gave him the power and status of the chief royal representative in south Wales and the influence once enjoyed by the family's patron, Rhys ap Thomas of Dinefwr. 
While Mansel's son Edward was defending the family's interests against George Herbert in a celebrated affray at Oxwich Castle in 1557, Rice was raising troops against the French. They were never used. Mary died, peace was restored, and before the new queen, Elizabeth, could reverse the religious changes of the previous reign, Mansel himself died at his town house in Clerkenwell on 10 April 1559. He was given an elaborate Catholic-style funeral and buried at St Bartholomew-the-Great, west Smithfield, a dissolved Augustinian priory, only recently restored as a Dominican priory by Queen Mary. No grave marker now survives, nor does a portrait; but his likeness has been preserved in the effigy on his fine tomb at Margam Abbey church. Three versions of his will are extant and two poems in his praise by the bard Iorwerth Fynglwyd (died 1527). 


@@@@@


doc= 67991


Philip ap Rhys (fl. 1547-1559), organist and composer, was apparently of Welsh descent, although all available biographical information refers to London. According to the churchwardens' accounts of St Mary-at-Hill, near Billingsgate in the city of London, 'Philipp Ryse, organ player' received wages of $2 15's'. for the three months ending at Christmas 1547. St Mary-at-Hill engaged a number of significant musicians in the first half of the sixteenth century, including Thomas Tallis, and had musical connections with the Chapel Royal and St Paul's Cathedral. It is not known when Philip ap Rhys arrived at St Mary-at-Hill, for there is a gap in the accounts between 1540 and 1547, but his engagement appears to have ceased at Christmas 1547. It is just possible that he was related to Ryse William who was paid 6's'. 8died for keeping the organ daily at the Lady mass for three months also in 1547-8. (An older, apparently unconnected Phylip ap Rice is named in the churchwardens' accounts of St Martin Outwich in 1508-9 as owing 16's'., and in 1522-3 as one of two wardens 'of our lady bretherhed'.) 
In 1559, as a musician at St Paul's Cathedral, Philip ap Rhys subscribed to the 'Acts of Supremacy and Uniformity' on the visitation of the royal commissioners; his signature takes the Welsh form, 'philip apryse', and is preserved on the document in LPL, Cartae miscellaneae xiii/57. He is most likely 'mr philip of poles' who was paid 16died 'for playing at organs one evensong -- the xvii daie of July, at the Salutaction' at St Mary-at-Hill in 1559, and is undoubtedly the composer of keyboard music found in BL, Add. MS 29996 attributed to 'phelyppe apprys Off Saynt poulls in london'. It is assumed that he left St Mary-at-Hill at Christmas 1547 in order to succeed John Redford, organist and almoner of St Paul's, who died in late October or early November 1547. There is no known record of his appointment, nor of his death, which must have been after 1559. 
Philip's musical significance rests on the liturgical compositions for organ, found uniquely in BL, Add. MS 29996, and specifically on the survival of the only largely complete British organ mass, a genre better known on the continent, in which the organ plays sections of the mass in alternation with sung plainsong (or polyphony based on the chant). However, there are signs that this mass was compiled, rather than composed, as a cycle. The scribe copied five of six intended pieces as a coherent group: 'Kyrie', 'Gloria', offertory 'Benedictus sit Deus Pater', 'Sanctus', and 'Agnus Dei'; there is a blank opening after the 'Gloria', with the title 'Credo'. The offertory is headed 'in die Sancte Trinitatis', and the whole cycle may have been intended for use on Trinity Sunday. However, the plainchant melodies used for the 'Sanctus' and 'Agnus Dei' are not those normally associated with that feast, suggesting that they may originally have come from a different cycle. 
Philip ap Rhys is given some prominence in this important mid-sixteenth-century source of liturgical organ music: his setting of the Miserere is placed at the very beginning, and he is one of only two composers whose place of work is noted. That the copyist found it necessary to explain that St Paul's was in London (rather than using the common abbreviation, 'Poulls') suggests that the manuscript may have been compiled or intended for use in the provinces. It was later owned by Thomas Tomkins (died 1656), born in St David's as son of the organist there, and himself appointed organist of Worcester Cathedral in 1596. There is therefore a possibility that it may have been intended for a church in Wales or on the Welsh borders. All of the compositions by Philip ap Rhys are in the earliest layer of the manuscript, along with works by John Redford and several other composers associated with St Mary-at-Hill in the 1540s. None of the music by Philip ap Rhys is taxing to play or especially striking, and it may have been written out for teaching purposes. 


@@@@@


doc= 67992


Edward Kyffin (1557/8-1603), Church of England clergyman and author, is believed to have been 'my brother Edward Kyffyn preacher', who is named in, and proved, the will of Maurice Kyffin. He was born at Oswestry and educated at Jesus College, Cambridge, but does not seem to have graduated. He was ordained deacon at London on 14 May 1585, at the age of twenty-seven, and priest at Bangor on 28 September 1590. He was also recorded as a witness at an ordination in Bangor on 26 September 1593. He was curate of St Martin Outwich, London, and it may have been there that he died from the effects of the great plague in 1603. Since his brother, Maurice, refers in the preface to his 'Deffynniad Ffydd' to the urgent need for a metrical version of the psalms in clear, intelligible Welsh verse, it may have been at his instigation that Edward undertook his translation. He was the author of 'Rhann o Psalmae Dafydd Prophwyd Iw canu ar ol y don arferedig yn Eglwys Loegr' ('Part of the psalms of the prophet David to be sung according to the tune customary in the Church of England'), which was printed by Simon Stafford for T[homas] S[alisbury] in 1603. In a letter to Sir John Wynn of Gwydir, Thomas Salisbury claims that Kyffin had composed about fifty metrical psalms before falling victim to the plague. However, the printed version, of which only one copy is known to be extant and which may never have been published, contains only the first twelve psalms and the first five verses of the thirteenth. They are set in simple free stanzas, known in Welsh as 'awdl gywydd', side by side with the biblical text. In the dedicatory epistle to his fellow countrymen, Kyffin explained that his reasons for undertaking the translation were that he believed Welsh to be one of the oldest languages in creation and that it had been preserved by God's providence down the centuries with some particular object in mind -- presumably to bring the Reformation to the Welsh in their own tongue. 


@@@@@


doc= 67993


Sidney, Barbara, countess of Leicester (c.1559-1621), noblewoman, was the only child of John Gamage (died 1584), lord of the manor of Coety in Glamorgan, and his wife, Gwenllian, daughter of Sir Thomas ap Jenkin Powell of Glynogwr and widow of Watkin Thomas. On her father's death in September 1584 Barbara's marriage became an important bargaining counter in Welsh political infighting. She was courted by her cousins Thomas Jones of Abermarlais, Sir James Whitney of Whitney, and Herbert Croft of Croft Castle; the privy council and Lord Burghley (acting in his capacity as master of the wards) and her influential uncles Sir Walter Ralegh and Lord Howard of Effingham sent contradictory instructions. But her guardian, Sir Edward Stradling, succumbed to even more powerful persuasions and accepted the suit of Robert Sidney (1563-1626), younger brother of Sir Philip Sidney. Robert's father, Sir Henry Sidney, was lord president of the council in the marches (and the leading opponent of the Croft faction on the council) and the family was connected by marriage with the earl of Leicester, Sir Francis Walsingham, and the earl of Pembroke. According to one tradition, it was Barbara who was attracted to young Sidney and persuaded her guardian to approve him. More conventional accounts emphasize that Barbara was married within weeks of her father's death to a man she had probably never met before, and one whose family connections were diametrically opposed to her own. 
Whichever version of events is nearer the truth, it was apparently a happy and successful marriage. Barbara Sidney's local influence provided Robert with the county seat for Glamorgan in the parliaments of 1584-5 and 1593, and her estates helped to restore the Sidneys' overstretched finances. She may have accompanied him on the campaign of 1585-6 in which his elder brother, Philip, was killed. She certainly went with him to Flushing, where he was governor, in 1590 and 1592 and again in 1597-8. Her early experiences may have left her vulnerable and insecure: on the rare occasions when they were apart, Robert's letters to her are full of anxious reassurance. Unfortunately, none of her letters to him has survived, though there are references to them in letters from others. It is even possible that she was unable to write and dictated her letters to an amanuensis, though the personal tone of Robert's letters to her suggests they were written for her own eyes. 
As both her confidence and their family grew (she and Robert had eleven children, including Robert Sidney and the poet Lady Mary Wroth), Barbara Sidney spent more time at Penshurst, with occasional and reluctant visits to London. At Penshurst she kept house in the traditional Welsh manner with a household that was unfashionably large by English standards. She seems to have been equally unfashionable in her devotion to her children. She was unwilling to leave them in England when she visited the Netherlands, and she kept her eldest son at home long after her husband considered he should have been sent to a tutor. While Sidney was absent in Flushing she was his representative at court and with the influential members of their family connection, especially with his sister, the gifted and distinguished Mary Herbert, countess of Pembroke. Barbara appears never to have returned to Wales after her marriage, though she maintained her connections there and Sidney planned to send her there for safety during the Armada crisis. She died in 1621, and was buried at Penshurst on 26 May 1621. 


@@@@@


doc= 67994


Howard, Katherine, countess of Nottingham (1545x50-1603), courtier, was the eldest daughter of Henry Carey, later first Baron Hunsdon (1526-1596), and his wife, Anne (died 1607), daughter of Sir Thomas Morgan of Arkstone, Herefordshire. Since she is not included in the list of nativities of their children that starts in 1551, Katherine was presumably born between 1545, when they married, and 1550. Her parents' marriage was a consequence of their connection to Princess Elizabeth: as well as being Elizabeth's first cousin, Carey was a gentleman of her household by 1551, while Anne Morgan was the granddaughter of Blanche, Lady Herbert of Troy, the princess's lady mistress from 1537 to 1546. After 1559 the Careys were treated as members of the extended royal family. It is possible that Katherine joined Elizabeth's household at Hatfield in 1556-8, for although no older than fifteen, she was appointed a gentlewoman of the privy chamber on 30 January 1560. A chance reference to Elizabeth's disguising herself as Kate Carey's maid to watch Lord Robert Dudley shoot at Windsor in November 1561 reveals her as one of Elizabeth's early intimates. In July 1563 Katherine married the lord chamberlain's son, Charles Howard, later second Baron Howard of Effingham and first earl of Nottingham (1536-1624), one of the defining alliances of the Elizabethan court. The disappearance of the Howard of Effingham papers makes their married life impossible to reconstruct, but she and Howard had at least two sons, William, third Baron Howard of Effingham ('b'. 1577), and Charles ('b'. 1579), and three daughters, including the queen's goddaughter, Elizabeth, who was a maid of honour by 1579 and married Sir Robert Southwell on 17 April 1583. Howard made her executor of the will he drafted on going to sea in 1588 and left her a life interest in the lordship of Esher. Like other gentlewomen of the privy chamber Katherine was given custody of some of the queen's jewels and the book of them, mainly new year's gifts received between 1572 and 1587, survives (BL, Sloane MS 814). In March 1579 the Spanish ambassador reported her as presiding over the table of the ladies of the privy chamber and by 1589 she was the senior gentlewoman, yet she does not appear to have been as active a patronage broker as some of her colleagues. In 1591 Elizabeth gave her the manor of Chelsea, which she and her husband had leased earlier. 
As Elizabeth's other intimates died off, Katherine and her family became steadily more entrenched at the centre of the court. Her husband (briefly) and then her father and brother all served as lord chamberlain, her younger sister Philadelphia, Lady Scrope, and her daughter Frances, countess of Kildare, joined her in the privy chamber (though without wages) and her granddaughter Elizabeth, 'fair young Mrs Southwell' (who later eloped with Sir Robert Dudley), became a maid of honour in 1599 ('Letters', ed. Collins, 2.141). However, Katherine's health deteriorated sharply in late 1601 and she went into a steady decline, dying at Arundel House on 24 February 1603 after suffering numerous 'fits'. Immediately afterwards gossip circulated that she had left secret riches, but the story that on her deathbed she revealed to Elizabeth that in 1601 she and her husband had deliberately destroyed the earl of Essex, by secreting a ring he had sent the queen to save his life, is apocryphal, as Lytton Strachey proved. More significantly, Elizabeth was said to have been more distressed by Katherine's death than her husband was, and her melancholy led to her own demise a month later. Katherine was buried at All Saints, Chelsea (Chelsea Old Church), on 25th April, three days before Elizabeth's funeral, but no monument appears to have been erected. 


@@@@@


doc= 67996


Savage, Thomas (1651/2-1668), apprentice and murderer, was said to have been born in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London. All that is known about his early life is that his father, John, a brewer or alehouse keeper, died when he was young, his mother remarried, and his parents 'endeavoured to have their son well-educated' ('God's Justice', 2). In December 1666 he was apprenticed to Francis Collins, a vintner who lived at the Ship tavern at Ratcliff Cross in Stepney. He apparently led a dissolute life, and frequented a nearby brothel, where he consorted with Hannah Blay. When he ran out of money on Sunday 28 June 1668, Blay is reported to have encouraged him to steal from his master. When he said this was not possible because a maidservant was always present in the house Blay told him to 'knock her on the head' ('God's Justice', 3-4). That afternoon Savage found himself alone with the servant, Judith Jones, alias Benson, and attacked her repeatedly with a hammer. She died from the wounds three days later. He broke open his master's cupboard, stole $62, and fled, but was apprehended on 29 June and was committed to Newgate prison. He then implicated Blay, who was committed that same day. He was tried at the Old Bailey on 24 October and was sentenced to death. On 28 October, aged sixteen, he was hanged outside the scene of the crime in Ratcliff. The body was taken down and carried to a tavern, where signs of life were detected. He recovered, but was hanged a second time four hours later. He is said to have been buried in Islington, where his mother then lived, but perhaps because he was an executed felon the burial did not take place in the church grounds. Blay, who was sentenced to death at the same sessions, pleaded pregnancy and was reprieved. She was hanged in the same place on 26 February 1669. 
This was an atypical murder for the time in that the offenders were so young, it took place in a private house, and the assault was unprovoked (most murders occurred in taverns or outdoors, in the context of arguments and fights). It must have shocked contemporaries; it attracted the attention of five nonconformist clergymen (Hugh Baker, Thomas Doolittle, Robert Franklin, James Janeway, and Thomas Vincent) as well as one other contemporary and several subsequent publishers of criminal biographies, who saw in this case a morality tale indicating the causes of sin and the possibilities of repentance. All accounts ascribe Savage's downfall to his initial sins of sabbath breaking and frequenting alehouses, and document his redemption through spiritual conversion while awaiting trial. This was the typical narrative of murderers' lives found in criminal biographies of the time; the clergymen's pamphlet, 'A Murderer Punished, and Pardoned', which forms the basis of all subsequent published accounts, appropriated this genre to demonstrate the power of puritan godliness. These pamphlets, which are the primary source of information concerning Savage's life, are thus of limited reliability for that purpose. Although the basic facts of the case are confirmed in the judicial records, there is at least one significant difference: while the published accounts indicate that he confessed the crime when he appeared at the Old Bailey (a sign he acknowledged his sins), his indictment indicates that he pleaded innocent. There are other hints that his conversion was incomplete: he was said to be drunk at his trial, and to have struggled with the executioner when he was hanged the second time. 
Accounts of the Savage case were frequently reprinted. 'A Murderer Punished, and Pardoned' went through thirteen editions to 1708. In 1710, at a time when the societies for the reformation of manners were engaged in a vigorous campaign against profanation of the sabbath, another account of the case was published which went through twenty-two editions in twenty-five years. In 1734 the story was guaranteed lasting fame when it was included in Charles Johnson's 'A general history of the lives and adventures of the most famous highwaymen, murderers, street-robbers, etc'. 


@@@@@


doc= 67999


Clark, Margaret (d. 1680), arsonist, was born in Croydon, Surrey, the daughter of 'honest but mean parentage' ('Warning for Servants', 1). She became a servant and was employed by several masters. By the end of January 1680 she had been with Peter Delanoy (De La Noy) a dyer, and 'a worthy and substantial person in Southwark' (ibid.), who lived in Montagu Close in the parish of St Saviour (also known as St Mary Overie) for some three months. On 1 February Delanoy and his family were away at his country retreat at Lee in Kent. That night three fires were started in his house. Margaret Clark and John Satterthwayt, a soldier in the duke of York's guards, were arrested, charged with arson, and brought to trial at the Surrey assizes at Kingston on 13 March. Satterthwayt was acquitted, but Clark was found guilty and hanged on 22 March 1680. 
Clark had admitted the offence in the early hours of 2 February and two JPs, James Reading and John Freeman, had taken her deposition. She alleged that on 26 January she had been approached by Satterthwayt to let him into the house in order to set it on fire, and on the third meeting she had finally agreed to do it for $2000. She had duly let him in and he had started three fires. However the neighbourhood had been alerted to the flames and the fire was put out. Suspicion fell upon Clark because she had salvaged a box claiming it to be her master's, which one of those present knew to be false. In it were several trinkets, but no plate or jewellery. Suspicion was reinforced by her dazed and faltering manner; brought before the magistrates she confessed after initial attempts at denial. Satterthwayt was picked up the following day from her description (she did not know his name); when brought before her she immediately identified him. Satterthwayt's defence to Clark's accusation was based on a detailed account of his movements before and during the crime. He was a member of the duke of York's guards which in the climate engendered by the Popish Plot only served to aggravate suspicions of him. However, his fellow guards vouched for his whereabouts in various taverns at the time he was meant to be at Delanoy's and his mother and uncle deposed that he was educated as a protestant. The jury believed him. 
Clark went to her execution penitent, accepting her guilt, refusing to seek a pardon and protesting the truth of her allegations against Satterthwayt, repeated at length to several Anglican divines and her many visitors in gaol, and printed after her death in two pamphlets. 'The True Confession of Margret Clark' (1680) was published by Joseph Collier. At its end it promised: 'A further account of her Behaviour in Prison, and what she delivered at her Execution, the Reader will have a fuller Narrative in a few days, with the Names of those Worthy Persons who were Eye and ear-witnesses of the whole Narrative. ('True Confession', 6)' This was duly provided the same year by 'Warning for Servants, and a Caution to Protestants'. 
The notoriety of the case prompted two other pamphlets, as well as being reported in the whig and tory press. Clark's story loomed large in the account of the three prisoners hanged at Kingston on 22 March. Satterthwayt (or a journalist purporting to be Satterthwayt) published a vindication of his innocence ('A True and Perfect Narrative of the Tryal and Acquitment of Mr. John Satterthwayt'), chronologically the first of the pamphlets. This detailed the testimony presented in court in his favour and presented him as a victim of the malice of the crown's enemies. 'I am a Gentleman', he declared, '... and a Souldier, though it be an Imployment obnoxious to a sort of people in this Age, who are dis-satisfied that His Majesty has any Guard for the Security of his Person' ('True and Perfect Narrative', 2). All the other pamphlets presented Clark's case that popish malignity was at the heart of the matter, a theme developed most fully in the 'Warning for Servants'. When Clark had agreed to the arson Satterthwayt and his accomplices had tried to persuade her to go to a priest of theirs who would confess her and give her the sacrament. The preface of the 'Warning' reminded its readers of 'the restless accursed endeavours of papists to ruine these Nations, and especially this Famous City and all its Suburbs'. Their incendiary devices had set the City alight in 1666, and (taking up an allegation made by Titus Oates) after several attempts they had succeeded in burning down a substantial part of Southwark. Being 'subtil and politick' they chose to keep in the background, seducing servants to burn down their master's houses. Delanoy's house was set: 'amongst abundance of old wooden, close Buildings, whence the devouring Flames, had they once got head (especially the House being fired in so many places) would easily have dispers'd themselves round about, and not only the Contiguous Alleys and Courts, but St Mary Overies stately Church, and the Houses on the Bridge. ('Warning for Servants', 5)' Margaret Clark's penitence was presented to move the reader, and to witness to the truth of her account: the dying words of a good protestant, who faced eternity and the stark choice of heaven or hell without the mitigating popish temptations to lie of absolution and purgatory. Clark's confession blamed her plight on her worldliness and desire to be better than her station in life: 'have a care of Pride and a worldly mind; for this, I say, Pride and Sabbath-breaking hath been my downfall' ('True Confession', 5). Asked by a minister on the day of her execution whether she were 'of a pilfering humour' and had set fire to the house to cover a robbery, she denied it, pointing out that she had had plenty of opportunities to steal from her master at much less risk ('Warning for Servants', 25-6). Both the 'Warning' and the account of the Kingston executions agreed in her penitence at the end: 'bathing herself in Tears, confessing to all that came to see her in Prison, that the Devil had deluded her and drawn her into his snare... and continued so penitent to the last, that notwithstanding the notorious Crime for which she was to suffer, she drew a general compassion from all or most of the Spectators, and so concluded her Life in a Flood of Tears. ('True Narrative', 2)' The 'Warning' did feel the need to refute the claim of the tory journalist Nathaniel Thompson's attempt to discredit her penitence. He had claimed that at the end she had tried to avoid her fate by accepting the offer of a young man in the crowd to marry under the gallows, which according to very dubious tradition, would have spared her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 68000


Phillips, Judith (fl. 1595), confidence trickster and thief, was a celebrated rogue who preyed on the unwary in London and southern England in the late sixteenth century. Her parentage, place of birth, and death are not known. She was married to one Pope, 'an honest man of a good constitution and well beloved amongst his neighbours' ('Brideling', 5), but grew dissatisfied with their poor condition and ran away to roam southern England 'in the company of divers persons naming themselves Egyptians', in other words, Gypsies ('Salisbury MSS', 83). She was once sentenced to death in Salisbury for her cozenage, or confidence tricks, but was pardoned. Afterwards she married John Phillips, a gun maker, who made her promise to lead an honest life, but to no avail. 
Phillips's most spectacular crime mixed mockery with larceny according to a true crime pamphlet of the day, 'The Brideling, Sadling and Ryding, of a Rich Churle in Hampshire' (1595). Working in league with two male companions Phillips hoodwinked a Hampshire farmer and his wife in the village of Upsborne. The coney catchers made enquiries about the farmer and learned that he was involved in a lawsuit; Judith then buried some coins under a hollow tree on the couple's land. With the trap in place she appeared on their doorstep. Telling them that she had magical gifts and that they were luckier than they knew, she gave them details about their lawsuit and directed them to the tree, where they dug up the planted money. When they were convinced she had second sight, she told them that she was intimate with the fairy queen and that she could make them rich if they would place their complete trust in her. Hooked, they agreed. 
Phillips told her marks to prepare for her royal highness the fairy queen by laying out their best plate and finest linen inside the house. Then she instructed the farmer to get down on all fours and allow her to put a bridle and reins on his head and a saddle on his back. This done, she mounted him and rode him three times around the garden, while the wife looked on. Directing both of them to lie flat on the ground with their eyes closed and not to stir, she robbed them and stole away. Finally realizing his foolishness the farmer rode to Winchester and raised a hue and cry. Judith was caught and imprisoned; she was brought before Lord Chief Justice Anderson at the assizes and confessed and 'received such deserved punishment as the law would permit' ('Brideling', 9). She soon returned to her old ways and fell into the company of two 'bad-minded men' who were out to swindle wealthy widows into marriage ('Brideling', 9). 
An account of Phillips's 'modus operandi' exists among the papers of Sir Robert Cecil. On 9 January 1595 serjeant-at-law (later lord chief justice) Thomas Fleming examined Judith Phillips and her husband, John, in Newgate prison concerning the tricking of Mrs Mascall, the well-off widow of a tripe-seller who lived at the back of St Nicholas Shambles in London. John Phillips, who was then at Crown Alley, Bishopsgate Street, was cleared of charges, but his wife was convicted. Working with an accomplice named Peters, who was bent on marrying the widow for her money, Judith Phillips forged a letter of introduction and gained her confidence. Through various ruses Phillips convinced Mrs Mascall that she was a wise woman who could work magic and that she could best advise her whom to marry. She also offered to help her find gold hidden in her house if her new friend would bring together all the gold she owned, which would draw the hidden gold to it. Pulling a fast switch Phillips managed to abscond with the widow's valuables but was arrested when she returned to the house to try for more, Mrs Mascall having discovered the switch. Phillips was whipped through the city on Valentine's day 1595. Mrs Mascall quickly became the butt of at least one pamphlet, 'A Quest of Enquirie, by Women to Know whether the Tripe-Wife were Trimmed by Doll, Yea or No' (1595), which retells the scandalous detail that Phillips had trimmed a lock of pubic hair from the widow to use in her staged fortune-telling. 
A flurry of pamphlets, broadside ballads, jigs, and plays magnified Phillips's notoriety. Fifteen years later Ben Jonson appears to have drawn on her exploits to fashion Doll Common in 'The Alchemist' (1610), which features the coney Dapper prostrate before a fake fairy queen played by Doll Common, in a scene with startling similarities to the tableau of humiliation created by Phillips. Shakespeare's 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' (1597) likewise depicts a gulled Falstaff cowering on the ground, tormented by a false fairy queen played by Mistress Quickly. 


@@@@@


doc= 68002


Berkeley, Lady Henrietta (b. in or after 1664, d. 1706), figure of scandal, was a younger daughter of George Berkeley, first earl of Berkeley (1626/7-1698), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1708), daughter of John Massingberd. Little is known of her early life. But in 1682 Lady Henrietta (or Harriett, as she was known in her family) became a well-known figure of scandal when still a minor, and under eighteen, following the revelation of her love affair with Ford Grey, Lord Grey of Warke (bap. 1655, d. 1701), the husband of her elder sister Mary. The intrigue seems to have begun in 1681 and continued for about fourteen months before it was discovered by Lady Henrietta's mother. Lady Berkeley forbade Grey from seeing Henrietta, and took her to the family seat at Durdans, near Epsom, where Lady Mary was also staying. However, Grey was invited to Durdans at the instigation of his wife, who was ignorant of the affair; Lady Berkeley, desperate to keep the matter secret from her daughter and husband, agreed to his coming. Grey arrived late one evening in August and stayed several days until his mother-in-law's protests finally succeeded in getting him to leave on 19 August. Later that night Henrietta fled the house, apparently aided by Robert Charnock, Grey's servant, and his wife, Anne. 
During the following weeks Lady Henrietta Berkeley lived incognito at a series of lodging houses in London. One week after she absconded lampoons began to appear speculating on the cause of her disappearance. Her family, who wished to send her to a nunnery in France, offered a reward of $200 to anyone who could trace her whereabouts and placed advertisements calling for her return in the London press. Grey admitted to the Berkeleys that he had access to his lover, but refused to let them see her. Eventually the earl of Berkeley launched a lawsuit for unlawful seduction against Grey and his accomplices, which was brought before the court of king's bench on 23 November 1682. Henrietta herself appeared at the trial, but with her evidence the lord chief justice told her, 'You have injured your own reputation, and prostituted both your body and your honour, and are not to be believed' ('State trials', 9.176). As the court was breaking up the earl attempted to take his daughter away with him, whereupon Henrietta announced that she was married to William Turner (Grey's servant). A scuffle broke out in the courtroom as she refused to return home and her father tried to seize her by force. For her own safety she was taken to the king's bench prison, accompanied by Turner, who reportedly lay with her there. After three days she was released. Grey and the other defendants were found guilty but escaped punishment as the matter was compromised early the next year. The trial attracted a great deal of publicity and the story of Lady Henrietta's affair with her brother-in-law became the inspiration for Aphra Behn's 'Love Letters between a Nobleman and his Sister', the first part of which was published in 1684. After Grey, a leading whig and supporter of the duke of Monmouth, was implicated in the Rye House plot in June 1683 Lady Henrietta accompanied him into exile in the Netherlands. She travelled with him to Cleves, where it was rumoured that she was pregnant. 
The rest of Lady Henrietta Berkeley's life remains a mystery. It is possible that she stayed in the Netherlands or joined Grey at his seat at Uppark, Sussex, on his return to England. Grey, earl of Tankerville from 1695, died in 1701 and in his will settled $200 a year on her. She died at Tonbridge, Kent, on 10 August 1706. By then her affair with Grey was stale news, and in recording her death the annalist Narcissus Luttrell confused her with her niece Elizabeth ['see 'Germain, Lady Elizabeth]. Lady Henrietta left in her will bequests totalling $370, of which $100 was left to her niece Elizabeth Berkeley. Lady Mary survived both her husband and her sister, marrying, in 1712, Richard Rooth of Epsom; she died in May 1719. 


@@@@@


doc= 68003


Hobry, Mary (d. 1688), murderer, was a French Catholic midwife of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields who emerged into prominence in late January 1688 when the head, torso, and limbs of her husband, Denis Hobry, were discovered one by one around London. His trunk was behind a dunghill in Parker's Lane, his limbs in one privy in the Savoy, his head in another. Much speculation centred on these body parts. The case became one site of rumour and debate over the Catholic menace in the months prior to the fall of James II. That three illustrations of Mary Hobry's crime and punishment are included in a deck of playing cards about the Revolution suggests the significance of the crime as a portent of the social and political disorder which could flourish under a Catholic king. 
The reassembled body was displayed in the St Giles bone house in the hope of determining the victim's identity. Once the victim was identified as Denis, Mary Hobry was apprehended on 2 February at the house of one of her clients. At the time of the murder she had been married to Denis for four years. Confusion as to the couple's last name seems to have been a consequence of the fact that they did not speak English, and that their English neighbours had a hard time grasping their name. Mary Hobry also seems to have been known by the name of her first husband, Defermeau. She had two children from her earlier marriage, a married daughter and a thirteen-year-old son who was a weaver's apprentice. Although both were living in London, neither lived with Hobry and her husband in Castle Street. A coroner's inquest was held on 8 February. A true bill was found against Mary at the Old Bailey on 22 February; she was arraigned the same day for petty treason and murder. She pleaded guilty. 
The fullest account of the events of 27 January appears in Roger L'Estrange, 'A Hellish Murder Committed by a French Midwife, on the Body of her Husband, Jan. 27, 1687/8' (London, 1688); other printed versions seem to have been based on this lengthy pamphlet. Since Hobry had confessed to her crime, and there was no trial, the tory journalist Sir Roger L'Estrange was concerned that there would be no published account to counter the many rumours circulating about the case, especially those attaching political significance to the murder: 'The late Barbarous Murder of Denis Hobry, (what with Malice, Prejudice, Credulity and Mistake) has put more Freaks and Crotchets into the Hearts and Minds of the Common People, than any Story of that size perhaps ever did in this World before' (L'Estrange, sig. A2'r'). Therefore L'Estrange assembled and published what he viewed as the case against Hobry: the sworn testimony of numerous witnesses, taken before him as investigating magistrate, as well as her own detailed 'confession', which he secured in a private interrogation with the help of a translator. L'Estrange emphasized the domestic nature of the murder. He explicitly pressed Mary on why she had disposed of parts of the body in privies at the Savoy, thereby incriminating the religion she professed. She replied that her only thoughts had been 'to part the Limbs and the Body, and hoped the Water might carry them away' (L'Estrange, sig. F3'r'). Similarly Henry Care, a journalist who was a whig ally of the king's, was concerned to refute 'the Croakings of the Faction' ('Publick Occurrences', 3, 6 March 1688), who had been busily turning the murder 'to the disadvantage of the Government, and scaring people, as it must needs be acted on some Religious score, and but the Bloody Prologue to some greater Tragedy' (ibid., 1, 21 Feb 1688). Care emphasized that the murder was the result of ''private Malice' or 'Revenge'' (ibid.). 
All accounts of the murder suggest that the marriage had been contentious and violent. The couple fought about Denis's extravagance, especially his seizure and waste of what Mary Hobry earned through her 'industrious Care' as a midwife ('Warning-Piece', 2), his drunkenness and dissolute life, which Mary claimed had infected her with a sexually transmitted disease, and his insistence that she 'submit to a compliance with him in Villanies contrary to Nature' (L'Estrange, sig. E3'v'). The couple alternated between separations, when Denis returned to France, and brief reconciliations, during which he would promise to amend his ways, with spells of open hostility. 

'A Hellish Murder' presents not only the fullest account of the murder itself, but also the one most sympathetic to Mary Hobry, since it so vividly details her provocation. On the night of the murder, by this account, Denis 'attempted the Forcing of this Examinate to the most Unnatural of Villanies, and acted such a Violence upon her Body in despite of all the Opposition that she could make, as forc'd from her a great deal of Blood' (L'Estrange, sig. F'r'). He also beat Mary, threatened her, and 'bit her like a Dog' (ibid., sig. F'v'). After he fell asleep she contemplated her limited options and decided to deliver herself from misery by killing him. She strangled him with a piece of packthread he used as a garter. Mary then spent several days deciding how to dispose of the body; at last, on 30 January, she dismembered him. 
Presenting the murder as the culmination of marital conflict did not render it less threatening, as L'Estrange seemed to hope. After all, murdering one's husband was distinguished from other murders as petty treason, and was associated by analogy with high treason, that is, any threat to or assault on the monarch and his or her government. For women, the punishments for petty and high treason were the same: burning at the stake. On 23 February Hobry was sentenced to be burnt; the sentence was carried out at Leicester Fields on 2 March. While the timing of the murder and Mary Hobry's status as a French Catholic made her crime even more controversial, her gruesome death links her to other murderous wives, whose murder of their husbands was also understood as treason. 


@@@@@


doc= 68005


Howard, Mary, duchess of Norfolk (1658/9-1705), noblewoman and divorcee, was the only daughter and heir of Henry Mordaunt, second earl of Peterborough (bap. 1623, d. 1697), and his wife, Lady Penelope ('c'.1622-1702), daughter of Barnabas O'Brien, sixth earl of Thomond. Her mother later served as groom of the stole to Mary of Modena. 
As a member of Charles II's court Lady Mary Mordaunt played Psecas in Thomas Crowne's masque of 1675, 'Calisto'. On 8 August 1677 she married Henry Howard (1655-1701), who became earl of Arundel in 1678 and seventh duke of Norfolk in 1684. Owing to the differences in their religion (he was a Catholic at the time, she a protestant, though their positions were later reversed) the wedding was private. As Lady Arundel she was lady of the bedchamber to Queen Catherine of Braganza. Like many women of the Restoration court she was the object of obscene satirical poetry. Her name was linked in particular to that of Charles Talbot, duke of Shrewsbury, which caused her to have a semi-publicized quarrel with Betty Felton over his affections. 
In 1685 Mary, now duchess of Norfolk, was taken to France by her husband. The duke, who had conformed to the Church of England in 1679, left her in a convent, where she was required to convert to Catholicism. Although he may have been spurred to part with her by the discovery of her adultery she later maintained that the duke was moved by financial necessity, 'to ease him in his charge and part; he frequently declaring, that when he should be more easy in his fortunes they should live together' ('A True Account of the Proceedings', 10). The separation, however, proved permanent. When the duchess returned to England in 1686 she took up residence at her estate at Drayton, Northamptonshire, and sued the duke for alimony of $400 a year, which he had promised in 1685 but never paid. She left England again in 1688, but returned again when her father (who had been imprisoned in the Tower after the revolution of 1688) fell ill. This time she took up residence in 'Fox-hall' (Vauxhall) under the assumed name of Lady Bateman, later explaining that she needed to remain incognito because she 'had at that time nothing to live upon', and 'not able to appear in a condition answerable to her quality' felt bound to retrench her expenses ('A True Account of the Proceedings', 21). 
In January 1692 the duke of Norfolk introduced the first of what were to be three bills in parliament to allow him to divorce his wife and remarry. A string of witnesses, mostly servants, attested before the House of Lords to the duchess's keeping company in 1685 and again in 1691 with the Dutch adventurer Sir John Germain (1650-1718). Divorces by act of parliament were at the time almost unprecedented and sparked a highly politicized debate over the relationship of church and state and the unreformed character of English canon law (which in contrast to continental protestantism permitted only separation from bed and board rather than full divorce). 
The duchess of Norfolk mounted a vigorous defence in parliament. She drew attention to the irregular nature of the proceedings which, she said, violated 'Magna Carta' and her rights as an English subject by creating new laws arbitrarily, she emphasized her status as a noblewoman descended from an ancient family, she threatened to prove the duke guilty of adultery, she pointed to the unfairness of making her 'prove a negative' of events that had happened so long ago, and she contended that the divorce proceeding was an attempt by the duke to pressure her into relinquishing her interest in Castle Rising, Norfolk, and other estates so that he could sell them to rescue his ailing fortunes. Her use of the press is especially striking. In response to 'libellous pamphlets' she published in 1692 'A True Account of the Proceedings' (printed again in 1693 as 'A Vindication of her Grace Mary Dutchess of Norfolk'), a long tract which interspersed summaries of testimony with observations attacking the credibility of the duke's plebeian witnesses. Still conscious of maintaining a wifely image the duchess explained that she had initially intended to release her pamphlet after the Lords rejected the duke's first bill in February 1692, but had suspended publication 'that there might be no offence to the Duke'. Given, however, that the duke had tried again with a suit in king's bench against John Germain and another bill for divorce in 1693, 'it now may not be thought impertinent for this true account to appear to the world' ('True Account', advertisement). The jury in king's bench had found Germain guilty of criminal conversation with the duchess, but awarded her husband in damages a derisory 100 marks ($66) rather than the $10,000 that he had sought. Although the duke was unable to obtain the passage of his second bill the duchess was persuaded in April 1694 'after long agitation' to convey to him the use of the manor of Castle Rising and her interest in 'a considerable part' of the manor of Sheffield in Yorkshire, 'it being condicible to their respective quiets and ease' ('The Case of Mary Dutchess of Norfolk'). 
In December 1696 the duchess was called to testify before the House of Lords regarding the behaviour of her cousin Charles Mordaunt, earl of Monmouth, during the attainder proceedings against the Jacobite Sir John Fenwick. Monmouth had apparently used the duchess as a conduit to convey advice to her friend, Mary, Lady Fenwick, to the effect that her husband should save himself by accusing prominent members of William III's government of Jacobite plotting. Whether the duchess wished like Mary Fenwick to expose Monmouth's intrigues, or whether she simply could not avoid testifying, is unclear. James Vernon, under-secretary of state, who certainly relished Monmouth's embarrassment, praised the duchess's performance: 'she behaved herself with great prudence and address; she appeared to be an unwilling witness, and yet left little room to suspect her sincerity' ('Letters Illustrative', 1.140). The result, in any case, was that Monmouth was humiliated, and blamed the duchess's malice. The duchess was also embarrassed in the proceedings by testimony that she had tried to recruit a widow, Mrs Norton, to discredit George Porter, the chief witness against Fenwick, by charging him with the murder of her husband. 
The antagonism between the duchess of Norfolk and her cousin Charles, who had succeeded her father as earl of Peterborough in 1697, was further inflamed by a legal dispute over the manor of Drayton and other properties. Peterborough's enmity may well have contributed to the reversal of her fortunes when the duke of Norfolk once more brought a bill for divorce in February 1700. A new raft of witnesses came forth to prove her adultery, some of whom claimed to have been sent abroad by Germain to prevent their testifying in 1692. The duke also emphasized the danger of his estate's falling into the hands of his Catholic collateral heirs, or of Germain's not-yet-conceived bastard children begotten on the duchess, should he not be allowed to remarry. This time the bill passed both houses, although with the proviso that the duke pay the duchess back her $10,000 marriage portion. 
The duke died in April the following year, and five months later Mary married Sir John Germain, baronet: the licence, dated 15 September 1701, was made out in the names of Lady Mary Mordaunt, spinster, and Sir John Germain, baronet (the title he had held since 1698). She died on 17 November 1705, aged forty-six, at her estate at Lowick, Northamptonshire, and was buried in the parish church there five days later. She had settled Drayton and other Mordaunt family property (according to one estimate worth $70,000) on her second husband: despite legal challenges by Peterborough he retained them until his death in 1718, when they passed to his second wife, Lady Elizabeth Germain, nee Berkeley. 


@@@@@


doc= 68006


Konigsmark, Karl Johann, Count Konigsmark in the Swedish nobility (1659-1686), army officer and accused accessory to murder, was of Swedish origin and was born at Nieuburg auf Fuhnen in Germany on 15 May 1659. He was the son of General Kurt Christoph Konigsmark (died 1673) and his wife, Marie Christina Wrangel. His brother was Philip Christoph Konigsmark, who was the lover of Sophia Dorothea of Celle, the wife of George, elector of Hanover and later George I of Great Britain, and who met his death under mysterious circumstances in 1694. 
Konigsmark was privately educated at home at the castle of Agathenburg and at Hamburg and Stade. He subsequently from the mid-1670s travelled throughout Europe, selling his sword and engaging in a number of adventures. He saw action in the forces of the Maltese knights of St John against the Barbary corsairs. After a supposedly single-handed assault against a corsair galley Konigsmark was rewarded by his installation as a knight of the order. He eventually went to England to seek service in Charles II's forces and to make some money by his other main talent as a card-sharp. 
Konigsmark fought in action at Tangier and on his return to England he was favoured by the king and was enough of a gallant at this time to attempt a liaison with and even proffer marriage to Lady Elizabeth Percy, styled countess of Ogle (1667-1722). She was heir to the inheritance of the earls of Northumberland and had been widowed for the first time when not quite fourteen. She was seduced by the count's charms, but Konigsmark was considered a very unsuitable match for the heir to one of the great estates of England and so her guardians rebuffed him. Instead she was given to the wealthy Thomas Thynne of Longleat, which angered Konigsmark, although the marriage was never consummated and Elizabeth soon absconded to the Netherlands. While Konigsmark hoped for an annulment of the marriage, Thynne, anxious to retain Elizabeth's property, sought legal redress and the return of his wife. Konigsmark, still feeling the insult of the marriage, planned his vengeance against Thynne. He sent a number of challenges to Thynne through his retainer Captain 
It was later claimed that Thomas Thynne ignored the many challenges sent by the count and had hired men to kill Konigsmark and Vratz. An attack apparently took place, but failed and left Vratz wounded. Soon afterwards Vratz recruited Lieutenant 
Planning continued, and when 
In prison Vratz, Stern, and Borosky were visited by two leading clergymen, Gilbert Burnet and Anthony Horneck, eager to bring these notorious murderers to a proper state of their sins and to ensure that they made a public, properly repentant, and godly end. Stern and Borosky showed the greatest signs of repentance and their confessions were duly published; Stern's was a lengthy and impassioned mix of autobiography and confession with prayers and spiritual meditations. Vratz was the most recalcitrant, though on the night before the execution Burnet detected signs of repentance. To Horneck, 'honour and bravery was the idol [Vratz] adored'; the captain regarded God 'as some generous, yet partial, prince, who would regard men's blood, descent, and quality more than their errors; and give vast grams of allowance to their breeding and education: and possibly the stout behaviour of some of the ancient Roman bravos (for he had read history) might roll in his mind. (Burnet and Horneck, 204)' Vratz, Stern, and Borosky were hanged at the site of the murder on Pall Mall on 10 March 1682, the day after Thynne's burial in Westminster Abbey. Narcissus Luttrell contrasted Stern's and Borosky's penitent and 'dejected' demeanour with Vratz's 'very undaunted temper' on the gallows (Luttrell, 1.170). To Sir John Reresby, to whom Vratz bowed 'with a steady look' from the cart carrying him to his place of execution, 'his whole carriage, from his first being apprehended till the last, relished more of gallantry than religion' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 257). The bodies of Stern and Vratz were given to their friends for burial; Borosky's was left to hang in chains at Mile End, 'being the road from the seaports where most of the northern nations doe land' (Luttrell, 1.171). 
Konigsmark sought consolation for the loss of Lady Elizabeth Percy in fresh military adventures. The authorities prevented any duels with whig lords, who still accused him of complicity in the crime, and he went to serve Louis XIV in his army, serving in 1683 and 1684 in the War of the Reunions between France and Spain and its allies. He was wounded at the action around Courtrai, and on his recovery served in Spain under Marshal Bellefonds and saw distinguished service in the French attack on Genoa. Eventually he went with his uncle Count Otto Wilhelm Konigsmark to Greece to fight against the Turk. There are various accounts of Konigsmark's death. He was either killed in action at Argos, or subsequently died of wounds and disease there, on 26 August 1686. He was later interred at the family mausoleum in Stade. 
Konigsmark was the classic Restoration bully and bravo. There is no doubt that he possessed a popular reputation for gallantry with women, as well as a headstrong nature. A short-tempered and violent man, who frequently stood upon his honour and engaged in a number of duels, he was also an excellent card player. Despite his protests at the trial and his subsequent release there is little doubt that he had been culpable in Thynne's murder. The fact that at the trial he was less concerned about the murder and more with having been placed in Newgate gaol, which he thought was 'a stain to his blood', says a great deal about his character (Lucas, 172). 


@@@@@


doc= 68007


Christopher Vratz (d. 1682), army officer and murderer, a professional soldier of German origin who had previously served as a mercenary in many of Europe's armies. Vratz had also at some point received a serious head injury, and latterly lived a dissolute life in Hamburg, having already spent some time as a highwayman in Poland. In Hamburg his arrogance led to his imprisonment and then expulsion. He then obtained a commission in the Dutch army and commanded a forlorn hope at Mons. His bravery was undoubted and one contemporary noted that he was as 'hard as flint' (Burnet and Horneck, 198). As a result of his bravery Vratz had obtained a lieutenancy in the Dutch guards and the king of Sweden was said to have given him command of a troop of horse. However, insubordination led to his further expulsion and he took service in the French army under Turenne. With the treaty of Nijmegen, Vratz made his way to Paris and then to London before ending up in Tangier, where he made the acquaintance of Konigsmark. 


@@@@@


doc= 68008


John Stern (1640/41-1682), army officer and murderer, to his design. Stern, who was in his forty-second year at his execution in 1682, was the illegitimate son of a Swedish baron who had been educated in Germany before becoming a professional soldier in the forces of the elector of Brandenburg. He had then spent twenty-three years or so wandering Europe in pursuit of his trade. In October 1681 he also had made his way to the kingdom of Charles II hoping to gain a place in one of the guards regiments. Falling in with him Vratz told Stern that he had a quarrel with an English gentleman and needed a second in order to duel with him. Stern agreed to fill this role. However, Vratz was also in communication with Konigsmark, who was lying low in London, allegedly recovering from a venereal disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 68009


Charles George Borosky (d. 1682), murderer, a Polish servant of Konigsmark's, arrived in England he was immediately handed over to Vratz and told to obey the captain. On Sunday 12 February 1682 Vratz told Borosky that he had a quarrel with an English gentleman, had sent him two challenges, and had been ignored; moreover, he said, the Englishman had attempted to have both himself and Konigsmark murdered. Vratz told him that he was bent on revenge and gave him a musquetoon. Borosky was reassured that, as in Poland, servants were not held responsible for carrying out the orders of their masters and together the pair, with Stern, ambushed Thynne's coach in Pall Mall at 8 o'clock that evening. As Stern moved in front of the coach Vratz and Borosky came up alongside. Borosky immediately fired his weapon into the coach and the blast struck Thynne in the stomach and hip, mortally wounding him. Sir John Reresby, in his capacity as a Middlesex magistrate, was able to arrest the trio quickly. Konigsmark's role was soon revealed and he fled. He was caught at Gravesend attempting to escape to Sweden. Brought back to London he arrogantly denied any complicity in the murder and claimed he had left only because he feared the possible fury of the English mob when he heard that he had been accused. He was committed to Newgate, but Reresby, for one, believed that Charles II was not keen to see the young man suffer for his crime. Indeed, at the ensuing trial Konigsmark, assisted by pressure from foreign ambassadors and judicious bribery, was the only one of the men actually released. Vratz claimed that he had wished only to get Thynne out of the coach so that he could duel with him; unfortunately a bemused Borosky had fired into the coach first. Vratz, Stern, and Borosky were all found guilty. 


@@@@@


doc= 68010


Rainbow, Bernarr Joseph George (1914-1998), historian of music education, was born on 2 October 1914 at 83 Silverthorne Road, Battersea, London, the only child of Ephraim James Rainbow (1888-1983) and his wife, Nellie Neal (1889-1965). His father was a cabinet-maker at Buckingham Palace and later curator of pictures at Hampton Court, so Rainbow grew up with a strong awareness of tradition through historic places and people. His father also was a keen amateur musician who played the cornet in brass bands and the trumpet in orchestras. 
After the family moved to Clapham, Rainbow became a church chorister and was intrigued by watching the organist play; he also loved to explore London with his mother. Another move took him to Rutlish School, Merton, and while still there he became organist and choirmaster at St James's Church; he later held similar posts at St Mary's, East Molesey, and St Andrew's, Wimbledon. He also gave piano recitals, admired for their maturity, and was active in local theatre. He formed the Merton Players' Guild, wrote a morality play for the group, and also directed and painted scenery. 
In 1932 the family moved to Hampton Court. Rainbow was subsequently a part-time student at Trinity College of Music, while earning a living as a civil servant in the map branch of the Land Registry. The war interrupted his studies; he served with the army in north Africa and Italy. 
On 9 August 1941 Rainbow married Olive Grace Still (1915-1996), a secretary, at the church of St Mary the Virgin, Merton; he composed the music for the service himself. In April 1944 he was discharged from the army on medical grounds after four years' service. In the following September he became organist of the parish church of All Saints, High Wycombe, and a few months later he was appointed senior music master at the Royal Grammar School there. 
Rainbow made a considerable impact at High Wycombe by putting on concerts at the parish church and starting a week-long annual festival in 1946. In 1950 Benjamin Britten, who had started his own Aldeburgh Festival in 1948, encouraged him by writing the preface to the programme book. Rainbow's pupils won awards, and representatives from thirty local choirs joined in Handel's 'Messiah'. Rainbow conducted the High Wycombe String Orchestra and was the soloist in his own piano concerto, which has not survived. In 1951 his parish church choir was chosen to sing evensong in the festival church on the new South Bank site in London. 
At this stage Rainbow began to be concerned about the low quality of music teaching in schools nationally. So in 1952 he took the post of director of music at the College of St Mark and St John, Chelsea, the Church of England training college for teachers. He was interested in new initiatives in music education, and put together a team of lecturers who would 'revolutionise the country's music education' ('The Guardian'), encouraging children's improvisations and compositions. When the college moved to Plymouth in 1972, Rainbow decided to remain in London and became head of music at Gypsy Hill College (later Kingston University); he retired from there in 1978. 
It was at Chelsea that Rainbow increasingly became a scholar and researcher. He had already acquired several music diplomas, but went on to gain three postgraduate degrees at the University of Leicester. His earlier publications, such as 'Music in the Classroom' (1956) and the 'Handbook for Music Teachers' (1964), were practical aids for teachers, but his most influential books were historical. His discovery of papers about John Pyke Hullah, a nineteenth-century predecessor at the College of St Mark and St John, aroused his interest in the social history of music education between 1800 and 1860 and led to 'The Land without Music' (1967), in which he gave the lie to the German description of Britain. 'The Choral Revival in the Anglican Church, 1839-1872' (1970) explored the movement to improve standards in church music, and gained Rainbow his doctorate from the University of Leicester. 'Music in Educational Thought and Practice' (1989) was his most substantial book, covering his subject from the ancient Greeks to the mid-1980s. Rainbow also edited some twenty-five separate primers from originals in various languages as 'Classic Texts in Music Education', a series which promised to be a major landmark. 
In 1978 Rainbow established the Curwen Institute to promote the work of John Curwen, the proponent of tonic sol-fa (whose brief biography Rainbow published in 1980). In the last two years of his life he became founder president of the Campaign for the Defence of the Traditional Cathedral Choir (opposing the introduction of girls into cathedral choirs) and established the Bernarr Rainbow award for school music teachers, subsequently supported by the Bernarr Rainbow Trust. His distinguished record was acknowledged when he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1994 and made an honorary fellow of Trinity College of Music in the following year. The history of music education was brought alive by the detailed research that Rainbow undertook in order to communicate both his vivid awareness of the past and his concern for the present. He had no children, and died from cancer on 17 March 1998 at the Princess Alice Hospice, Esher, Surrey, two years after his wife's death. He was cremated at Mortlake on 25 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 68011


Allen, Sir John (c.1470-1544), mayor of London, was born in Thaxted, Essex, into an agrarian family of moderate means. His father, Richard Allen, apprenticed him to Roger Bourchier of the London Mercers' Company, to which he was admitted in 1497. Allen was elected a warden of the Mercers in 1509, making him eligible for ward office, and in 1515 he was nominated alderman from Langbourn and Vintry wards. When Allen's nomination was rejected by the court of aldermen, the freemen from Vintry ward, where the Mercers maintained an almshouse, elected him anyway. Allen was nominated alderman from eight other wards during a civic career that spanned three decades. He rose to the status of master mercer in 1518, and was designated one of two London sheriffs by Lord Mayor Thomas Exmew that same year. In 1523 Allen translated from Vintry to Lime Street ward and in 1525 the court of common council elected him lord mayor of London. As was customary, Henry VIII knighted the new officer. 
During Allen's first term, following a decision in Star Chamber that aliens must contribute to the king's treasury just as natural-born citizens did, foreigners were ordered to come before the mayor, swear allegiance to the monarch, and indicate their wealth. At the same time the city ordered a boycott of immigrant merchants who imported woad, simultaneously damaging their businesses while taxing them. Thus Allen's first mayoralty, called 'distinguished' by Lyell and Watney (p. xxiii), has been branded as xenophobic by others. 
In late 1525 or early 1526 Allen was sworn as a councillor to the king, part of the outer ring of advisers stationed at Westminster that dealt with criminal matters. Allen served on a number of government commissions for the jurisdiction of London, including those for the peace, tax collection, and the property of lunatics. In August 1532 he and Thomas Cromwell were examiners in a treason trial; two months later Allen was among a dozen signatories to a letter 'from Council Chamber, Westminster', sent to the king advising him of plague around the inns of court ('LP Henry VIII', 5, no. 1421). Stow refers to Allen in 1536 as 'one of the king's council' (Stow, 242). As a councillor Allen was the recipient of many gifts from the monarch and purchased a suppressed priory at Hatfield Peverel in Essex. Allen also adjudicated disputes involving the Merchant Adventurers, of which he was a member, during the decade after his first mayoralty. 
Allen no doubt anticipated a peaceful retirement from municipal duties and bought a large house in Sything Lane in Tower Street ward. In 1535, however, the king proclaimed to common council his preference for Allen to serve as mayor again in the coming year. Despite the custom of a single-term limit for London mayors during Tudor times and Allen's sincere reluctance to accept the office, he was elected, one of only two men to serve twice during the reign of Henry VIII. Allen was instrumental in keeping London calm during the tumultuous events of 1536 and personally arranged for the supplying of horses to the king's men during the Pilgrimage of Grace. Fearful of economic depression in the city after the dissolution of the monasteries, Allen asked Cromwell to allocate $10,000 as a subsidy for St Bartholomew's fair in Smithfield. By royal command, the lord mayor and a deputation of aldermen attended the arraignment and trial of Anne Boleyn. They also witnessed her execution; Allen ordered all foreigners excluded from the vicinity. During his second mayoralty King Henry and Jane Seymour attended the marching watch of the city on St Peter's night from the vantage point of the newly built Mercers' Hall. In late 1536 Allen received the designation 'Father of the City' from the court of aldermen. 
Allen contended with Thomas Barnaby, a fellow mercer, over a loan of $100 made by Allen to Barnaby in 1537 for the lease of his house in security. Cromwell urged Allen to be patient with Barnaby, but Allen's misgivings proved prescient. In the autumn of 1541, after Cromwell's fall and Allen's retirement from government service, Barnaby convinced the privy council to act against the former mayor; Allen was ordered to 'compound with Thomas Barnaby for his debt and to restore the lease of a house Barnaby had given him in caution' ('LP Henry VIII', 16, no. 1155). 
Allen has been described as a bachelor by some sources, and his sons are labelled illegitimate by official records. However, the Mercers' records indicate that his tomb contained enough room 'for him and his wife' (Watney, 103). This was probably the Elizabeth Jay who was the major beneficiary of Allen's will. Allen also had a romance with a much younger woman, the sister of Lady Sidney, and gossip about his behaviour was relayed to Cromwell, who lamented Allen's indiscreet conduct. 
Allen died in London in September 1544, and was initially buried in a 'fair and beautiful chapel, arched over with stone, by him built' adjacent to the former St Thomas of Acon Hospital and to the Mercers' Hall in Cheape ward (Stow, 103, 242). By Stow's time Allen's tomb had been removed to the main Mercers' church and his chapel had been divided into leased shops; vandals had defaced many of the funerary monuments in the Mercers' church including Allen's. Allen left portions of his sizeable estate throughout England to three sons, John, Christopher, and Lazarus. Sir William Paget had the right to wardship and marriage of Christopher and Lazarus Allen; the brothers eventually married Paget's daughters Margaret and Agnes. Allen consigned his London house and lands in Middlesex to Elizabeth Jay, probably his mistress and the mother of Christopher and Lazarus; he also entrusted her with 'the keeping of John, my fool', during his natural life. He bestowed large amounts for poor relief, including $50 to be shared among the poor at 10's'. per week, $10 for poor maidens' marriages, and 500 marks to stock sea coal, financed by rent from his Essex estate. Stow included Allen in his roll of honourable citizens, noting that Allen gave to the city of London 'a rich collar of gold' to be worn by the mayor (Stow, 103). The lord mayor's collar, composed of twenty-eight ornate SS links joined by alternate enamel Tudor roses and gold knots, was first worn by Sir William Laxton, mayor in 1548. 


@@@@@


doc= 68012


Aucher, Sir Anthony (d. 1558), administrator and landowner, was the only surviving son and heir of James Aucher (died 1509), gentleman, of Otterden, Kent, and his wife, Alice Hill. The father, a son and heir of John and Margaret Aucher, was the successful head of a minor gentry family who bequeathed much of his estate to the church. In his will of 1 January 1509 he entrusted his son to Roger Churche (died 1524), rector of Bishopsbourne, Kent, and vicar-general in spirituals to John Morton, archbishop of Canterbury, and John Hales of Gray's Inn and Canterbury, 'fynding my said son Anthony to Scoole and lernyng' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/16, fol. 96). Aucher's mother subsequently married into the family of Hardres of Upper Hardres, Kent. 
Anthony Aucher began his ascent in Kent and at court in the 1530s as a servant of Thomas Cromwell, secretary of state. His connection to Cromwell dates from at least 1532, and by 1535 he was clearly in his service, active in miscellaneous Kentish affairs. Aucher acquired the position of auditor and surveyor of the estates of Christ Church Priory, Canterbury, and ingratiated himself with Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, governor of Calais. In 1537 Aucher was appointed paymaster of the royal haven works at Dover through the intervention of Cromwell and his agent Henry Polsted, and in 1539 he became one of the superintendents for the construction of the new bulwarks in the downs. During the ensuing Anglo-French war he was paymaster and surveyor for all building works at Dover, including the extensive alterations to the Maison Dieu Hospital when it was converted in 1545 to a victualling yard for the supply of the navy and the army in France. 
Aucher married well, before 1540, to Affera, daughter of William Cornwallis of Norfolk. With other former members of Cromwell's Kentish clientele, he aligned himself with the county's religious conservatives of the 1540s and flourished. This is perhaps surprising, for in 1540 he had in his household at Dover as tutor to his children the reformer Nicholas Partridge, a pupil and protege of Heinrich Bullinger. Aucher accompanied the royal army to France in 1544 as a lieutenant, responsible for aspects of transportation and supplies. At court he became joint master of the tents and pavilions, and master of the jewel house from 29 September 1545 to 6 June 1557. He was victualler of the works at Dover, chief victualler of Boulogne and Le Havre by October 1545 until 4 March 1550, surveyor of the victuals at Boulogne, Newhaven, and Blackness (1545-50), victualler of Calais from February 1551, marshal of Calais from 6 October 1552 until his death and receiver-general of the second court of augmentations for Kent, Surrey, and Sussex. Aucher also served as a JP of Kent, and was named to the chantry commissions of 1546 and 1548 for the county. He was knighted on 22 February 1547 at the festivities that followed Edward VI's coronation. 
Aucher's activities during the French wars and the debasement of the coinage led to his management of very sizeable amounts of money and commodities. In February 1547 he personally delivered 4116 ounces of plate from Christ Church Priory, Canterbury, to the mint for coining, and over the next four years he sent there $24,966 worth of plate from the chantries and free chapels, a good proportion of which was melted into ingots by Aucher in a specially constructed facility within the Tower of London. In addition, he became responsible for the plate confiscated from Thomas Seymour, Lord Seymour of Sudeley, Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset, and other notables. Aucher appeared able to weather every political storm, and was able to avoid accounting for his principal fiscal responsibilities for well over a decade. In July 1556 it was determined that he had never rendered any account as master of the jewel house under three monarchs. In his victualling accounts he was permitted to carry over year-to-year cash balances exceeding $10,000 without verification, to write off substantial sums on his uncorroborated testimony, and to charge exorbitant rates for victualling Boulogne's fortresses. In an era of laxity in fiscal accounting Aucher's activities were viewed as unprecedented, and repeatedly called into question. 
The rising gentleman employed his new-found wealth and connections to embark upon an ambitious programme of personal aggrandizement, well in excess of his annual wages and perquisites of office. From the crown Aucher acquired various lands, including Cromwell's possessions of the late priory of Mottenden, Kent. In 1549 he and Polsted, of Chilworth, Surrey, completed the payment of $2744 17's'. 9died for the manors of Ashford and Esture, Kent. Aucher was one of the major purchasers of crown lands in Kent following the dissolution of the monasteries, acquiring property conservatively valued in excess of $180 per annum. Private acquisitions included the purchase of the manors of East Hall, Kent, in 1552, and Bishopsbourne in 1557. 
In 1545 Aucher built in Kent, at his own cost, the great bark 'Aucher', a vessel of 240 tons with a crew of 200. Immediately leased to the crown as a warship, the bark served as Thomas Wyndham's flagship in the Scottish campaign of 1547-8. In November 1550, at the conclusion of the war, Aucher sent his ship on a celebrated exploratory voyage of commerce to the Aegean under the command of Roger Bodenham. Aucher had been assigned by Edward VI's privy council a leading role in the defence of Kent during the Anglo-French war of 1549-50, and he aided in combating the popular insurrection of 1549 in the county. It was while engaged in the latter activity that Aucher emerged as a strident social conservative, protesting in September to Somerset against the 'evyll accustomyd myschefs' of 'the Commonwelthe of Kent called Latymer', and asking permission to 'have the knave cuffed and beaten in every corner of the shire' (Beer and Nash, 176-7). The antagonism between Aucher and the Kentish commons was mutual: in the food shortages and economic crisis of the winter of 1550 he was singled out by protesters as a worthy candidate for hanging. The next year Aucher was drawn into controversy again when his servant, John Greene, was found guilty of complicity in the notorious murder of Thomas Arden of Feversham. 
The successes and ultimate disgrace of Aucher were closely linked to his ruthless exploitation of crown offices for personal aggrandizement. When Aucher attempted in 1545 to secure in advance a royal pardon for all future negligence in his new office as victualler of Boulogne, alleging that his personal estate was insufficient to bear the risk, Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, wrote a damning, mocking critique and demanded that he was 'eyther to serve like a man, manly, with such conditions in service as reason wold he shold be content with, or elles to make sute, for his inhabilite, to be discharged' from office ('Letters', ed. Muller, 150-51). Aucher was never forced to account for the large annual balance he created for this account; in the end the privy council permitted him to write off on unsupported testimony the sum of $7770 for commodities allegedly lost at the English abandonment of Boulogne and Newhaven. Aucher also successfully stalled until after his death demands for the $2356 due in the court of augmentations for his receipts as receiver-general for the year 1548-9. By March 1552 he had paid off a separate debt of $4395 for his arrears in this office during the year 1549-50. Only under Mary I did the government adopt a firmer approach, and begin to default his wages for fresh irregularities in his receivership accounts. Aucher lost control of some of his estates. He had already sold Swingfield to Sir Henry Palmer in 1551. Ashford manor, mortgaged to Sir Andrew Judde, was foreclosed upon in 1556, and Esture was sold to Judde in 1557. However, Aucher's problems ran deeper. Twice in March 1555 the Venetian ambassador reported on rumours of a plot to betray Calais to the French and identified as the ringleader the marshal, Aucher, who was distrusted by Philip and Mary. He was called to account for the keepership of the jewel house in 1556. In June 1557 Aucher surrendered the office to the queen in exchange for a payment of $200 and a gratuity of $166 13's'. 4died in recognition of service. He died intestate in early January the following year, slain at the French capture of Calais after leading several notable sorties. The crown moved speedily to acquire his assets, but initially secured merely $232 12's'. 9died from the seizure of household effects at his seat of Bishopsbourne. Unable under existing legislation to confiscate Aucher's landed property, the state was still seeking restitution fifty years later. John Aucher, the eldest son, died at about the same time as his father; John's sole daughter and heir, Anne, inherited the family manor of Otterden and subsequently married Sir Humphrey Gilbert. 


@@@@@


doc= 68013


Mewtas, Sir Peter (d. 1562), soldier and courtier, was the son of Philip Mewtas and Elisabeth Foxley, and grandson of Frenchman John Mewtas, French secretary to Henry VII and Henry VIII between 1491 and 1522. He was a man of action: tall, thickset, with a long fair beard, and expert in small arms, first coming to notice in Thomas Cromwell's circle. He was active in the suppression of the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536 and was said in 1538 to have been to France in order to shoot Cardinal Pole, though this may have misinterpreted missions of 1537-8, when Henry sent him to explore the king's marrying Marie de Guise. 
Mewtas was appointed gentleman of the privy chamber (1536), master of Bethlem Hospital (1536), comptroller of the mint (1537), overseer of artillery (1537), keeper of Wanstead Park (1540), governor of Guernsey (1545), and chancellor of the tenths of the household (by 1546). He married Jane Astley, a lady of the queen's privy chamber, in 1537; and, by 1552, another Jane, perhaps surnamed Angersley, about whom little is known. In 1539 he and the first Jane were granted lands at West Ham, Essex, to which was added the adjacent manor of Bretts in 1540. A child was baptized in February 1539, probably Henry, or perhaps Frances, later gentlewoman of the chamber to Elizabeth I and wife of Henry, Viscount Howard of Bindon. There were other sons, Thomas and Hercules, the youngest. Mewtas's widow and Frances were given a new lease of Bretts in 1565 and, in 1567, enjoyment of it for Jane's life; she died in 1577. 
Mewtas was one of the English dignitaries greeting Anne of Cleves at Calais in 1540. It was probably about this time that he received from Duke Philip of Bavaria, who was of the same party and a suitor to the Princess Mary, that 'best diamonte' bequeathed in his will to Frances. Mewtas resigned the comptrollership of the mint in 1542. The following year he furnished 200 men for service at Guines. He was knighted on 18 May 1544 on campaign at Butterden, leading 500 hackbutters. In Guernsey he oversaw works at Castle Cornet, including the construction of the Mewtas Bulwark, employing the engineer John Rogers. In 1546 he appears to have gone undercover in France: an English agent matching his appearance was sighted in Normandy that October. 
Henry VIII willed 200 marks to Mewtas, as one deserving a token of special affection. In February 1547 he conveyed to France notice of Edward VI's accession. At Rye on 6 July 1551 he was deputed to greet Jean d'Albon, Marechal de St Andre, on the latter's embassy to invest Edward with the order of St Michel, apparently receiving from the 'marechal' a brooch and chain which Frances also came to inherit. Under Edward, Mewtas continued to supervise the defences of Guernsey and represent royal interests in the island, where he was ordered to see that reformed church services were observed and ecclesiastical goods protected from misappropriation. 
At the king's death Mewtas joined Northumberland's attempt to subvert the Tudor succession, reputedly contributing a significant contingent of followers. This led to his imprisonment and loss of office by September 1553. He was also implicated in an attack with a knife upon a resident of a village near London who favoured the mass. He was committed to close prison in the Fleet in March 1555, but the following month was permitted to enter a $500 recognizance. 
Elizabeth's accession saw Mewtas's return to favour. In August 1559 he visited Francois II with the queen's condolences on the death of Henri II. Throckmorton, impressed by Mewtas's protestantism, repeatedly recommended he should succeed him as ambassador in France. In 1561 Mewtas was in Scotland, pursuing ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh. Back in France in July 1562, on a somewhat ill-defined mission to the prince de Conde, he fell sick at Dieppe, dying there in August or September 1562, and was buried there in September, in the course of activities representative of his career and ancestry: on French business, employing diplomatic and martial experience in the interests of protestantism and the English crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 68014


Tasburgh, Dorothy (1531-1577), landowner, was born in London, one of four daughters of the wealthy London mercer and sheriff Sir Thomas Kitson (1485-1540) and his second wife, Margaret Donnington of Stoke Newington, Middlesex. In November 1540 Dorothy's widowed mother married Sir Richard Long (died 1546), a gentleman of the privy chamber, and in 1548 she took as her third husband John Bourchier, second earl of Bath. On 20 September 1546, only days before her stepfather's death, Dorothy was granted a dispensation to marry Sir Thomas Pakington ('c'.1530-1571) of Hampton, Worcestershire, son of the evangelical London merchant Robert Pakington (who was murdered in 1536). Thomas and Dorothy had three sons and three daughters; their eldest son, Sir John Pakington (1549-1625), known as Lusty Pakington, was a courtier and favourite of Elizabeth I. Following Thomas Pakington's death in June 1571, Dorothy remained a widow for at least a year before taking as her second husband the young Buckinghamshire lawyer and future exchequer teller Thomas Tasburgh ('c'.1554-1602) of Hawridge. 
Dorothy's celebrity derives from her role as a parliamentary patron. Shortly before their marriage Dorothy's first husband, Thomas Pakington, had inherited the lordship of Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire from Chief Justice John Baldwin, his maternal grandfather and guardian, and in 1554 Aylesbury was incorporated as a borough under the control of the Pakington family, who usually returned their friends as MPs. As a widow Dorothy Pakington exercised the full powers of lordship herself, including returning the writ for the 1572 parliament. On 4 May 1572 she nominated Thomas Lichfield and George Burden as the borough's two MPs; Lichfield, a family friend, was to marry Dorothy's eldest daughter, Margaret, the following year. Although Lady Pakington's 1572 return was not unique, returns of MPs by widows were extremely rare in early modern England. They presented the authorities with a dilemma, for in 1586 the privy council expressed concern at a woman nominating burgesses, yet at the same time there was a powerful reluctance to restrict any property rights, even when exercised by widows. With her husband's consent, Dorothy made her will on 30 April 1577, requesting burial in the parish church at Hawridge, Buckinghamshire. The will, which has a protestant preamble, was proved on 21 June 1577. 


@@@@@


doc= 68015


Leighton, Sir Thomas (c.1530-1610), soldier, was a son of John Leighton of Wattlesborough, Shropshire (died 1532), esquire of the body to Henry VIII and MP for Shropshire, and his wife, Joyce, daughter of Edward Sutton, second Baron Dudley. Like Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick, and Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Thomas Leighton was a great-great-grandson of John Sutton, first Baron Dudley. His career was strongly influenced by family connections, which placed him at the core of the Dudley clientele. It may be inferred that he was a conspirator against the crown in Mary's reign and implicated in the plot of 1555-6 led by his first cousin Henry Dudley. In 1559 Elizabeth I named Leighton, along with known plotters exiled in France, as 'serviceable' and welcome to return to England. In summer 1560 Leighton served as captain of 200 foot soldiers during the Scottish campaign (TNA: PRO, SP 70/59/3). He may earlier have fought for Henri II in the war with England (1557-9): in 1563, when seeking to lead a force of 100 lances, he noted 'that is the kynd of servis I have been broght up in and do most love, besides I knowe as well as most men the manner of the servis of the Frenche with all the contry' (ibid.). 
Leighton's French language skills, which were to shape his career, probably originated in this period. In October 1562 he served with distinction at Rouen, commanding the English forces sent to aid the Huguenots. At the capture of Rouen he was wounded and taken prisoner, avoiding the galleys or worse by the intercession of Henri, comte de Damville. He was exchanged, only to be named as one of the English hostages upon Warwick's withdrawal from Le Havre in 1563. A recommendation from the Dudleys resulted in a captaincy for Leighton in Henry Sidney's colonizing enterprise in Ireland (1565-7); he also became a member of the corporation for the settlement of Munster. Connections at court brought more substantial returns. Leighton had been named by William Cecil in his list of Leicester's particular friends, which can now be dated to spring 1565, and he was created a gentleman of the privy chamber in 1568. In May of that year Elizabeth sent him to Mary, queen of Scots, and the earl of Moray to encourage a composition between their parties. 
Leighton served near Pontefract in suppressing the northern uprising of 1569. He was appointed governor of Guernsey on 14 April 1570 and took up residence, over the years advancing works at Castle Cornet (where he employed the engineer Paul Ivy) and encouraging the island's developing presbyterian polity. The natives persistently challenged many aspects of his government, particularly in the decade 1579-89; generally Leighton enjoyed the privy council's support in these disputes. He also continued in favour in diplomatic affairs, and was employed on an embassy in 1574 seeking to reconcile Charles IX with Alencon. In 1577 he visited the Low Countries to encourage peace between the states and Don John of Austria. 
In 1578 Leighton married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Francis Knollys, a gentlewoman of the privy chamber and first cousin once removed of the queen. His wife's sister Lettice, countess of Essex, married Leicester in the same year. Leighton was knighted in May 1579. The scurrilous 'Leicester's Commonwealth' (1584) inevitably characterized him as one of the earl's 'most obliged dependents' (Peck, 105). In 1585 the queen granted him the manor and park of Feckenham, Worcestershire. He was sent to represent the Huguenot cause before Henri III in June 1588. Diplomatic responsibilities did not diminish military obligations, and later that summer Leighton was a commissioner organizing defences and a senior officer of the royal camp at Tilbury. He was made deputy in Normandy to the earl of Essex in 1591. Trusted by the queen to supervise her favourite's military ardour, and prey to gout, Leighton found himself in exasperating circumstances. 
Leighton's governorship did not bring unmixed relief. He and Guernsey's royal court once more were in dispute before the privy council in 1597. Again Leighton emerged with honour. He may well have felt some satisfaction in providing a refuge for the eminent puritan Thomas Cartwright, whom he employed as chaplain at Castle Cornet (1595-1601). He devoted other energies to preserving game on the island of Herm; sadly in 1597 this retreat saw the drowning, with his tutor Isaac Daubeney, of Walter St John, son of Leighton's daughter Elizabeth, the wife of John St John. Leighton's other child, Thomas, married Mary, daughter of Edward, eleventh Baron Zouche. Lord Zouche acted in 1600-01 as Leighton's lieutenant in Guernsey. Thomas junior also served as lieutenant, being sworn in on 10 September 1604. The latter died in Guernsey and was buried in St Peter Port church on 25 September 1617. 
Leighton joined the council in the marches of Wales in 1601. In the same year he was appointed to the quorum on the commission of the peace of Worcestershire. He represented the shire in the parliament of 1601 where, appropriately given his puritan convictions, he was appointed to committees for bills for penal reform and against blasphemous swearing. The ill-fated bill for prohibiting the transport and sale abroad of iron ordnance touched Leighton's own patent. The stout defence of the royal prerogative made before the Commons by his father-in-law, Sir Francis Knollys, and the bill's failure, cannot have been unwelcome. 
Leighton's waning status under James I was symptomized by concessions made to Guernsey's authorities in 1607-8. Less significance may have attached to his military office at the former frontier, and his puritanism may also have lost him favour. He was elderly, and his one-time patron long beyond secular influence. Leighton died in Guernsey and was buried in the parish church of St Peter Port on 1 February 1610. The record of this referred, in French, to his government of the island as 'fortunate'. An early modern interlineation has altered the meaning to 'most unfortunate'. Traditionally Leighton was recalled in Guernsey with just such rancour, notwithstanding his distinction and his contributions to the island's military security and religious independence. In England he is barely remembered at all. 


@@@@@


doc= 68016


Astley, Katherine (d. 1565), courtier, was the daughter of Sir Philip Champernowne (died 1545), landowner, of Modbury, Devon, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir Edmund Carew of Mohun's Ottery, Devon, and his wife, Katherine. She was related by marriage to all the leading gentry families of the west country. Nothing is known of her early life, although her distinctive, if old-fashioned, hand, her lifelong association with the reformed religion, and her key role in the education of Princess Elizabeth indicate that she received a better education than most women of her class and generation. Sir Philip Champernowne clearly was not against his children's studies and Katherine was commended for her learning. 
By October 1536, when probably still a teenager and certainly still unmarried, Katherine had joined Elizabeth's household. Her introduction to court was ostensibly effected by Sir Thomas Cromwell, principal secretary, but her brother-in-law Sir Anthony Denny, who married her sister Joan Denny ['see under 'Denny, Sir Anthony], may also have been instrumental. There is little to distinguish her from her female peers during her first decade of service, and it was only when Elizabeth entered her teens that Katherine emerged as a key figure in her circle. About 1545 she married John Astley (c.1507-1596), courtier, of Allington and Maidstone, Kent, first son of Thomas Astley of Hill Morton and Melton Constable, Norfolk, and his second wife, Anne. Astley was one of Elizabeth's many Norfolk cousins. The couple had no children. 
By 1547 Katherine was powerful enough to secure the position of Elizabeth's governess, and her 'dilligent overseeinge' (BL, Add. MS 33271, fol. 46'r') of her office gave her a lasting influence -- she was particularly close to her charge, encouraging her education. The results of her more overtly political influence were mixed, although it is difficult to establish the extent to which she was an independent player or the tool of others when she encouraged Elizabeth to consider marriage with Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley, lord admiral, in 1548. Astley warned his wife not to encourage Elizabeth's 'affection' towards Seymour, recognizing the danger of meddling in royal marriages, but Katherine was quite smitten with the lord admiral's charms herself (Hatfield, Cecil MS 150, fol. 86'r'). Seymour joked about Katherine with his servant and illegitimate half-brother John Seymour, asking him to enquire 'whither her great buttokes were grown eny les or no' (ibid., fols. 85'r'-87'r'). Anne Seymour, duchess of Somerset, was scathing about Katherine's performance of her office, saying 'she was not worthy to have the governance of a kinges doughter', while Denny warned her to moderate her behaviour (ibid., fol. 80'r'). In January 1549, in the wake of Seymour's fall, she was sent to the Tower while her husband was put in the Fleet prison. As the execution just seven years earlier of Jane, Viscountess Rochford, had shown, complicity in royal affairs could be fatal, even for women, and Katherine was now terrified, however belatedly. Her depositions supplied the grounds needed for Seymour's conviction for treason, while she was spared because of the lack of interest in pursuing Elizabeth, and indeed was released shortly afterwards. Elizabeth pleaded successfully for the restoration of both Astleys to her household. Katherine was reinstated by 1551, and remained in Elizabeth's service following Mary I's accession, although her suspected involvement in the Dudley conspiracy resulted in a second spell in the Tower in 1556, leading to her dismissal. 
Katherine enjoyed a level of favour after Elizabeth's accession matched by no women and few men. She was appointed chief gentlewoman of the privy chamber, and 'had such influence with the queen that she seemed, as it were, patroness of all England' ('CSP Rome', '1558-71', 105). Unsurprisingly, her relations with other leading figures were complex; her active promotion of rivals for Elizabeth's hand in marriage angered Sir Robert Dudley, and led to two more brief periods of imprisonment, the last in 1562 for encouraging the suit of Erik XIV of Sweden, although once again she fully recovered her position at court within a matter of months. She died in London in her prime, on 18 July 1565, and was probably buried there. Katherine Astley was a powerful, if not particularly rich, woman whose influence derived solely from her friendship with Elizabeth, and was founded less on birth or political skill than on unswerving personal loyalty and an impregnable emotional bond with her mistress. 


@@@@@


doc= 68018


Arnold, Elizabeth (fl. 1616), translator, may have been the daughter of William Arnold of Cromer, Norfolk, whose genealogical line was recorded by the visitation of the Society of Heralds to Norfolk in 1613, although no details of her birth, death, and family are known. Arnold translated and annotated a short essay from Spanish, which prefaces Thomas Tuke's 'A Treatise Against Painting and Tincturing of Men and Women' (1616). There is no clue as to her biography in the prefatory material, nor did she translate texts for any of Tuke's other works. Tuke was 'minister of God's word' at St Giles-in-the-Fields in 1616, and dedicated several of his works at this time to Lady Alicia Dudley, who lived in Clerkenwell, and so it is possible that Arnold had some local Clerkenwell connection, although there is no documentary evidence yet to support this hypothesis. She was evidently well educated and literate. 
Arnold's text is one of a number of contributions with which Tuke prefaces his treatise. The other contributions are all poems by a medley of contemporary poets, R. Jackson, Thomas Farnaby, Robert Felton, Thomas Drayton, Edward Tyleman, and Josuah Sylvester. Tuke's literary connections were thus extensive, and suggest that Arnold had at least access to the fringes of a puritan literary circle. 
The text Arnold translates is what she describes as an 'invective against the painting of women' from book 5, chapter 62, of Andres de Laguna's 'Pedacio Dioscorides Anazarbeo acerca de la materia medicinal y de los venenos moriteros, traduzido de lengua griega en la vulgar castiliana y illustrado con claras substantiales' (1570), referred to in English by Arnold as his 'annotations upon Dioscorides'. The main body of her translation from the Spanish is a lucid and exact transcription from the original. However, she does add a brief commentary when she links two parts of Dioscorides' commentary together: 'Now that you may know that he flouteth his countrywomen, hear what he saith of this', proceeding to include an additional translation from a different part of the annotations, an account of the dangerous chemicals Spanish women use, which age and eat at their faces. It is clear from this linking commentary that Arnold both organized and structured her translation to make her polemical points against the dangers and pitfalls of cosmetics more powerful. 
Tuke's use of a woman's translation of an invective against cosmetics enabled his 'Treatise Against Painting' to avoid potential charges of misogyny, and both his main text and Arnold's translation focus on the physical, chemical damage of cosmetics and the theological tradition of linking cosmetics with devilish practices. Arnold's willingness to undertake such a translation for Tuke, a well-known Calvinist preacher, suggests that both her personal views and family circumstances were sympathetic to the puritan wing of the Jacobean church. 


@@@@@


doc= 68019


Arundell, Dorothy (1559/60-1613), author and Benedictine nun, was the daughter of Sir John Arundell (1527x30-1590) ['see under 'Arundell family] of Lanherne, Cornwall, and Lady Anna Stourton, daughter of the earl of Derby. The Arundells were the chief mainstay of Catholicism during Elizabeth I's reign, providing shelter and other services for priests and local recusants. Both of Dorothy's parents were active recusants. Her father was imprisoned several times, accused of sympathy with Spain in the 1570s, of receiving priests in 1584 and 1585, and held again during the danger of Spanish invasion in 1587. Dorothy's home environment and education were therefore intensely and actively Catholic, although her father maintained a strict loyalty to the English crown. The family tradition of strong spirituality and adherence to Catholicism may be gauged from the wording of her uncle Edward Arundell's will of 1587. He bequeathed Dorothy, 'my rope of pearl that was sometime her grandame's my mother, and a little diamond ring that was also hers... and I beseech God to make her a right follower of that good grandame's life', in other words, a staunch Catholic. 
The priest John Cornelius, whose early education had been funded by the Arundells, returned to England in 1583 and remained the family priest for eleven years, although he also engaged in duties elsewhere in the country. He formed a close spiritual alliance with Dorothy, inspiring her to become a nun. Sir John Arundell died in 1590, and his widow moved with her daughters and Father Cornelius to Chideock Castle in Dorset, fostering a small Catholic community in the seclusion of her own property. The priest's presence was betrayed, and all family members were examined. Dorothy claimed that she alone had hidden him. Cornelius was executed in 1594. Dorothy later wrote an account of his life, 'Life of Father Cornelius the Martyr' (once in the archives at the Vatican, but now listed as missing). She describes rays of light 'glimmering' and surrounding his head when offering a mass, when accused, and when beheaded (Foley, 3.445). She gives testimony to their close spiritual relationship. When he saw her the night before he died, he said: 'I will pray our Lord Jesus will make you a religious [a nun] full of years and merits and heavenly favours, so that we may again with joy meet in heaven' (ibid., 3.468), and in a letter he wrote that same night: 'we shall see one another in heaven if you keep inviolable the word you have given first to God and then to St Bridget' (ibid., 3.469-70). 
Arundell had intended, under Cornelius's direction, to enter the order of St Bridget, and now left for Europe in 1597. According to family history Cornelius appeared to her, while praying in Brussels, and suggested she join the new Benedictine convent being established in Brussels, the abbey of the Glorious Assumption of Our Lady. However, chronicles of her order record that she received 'some extraordinary special favour' from God while praying in St Saviour's at Rome on 9 November 1597, an anniversary she always afterwards celebrated 'with special devotion' (Foley, 3.437-8), which suggests that the family story is apocryphal. The financial and personal support of both Dorothy and her sister Gertrude in setting up the convent were crucial, and it grew quickly in its first decades, attracting many daughters of renowned English Catholic families. 
Arundell entered the convent on 11 July 1598, was invested in the holy habit on 21 November 1599, and professed as a nun, along with her sister, on 21 November 1600, aged forty. Both the infanta and the pope's nuncio attended, and the infanta led Dorothy into the church. The nuns engaged in contemplation, prayer, and the day-to-day running of an enclosed community. Dorothy Arundell may have completed, or edited her manuscript of the 'Life of Father Cornelius' during this time; she died in 1613. 


@@@@@


doc= 68026


Bentley, Catharine (1591-1659), abbess and translator, may have been the younger sister of Ann Bentley who entered the same convent on 3 May 1611, aged twenty-two; nothing further is known of her family. She took vows at the English convent of the Poor Clares at Gravelines, France, on 3 November 1610, aged eighteen, adopting the name Sister Magdalen Augustine. In 1619 she was one of eleven nuns who left Gravelines for Aire, in the province of Artois, to set up a secondary branch of the convent there. She became abbess of the nunnery at Aire and died, at the age of sixty-eight, on 1 July 1659, 'having been very vertuous, charitable, and devout' (Hunnybun, 38). 
Bentley seems to have been involved with translations of religious works. A group of interconnected texts related to St Clare appeared in print around 1621-2, mostly associated with Douai, and one of them names Magdalen Augustine as the translator behind it. In addition, in 1635 there appeared 'The History of the Angelicall Virgin Glorious St. Clare... Extracted out of the R. F. Luke Wadding his Annalls of the Freer Minors Cheifly by Francis Hendricq and now Donne into English, by Sister Magdalen Augustine, of the Holy Order of the Poore Clares in Aire, Printed by Martin Bocart at Douai'. As the title-page states the text is a translation of Hendricq's 1631 abridgement of Wadding's work. The translator dedicates the work to Queen Henrietta Maria from her 'Beads-women' at Aire, and adds a preface to the reader stressing that Clare was 'Of Feminine Sex, but Masculine virtue' (p. 3). 
While the evidence that Bentley was involved in these translations seems strong, Luke Wadding himself, writing within the lifetime of all involved, credited them not to her but to Catherine Magdalen -- that is Bentley's colleague Elizabeth Evelinge. The problem seems insoluble, although it has been suggested that it is evidence of collaborative translation practices (Allison, 37). 


@@@@@


doc= 68030


Brockman, Ann, Lady Brockman (d. 1660), writer on medicine, was the daughter of Simon Bunce of Linstead and Dorothy, daughter of William Grimsdiche. Her date of birth is unknown, as are details of her early life. She married Sir William Brockman of Newington, Kent, on 28 May 1616, and they had seven children. Her first son, Henry, died 'aged four years and eight months' on 13 September 1622 (according to his sepulchre in Newington church). One other child (Helen) died young, but five survived into adulthood: Martha, Anne, James, Helen, and Margery. The loss of their first child evidently affected the parents most deeply, since he was the only one given a sepulchre in the local church. Sir William Brockman was lord of the manor of Beachborough, owning Cheriton manor as well. 
In 1638 Ann Brockman began 'A book of receits'. She titled, dated, and signed the frontispiece, and the book was evidently used as her household and estate medicine book. The handwriting is a clear italic, with later additions in different inks. Included among the recipes are ones for 'a thin coff', 'the coff of the lungs', 'an excellent water for the stock', 'a tetter or ring worm', 'the payne in the head', and 'the payne in the back' (fol. 3). Her index shows the range and kinds of diseases she treated, and some of the methods: aching backs, ague, 'bath, for any smelling', sore breasts, bruises, burns, conception, convulsions, dropsy, eyes, headache, impostumes, itch, hypochondria, measles, melancholy, mouth sores, palsy, piles, plague (a late entry), purging, rupture, plasters, pox, running sores, salve, scalds, sleep, spleen, stones, sweating, syrup of vinegar, tobacco salve, toothache, sore throat, water, worms, wounds. The breadth of ailments, from simple aches and pains to more severe illnesses such as plague, suggests that she may have been treating a large household and its surrounding villagers. The recipes do not suggest the need for a physician -- although her recipe for a purgation is 'of Doctor Merton' (fol. 3) -- but they show that she provided traditional herbal recipes and treatment. 
During the civil war Brockman's husband fought on the king's side, and was imprisoned twice: once in 1642, and again in 1648 after he was captured for his key role at the siege of Maidstone. On both occasions Ann Brockman petitioned for his release, personally writing the first petition on 7 February 1643 but merely signing that of 1648. In 1643 she says she is worried about 'the preservation of his health, which I fear may be in some danger through the multitude of prisoners committed lately to that place' (Brockman, 'The humble petition', fol. 4), while in 1648 the writer of the petition says that it is her health that is suffering. Active petitioning of committees for prisoners was commonly performed by wives of imprisoned cavaliers during the civil war, but Ann's words illustrate her personal love and concern for her husband and her sense of responsibility in his absence. Her husband's letters on taxation and the provision of militia during the civil war occasionally refer to her knowledge of their estate, suggesting her role as partner with him in managing it. 
During her husband's lifetime Brockman had some personal control of land and money: a bond of $100 to her is included in the Drake-Brockman papers in the British Library. After her husband's death in 1654, their son James inherited his lands and title. However, Ann continued to manage some lands and money as her dower, which James paid from the estate until her death in 1660. In the years between 1656 and 1660 she received about $130 annually for 'her lady days rent', and a similar amount at Michaelmas, some from 'her 5 acres of meadow' (BL, Add. MS 45206, fol. 5). Ann Brockman died on 29 November 1660 and is buried at Newington church. Given that she married in 1616, she must have been at least sixty. 


@@@@@


doc= 68031


Bulstrode, Cecily (bap. 1584, d. 1609), courtier and subject of poetry, was baptized on 12 February 1584 at Beaconsfield, one of the ten children of Edward Bulstrode (died 1595), landowner, and his wife, Cecily ('fl'. 1575-1608), daughter of Sir John Croke of Chilton, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, and sister of Sir John Croke, recorder of London. Edward Bulstrode (c.1588-1659) was her brother. 
Members of the Bulstrode family had been minor courtiers in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and Cecily Bulstrode followed them. In 1605 she was among the entourage of the countess of Bedford, her mother's first cousin and her father's second cousin. Her possession at that time of a copy of a surreptitiously circulated puritan text suggests that she shared Lady Bedford's godly religious inclinations. By 1607 she and her sister Dorothy were gentlewomen of the queen's bedchamber. She became the object of scandalous gossip at court. Two poems attributed to Sir John Roe, 'True Love Finds Wit' and 'Shall I go force an elegie?' are identified as about her in early manuscripts; the latter is about a woman's offer to have sexual intercourse once, and once only, with an admirer. Bulstrode has, on the basis of an obscure passage in a letter of Donne's, been seen as the lover of Roe's brother Sir Thomas. Ben Jonson attacked her as promiscuous, vain, and untrustworthy in his 'Epigram on the Court Pucell', a copy of which was stolen from him when he was drunk and given to Bulstrode. The subject of this poem associates with 'sermoneeres', but also with wits at court, and writes 'newes Equall with that, which for the best newes goes' ('Ben Jonson', 8.222). This has been taken as evidence that the essays called 'newes' which were published with Sir Thomas Overbury's poem 'A Wife' were composed by friends of Bulstrode's, and that she herself wrote the essay 'Newes of my Morning Worke', which is identified in 'A Wife' as by 'Mris B'. Jonson's poem is, however, to some extent a formal exercise in satire, and it would be unwise to depend upon it as a biographical document. 
Bulstrode fell ill in 1609, suffering great pain, sleeplessness, fever, and vomiting. Francis Anthony dosed her with potable gold, and claimed that this had helped her. She died on 4 August 1609 at the countess of Bedford's house, The Park, Twickenham, and was buried two days later at the church there. The title of a poem on her death by Edward Herbert (later Lord Herbert of Cherbury) states that she died 'non sine inquietudine spiritus et conscientiae' ('with an unquiet spirit and conscience'). Jonson also commemorated her in verse, as did Donne, in the poems 'Death I recant' and 'Language thou art too narrow', which can be seen as products of Lady Bedford's patronage. Another elegy, 'Death be not proud', apparently a reply to 'Death I recant', has been ascribed to the countess herself. 
In the 1990s Bulstrode was rediscovered by historians of women's writing. Although 'Newes of my Morning Worke' is very short, and dubiously ascribed to her, it has been admired by some critics, and it has been suggested that more witty pieces by her may lie undiscovered. 


@@@@@


doc= 68033


Barlowe, Jerome (fl. 1528-1529), Franciscan friar and writer, is an obscure figure. The one incontrovertible record of Barlowe is that he was sighted on the road north from Attleborough to Bishop's Lynn in June 1529. Cardinal Wolsey's agents exacted this information as they made enquiries in East Anglia for Barlowe and his companion William Roy. Having lost the trail in Yarmouth, they met a man from Lincolnshire at Langley Abbey who claimed to have spotted the fugitives. Roy hid his face and went off the road; Barlowe, 'who had a red head' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3, 5667), was more forward and asked the way to Lynn. Afterwards, Roy and Barlowe were reported to have caught a ship in Lynn for Newcastle, where, the agents told Wolsey, they intended to continue the pursuit. 
Roy and Barlowe were the prime suspects for the production of 'Rede me and be Nott Wrothe', a truculent satire against Wolsey, written in octosyllabics interspersed with rhyme royals, and published anonymously, without printer's mark, in Strasbourg in 1528. The printer, Johann Schott (active 1500-44) published nothing in English except this and another work by Roy in the same year. Questioned on oath by Wolsey's representative Hermann Rinck, Schott confessed to printing 1000 copies each of the two English books, but said he had received no payment from Roy and Barlowe. Wolsey's men searched for the collaborators in various centres of book production, Strasbourg itself, Frankfurt, Antwerp, and lastly Cologne, where Roy and Barlowe were expecting (it was said) to collect the money. The attribution of 'Rede me and be Nott Wrothe' was repeated by Thomas More in 1530 and has largely been taken as read since. 
Tyndale in the 'Parable of the Wicked Mammon' (1528) provides the fullest surviving account of Barlowe. He identifies him, like Roy, as a lapsed observant friar of the Franciscan convent at Greenwich. Barlowe (Tyndale says) had arrived in Strasbourg from Worms in 1527, professing his new baptism and promising to give up the friar's life of idleness. According to Tyndale, Roy 'gate [Barlowe] to him and sett him a werke to make rimes' (Tyndale, sig. A3'r'). It is possible, therefore, on Tyndale's evidence, to see Barlowe as the proper author and poet of 'Rede me'. 
The tract, written as a dialogue, contains topical references to the murder of Richard Hunne and the burning of Tyndale's 'New Testament' by the bishop of London. Much of the dialogue is given over to a scurrilous anti-clerical attack on Wolsey, but what made it scandalous to More was the reference to the mass as dead and buried. 
Jerome Barlowe has sometimes been confused (including in the 'Dictionary of National Biography') with William Barlow. It is conceivable that it was Jerome and not William who wrote an anti-protestant work called the 'Lutheran Factions', and recanted to Henry VIII in 1533. It is also conceivable that William, not Jerome, participated in the production of 'Rede me', since the recantation refers to 'the Treatyse of the Buryall of the Masse' (BL, Cotton MS Cleo E IV, fol. 121). Scholarship is divided on these questions. 


@@@@@


doc= 68034


Beverley, Peter (fl. 1566-1568), poet, was a member of Staple Inn in 1566. He may be the person of that name who matriculated pensioner from St John's College, Cambridge, in Michaelmas term 1553, graduated BA from Clare College in 1556-7, and became a fellow of Clare on 16 December 1556. His 'Historie of Ariodanto and Jenevra' was entered in the Stationers' register to Henry Wekes, 1565-6. Its dedication to the 'Worshipfull M. Peter Reade' is dated 'from my chamber at Staple Inne. The first day of August', presumably 1566. Reade, a Norwich man, left Beverley (his godson) an annuity of $6 on his death in December 1568. This Norwich connection makes it unlikely that Beverley was a Yorkshireman by birth, as Prouty suggested. 

'Ariodanto and Jenevra' is the earliest English translation from Ariosto's 'Orlando Furioso', although it is so free with its original that to call it a translation is misleading. In competent but artless fourteeners Beverley elaborates the tale of Ariodante and Ginevra from 'Orlando Furioso', cantos 4.51-6.16, which relates how Polinesso, the wicked duke of Albany, tricks the Italian Ariodante into believing that his love, the Scottish princess Ginevra, is unfaithful. Polinesso disguises Ginevra's maid as the princess, and kisses her in view of Ariodante and his brother. This episode from Ariosto provides the chief source for the trick played by Don John on Claudio in 'Much Ado about Nothing', although it is unlikely that Shakespeare came to it through Beverley's version. Beverley transforms his original (which he nowhere mentions) from a fabliauesque novella chiefly related by Ginevra's maid Dalinda, into a tale of 'fine amour' which owes much to Chaucer's 'Knight's Tale'. The complex sequence in which the events of the tale are related in Ariosto is replaced by simple chronological order. Beverley's Polinesso first steals a diamond engagement ring from Jenevra in order to trick Ariodanto into believing that she is unfaithful (an episode with no counterpart in Ariosto), and then resorts to disguising Dalinda, as he does in the original. Beverley adds lengthy courtly complaints and set-piece descriptions of times of day to each stage of the narrative. The work was reprinted by Prouty in 1950. Beverley's only other known work is a commendatory poem for Geoffrey Fenton's 'Tragical Discourses' (1567). 


@@@@@


doc= 68035


Coningsby, Humfrey (1567-1610/11), collector of poems and traveller, was born about February 1567, probably at Neen Sollars, Shropshire, the only son of John Coningsby and his wife, Anne, daughter of Thomas Barnaby of Bockelton, Worcestershire. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, after 27 November 1581, aged fifteen. He was related to Thomas Coningsby (1550-1625) of Hampton Court, Herefordshire, whose wife, Philippa, was the daughter of Sir William Fitzwilliam and his wife, Anne, sister of Sir Henry Sidney. Thomas Coningsby accompanied Philip Sidney on his European tour in 1573. In 1604 Sir Thomas Coningsby sent letters to Robert Sidney, Lord Sidney, 'by my cousin Humfrey Coningesby' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 3.99). 
Humfrey Coningsby was the owner and compiler of an important Elizabethan poetical miscellany (BL, Harleian MS 7392 (2)). It consists of a collection of courtly poems by writers such as Queen Elizabeth, Edward Dyer, Arthur Gorges, the earl of Oxford, Walter Ralegh, and Philip Sidney, as well as pieces printed in 'The Paradyse of Dynasty Devises' (1576), some topical poems, and a large number of poems which appear to be unique to the manuscript. Coningsby's name and signature occur several times in the manuscript: many of the poems have his initials or H. Con. written after them, while other ascriptions indicate some concern with the correct attribution of their authorship. At Oxford, 'c'.1581-1583, and at the inns of court in London in 1584, the manuscript circulated among his friends who included the antiquary St Loe Kniveton (died 1628), Edward Evans, and Richard Allott, the compiler of 'Englands Parnassus'. Thomas Coningsby may have been the source for the courtly poems in his cousin's miscellany. 
Humfrey Coningsby was a traveller who left England in April 1594 and during the next four or more years visited much of Europe, including France, Germany, Sicily, and Italy. A second journey took him to Bohemia, Poland, and Hungary where he served under the emperor Rudolph II at the siege of Strigonium. He then went on to Greece, into Asia, and stayed for thirteen months in Turkey. After he returned to England, his next visit was to Spain. He set off, finally, from London on 10 October 1610 for Venice, was never heard of again, and was pronounced dead in 1611. In his will made on 10 November 1608 he left his books, his best lute, and his pictures to Thomas: other bequests included 'a white hower glasse of sea horse toothe' and 'Three greate Venetian lookinge glasses' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/148). His fine tomb in the church at Neen Sollars was set up in 1624 by his half-sister Joyce Jefferies; its inscription supplies most of what is known of his life. He was unmarried: his heir was his sister, Catherine, who married Edward Freeman of Evenlode, Worcester. 


@@@@@


doc= 68036


Cornwallis, Anne, countess of Argyll (d. 1635), Roman Catholic benefactor and supposed author, was the daughter of Sir William Cornwallis ('c'.1551-1611) of Brome, Suffolk, and his wife, Lucy, daughter of John Neville, fourth Baron Latimer (died 1577); the essayist Sir William Cornwallis (c.1579-1614) was her cousin. After the death of Lucy Cornwallis, Anne's father married Jane ('c'.1581-1659), daughter of Hercules Meautys of West Ham, Essex, and Philippa Cook of Gidea Hall, Essex. No details of Anne's upbringing and early life are known, but she came to the notice of literary historians because the short anthology of sixteenth-century poetry known as the Cornwallis-Lysons manuscript, now in the Folger Library (Folger MS V.a.89), bears on its second page the signature, in a large, rather immature italic hand, 'Anne Cornwaleys her booke'. Samuel Lysons, the late eighteenth-century antiquary, was a subsequent owner. Beginning with seven verses by John Bentley, the anthology moves on to twenty-seven more poems, including some by Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford, and one which is attributed to Shakespeare: 'When that thyne eyes hathe chose the dame'. 
It was James Orchard Halliwell-Phillips, the prolific nineteenth-century Shakespeare scholar and collector, who identified 'Anne Cornwaleys' as Sir William's daughter. Convinced that several of the poems were by Shakespeare, he saw the anthology as an intriguing link between Shakespeare and Oxford, and he set about investigating the circumstances in which the poems had been copied. He discovered that, probably in the autumn of 1588, Anne's father had purchased from Oxford, his friend and distant relative, the London house named Fisher's Folly. An enormous mansion set in extensive gardens just east of Bishopgate Street Without, on the site of the present Devonshire Square, it had served as a centre for the many poets and dramatists patronized by Oxford, until his precarious finances forced him to dispose of it to Sir William. Presumably the poems in the anthology had been found in manuscript in Fisher's Folly after Sir William and his daughter moved in, and scholars assumed that Anne had actually copied the contents herself. 
Apparently on this basis, the editor of the 'Complete Peerage' declared that 'she was distinguished as an authoress of some note'. In fact, the verses were transcribed in an accomplished secretary hand by someone now believed to have been a professional scribe. Most are love poems, and it is probable that, rather than being copied by a scholarly young woman with literary tastes, they were simply chosen to please a romantic adolescent and presented to Anne by a friend or relative. Her signature in the volume cannot therefore be taken as such important evidence of women's involvement in the transmission of literary manuscripts as has sometimes been supposed. 
Anne's true significance lies elsewhere. On 30 November 1609 she made a prestigious marriage when, at St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London, she became the wife of the widowed Archibald Campbell, seventh earl of Argyll (1575/6-1638), one of the Scottish nobles who had come south with James VI and I in 1603. It was an unequal match, he being of much higher status, but no doubt she brought her bridegroom a substantial dowry, all the more welcome because he was constantly being pursued by importunate creditors. There was presumably also a dynastic motive, because his first wife had left him with only one son, along with six daughters. He and his new countess went on to have three sons and five daughters. 
Anne was a devout Roman Catholic and her influence became evident when, in 1618, the earl shocked his presbyterian friends and relatives by converting to Catholicism. He and Anne moved to the Spanish Netherlands, where he entered the king of Spain's service. They formed close connections with the Jesuits and all but one of their daughters eventually became nuns. In 1627 Argyll decided to return to London again, to live in retirement. He and Anne took a house in Drury Lane and it was there that she died on 12 January 1635, two days after making a will leaving most of her estate to her daughter Mary and $100 sterling 'for pious purposes', to be distributed at the discretion of Dame Katherine Knollys, wife of Sir Francis Knollys, and Thomas Dade. Dade, who also received an annuity, was possibly the Father Thomas Middleton, alias Dade, who, as Dominican provincial in England, was brought to trial in 1651. Countess Anne was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 13 January 1635. 


@@@@@


doc= 68037


Denisot, Nicolas (1515-1559), French poet and tutor, was born at Le Mans, the son of Jean Denisot (died 1539), bailiff of Asse and advocate in the provincial court of Le Mans. He learned the arts of engraving and cartography and produced maps of Maine and Peru. In 1540 he was a member of the entourage of Cardinal Philippe de Luxemburg at Le Mans. He also figured in a group of Le Mans poets who became involved in a literary argument between Clement Marot and Francois Sagon. Denisot's verses in defence of Sagon were so clumsy that his name was used by his opponents to imply that he was a fool ('sot'). Most of his subsequent works were written under a pseudonym, usually Le conte d'Alsinois, an anagram of his name. In 1545 he composed a series of religious songs, the 'Noels'. In the course of that year he left Maine for Paris, entering the service of Francois I where he was given a post in the household 'for his good qualities and merits' (Juge, 42). During this period his poetic style was refined by his contact with the Renaissance poets of the Pleiade. 
Between 1547 and 1549 Denisot was in England and became a tutor to the three daughters of the duke of Somerset, lord protector during the minority of Edward VI. He may have ingratiated himself by writing poems in praise of the new king and his father, Henry VIII. These survive in the British Library, in an exquisite little vellum book probably made by Denisot. On his return to France he edited a collection of Latin poems by the daughters of Somerset and a number of French poets, which paid tribute to Marguerite de Navarre, who had recently died. The following year, 1551, he brought out another edition with translations in Greek, French, and Italian by members of the Pleiade; it was prefaced by an engraving of Marguerite de Navarre by Denisot. He may have left England under a cloud; subsequently Dr Wotton, England's ambassador in France, expressed the opinion that he had forged letters and was 'a crafty child' ('CSP for.', '1553-8', 267). 
It was probably on his return from England that Denisot had been appointed valet of the chamber to Henri II. In 1553 he distanced himself from the Pleiade by publishing the devout 'Cantiques du premier advenement de Jesus Christ', which condemned both paganism and the laxity of priests. Yet he does not seem to have inclined towards protestantism. Indeed, in 1556 he was probably asked by Henri to go to Calais under the pretext of tutoring the children of the controller, again ingratiating himself by exploiting his handsome appearance and pleasing manner. He drew a plan of the town which he sent to the French king; he was identified as a spy and imprisoned but managed to escape. His efforts probably contributed to the French capture of Calais in 1558. He may subsequently have married, as his second wife, a peasant girl who assisted his escape, Michelle Mesnil; in 1567 she was involved in a dispute with his heirs over her dowry. 
In 1557, under the name Theodose Valentinian, Denisot composed his largest work, 'Amant resuscite de la mort d'amour'. This sentimental novel subverts the cult of carnal love in favour of the duty owed to God and Christian marriage. In September 1559 he died of a fever while residing in the faubourg St Marceau in Paris and was buried in the church of St Etienne-du-Mont. His reputation as a poet remained high during the sixteenth century but was subsequently eclipsed; he was later seen as occupying an 'eccentric' position in French literature outside the circle of Pleiade poets (Balmas, 21). 


@@@@@


doc= 68039


Hurlestone, Randall (1525/6-1587?), religious writer, was one of seven children of Richard Hurlston of Picton, Cheshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of James Shawcrosse of Manchester. The records of Hurlestone's education, and indeed of his entire career, are obscured by some uncertainty, to no small degree because of the many variant spellings of his name. Both Venn and Sterry claim that he is the Ralph Hurleton who attended Eton College between approximately 1539 and 1543, and who was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, on 12 August 1543, aged seventeen, and left without a degree, despite having been made a fellow, in 1546-7. 
About 1550 Hurlestone published 'Newes from Rome concerning the blasphemous sacrifice of the papisticall masse with dyvers other treatises very godlye and profitable', a pamphlet containing four dialogues which he claimed to have translated. The first dialogue, writes Hurlestone: 'teacheth playnly that the papisticall Masse is no sacrifice, but rather a blasphemie of Christes passion invented by man. The next techeth how God must be worshypped aryght. The third how sayntes ought to be worshypped. The last what is Christian lybertie.' The introductory matter also attacks popish practices. In a preface to Thomas Howard, Hurlestone berates the 'beggerly ceremonies fetched out of the bottome of hell'. He writes that he has published the pamphlet, so that 'your hole posteritie may knowe what religion your lordshyp followed: forsakynge throughly the Romisshe ydoll, with al his toyes and invencions contrary to gods holy worde'. In a subsequent letter to the reader, Hurlestone calls for Christian teaching to be grounded in the reading of the scripture; he also attacks Catholic teaching, ceremony, and icons, in particular the assumption that the Catholic mass is 'a ful sacrifice 'ex opere operato''. 
In 1551 Hurlestone appears to have been in the employment of Lord Dacre: his name is appended to an order for certain items of clothing for Lord Dacre (BL, Add. MS 5751A, fol. 55). One Ranulph or Randulph Hurleston, who is said to come from Picton and who may very well be the same as the Randall Hurlestone above, was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1553. He was called to the bench in 1569, and made reader in 1572 and treasurer in 1582. He appears frequently in the Inner Temple records until 1587, when he appears to have died. He had no children, but his nephew, John Hurlestone, also applied for admission to the Inner Temple. 


@@@@@


doc= 68044


Punt, William (fl. 1548-1563), polemicist and book smuggler, emerged from obscurity in 1548 as the author of 'A New Dialoge called the Endightment agaynste Mother Messe'. This work proved to be popular (three editions were published in two months), perhaps because it skilfully drew on the work of major evangelical writers such as William Turner and John Bale. Punt's links to Bale went beyond imitation; some time between 1549 and 1552, Punt loaned the great bibliophile two books of Latin poetry. In Mary's reign Punt demonstrated the extent of his devotion to the protestant cause. Throughout the years 1554 and 1555, he ran considerable risks acting as a courier for imprisoned protestant leaders, a task which included smuggling letters, documents, and treatises in and out of various English prisons. In 1554 Punt made the first (or at least the first known) of numerous trips to the continent, carrying a letter John Hooper wrote to his wife, Anna, in Frankfurt. Punt, however, seems to have been particularly close to John Bradford, and he was almost certainly the 'W. P.' whom Bradford made co-executor of his books and to whom the martyr bequeathed two shirts. 
Some time during this period Punt married Dorothy Rawlins, the daughter of Erkenwald Rawlins, an affluent London merchant and correspondent of Bradford. Rawlins fled into exile in Mary's reign, arriving in Frankfurt by the autumn of 1555 and settling in Geneva by October 1558. His daughter initially remained in England with her husband. Some time after Bradford's execution on 1 July 1555, Punt seems to have gone abroad, very probably taking his wife with him. This, however, was only a respite. In the spring of 1556, an informer wrote to Bishop Edmund Bonner of London, describing Punt as one of the 'principal teachers of heretical doctrine in London' and as one of those who 'do most harm in persuading the people' (Foxe, 1605). The informant also reported that Punt was a bachelor; this probably indicates that Punt left his wife on the continent and returned to England alone. Most particularly, Bonner's informant reported that Punt was 'a great writer of devilish and erroneous books' and that he smuggled heretical books printed on the continent into England. On Palm Sunday 1556 Punt, smuggling a barrel-load of books into London, publicly read from one of them, an attack on the Anabaptists. 
The two major concerns of Punt's life, books and the Marian martyrs, were combined in Elizabeth's reign, when he assisted John Foxe in the research for Foxe's great martyrology, the 'Actes and Monuments'. Punt's role in aiding Foxe is revealed in a letter he wrote to Foxe from Ipswich on 23 April 1563. The accuracy of one of the stories Foxe had related in the first edition had been challenged. Punt, in his letter to Foxe, revealed that he had helped Foxe interview the sources for the disputed story. Now he travelled back to Ipswich to gather depositions from various witnesses to verify the story. After this, Punt vanishes back into obscurity. He was very probably the William Punt who was licensed by Bishop John Parkhurst of Norwich to read the proscribed 'Admonition to Parliament'. The William Punt of Heacham, Norfolk, whose undated will was proved in 1582 may have been the protestant writer and activist; if so, he had a new wife named Elizabeth and a daughter named Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 68045


Wever, R. (fl. 1550), playwright, is known solely from the appearance of his name ('quod R. Wever') at the end of two of the three surviving editions of 'An Enterlude called Lusty Juventus', apparently written during the reign of Edward VI, and notable for its strong anti-Catholic tone. A play thus entitled was recorded (without attribution) in the Stationers' register under the year 1560-61, and the successive editions are datable within the subsequent fifteen years. No information has otherwise come to light as to R. Wever's identity, and even his forename (sometimes given as Richard, or Robert) is a matter of conjecture. Attention has been drawn to the existence of a protestant clergyman called Richard Wever, who took a BA degree at Oxford in 1524. He may be the person of that name who became a fellow of St Chad's College, Shrewsbury (in 1546), and then prebendary of Bubbenhall (in 1549) and Hansacre (in 1554) in the diocese of Lichfield. This man was probably the Richard Wever whom Foxe mentions in the 'Acts and Monuments' as one of a number of persons examined at Lichfield in 1556. However, nothing is known that would connect him with the composition of 'Lusty Juventus'. 


@@@@@


doc= 68048


Deacon, Pudentiana (1580/81?-1645), Benedictine nun and translator, was the daughter of John Deacon of Middlesex. There are no records of her education but she was received into the Abbey of the Glorious Assumption of Our Lady in Brussels in 1607, so it is likely that her family were Catholics. The English agent for James I in Brussels described the profession: 'Here was yesterday a solemn professing of five Englishwomen to be nuns... [Albert and Isabella] did them honour to assist with their persons and the Pope's nuncio to sing the mass and to put their garments on them. The first in rank was Mrs. Morgan, who sometimes waited on the Countess of Sussex... the fifth one, Mrs. Deacon, that heretofore attended on the Lady Riche. (TNA: PRO, Flanders correspondence, fol. 279)' Pudentiana was undoubtedly from a gentry family, since she attended on Lady Rich, but her social status was the lowest of the five nuns professed that day. 
Deacon was received into the abbey on 11 July 1606, invested in holy habit on 23 April 1607, and professed on 29 April 1608, said to be aged thirty-two (though only twenty-seven or twenty-eight if her age given at death is correct). She was described as a 'regular person' (Neville, 9), suggesting her strict adherence to the abbey's rules. In 1623 she was sent with two other nuns to help with a new convent at Cambrai, Our Blessed Lady of Consolation, established directly under the Benedictines. The account of her life, responsibilities, and character is recorded in 'A Catalogue of the names of the religious Dames and Sisters professed of this convent': 'shee being a woman of a very good wit, judgement and understanding, was thought fit by her superiors and others to give help in a business of that consequence as the beginning of a monastery, which shee diligently performed, joyning a great zeal of regular observance with a motherly affection to all and care of all. (Gillow, 'Records', 77-8)' She held three key administrative roles: cellarer, mistress of the novices, and prioress. The latter two involved giving spiritual direction, and all required effective administrative skills.The convent was renowned for its translation work and for its manuscript and book collection. Deacon participated in this spiritual literary culture, translating Francis de Sales's 'Les vrays entretiens spirituels', from the French, as 'Delicious Entertainments of the Soule', published at Douai in 1632. Her name is not on the title-page but a seventeenth-century catalogue of the convent's library names her as the translator. Augustine Baker was spiritual director of the convent until 1633, and the nuns engaged in many translations under his direction. It is possible that Deacon was involved in other additional translations; Gillow names her as translator of 'The Mantle of the Spouse', although no supporting evidence confirms this. The prefatory address to 'Delicious Entertainments' notes: 'the translatresse, a woman... had not much skill in the Frenche... never intending more than the use of a particular cloister, though God and her superiors have otherwise disposed of it' (sig. a2'r'). Nevertheless the translation is lucid and professionally finished. De Sales's treatise may have attracted her because it directly addresses sisters for their spiritual direction and education through contemplation. 
Having fallen into 'great bodily infirmities which shee suffered with a remarkable patience... Her end was pious and peaceful in the 64 [year] of her age' (Gillow, 'Records', 77-8). Deacon died on 21 December 1645 at Cambrai. 


@@@@@


doc= 68049


Willoughby, Maria, Lady Willoughby de Eresby (d. 1539), noblewoman and courtier, was the daughter of Martin de Salinas and Josepha Gonzales de Salas, who were probably related of the Castilian royal family. Although she was not included in Katherine of Aragon's household list drawn up in 1500, Maria probably accompanied her to England in 1501 for her marriage to Arthur, prince of Wales. While the date of Maria's arrival remains unknown, it seems unlikely that she would have joined Katherine's household after the prince's death in 1502, when his widow was in financial difficulties. Possibly Maria was one of the Spanish ladies Isabella of Castile added to her daughter's household in March 1501, when she decided to increase their number. By 1511 Maria was certainly in England, for that year she was godmother to Mary, daughter of Charles Brandon, afterwards duke of Suffolk, and his first wife, Anne Browne. In 1514 Luis Caroz de Villaragut, ambassador of Katherine's father, Ferdinand of Aragon, complained about Maria's influence over his daughter, who by now was Henry VIII's queen. According to Villaragut, Maria was conspiring with her kinsman Juan Adursa, a merchant in Flanders who hoped to become treasurer to Philip, prince of Castile, to dissuade Katherine from co-operating with him and to encourage her to favour her English subjects instead. 
On 5 June 1516, having been naturalized on 29 May, Maria was married at Greenwich to William, tenth Lord Willoughby de Eresby, as his second wife. For her marriage, the king granted her Grimsthorpe and other Lincolnshire estates, and Suffolk served as feoffee on her jointure. At the wedding Henry also gave an offering of 6's'. 8died For some years Maria remained at court, and attended the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520. In 1522 a ship called the 'Mary Willoby', which may have been named after her, formed part of the Royal Navy. Her two sons, Henry, the king's godson, and Francis, possibly the namesake of the French king, Francois I, both died as infants. Her sole surviving child was her daughter, Katherine, born on 22 March 1519 at Parham, Suffolk. 
Lord Willoughby died on 19 October 1526 and was buried at Mettingham, Norfolk, although he had requested burial at Spilsby, Lincolnshire. Thereafter his widow struggled to maintain her daughter's rights as heir-general against the claims as heir male of her brother-in-law Sir Christopher Willoughby. Some lands her husband had settled on Lady Willoughby had previously been entailed to Sir Christopher, whose legal claim to them was strong. The resulting dispute with her brother-in-law, which erupted into violence shortly after her husband's death, led to a series of lawsuits in chancery and Star Chamber. Sir Thomas More made a preliminary settlement, placing some of the manors in the hands of the two disputants, where these could be identified as Lord Willoughby's intended recipients of them. The profits of other manors were sequestrated, until in 1531 More distributed some of these properties to Lady Maria and Sir Christopher. The duke of Suffolk had obtained Katherine's wardship with the intention of marrying her to his heir, Henry Brandon, earl of Lincoln, and with Cardinal Wolsey's assistance he supported Lady Willoughby's efforts. Then, in September 1533, after the death of his wife, Mary Tudor (whose funeral Lady Willoughby attended), Suffolk himself married Katherine. No doubt it was the duke's intervention which led to a parliamentary act in 1536 treating Lady Maria more generously than Sir Christopher. Nevertheless, the dispute was not fully resolved until 1565. 
Meanwhile, in December 1533, after the king's marriage to Anne Boleyn, Lady Willoughby informed Eustace Chapuys, the imperial ambassador, that her son-in-law was reluctant to fulfil his commission to require Katherine of Aragon to accept the annulment of her marriage. Two years later, upon learning of the ex-queen's illness, Lady Willoughby repeatedly but unsuccessfully requested a licence to visit her at Kimbolton. Finally, she journeyed from her London property of Barbican or Bas Court to Kimbolton, where she arrived about 6 p.m. on 1 January 1536. Sir Edmund Bedingfield admitted her, but only after she proclaimed that the injuries she had suffered from falling from her horse prevented her from travelling any farther. She remained with Katherine until the latter's death on 7 January, and with her daughter attended her funeral. Lady Willoughby herself died between 7 and 20 May 1539; it is not known where she was interred, but the story of her loyalty to Katherine fuelled the legend that she was buried with her in Peterborough Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 68050


Fane, Elizabeth, Lady Fane (d. 1568), literary patron, was the daughter and heir of Roland Brydges of Middlesex and his wife, Margery, and the wife of Sir Ralph Fane (d. 1552). Sir Ralph's close connections with Protector Somerset's circle, as well as Elizabeth's strongly protestant convictions, made her an attractive patron for radical poets, such as Robert Crowley. 
In 1550 Crowley published Elizabeth's translation (now lost) of 'certaine psalmes of godly meditation in number 21. with 102 proverbs' (A. Maunsell, 'The First Part of the Catalogue of English Printed Books', 1595, fol. 85'r'). In 1551 Crowley dedicated to Elizabeth, in the hope that she would be his 'liberall patrones', 'Pleasure and Payne, Heaven and Hell: Remembre these Foure, and All Shall be Well', a poem in skeltonics warning against the vanities of this world. 
Sir Ralph was executed in February 1552 (on a charge of conspiring to murder the earl of Northumberland), and his property at Penshurst and the contents of his Westminster home were subsequently sequestered. Henry Fane, a relative of her husband's, a former servant of Sir Thomas Wyatt the elder and a client of the Dudley family, also attempted to sue her for certain trust lands in 1552. None the less Elizabeth continued her role as protestant sponsor. Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments' celebrates her as 'a special nurse, and a great supporter' of radical protestants imprisoned during the reign of Mary, including John Bradford and John Philpot ('Acts and Monuments', 7.234), and John Careless, Bartholomew Trahene, and Thomas Rose. During their imprisonment Elizabeth corresponded regularly with them, exchanging books, spiritual advice, and messages of mutual admiration. Elizabeth possibly also adopted a more political role disseminating their prison writings, since details of their examinations appear to have been passed to her ('Examinations and Writings of John Philpot', 2.269, 289). 
After the execution of Philpot and Bradford in December 1555 the political situation forced Elizabeth into hiding, and she was harboured by the minister Thomas Thackborn near Reading for twenty-one weeks. Despite her involvement with radical protestants, Elizabeth survived Mary's reign. She died in Holborn and was buried there at St Andrew's on 11 June 1568. 


@@@@@


doc= 68051


Seymour, Lady Jane (1541-1561), writer, was the daughter of Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset (c.1500-1552), lord protector of England in the minority of Edward VI, and thus the niece of Queen Jane Seymour. She was one of the ten children (six daughters, four sons) whom Seymour had with his fiercely protestant second wife, Anne Seymour (c.1510-1587), herself a granddaughter of Thomas of Woodstock, youngest son of Edward III. Together with two of her sisters, 
The three Seymour sisters seem to have resembled their near-contemporaries, the four daughters of Anthony Cooke, in being conscious of themselves as a group. Their claim to fame is that they collectively composed a collection of 103 Latin distichs for the tomb of Marguerite de Valois, author and queen of Navarre, edited by Denisot and published in Paris in 1550. Margaret, in the judgement of the French humanists, was the most talented. Their work was most respectfully received: the sisters were hailed with a long ode from Ronsard, while a distinguished list of French humanists contributed congratulatory poems to the volume itself. This reception of the sisters' little book is probably to be connected with the high visibility of their father: Ronsard, in another of his odes, celebrates Somerset as the architect of an Anglo-French peace treaty concluded on 24 March 1550, which left the French in possession of Boulogne. The 'Hecatodistichon' ran to a second edition, produced in 1551, which shows some interesting differences. Each distich is followed by translations into Greek, Italian, and French, which has the effect of shifting the interest of the collection from the distichs themselves to the translation exercise which they have come to represent. However, the fact that this second edition includes French translations may indicate that the work was attracting genuine interest. 
While the sisters were at work on the poem, their father was deposed from the office of lord protector on 14 January 1550. His formal rehabilitation on 10 April of that year was marked by a swiftly arranged marriage between his daughter Anne and John, Lord Lisle, son and heir of his principal enemy, John Dudley, earl of Warwick and duke of Northumberland, on 3 June. The marriage was nearly as brief as the alliance which created it: Lord Lisle was condemned with his father after the fall of Lady Jane Grey, and although Mary spared his life, he died a few days after his release from the Tower in 1554. Meanwhile, Somerset himself had been executed in January 1552. Nothing more is heard of Margaret (who had perhaps died), but Jane became a maid of honour at Mary's court, then at Elizabeth's, and was the prime mover in the disastrous marriage between her brother, Edward Seymour, and Lady Katherine Grey, though she died just before the scandal broke. Jane, in fact, was so entirely responsible for stage-managing the occasion that after her death no single witness to the wedding could be found, and no one knew where to locate the officiating clergyman. This marriage was perceived by Elizabeth as a bid for the succession; it probably was, since the Seymours had Plantagenet blood through their mother, while Lady Katherine was a granddaughter of Mary Tudor, queen of France, and the deeply protestant principles entertained by both sides suggest that the couple had a common interest in reviving the Edwardian religious settlement. Jane died in 1561 and was buried in Westminster Abbey, where a monument was erected to her. 
Anne, on the other hand, after only a year of widowhood, married a Berkshire gentleman, Sir Edward Unton, in 1555, rusticated at Faringdon, had seven children in ten years, and in 1566 'fell into lunacy', though according to her son's later testimony, 'she enjoyed lucid intervals'. She seems to have kept the title of countess of Warwick from her brief first marriage, since it is the name used in Chamberlaine's funeral sermon for her. She died in 1587, and was buried at Faringdon. No portrait from life is known, but her second son, Sir Henry Unton, is remembered by art historians for his memorial portrait ('c'.1596, National Portrait Gallery): a representation of his mother nursing him in infancy is shown on the bottom right. 


@@@@@


doc= 68053


Seymour, Anne, duchess of Somerset (c.1510-1587), noblewoman and literary patron, was the only child of Sir Edward Stanhope (died 1511) of Rampton, Nottinghamshire, by his second wife, Elizabeth ('b'. before 1473, died 1557), daughter of Fulk Bourchier, Lord Fitzwarine, a descendant of Edward III. After her father's death her mother married Sir Richard Page of Beechwood, Hertfordshire. Some time before 9 March 1535 Anne married, as his second wife, Sir Edward Seymour (c.1500-1552) who was ennobled as earl of Hertford in 1537. Henry VIII visited them at Elvetham, Hampshire, in 1535 and at Wolfhall, Wiltshire, in 1539. They were installed at Greenwich Palace in 1536 to chaperone Edward's sister Jane, who succeeded Anne Boleyn as queen. 
Anne Seymour gave birth to ten children: Edward ('b'. 1537), who died in infancy; Anne ('b'. 1538); a second Edward ('b'. 1539); Henry ('b'. 1540); Margaret ('b'. 1540); Jane ('b'. 1541); then Mary and Catherine; in 1548 a third Edward, godchild of Edward VI, who died in 1574; and Elizabeth ('b'. 1550). Following royal practice the Seymours offered their three eldest daughters classical instruction. Anne herself participated in Anne of Cleves's reception and served as lady-in-waiting to Katherine Howard and in the privy chamber of Katherine Parr. Validating vague literary tradition, some scholars have identified her with the wolf in Surrey's poem 'Eche beast can chose hys fere according to his minde', which refuses the advances of the lion -- that is, a lady who refuses to dance with the poet (Sessions). 
After Edward's accession in 1547 and Hertford's elevation as lord protector and duke of Somerset Anne protested against Katherine Parr's marriage to her brother-in-law Thomas, Lord Seymour of Sudeley. John Foxe reported that 'upon what occasion' he knew not 'a displeasure betwixt' the ladies escalated into a conflict between their spouses, and that unconfirmed rumours claimed that Anne had manipulated Somerset into executing Seymour in 1549 (Foxe, 5.283). Embellishing Foxe's comments Nicolas Sander and John Hayward charged Anne, whom they characterized as extremely proud and domineering, with demanding precedence over the queen dowager, a claim lacking contemporary corroboration. It has been argued, moreover, that John Strype misread 'duchess' for 'duke' as the addressee of Sir Thomas Smith's letter of 1547, in which he responded to charges that he lacked religious fervour (Nichols, 380). Modern writers have favoured the Sander-Hayward characterization, perhaps to offset the invention of Somerset as the good duke. Though historians, including M. L. Bush, challenged this invention they mostly validated Strype's judgement of Anne, while omitting references to the extensive evidence of her deep religious faith, such as Foxe's confirmation of John Bale's claim that she gave 10's'. to the protestant martyr Anne Askew in 1545. 
After Katherine Parr's death in 1548 the duchess briefly sheltered the late queen's infant and assumed her sponsorship of the second volume of the translations of Erasmus's 'Paraphrases', which appeared twice in 1549 with John Olde's dedication to her. In 1549-50, as a patron, she contended with William Paget and Katherine, duchess of Suffolk, for resources for her clients. In 1550, having earlier apologized for his wife's offence, Sir John Cheke thanked Lady Somerset for supporting his court appointment. Between 1548 and 1551 nine additional publications saluted Anne, a larger number than for any other woman in early Tudor England. In her honour Walter Lynne produced three volumes, plus a translation of Bullinger's biblical concordance; Nicholas Lesse two translations (of Francis Lambet and of Augustine); William Samuel his 'Abridgement of God's Statutes'; and the family chaplain, Thomas Becon, dedicated to her a work entitled 'The Flower of Godly Prayers', which, reprinted twice, praised her godliness, liberality, 'gentle nature', and patronage of learning. At Martin Bucer's death in 1551 Anne obtained most of his books. Between 1560 and 1570, with their dedications, Becon's 'Prayers' was reprinted three times and Lynne's 'Concordance' once. In 1570 Edward Crane and in 1585 Ephraim Pagett dedicated translations to her. 
When John, duke of Northumberland, imprisoned Somerset for the second time in October 1551 Anne was incarcerated in the Tower, where John Hooper, bishop of Gloucester, visited her. Somerset was executed in 1552 but Anne, though protestant, remained on good terms with Queen Mary, who freed her on 10 August 1553 and granted her Hanworth, Middlesex, in March 1558. Later that year she married her late husband's steward, Francis Newdegate (1519-1582), fifth son of John Newdegate of Harefield, Middlesex, and Anne, daughter of Nicholas Hilton of Cambridge. In 1561, after learning of the secret marriage of Anne's son Edward, then earl of Hertford, and Katherine Grey, a royal claimant, Elizabeth imprisoned them; though Anne denounced their actions she obtained custody of Hertford in 1563-4 and later repeatedly requested his and his wife's freedom. In 1564 the crown questioned Newdegate, a parliamentary member, about his support for Katherine's succession claims. Ultimately both sons of the marriage of Edward and Katherine were placed in Anne's care. 
At his death in January 1582 Newdegate bequeathed his entire estate to Anne. In her will, dated 14 July 1586, she left bequests to four of her children: Hertford, whom she favoured as her sole executor; Henry, husband of Joan Percy, daughter of the seventh earl of Northumberland; Mary, wife of Andrew Rogers of Dorset and later of Sir Henry Peyton; and Elizabeth, second wife of Sir Richard Knightly of Northamptonshire. She died at Hanworth Palace, Middlesex, on 16 April 1587 and was buried at Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 68054


Egerton, Bridget, Lady Egerton (d. 1648), religious writer, was the only surviving daughter of Arthur Grey, fourteenth Baron Grey of Wilton (1536-1593), and his second wife, Jane Sibylla (1552-1615), daughter of Sir Richard Morison and widow of Edward Russell, Baron Russell (died 'c'.1572); Thomas Grey, fifteenth Baron Grey of Wilton (1575-1614), was her eldest brother. Her youth was presumably overshadowed by the financial troubles of her father, who died deeply indebted in 1593, and by the conviction of her unstable brother for treason in 1603; later Bridget described herself as 'the last remnant of that auncient house, that hath tasted miserie and affliction enoughe' (Bridget Egerton to duke of Buckingham, 28 Oct 1616, BL, Add. MS 37069, fol. 202). But her family was also renowned for its enthusiastic protestantism, a tradition she seemed to uphold as inheritor of the advowson of Bletchley, Buckinghamshire, in her petition of 1616 to secure the living for the son of her father's incumbent, the erstwhile nonconformist Thomas Sparke. In 1609 (marriage settlement December) she married Rowland Egerton (died 1646), eldest surviving son of Sir John Egerton of Egerton and Oulton, Cheshire, knight, and Margaret, daughter of Sir Rowland Stanley. Their eldest son, Thomas ('b'. 1614/15, died in or before 1646), was born in Buckinghamshire; they had five other sons -- John ('bur'. 1674), Arthur, Rowland, Sir Philip Egerton (d. 1698), and Charles -- and three daughters -- Sibylla or Sybill, Elizabeth, and Mary. Following the death of Thomas Grey in the Tower in July 1614 without male heirs, his barony fell into abeyance between Bridget Egerton and her older half-sister, Elizabeth Goodwin. Bridget's husband was knighted at Whitehall in March 1617 and acquired a baronetcy three weeks later. After his father's death in 1623 or 1624, he established himself on family estates at Farthinghoe, Northamptonshire, although he sat in the 1624 and 1625 parliaments as MP for Wotton Bassett, Wiltshire. 
In 1872 one of Lady Egerton's descendants published 'A forme of confession grounded upon the ancient catholique and apostolic faith', which survived among family papers as a small, neatly written notebook, bearing her name and dated 1636. Its nineteen articles of belief display confident protestant faith and a capacity for sophisticated understanding and lucid, trenchant argument, extending beyond simple amplification of the texts of the apostles or the Nicene creed; they are heavily allusive both to the 'Old' and the 'New' testaments. God is a spiritual essence, the first of the 'coequall, coessentiall and consubstantiall' Trinity ('A forme of confession', 10). An account of the fall of man and original sin is followed by an assertion of predestination, sustained in frequent subsequent references to the elect, although there is no reference to the fate of the reprobate or unbelievers. Salvation is by faith alone; works are its fruit, by God's command, by Christ's purchase, by love and charity, and make 'our calling, and election certain to our selves' (p. 20). Jesus, priest, prophet, and king, is the only mediator, advocate and intercessor; the papists' 'fiction' (p. 18) of purgatory is rejected. The canonical scriptures contain everything necessary to salvation: 'I see no neede, nor place left, for the popish trash, of unwritten verities' (p. 20). 'The supremacie of the Sea of Rome... is a Satanicall forgery' and in practice 'any particular church may erre' (p. 23); a true church is known by its preaching of the Word of God, by its sacraments 'sincerely ministered' (p. 24), and (less essentially) by its execution of scriptural discipline. The two sacraments are important, but are 'externall signes' (p. 25): the significance of baptism is specifically linked to the washing of 'such as are within the covenant' (p. 26); the Lord's supper is spiritual nourishment, the 'popish dreame' of transubstantiation 'utterly' rejected (p. 27). The author ends with the assertion that 'This is my faith, this is my hope and trust ye which I have learned and been taught out of the word of God' (p. 30). 
Lady Egerton has been described as 'an ardent Puritan' (Hampson, 255) but, as with many contemporary gentry, her ascription to a particular place in the spectrum of opinion within the Church of England is not straightforward. Sir Rowland's taking of his churchwardens to the court of high commission in 1639 in a dispute over church seating does not seem to indicate someone reluctant to use the instruments of Laudianism, although he may have regretted it when costs were awarded against him in November 1639. He was prominent as a royalist before his death on 3 October 1646, and was listed in 1648 as having lent the king $1080 on the Oxford engagement, but he gave some service to parliament, and the rector whom he presented to Farthinghoe in 1638, Walter Jackman, lived an apparently quiet life through the 1640s and 1650s. On the other hand, the 'Mr Diggle' named as household chaplain in Lady Egerton's will, drawn up on 1 January 1648, was almost certainly Edmund Diggle of Magdalen College, Oxford: he had preached before the Oxford parliament, refused a DD after the fall of the city in 1646, and was ejected from his fellowship later in 1648; after the Restoration, as chaplain to Bishop Accepted Frewen, he may be associated with the more ceremonial wing of the church. 
Lady Egerton's personal faith remained constant: her will conveyed assurance of salvation and contemplated her soul's 'ascent to the Heavenly Jerusalem', longing 'as the hart panteth after the waterbrookes... [to] bee with the liveinge God' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/206, ref. 128). Desiring to be buried near her deceased eldest son, Thomas, she left small bequests to her daughter Elizabeth, wife of Sir William Radcliffe of Lancashire, her sons Philip, Rowland, and Charles, and her servants. The overseers were Edward Bagshawe of Moreton Pinckney, Northamptonshire, and John Griffith of Bloxham, Oxfordshire, while the residue of the estate was to go to her executrix, her daughter Sybill, widow of Edward Bellot of The Ashes, Staffordshire. Lady Egerton died that summer, and was buried at Farthinghoe on 28 July. The will was proved in November by her daughter, by that time married to Sir Edmund Anderson. 


@@@@@


doc= 68056


Witt, Johannes de (c.1566-1622), humanist and visitor to London, was born in Utrecht, the Netherlands, the son of Steven de Witt (died 1572), knight, and his second wife, Machteld Bruininck Foeck. De Witt was descended from a respectable Utrecht family, several of whose members had distinguished themselves as legal specialists in public office. When Johannes was six years old his father died, and the child was committed to the care of an uncle, the prebendary Jacob Foeck. He read letters (and presumably also law) at Leiden University, where he heard Justus Lipsius, and he also studied at the Catholic University of Douai, together with Aernout van Buchell 
(Arnoldus Buchelius; 1565-1641)
, his boyhood friend and lifelong correspondent. For reasons that remain obscure, de Witt was in Paris from July 1585 to May 1586. 
Following his studies, de Witt settled on the family estate of Wiltenburg, near Utrecht. In 1596 he was in London, and reported on four public theatres, two of which he mentioned by name, the Rose and the Swan. Of special interest is the latter, whose 'intersignium est 'cignus' (vulgo le theater off te cijn)' and whose interior de Witt described and drew. The famous drawing that survives is a copy (perhaps of a later copy produced by de Witt himself of his own original sketch), made by van Buchell during the late 1590s or early 1600s. The drawing, discovered in 1880, is in van Buchell's writing book, which also contains excerpts that he kept of additional letters from Witt and others. It is now in Utrecht University Library (MS 842, fol. 132'r'), and is one of the most important documents in Elizabethan theatre history. 
De Witt became a prebendary of St Mary's at Utrecht on 1 October 1608. The twelve years' truce between Spain and the protestant north (1609-21), together with the waiver of his duty to reside in Utrecht, created an opportunity for this devout Roman Catholic to realize one of his greatest ambitions, a journey to Rome. He left Utrecht in 1610, and his first stop (via Antwerp, from where he sent van Buchell two small notebooks) was Paris, where he stayed for a rather surprising number of years (1611-17), preparing, as he himself relates in a letter to Gilles van Ledenbergh (1615), editions of 'Historia Caroli VI. Francorum rex', 'Passchasii Rathberti abbatis opera', 'Fulgentis opuscula aliquot', and the poems of Nicolas Braja ('Poemata de gestis Ludovici VIII'). None of this work seems to have been published. 
Following a detour via Angers and Tours, de Witt arrived in Lyons in the spring of 1618 and reached the holy city in December the following year. There he established friendships with Dutch painters resident there. Health problems did not prevent him from taking journeys to Monti Albani and Naples. Plans to return to the Low Countries via Venice and Germany were not to be realized. De Witt died in Rome on 30 September 1622, leaving his various collections of antiquities to a friend in the city, Johannes Honorius Axelius. 


@@@@@


doc= 68057


Constance Fowler (d. 1664), who laments his absence and begs for more of his poems. Constance helped bring about the union of her brother and Katherine Thimelby (1617/18-1658), his 'Seraphina', a member of a prominent Catholic family in Irnham, Lincolnshire, after his return from Spain in July 1638. The marriage probably took place that October. 


@@@@@


doc= 68059


Hatton, Elizabeth, Lady Hatton (1578-1646), courtier, was the fourth daughter of Thomas Cecil, first earl of Exeter (1542-1623), and Dorothy Neville (1548-1609), daughter of Lord Latimer. In the early 1590s she married Sir William Hatton (formerly Newport), who died in 1597, bequeathing her Corfe Castle, the Isle of Purbeck, Hatton House in Holborn, and the care of her stepdaughter, Frances Hatton. On 6 November 1598 she married Sir Edward Coke (1552-1634), a lawyer, who had ten children by his previous marriage, and they had two daughters, Frances and Elizabeth. She was popular at court, performing with the queen as one of the goddesses in the masque 'The Vision of Twelve Goddesses' (1604), and was well known for her lavish and lively entertainments at Hatton House. Jonson's masque 'The Hue and Cry after Cupid' (1608) commended her as one of the loveliest court ladies. In 1621 she was one of the select members of the audience directly addressed by one of the Gypsies in Jonson's 'The Gypsies Metamorphosed' (1640): '
Others' fortunes may be showne 

You are the builder of your owne 
(p. 71)' exemplifying her reputation as an independent, forceful, and powerful woman. She corresponded with Elizabeth of Bohemia and visited her in exile at The Hague in 1627. 
Elizabeth's marriage to Edward Coke was difficult. She initiated several legal actions against his appropriation of lands and revenue inherited from her first husband, in 1617 and after Coke's death in 1634. The 1634 text of her petition to the privy council outlines their financial disagreements, claiming Coke refused her maintenance and used profits from her lands to advance the children of his first marriage. Lady Hatton's resistance to the view that a husband owned his wife's property displays her strong, intelligent, and independent temperament, exemplifying how powerful married women conceived of their property, and the fight they faced to retain it. In 1600 she left him for at least a year, using her connections with influential men to force Coke to grant her an annual allowance. She refused to take his name, continuing to use 'Lady Hatton', and for most of their marriage they lived apart. In 1617 she petitioned the council for her assets, condemning his appropriation of land, revenue, and a mortgage. Chamberlain described her performance before the council: 'divers said Burbage could not have acted better' ('CSP dom.', '1611-18', vol. xcii, no.42). The dispute was settled by negotiation. 
Coke treated his wife's daughters as he did her property. In 1605 he forced the marriage of her stepdaughter Frances Hatton to Sir Robert Rich. The marriage of Coke's and Hatton's own daughter, Frances Coke, to Sir John Villiers, George Villiers's brother, is renowned. Coke negotiated the details, to which neither mother nor daughter were party, in 1617. Lady Hatton removed her daughter, but Coke obtained a warrant, forcing entry to obtain her. Francis Bacon, then lord keeper, was petitioned by Lady Hatton, who described herself as 'like a cow that has lost a calf' (Spedding, 4.225). He ruled that both parents' consent was needed (given Frances was heir to her mother's estates), ordering Coke to return Frances to her mother. Lady Hatton agreed to the marriage on terms ensuring her daughter an income, but Frances's life with Villiers was unhappy and she was arraigned for adultery in 1627. Lady Hatton provided equivocal support for her daughter, but did leave her estate to her son. 
Hatton was actively involved in the financial management of her estates: there are records of disputes about leases for Hatton House and about access over her land. Her will gives precise details of the disposal and care of her properties and large bequests for poor relief in Holborn and Stoke Poges. During the civil war she supported parliament. She died on 3 January 1646 and was buried in St Andrew's parish church in Holborn. There is no monument, despite a request in her will that one be erected to her there; the exigencies of the civil war may explain its absence. 


@@@@@


doc= 68062


Hayllar family (per. c.1850-c.1900), painters, came to prominence with James Hayllar (1829-1920), who was born on 3 January 1829, probably at The Hornet, Whyke, Chichester. He was baptized on 13 February at St Pancras, Eastgate Square, Chichester, the son of Thomas Hayllar (1794-1859), coal merchant, farmer, and miller, and his wife, Mary Ann Child (1794-1885). Richard Cobden was his cousin on his father's side. He was educated at Midhurst grammar school and subsequently studied under the marine artists William and John Cantiloe Joy. In 1848 he became a resident pupil of Francis Stephen Cary, who had taken over Henry Sass's academy in Bloomsbury in 1842; he remained with the Carys at 21 Bloomsbury Street until 1851 -- even after his entry to the Royal Academy Schools in 1849 -- while working as a portraitist, principally in crayons. In October 1851 he travelled to Italy with his friend John Cavell -- to whose sister Ellen he had recently become engaged -- and spent two years in Rome (where he met Lord Leighton) and Florence studying from the antique and old masters. On his return in October 1853 he resumed portrait painting, mainly in oils, taking studios in London in Berners Street in 1854 and Great Ormond Street in 1855; 'Lady Mynzomdie' (exh. RA, 1854) -- a portrait of Ellen Cavell -- and 'John Cavell' (exh. RA, 1855) were among his first exhibited works. He continued to paint portraits throughout his life, his most famous commissions being for Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn, the duke and duchess of St Albans, and General Hardy. 
On 8 March 1855 James Hayllar married Ellen Phoebe Cavell (1827-1899), the daughter of a law stationer, and aunt of Edith Cavell. Although he exhibited from a studio, 1 Langham Chambers, Langham Place, between 1860 and 1864, from 1855 until 1875 they lived at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, where his father-in-law, John Cavell, was head of the household until his death in 1863 and where, between 1856 and 1868, they had nine children, four boys and five girls. Jessica, Edith, Kate, and Mary ['see below'] all became professional painters. 
James Hayllar had exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (SBA) from 1851. From 1855 his work was also shown at the British Institution, the Liverpool Academy (LA), and the Royal Manchester Institution, and in subsequent years at the Royal Hibernian Academy, the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours, and the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, among other galleries. In the 1850s he exhibited landscapes and genre subjects such as 'The Teetotaller and Tippler' (exh. SBA and LA, 1855) and 'Bookworm and Grub' (exh. LA, 1857). During the 1860s he also experimented with historical genre, appending lengthy quotations to titles such as 'The incident out of which arose Lord Mansfield's decision that as soon as a slave set his foot upon English territory, he became free' (exh. RA, 1864; V&A), the latter subject having been suggested to him by Richard Cobden. It was not until 1866 that he won acclaim, with a painting entitled 'Miss Lily's Carriage Stops the Way' (exh. RA, 1866; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), the first of a series that included 'Miss Lily's First Flirtation' (1867; exh. Sothebys, 18 March 1987) and 'Miss Lily's Return from the Ball' (exh. RA, 1867; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), depicting one of his small daughters; all three were engraved by Robert Graves. The charm and importance of children in an adult world became James Hayllar's principal and most popular theme. He missed election as an associate of the Royal Academy by one vote, but in 1876 was successfully elected a member of the Society of British Artists. 
Between 1865 and 1872 the Hayllars rented a country house called Carlton Rookery, near Saxmundham, in Suffolk, where from April they spent five or six months of every year. The children engaged in numerous outdoor activities and acted in plays written by their father. There are also artistic records (chiefly rural genre scenes and landscapes) of visits to Boulogne between 1862 and 1886. The period 1872-5 was spent in London, at which time all five girls attended a day school in Gower Street that was associated with Bedford College. In 1875 the family settled in the country, at Castle Priory, a large house fronting the Thames at Wallingford, Berkshire, where they remained until 1899. George Dunlop Leslie RA, also with a large family, lived next door. Sport and physical exercise were an important part of life at Castle Priory. Hayllar taught his daughters to swim and also to row, as a result of which the four eldest were all accomplished oarswomen; coxed by their father, they used to row their boat 27 miles in a morning to the Henley regatta. On leaving school Hayllar's daughters and his youngest son, Algernon, received art instruction at home. In an old laundry building converted into a studio their father taught them drawing, painting, and perspective, with evenings devoted to modelling, etching, and engraving. His method, according to his daughter Jessica, was 'never to let anything pass that was not quite correct in form or relation to its surroundings' (Hayllar, 13). Algernon Victor ('b'. 1868), having been apprenticed to Cotton Webb for six months, started a career as an engraver and exhibited two engravings at the Royal Academy in 1889. The four daughters who became painters (primarily in oils) specialized initially in meticulously rendered still life and, throughout their careers, in subjects drawn from their comfortable life at Castle Priory. 
Children remained focal in James Hayllar's work, chiefly in the context of local village life, examples being 'The Only Daughter' (exh. RA, 1875; Forbes Magazine Collection, New York), 'As the Twig is Bent so is the Tree Inclined' (exh. SBA, 1879; exh. Christopher Wood Gallery, March 1983), and 'The Centre of Attraction' (exh. RA, 1891; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), for which he was awarded a silver medal. Jessica described his pictures at this time as 'subjects to bring the poor and well-to-do together, kindly acts and interest shown in various ways' (Hayllar, 11). 
James Hayllar last exhibited in 1898, although he continued to sketch landscapes until the end of his life. In 1899 his wife, Ellen, died and he moved with two of his daughters, Jessica and Kate, to Redholme, 14 Cambridge Road, Bournemouth, where he died on 9 March 1920. 
The eldest daughter, Jessica Ellen Hayllar (1858-1940), was born on 16 September 1858 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She was the most prolific painter of the five sisters and exhibited at the Society of British Artists and the Dudley Gallery from 1879, the Royal Academy from 1880 (until 1915), the Royal Manchester Institution from 1882, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours from 1883, and widely in the provinces. After still-life subjects such as 'Going to 'my Uncle's'' (exh. RA, 1880; exh. Christies, 6 May 1983) Jessica Hayllar painted domestic scenes, often including children, that depicted everyday occurrences at Castle Priory -- for example, 'House Cleaning' (exh. SBA, 1882-3) -- as well as more important family occasions, such as 'Christmas Comes but Once a Year' (exh. RA, 1881), 'Fresh from the Font' (exh. RA, 1887), 'The Return from Confirmation', exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, 3 February 1978), and 'The Day of the Wedding' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1882). Her paintings -- which often feature doorways and windows -- are notable for their effective perspective and suggestion of depth; the same recessive view through interconnecting rooms characterizes 'A Coming Event' (exh. RA, 1886), 'Autumn Sunlight' (exh. RA, 1891), and 'Teaching' (1895), and windows provide not only interesting effects of light but detailed views of the garden beyond. Figures (usually family members), furnishings, and flowers are painted with equal emphasis by Jessica Hayllar, whose approach has been compared with that of the snapshot photographer (Wood, May 1974, 5). From about 1900 she was confined to a wheelchair as a result of an accident (according to family tradition she was knocked down by a carriage) and during the rest of her life in Bournemouth she chiefly painted flowers, azaleas in particular. She died, unmarried, on 7 November 1940 at Hill House, Perry Hill, Worplesdon, Surrey. 

Edith Parvin Hayllar (1860-1948) was born on 15 May 1860, also at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She too depicted daily life at Castle Priory, in paintings such as 'Amy's Birthday' (exh. SBA, 1885) and 'More Hindrance than Help' (1893; exh. Sothebys, Belgravia, London, 24 October 1978). Her work reveals a particular interest in subjects connected with the family's numerous sporting activities: these included hunting, as depicted in 'This Way, Sir!' (exh. SBA, 1882; exh. Sotheby Beresford Adams, Chester, 31 July 1981); shooting, as in 'The 1St of September' (exh. RA, 1887; exh. Sothebys, London, 25 November 1983) and 'The 1St of October' (exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, London, 18 October 1974); and tennis -- 'A Summer Shower' (exh. RA, 1883; Forbes Magazine Collection) engagingly portrays an interlude in a mixed doubles. Of the four sisters Edith alone painted the Thames, in works such as 'Feeding the Swans' (exh. Sothebys, 6 November 1996) and 'A Punting Party'. The settings in Edith Hayllar's figure compositions are always painted in great detail, with careful attention to the particularities of flowers, feathers (in dead game), and household objects, as well as to the social interaction between individuals that forms the subject of a work. 
She exhibited at the Society of British Artists (1881/2-1889), the Royal Academy (1882-97), and the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours (1883/4-1895/6). On 9 June 1896 she married the Revd Edward Bruce Mackay (1861-1921), rector of Wallingford and afterwards of Sutton Courtenay, with whom she had four children. She did not paint after her marriage, and died in Guildford, Surrey, on 3 January 1948. 

(Alexandra) Mary Hayllar (1862-1950) was born in Mecklenburgh Square on 18 November 1862. She exhibited still lifes, such as 'Lawn Tennis Season' ('c'.1881; Southampton Art Gallery), and figure subjects usually including children -- for example, 'Helping Gardener' (exh. RA, 1885; exh. Sothebys, 27 March 1996) -- with her subject matter, like that of her sisters, drawn entirely from life at Castle Priory. She was mainly represented at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (1880-85), the Dudley Gallery (1881-4), and the Royal Manchester Institution (1882-4). On 1 July 1885 she married Henry Watkins Wells (1855/6-1932), a brewer, and largely abandoned painting, except for miniatures of children. She died at Stone Hall, Wallingford, Berkshire, on 6 January 1950. (Beatrice) Kate Hayllar (1864-1959) was born on 1 September 1864 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She exhibited still lifes, often featuring flowers, at the Society of British Artists (1883-1888/9) -- where her first exhibited painting was bought by the princess of Wales -- and the Royal Academy (1885-98). About 1898 she became a nurse and in 1899 she moved to Bournemouth with her father and sister Jessica. Later she lived with her sister Mary at Wallingford, Berkshire, where she died on 8 October 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 68063


Hayllar family (per. c.1850-c.1900), painters, came to prominence with James Hayllar (1829-1920), who was born on 3 January 1829, probably at The Hornet, Whyke, Chichester. He was baptized on 13 February at St Pancras, Eastgate Square, Chichester, the son of Thomas Hayllar (1794-1859), coal merchant, farmer, and miller, and his wife, Mary Ann Child (1794-1885). Richard Cobden was his cousin on his father's side. He was educated at Midhurst grammar school and subsequently studied under the marine artists William and John Cantiloe Joy. In 1848 he became a resident pupil of Francis Stephen Cary, who had taken over Henry Sass's academy in Bloomsbury in 1842; he remained with the Carys at 21 Bloomsbury Street until 1851 -- even after his entry to the Royal Academy Schools in 1849 -- while working as a portraitist, principally in crayons. In October 1851 he travelled to Italy with his friend John Cavell -- to whose sister Ellen he had recently become engaged -- and spent two years in Rome (where he met Lord Leighton) and Florence studying from the antique and old masters. On his return in October 1853 he resumed portrait painting, mainly in oils, taking studios in London in Berners Street in 1854 and Great Ormond Street in 1855; 'Lady Mynzomdie' (exh. RA, 1854) -- a portrait of Ellen Cavell -- and 'John Cavell' (exh. RA, 1855) were among his first exhibited works. He continued to paint portraits throughout his life, his most famous commissions being for Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn, the duke and duchess of St Albans, and General Hardy. 
On 8 March 1855 James Hayllar married Ellen Phoebe Cavell (1827-1899), the daughter of a law stationer, and aunt of Edith Cavell. Although he exhibited from a studio, 1 Langham Chambers, Langham Place, between 1860 and 1864, from 1855 until 1875 they lived at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, where his father-in-law, John Cavell, was head of the household until his death in 1863 and where, between 1856 and 1868, they had nine children, four boys and five girls. Jessica, Edith, Kate, and Mary ['see below'] all became professional painters. 
James Hayllar had exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (SBA) from 1851. From 1855 his work was also shown at the British Institution, the Liverpool Academy (LA), and the Royal Manchester Institution, and in subsequent years at the Royal Hibernian Academy, the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours, and the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, among other galleries. In the 1850s he exhibited landscapes and genre subjects such as 'The Teetotaller and Tippler' (exh. SBA and LA, 1855) and 'Bookworm and Grub' (exh. LA, 1857). During the 1860s he also experimented with historical genre, appending lengthy quotations to titles such as 'The incident out of which arose Lord Mansfield's decision that as soon as a slave set his foot upon English territory, he became free' (exh. RA, 1864; V&A), the latter subject having been suggested to him by Richard Cobden. It was not until 1866 that he won acclaim, with a painting entitled 'Miss Lily's Carriage Stops the Way' (exh. RA, 1866; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), the first of a series that included 'Miss Lily's First Flirtation' (1867; exh. Sothebys, 18 March 1987) and 'Miss Lily's Return from the Ball' (exh. RA, 1867; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), depicting one of his small daughters; all three were engraved by Robert Graves. The charm and importance of children in an adult world became James Hayllar's principal and most popular theme. He missed election as an associate of the Royal Academy by one vote, but in 1876 was successfully elected a member of the Society of British Artists. 
Between 1865 and 1872 the Hayllars rented a country house called Carlton Rookery, near Saxmundham, in Suffolk, where from April they spent five or six months of every year. The children engaged in numerous outdoor activities and acted in plays written by their father. There are also artistic records (chiefly rural genre scenes and landscapes) of visits to Boulogne between 1862 and 1886. The period 1872-5 was spent in London, at which time all five girls attended a day school in Gower Street that was associated with Bedford College. In 1875 the family settled in the country, at Castle Priory, a large house fronting the Thames at Wallingford, Berkshire, where they remained until 1899. George Dunlop Leslie RA, also with a large family, lived next door. Sport and physical exercise were an important part of life at Castle Priory. Hayllar taught his daughters to swim and also to row, as a result of which the four eldest were all accomplished oarswomen; coxed by their father, they used to row their boat 27 miles in a morning to the Henley regatta. On leaving school Hayllar's daughters and his youngest son, Algernon, received art instruction at home. In an old laundry building converted into a studio their father taught them drawing, painting, and perspective, with evenings devoted to modelling, etching, and engraving. His method, according to his daughter Jessica, was 'never to let anything pass that was not quite correct in form or relation to its surroundings' (Hayllar, 13). Algernon Victor ('b'. 1868), having been apprenticed to Cotton Webb for six months, started a career as an engraver and exhibited two engravings at the Royal Academy in 1889. The four daughters who became painters (primarily in oils) specialized initially in meticulously rendered still life and, throughout their careers, in subjects drawn from their comfortable life at Castle Priory. 
Children remained focal in James Hayllar's work, chiefly in the context of local village life, examples being 'The Only Daughter' (exh. RA, 1875; Forbes Magazine Collection, New York), 'As the Twig is Bent so is the Tree Inclined' (exh. SBA, 1879; exh. Christopher Wood Gallery, March 1983), and 'The Centre of Attraction' (exh. RA, 1891; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), for which he was awarded a silver medal. Jessica described his pictures at this time as 'subjects to bring the poor and well-to-do together, kindly acts and interest shown in various ways' (Hayllar, 11). 
James Hayllar last exhibited in 1898, although he continued to sketch landscapes until the end of his life. In 1899 his wife, Ellen, died and he moved with two of his daughters, Jessica and Kate, to Redholme, 14 Cambridge Road, Bournemouth, where he died on 9 March 1920. 
The eldest daughter, Jessica Ellen Hayllar (1858-1940), was born on 16 September 1858 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She was the most prolific painter of the five sisters and exhibited at the Society of British Artists and the Dudley Gallery from 1879, the Royal Academy from 1880 (until 1915), the Royal Manchester Institution from 1882, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours from 1883, and widely in the provinces. After still-life subjects such as 'Going to 'my Uncle's'' (exh. RA, 1880; exh. Christies, 6 May 1983) Jessica Hayllar painted domestic scenes, often including children, that depicted everyday occurrences at Castle Priory -- for example, 'House Cleaning' (exh. SBA, 1882-3) -- as well as more important family occasions, such as 'Christmas Comes but Once a Year' (exh. RA, 1881), 'Fresh from the Font' (exh. RA, 1887), 'The Return from Confirmation', exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, 3 February 1978), and 'The Day of the Wedding' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1882). Her paintings -- which often feature doorways and windows -- are notable for their effective perspective and suggestion of depth; the same recessive view through interconnecting rooms characterizes 'A Coming Event' (exh. RA, 1886), 'Autumn Sunlight' (exh. RA, 1891), and 'Teaching' (1895), and windows provide not only interesting effects of light but detailed views of the garden beyond. Figures (usually family members), furnishings, and flowers are painted with equal emphasis by Jessica Hayllar, whose approach has been compared with that of the snapshot photographer (Wood, May 1974, 5). From about 1900 she was confined to a wheelchair as a result of an accident (according to family tradition she was knocked down by a carriage) and during the rest of her life in Bournemouth she chiefly painted flowers, azaleas in particular. She died, unmarried, on 7 November 1940 at Hill House, Perry Hill, Worplesdon, Surrey. 

Edith Parvin Hayllar (1860-1948) was born on 15 May 1860, also at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She too depicted daily life at Castle Priory, in paintings such as 'Amy's Birthday' (exh. SBA, 1885) and 'More Hindrance than Help' (1893; exh. Sothebys, Belgravia, London, 24 October 1978). Her work reveals a particular interest in subjects connected with the family's numerous sporting activities: these included hunting, as depicted in 'This Way, Sir!' (exh. SBA, 1882; exh. Sotheby Beresford Adams, Chester, 31 July 1981); shooting, as in 'The 1St of September' (exh. RA, 1887; exh. Sothebys, London, 25 November 1983) and 'The 1St of October' (exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, London, 18 October 1974); and tennis -- 'A Summer Shower' (exh. RA, 1883; Forbes Magazine Collection) engagingly portrays an interlude in a mixed doubles. Of the four sisters Edith alone painted the Thames, in works such as 'Feeding the Swans' (exh. Sothebys, 6 November 1996) and 'A Punting Party'. The settings in Edith Hayllar's figure compositions are always painted in great detail, with careful attention to the particularities of flowers, feathers (in dead game), and household objects, as well as to the social interaction between individuals that forms the subject of a work. 
She exhibited at the Society of British Artists (1881/2-1889), the Royal Academy (1882-97), and the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours (1883/4-1895/6). On 9 June 1896 she married the Revd Edward Bruce Mackay (1861-1921), rector of Wallingford and afterwards of Sutton Courtenay, with whom she had four children. She did not paint after her marriage, and died in Guildford, Surrey, on 3 January 1948. 

(Alexandra) Mary Hayllar (1862-1950) was born in Mecklenburgh Square on 18 November 1862. She exhibited still lifes, such as 'Lawn Tennis Season' ('c'.1881; Southampton Art Gallery), and figure subjects usually including children -- for example, 'Helping Gardener' (exh. RA, 1885; exh. Sothebys, 27 March 1996) -- with her subject matter, like that of her sisters, drawn entirely from life at Castle Priory. She was mainly represented at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (1880-85), the Dudley Gallery (1881-4), and the Royal Manchester Institution (1882-4). On 1 July 1885 she married Henry Watkins Wells (1855/6-1932), a brewer, and largely abandoned painting, except for miniatures of children. She died at Stone Hall, Wallingford, Berkshire, on 6 January 1950. (Beatrice) Kate Hayllar (1864-1959) was born on 1 September 1864 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She exhibited still lifes, often featuring flowers, at the Society of British Artists (1883-1888/9) -- where her first exhibited painting was bought by the princess of Wales -- and the Royal Academy (1885-98). About 1898 she became a nurse and in 1899 she moved to Bournemouth with her father and sister Jessica. Later she lived with her sister Mary at Wallingford, Berkshire, where she died on 8 October 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 68064


Hayllar family (per. c.1850-c.1900), painters, came to prominence with James Hayllar (1829-1920), who was born on 3 January 1829, probably at The Hornet, Whyke, Chichester. He was baptized on 13 February at St Pancras, Eastgate Square, Chichester, the son of Thomas Hayllar (1794-1859), coal merchant, farmer, and miller, and his wife, Mary Ann Child (1794-1885). Richard Cobden was his cousin on his father's side. He was educated at Midhurst grammar school and subsequently studied under the marine artists William and John Cantiloe Joy. In 1848 he became a resident pupil of Francis Stephen Cary, who had taken over Henry Sass's academy in Bloomsbury in 1842; he remained with the Carys at 21 Bloomsbury Street until 1851 -- even after his entry to the Royal Academy Schools in 1849 -- while working as a portraitist, principally in crayons. In October 1851 he travelled to Italy with his friend John Cavell -- to whose sister Ellen he had recently become engaged -- and spent two years in Rome (where he met Lord Leighton) and Florence studying from the antique and old masters. On his return in October 1853 he resumed portrait painting, mainly in oils, taking studios in London in Berners Street in 1854 and Great Ormond Street in 1855; 'Lady Mynzomdie' (exh. RA, 1854) -- a portrait of Ellen Cavell -- and 'John Cavell' (exh. RA, 1855) were among his first exhibited works. He continued to paint portraits throughout his life, his most famous commissions being for Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn, the duke and duchess of St Albans, and General Hardy. 
On 8 March 1855 James Hayllar married Ellen Phoebe Cavell (1827-1899), the daughter of a law stationer, and aunt of Edith Cavell. Although he exhibited from a studio, 1 Langham Chambers, Langham Place, between 1860 and 1864, from 1855 until 1875 they lived at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, where his father-in-law, John Cavell, was head of the household until his death in 1863 and where, between 1856 and 1868, they had nine children, four boys and five girls. Jessica, Edith, Kate, and Mary ['see below'] all became professional painters. 
James Hayllar had exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (SBA) from 1851. From 1855 his work was also shown at the British Institution, the Liverpool Academy (LA), and the Royal Manchester Institution, and in subsequent years at the Royal Hibernian Academy, the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours, and the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, among other galleries. In the 1850s he exhibited landscapes and genre subjects such as 'The Teetotaller and Tippler' (exh. SBA and LA, 1855) and 'Bookworm and Grub' (exh. LA, 1857). During the 1860s he also experimented with historical genre, appending lengthy quotations to titles such as 'The incident out of which arose Lord Mansfield's decision that as soon as a slave set his foot upon English territory, he became free' (exh. RA, 1864; V&A), the latter subject having been suggested to him by Richard Cobden. It was not until 1866 that he won acclaim, with a painting entitled 'Miss Lily's Carriage Stops the Way' (exh. RA, 1866; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), the first of a series that included 'Miss Lily's First Flirtation' (1867; exh. Sothebys, 18 March 1987) and 'Miss Lily's Return from the Ball' (exh. RA, 1867; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), depicting one of his small daughters; all three were engraved by Robert Graves. The charm and importance of children in an adult world became James Hayllar's principal and most popular theme. He missed election as an associate of the Royal Academy by one vote, but in 1876 was successfully elected a member of the Society of British Artists. 
Between 1865 and 1872 the Hayllars rented a country house called Carlton Rookery, near Saxmundham, in Suffolk, where from April they spent five or six months of every year. The children engaged in numerous outdoor activities and acted in plays written by their father. There are also artistic records (chiefly rural genre scenes and landscapes) of visits to Boulogne between 1862 and 1886. The period 1872-5 was spent in London, at which time all five girls attended a day school in Gower Street that was associated with Bedford College. In 1875 the family settled in the country, at Castle Priory, a large house fronting the Thames at Wallingford, Berkshire, where they remained until 1899. George Dunlop Leslie RA, also with a large family, lived next door. Sport and physical exercise were an important part of life at Castle Priory. Hayllar taught his daughters to swim and also to row, as a result of which the four eldest were all accomplished oarswomen; coxed by their father, they used to row their boat 27 miles in a morning to the Henley regatta. On leaving school Hayllar's daughters and his youngest son, Algernon, received art instruction at home. In an old laundry building converted into a studio their father taught them drawing, painting, and perspective, with evenings devoted to modelling, etching, and engraving. His method, according to his daughter Jessica, was 'never to let anything pass that was not quite correct in form or relation to its surroundings' (Hayllar, 13). Algernon Victor ('b'. 1868), having been apprenticed to Cotton Webb for six months, started a career as an engraver and exhibited two engravings at the Royal Academy in 1889. The four daughters who became painters (primarily in oils) specialized initially in meticulously rendered still life and, throughout their careers, in subjects drawn from their comfortable life at Castle Priory. 
Children remained focal in James Hayllar's work, chiefly in the context of local village life, examples being 'The Only Daughter' (exh. RA, 1875; Forbes Magazine Collection, New York), 'As the Twig is Bent so is the Tree Inclined' (exh. SBA, 1879; exh. Christopher Wood Gallery, March 1983), and 'The Centre of Attraction' (exh. RA, 1891; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), for which he was awarded a silver medal. Jessica described his pictures at this time as 'subjects to bring the poor and well-to-do together, kindly acts and interest shown in various ways' (Hayllar, 11). 
James Hayllar last exhibited in 1898, although he continued to sketch landscapes until the end of his life. In 1899 his wife, Ellen, died and he moved with two of his daughters, Jessica and Kate, to Redholme, 14 Cambridge Road, Bournemouth, where he died on 9 March 1920. 
The eldest daughter, Jessica Ellen Hayllar (1858-1940), was born on 16 September 1858 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She was the most prolific painter of the five sisters and exhibited at the Society of British Artists and the Dudley Gallery from 1879, the Royal Academy from 1880 (until 1915), the Royal Manchester Institution from 1882, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours from 1883, and widely in the provinces. After still-life subjects such as 'Going to 'my Uncle's'' (exh. RA, 1880; exh. Christies, 6 May 1983) Jessica Hayllar painted domestic scenes, often including children, that depicted everyday occurrences at Castle Priory -- for example, 'House Cleaning' (exh. SBA, 1882-3) -- as well as more important family occasions, such as 'Christmas Comes but Once a Year' (exh. RA, 1881), 'Fresh from the Font' (exh. RA, 1887), 'The Return from Confirmation', exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, 3 February 1978), and 'The Day of the Wedding' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1882). Her paintings -- which often feature doorways and windows -- are notable for their effective perspective and suggestion of depth; the same recessive view through interconnecting rooms characterizes 'A Coming Event' (exh. RA, 1886), 'Autumn Sunlight' (exh. RA, 1891), and 'Teaching' (1895), and windows provide not only interesting effects of light but detailed views of the garden beyond. Figures (usually family members), furnishings, and flowers are painted with equal emphasis by Jessica Hayllar, whose approach has been compared with that of the snapshot photographer (Wood, May 1974, 5). From about 1900 she was confined to a wheelchair as a result of an accident (according to family tradition she was knocked down by a carriage) and during the rest of her life in Bournemouth she chiefly painted flowers, azaleas in particular. She died, unmarried, on 7 November 1940 at Hill House, Perry Hill, Worplesdon, Surrey. 

Edith Parvin Hayllar (1860-1948) was born on 15 May 1860, also at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She too depicted daily life at Castle Priory, in paintings such as 'Amy's Birthday' (exh. SBA, 1885) and 'More Hindrance than Help' (1893; exh. Sothebys, Belgravia, London, 24 October 1978). Her work reveals a particular interest in subjects connected with the family's numerous sporting activities: these included hunting, as depicted in 'This Way, Sir!' (exh. SBA, 1882; exh. Sotheby Beresford Adams, Chester, 31 July 1981); shooting, as in 'The 1St of September' (exh. RA, 1887; exh. Sothebys, London, 25 November 1983) and 'The 1St of October' (exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, London, 18 October 1974); and tennis -- 'A Summer Shower' (exh. RA, 1883; Forbes Magazine Collection) engagingly portrays an interlude in a mixed doubles. Of the four sisters Edith alone painted the Thames, in works such as 'Feeding the Swans' (exh. Sothebys, 6 November 1996) and 'A Punting Party'. The settings in Edith Hayllar's figure compositions are always painted in great detail, with careful attention to the particularities of flowers, feathers (in dead game), and household objects, as well as to the social interaction between individuals that forms the subject of a work. 
She exhibited at the Society of British Artists (1881/2-1889), the Royal Academy (1882-97), and the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours (1883/4-1895/6). On 9 June 1896 she married the Revd Edward Bruce Mackay (1861-1921), rector of Wallingford and afterwards of Sutton Courtenay, with whom she had four children. She did not paint after her marriage, and died in Guildford, Surrey, on 3 January 1948. 

(Alexandra) Mary Hayllar (1862-1950) was born in Mecklenburgh Square on 18 November 1862. She exhibited still lifes, such as 'Lawn Tennis Season' ('c'.1881; Southampton Art Gallery), and figure subjects usually including children -- for example, 'Helping Gardener' (exh. RA, 1885; exh. Sothebys, 27 March 1996) -- with her subject matter, like that of her sisters, drawn entirely from life at Castle Priory. She was mainly represented at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (1880-85), the Dudley Gallery (1881-4), and the Royal Manchester Institution (1882-4). On 1 July 1885 she married Henry Watkins Wells (1855/6-1932), a brewer, and largely abandoned painting, except for miniatures of children. She died at Stone Hall, Wallingford, Berkshire, on 6 January 1950. (Beatrice) Kate Hayllar (1864-1959) was born on 1 September 1864 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She exhibited still lifes, often featuring flowers, at the Society of British Artists (1883-1888/9) -- where her first exhibited painting was bought by the princess of Wales -- and the Royal Academy (1885-98). About 1898 she became a nurse and in 1899 she moved to Bournemouth with her father and sister Jessica. Later she lived with her sister Mary at Wallingford, Berkshire, where she died on 8 October 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 68065


Hayllar family (per. c.1850-c.1900), painters, came to prominence with James Hayllar (1829-1920), who was born on 3 January 1829, probably at The Hornet, Whyke, Chichester. He was baptized on 13 February at St Pancras, Eastgate Square, Chichester, the son of Thomas Hayllar (1794-1859), coal merchant, farmer, and miller, and his wife, Mary Ann Child (1794-1885). Richard Cobden was his cousin on his father's side. He was educated at Midhurst grammar school and subsequently studied under the marine artists William and John Cantiloe Joy. In 1848 he became a resident pupil of Francis Stephen Cary, who had taken over Henry Sass's academy in Bloomsbury in 1842; he remained with the Carys at 21 Bloomsbury Street until 1851 -- even after his entry to the Royal Academy Schools in 1849 -- while working as a portraitist, principally in crayons. In October 1851 he travelled to Italy with his friend John Cavell -- to whose sister Ellen he had recently become engaged -- and spent two years in Rome (where he met Lord Leighton) and Florence studying from the antique and old masters. On his return in October 1853 he resumed portrait painting, mainly in oils, taking studios in London in Berners Street in 1854 and Great Ormond Street in 1855; 'Lady Mynzomdie' (exh. RA, 1854) -- a portrait of Ellen Cavell -- and 'John Cavell' (exh. RA, 1855) were among his first exhibited works. He continued to paint portraits throughout his life, his most famous commissions being for Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn, the duke and duchess of St Albans, and General Hardy. 
On 8 March 1855 James Hayllar married Ellen Phoebe Cavell (1827-1899), the daughter of a law stationer, and aunt of Edith Cavell. Although he exhibited from a studio, 1 Langham Chambers, Langham Place, between 1860 and 1864, from 1855 until 1875 they lived at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, where his father-in-law, John Cavell, was head of the household until his death in 1863 and where, between 1856 and 1868, they had nine children, four boys and five girls. Jessica, Edith, Kate, and Mary ['see below'] all became professional painters. 
James Hayllar had exhibited at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (SBA) from 1851. From 1855 his work was also shown at the British Institution, the Liverpool Academy (LA), and the Royal Manchester Institution, and in subsequent years at the Royal Hibernian Academy, the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours, and the Atkinson Art Gallery, Southport, among other galleries. In the 1850s he exhibited landscapes and genre subjects such as 'The Teetotaller and Tippler' (exh. SBA and LA, 1855) and 'Bookworm and Grub' (exh. LA, 1857). During the 1860s he also experimented with historical genre, appending lengthy quotations to titles such as 'The incident out of which arose Lord Mansfield's decision that as soon as a slave set his foot upon English territory, he became free' (exh. RA, 1864; V&A), the latter subject having been suggested to him by Richard Cobden. It was not until 1866 that he won acclaim, with a painting entitled 'Miss Lily's Carriage Stops the Way' (exh. RA, 1866; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), the first of a series that included 'Miss Lily's First Flirtation' (1867; exh. Sothebys, 18 March 1987) and 'Miss Lily's Return from the Ball' (exh. RA, 1867; exh. Sothebys, 2 November 1994), depicting one of his small daughters; all three were engraved by Robert Graves. The charm and importance of children in an adult world became James Hayllar's principal and most popular theme. He missed election as an associate of the Royal Academy by one vote, but in 1876 was successfully elected a member of the Society of British Artists. 
Between 1865 and 1872 the Hayllars rented a country house called Carlton Rookery, near Saxmundham, in Suffolk, where from April they spent five or six months of every year. The children engaged in numerous outdoor activities and acted in plays written by their father. There are also artistic records (chiefly rural genre scenes and landscapes) of visits to Boulogne between 1862 and 1886. The period 1872-5 was spent in London, at which time all five girls attended a day school in Gower Street that was associated with Bedford College. In 1875 the family settled in the country, at Castle Priory, a large house fronting the Thames at Wallingford, Berkshire, where they remained until 1899. George Dunlop Leslie RA, also with a large family, lived next door. Sport and physical exercise were an important part of life at Castle Priory. Hayllar taught his daughters to swim and also to row, as a result of which the four eldest were all accomplished oarswomen; coxed by their father, they used to row their boat 27 miles in a morning to the Henley regatta. On leaving school Hayllar's daughters and his youngest son, Algernon, received art instruction at home. In an old laundry building converted into a studio their father taught them drawing, painting, and perspective, with evenings devoted to modelling, etching, and engraving. His method, according to his daughter Jessica, was 'never to let anything pass that was not quite correct in form or relation to its surroundings' (Hayllar, 13). Algernon Victor ('b'. 1868), having been apprenticed to Cotton Webb for six months, started a career as an engraver and exhibited two engravings at the Royal Academy in 1889. The four daughters who became painters (primarily in oils) specialized initially in meticulously rendered still life and, throughout their careers, in subjects drawn from their comfortable life at Castle Priory. 
Children remained focal in James Hayllar's work, chiefly in the context of local village life, examples being 'The Only Daughter' (exh. RA, 1875; Forbes Magazine Collection, New York), 'As the Twig is Bent so is the Tree Inclined' (exh. SBA, 1879; exh. Christopher Wood Gallery, March 1983), and 'The Centre of Attraction' (exh. RA, 1891; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), for which he was awarded a silver medal. Jessica described his pictures at this time as 'subjects to bring the poor and well-to-do together, kindly acts and interest shown in various ways' (Hayllar, 11). 
James Hayllar last exhibited in 1898, although he continued to sketch landscapes until the end of his life. In 1899 his wife, Ellen, died and he moved with two of his daughters, Jessica and Kate, to Redholme, 14 Cambridge Road, Bournemouth, where he died on 9 March 1920. 
The eldest daughter, Jessica Ellen Hayllar (1858-1940), was born on 16 September 1858 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She was the most prolific painter of the five sisters and exhibited at the Society of British Artists and the Dudley Gallery from 1879, the Royal Academy from 1880 (until 1915), the Royal Manchester Institution from 1882, the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours from 1883, and widely in the provinces. After still-life subjects such as 'Going to 'my Uncle's'' (exh. RA, 1880; exh. Christies, 6 May 1983) Jessica Hayllar painted domestic scenes, often including children, that depicted everyday occurrences at Castle Priory -- for example, 'House Cleaning' (exh. SBA, 1882-3) -- as well as more important family occasions, such as 'Christmas Comes but Once a Year' (exh. RA, 1881), 'Fresh from the Font' (exh. RA, 1887), 'The Return from Confirmation', exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, 3 February 1978), and 'The Day of the Wedding' (exh. Royal Manchester Institution, 1882). Her paintings -- which often feature doorways and windows -- are notable for their effective perspective and suggestion of depth; the same recessive view through interconnecting rooms characterizes 'A Coming Event' (exh. RA, 1886), 'Autumn Sunlight' (exh. RA, 1891), and 'Teaching' (1895), and windows provide not only interesting effects of light but detailed views of the garden beyond. Figures (usually family members), furnishings, and flowers are painted with equal emphasis by Jessica Hayllar, whose approach has been compared with that of the snapshot photographer (Wood, May 1974, 5). From about 1900 she was confined to a wheelchair as a result of an accident (according to family tradition she was knocked down by a carriage) and during the rest of her life in Bournemouth she chiefly painted flowers, azaleas in particular. She died, unmarried, on 7 November 1940 at Hill House, Perry Hill, Worplesdon, Surrey. 

Edith Parvin Hayllar (1860-1948) was born on 15 May 1860, also at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She too depicted daily life at Castle Priory, in paintings such as 'Amy's Birthday' (exh. SBA, 1885) and 'More Hindrance than Help' (1893; exh. Sothebys, Belgravia, London, 24 October 1978). Her work reveals a particular interest in subjects connected with the family's numerous sporting activities: these included hunting, as depicted in 'This Way, Sir!' (exh. SBA, 1882; exh. Sotheby Beresford Adams, Chester, 31 July 1981); shooting, as in 'The 1St of September' (exh. RA, 1887; exh. Sothebys, London, 25 November 1983) and 'The 1St of October' (exh. RA, 1888; exh. Christies, London, 18 October 1974); and tennis -- 'A Summer Shower' (exh. RA, 1883; Forbes Magazine Collection) engagingly portrays an interlude in a mixed doubles. Of the four sisters Edith alone painted the Thames, in works such as 'Feeding the Swans' (exh. Sothebys, 6 November 1996) and 'A Punting Party'. The settings in Edith Hayllar's figure compositions are always painted in great detail, with careful attention to the particularities of flowers, feathers (in dead game), and household objects, as well as to the social interaction between individuals that forms the subject of a work. 
She exhibited at the Society of British Artists (1881/2-1889), the Royal Academy (1882-97), and the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours (1883/4-1895/6). On 9 June 1896 she married the Revd Edward Bruce Mackay (1861-1921), rector of Wallingford and afterwards of Sutton Courtenay, with whom she had four children. She did not paint after her marriage, and died in Guildford, Surrey, on 3 January 1948. 

(Alexandra) Mary Hayllar (1862-1950) was born in Mecklenburgh Square on 18 November 1862. She exhibited still lifes, such as 'Lawn Tennis Season' ('c'.1881; Southampton Art Gallery), and figure subjects usually including children -- for example, 'Helping Gardener' (exh. RA, 1885; exh. Sothebys, 27 March 1996) -- with her subject matter, like that of her sisters, drawn entirely from life at Castle Priory. She was mainly represented at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists (1880-85), the Dudley Gallery (1881-4), and the Royal Manchester Institution (1882-4). On 1 July 1885 she married Henry Watkins Wells (1855/6-1932), a brewer, and largely abandoned painting, except for miniatures of children. She died at Stone Hall, Wallingford, Berkshire, on 6 January 1950. (Beatrice) Kate Hayllar (1864-1959) was born on 1 September 1864 at 15 Mecklenburgh Square, London. She exhibited still lifes, often featuring flowers, at the Society of British Artists (1883-1888/9) -- where her first exhibited painting was bought by the princess of Wales -- and the Royal Academy (1885-98). About 1898 she became a nurse and in 1899 she moved to Bournemouth with her father and sister Jessica. Later she lived with her sister Mary at Wallingford, Berkshire, where she died on 8 October 1959. 


@@@@@


doc= 68067


Henry Pether (fl. 1828-1865), whose landscapes, including moonlight scenes along the Thames, are frequently confused with Pether's, was probably his son. 'It is not always easy to see where Sebastian's pictures end and Henry's begin, unless they are signed. Henry more frequently used a signature, and his pictures, if less inventive in romantic imagery, are painted with more refinement, and show a sense of topography and local atmosphere. (Maas, 51)' 


@@@@@


doc= 68071


King, Anne (b. in or before 1621, d. 1684x1701), poet and literary muse, was the youngest of four surviving daughters, and probably the youngest of the twelve children of John King (d. 1621), from 1611 bishop of London, and his wife, Joan Freeman (died in or after 1621). Clearly there was a considerable gap in age between her and her eldest brother Henry King (1592-1669), but the source for the claim that she was only five weeks old at her father's death on 30 March 1621 is not evident, and the balance of probability points to an earlier birth date. She was a beneficiary of her father's will, made on 4 March 1621, at which date she had already been given her portion. Many details of her life are elusive, but there is no doubt that she was well educated, that she developed her talents in Henry King's literary circle, and that she was known to and appreciated by many of her more distinguished contemporaries. 
Possibly as early as 1633 Henry addressed a poem 'To my sister Anne King who chid mee in verse for being angry', paying her the compliment that her '
Quill [was] so sage 

It Passion tunes, and calmes a Tempest's rage 

' and requesting that henceforward, if he were aroused to anger, she should reprove 'That froward Spleene in Poetry and Love' and 'Rhime me back againe into my Witts' ('Poems of Henry King', 166). 
She was regarded as equally accomplished as an artist: the clergyman-poet Jasper Mayne commended 'Mrs Anne King's Table-Book of Pictures' (BL, Harleian MS 6931). James Howell, then a frequenter of London literary circles, wrote from Westminster on 3 February 1637 [probably 1638] of an encounter with Anne. Impressed by the King brothers, he had discovered that 'the same Genius diffuseth itself also... among the sisters'; 'an Epitaph and an Anagram of her own composure and writing' (Howell, 311-2) captured his imagination, inspiring him to write verse 'For the admitting of Mistress Anne King to be the Tenth Muse'. His favourable opinion lingered: in March 1643 he drew up a mock will, leaving his intellectual interests, as appropriate, to Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Sir Kenelm Digby, Archbishop James Ussher, and Lord George Digby, and 'my poetry, such as it is' to Anne 'who I know is a great minion of the Muses' (ibid., 324). 
As a single young woman Anne probably lived in the households of her siblings, particularly Henry and Dorothy, who married Sir Richard Hubert of Langley, Buckinghamshire. From 1643 Henry, deprived of his briefly held bishopric of Chichester and without a settled home, also lodged with family and friends. Ten years later he singled out Anne as the one 'from whome during my misfortunes since the losse of all I had at Chichester, I received speciall significacon of her love' ('Poems and Psalms by Henry King', cxii). Some time in 1647 Henry established an informal praying community, observing the liturgy of the 'Book of Common Prayer', in the adjacent parish to Langley at Richings Park near Eton, Berkshire, the home of Lady Salter, widow of Sir William (or Walter) Salter and niece of Brian Duppa, bishop of Salisbury. Although about 1648 Anne married, as his second wife, John Dutton (1594-1657) ['see under 'Dutton family] of Sherborne, Gloucestershire, she remained or became a key member of the Richings 'college'. At the time of their marriage, Dutton, a wealthy man with a reputation for learning, was in the middle of lengthy negotiation over his fines as a 'delinquent'. Religious and scholarly inclination may have combined with family obligations and convenience to encourage Anne to linger at Richings and Langley. Henry King's 1653 will reveals that she was the family member best acquainted with his financial affairs; it was to her that he left the French 'Bible' he had inherited from his friend John Donne. When the scholar John Hales, who served as chaplain to the 'college', left Richings in November 1655, only to die six months later, it was Anne who drew his picture for the benefit of the community. She 'did so', according to Izaak Walton, 'in black and white boeth... exilently well as [to the finenes] to the curiousnes... as well to the likenes'. In verse written underneath Anne sought to counter any accusation of presumption, affirming that '
I did contend with greater zeale then Art, 

This shadow of my phantie to impart. 

' She hoped she might be excused, being a woman and 'working only from memory'. Walton, who later gleaned several anecdotes from her about her friend Hales, found her 'a most generous and ingenious lady' (Butt, 271). The portrait does not survive. 
John Dutton died on 14 January 1657 and was buried at Sherborne five weeks later. The monument Anne erected there celebrated the learning, prudence, and meekness of the man to whom she had been married for eight years. In 1658 she also lost her sister Dorothy Hubert. At some point thereafter she married, again as his second wife, Richard Grobham Howe (1621-1703) of Great Wishford, Wiltshire, widower of Lucy St John (died 1658). Howe, a longstanding but inactive MP, was knighted about 1665 and succeeded his father as second baronet about 1671. Lady Howe was left a picture by Sir Anthony Van Dyck in the will of her nephew Henry King in 1671, and a ring by Izaak Walton in his will written in 1683. The following year she belatedly erected a monument to Lady Hubert containing the final extant example of her verse. In a 'Choice peece of destruction', Death had aimed her 'Dart' and 'Malice' at an exceptionally witty and sweet woman; Anne, 'endeer'd in Blood and Heart / [had] felt the stroke and still weep's for ye smart' (Greer, 182). She herself died in or before 1701: Sir Richard's will of 19 December that year makes no mention of her. 


@@@@@


doc= 68072


Lawraunce, Ane (fl. 1610), gentlewoman, is known only for a letter she wrote in May 1610 to Thomas Sutton, a businessman and moneylender, proposing that he name her as a beneficiary in his will. The letter is currently lodged with the other Sutton documents (LMA, ACC 1876 F3 351) and, transcribed by Joseph Crowley, is reproduced in ''The Muses Females Are': Martha Moulsworth and other Women Writers of the English Renaissance', edited by Robert Evans and Anne Little (1995). Lawraunce describes herself as 'a poore gentelwoman and a maide', 'youndge', living in Battersea, Surrey. Her father could not provide for her, while her own 'infirmyties in my heade and eyes' prevent her employment. The manner of her argument and its intertextual references to biblical and classical sources suggest that Lawraunce was both intelligent and very well educated. 
Lawraunce had previously sought to borrow $200 from Sutton, renowned for lending credit, meeting him twice. Despite her undoubted eloquence, which can be gauged in the letter itself, Sutton stuck to sound business principles and refused to lend the money without security. Her commentary on his decision displays her personal determination and perspective on their potential business arrangement, which provides a counterbalance to Sutton's business and worldly ethics: 'I coulde not give yow sitch security wich worldly wise men to mutche staundes upon; yet by godes healpe I woulde with all possible speade as justly have paide that mony againe and interest for it as if the Excheacor of Einglaunde had bin my Seaurety. (''A sutor for my selfe'', 271)' This binary opposition, between his worldly ethics and her view of charity, informs the tenor and rationale of Lawraunce's letter to Sutton: her beneficiary request is postponed until the last two paragraphs of the letter, while the main part is a sermon-like exhortation on the need for charity and repentance before death. Her letter displays a sophisticated use of literary and rhetorical tools. Its structure clearly follows the seven-part Ciceronian oratory model and she includes classical, Christian, and native English literary modes and sources within this rhetorical structure. She frames her argument within a Christian 'memento mori' tradition; she interweaves quotations and language from 'Proverbs' and the gospels, and includes secular stories. The interlinking of the secular and the Christian both promises Sutton that redemption is possible and argues that this will be through charity to her. The whole argument is an intellectual 'tour de force', which unfortunately did not convince Sutton to name her as a beneficiary. 


@@@@@


doc= 68073


Honor Plantagenet (1493x5-1566), Lisle's second wife, whom he married in November 1528, was the daughter of Sir Thomas Grenville of Stowe in Kilkhampton, Cornwall, and widow of Sir John Basset of Umberleigh, Devon. She had three sons and four daughters from her first marriage: Philippa, born in 1516; Katherine, born in 1517; John, born the following year; Anne, born in 1521; Mary, born 'c'.1522-5; George, born 'c'.1522-5; and James, born 'c'.1526-7. She had no children with Lisle, though she was rumoured to be pregnant in 1536-7. She was successful both in arranging good marriages for her daughters and in furthering the education of her children by placing them in important households, both in England and France; these included those of Thomas Cromwell, Edward Seymour, and Thybault Rouaud, sire de Reion (near Abbeville). Anne became a maid of honour to Jane Seymour, while James joined the household of Bishop Gardiner in 1537. These placements may have served the further purpose of creating useful contacts and networks for her second husband, who was isolated at Calais from the main focus of political activity at court. In 1532 she went with Lord Lisle to Calais, and was one of six ladies appointed to attend upon Anne Boleyn, who had accompanied Henry VIII thither. She was careful to cultivate good relations with Anne thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 68074


Man, Judith (fl. 1640), translator, was the daughter of Peter Man, solicitor to Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford. By her own account, Man was brought up in Strafford's household where she received some education, including competence in the French language. All evidence regarding her life and interests comes from her own hand, namely from the prefatory materials to her translation of John Barclay's 'Argenis', which was originally published in Latin, and had been translated into English by both Kingsmill Long (in 1625) and Robert le Grys (in 1628). Man's translation, 'Epitome of the History of Faire Argenis and Polyarchus', printed in 1640, was taken from an epitome of Barclay's text written by Nicolas Coeffeteau, bishop of Marseilles, and dedicated to Wentworth's eldest daughter, Anne, apparently as a tribute to the 'Schoole of Vertue' (Man, sig. A2'v') where she had been educated. Her translation is very literal, and stresses the virtuous femininity of the heroine, Argenis, rather than the political allegory for which Barclay's work was renowned, although Barclay's commitment to monarchy would have made it a suitable text for Wentworth's royalist household. From the evidence of the dedication it is possible to infer that the translation doubled as an exhortation to Anne Wentworth to marry. One of the more interesting aspects of Man's text is her self-presentation as an author. She sees the text as having a specifically didactic purpose, but views translation as a fitting activity for a woman because it creates diversion and provides self-improvement: 'so... I might make my selfe, so much the more perfect, in the French tongue' (ibid., sig. A6'v'). Man authorizes her literary undertaking by referring to other romance texts translated by women: 'who have traced me the way, witnesse the translation into French of Sir Philip Sidney's 'Arcadia', the 'New Amarantha' and 'Urania'' (ibid., sig. A7'r'). Of Man's later life or writing, nothing is known. 


@@@@@


doc= 68075


Middleton, Elizabeth (supp. fl. 1637), supposed poet, has been claimed as author of a 173-stanza poem 'The Death, and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it was Acted by the Bloodye Jewes, and Registred by the Blessed Evangelists', surviving in a manuscript volume assumed to belong to her (Bodl. Oxf., MS Don. e. 17). As such she has been cited as an example of an emerging category, that of early modern women writers whose work circulated privately among contemporaries, only to slip from view until rediscovered in the later twentieth century, and her work seemed representative of a sub-strand of devotional composition which exhibited very broad religious sympathies. The date 1637 appears on the title page of the first entry in the volume, a staunchly protestant prose treatise, 'A Soveraigne Antidote agayst Dispayre', while the third and final entry is an unattributed portion of William Austin's poem 'Ecce Homo', which had been known by 1628 and first published in 1635. 'The Death, and Passion', which is introduced by an apparent dedication, 'To Mrs Sara Edmondes Elizabeth Middleton wished all Health and Happynes' (fol. 13) and an acrostic poem on the name of the former, borrowed stanzas from 'Saint Peters Complaint' by the Jesuit Robert Southwell, published after his death in 1595. 
The 'curiously ecumenical nature of the manuscript volume' (Greer and others, 94) has led to Elizabeth's being tentatively identified as one of the Middletons of Denbighshire, who combined adherence to the Church of England with puritan and parliamentarian sympathies and contact with exiled Catholics; also prominent in the London mercantile and legal circles, the family had associations with leading poets and playwrights. The most likely candidate for the author of 'The Death, and Passion' has seemed to be Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Sir Thomas Middleton (1586-1666) of Chirk Castle, a puritan active in the government of north Wales, and his second wife, Mary Napier (died 1655). Born on 24 January 1619, she married Sir George Warburton of Warburton and Arley, Cheshire, and had six children. Nothing is known of her personal tastes or talents, but her sister Mary ('b'. 1620) was said to be both pious and learned. However, there were other Elizabeths among the Middletons, and this Elizabeth was only eighteen in 1637. Moreover, many of this name but from other families were baptized in London in the first decades of the seventeenth century. Likewise, there were many Sara Edmondes in the city; the suggestion that the woman referred to in the acrostic was the former Sara Harington, wife of Sir Thomas Edmondes the diplomat and a neighbour in Essex of the future Lady Warburton's grandfather Sir Thomas Middleton (1550-1631), is implausible since her title was 'Lady' and not 'Mistress'. 
Whoever she was, the claims of Elizabeth Middleton as a poet have been questioned. First, closer examination of 'her' poem indicated she was largely a copyist rather than an author. Apart from plagiarism from Southwell, 130 stanzas were lifted (with one or two slight alterations in a still more Catholic direction) from another Catholic work, Ralph Bullokar's 'A True Description of the Passion of Our Saviour Jesus Christ' (1622). Even the striking imagery used when talking of Judas, which indicates both familiarity with and loathing of the mercantile world, may not be original, although an extended final section depicting the thieves crucified beside Jesus may reveal an authentic voice. Such a conclusion would still invest Elizabeth Middleton with significance as an exemplar of a female copyist of Catholic leanings but eclectic tastes, expressing her piety in a medium and artistic style similar to that found in the contemporary community at Little Gidding. However, the discovery of further manuscripts in similar style to, and duplicating much of the content of MS Don. e.17, which seem to be by the same scribe but which carry different dedications by different dedicators, appear to have reduced Elizabeth Middleton to a bystander. That scribe is now revealed with some certainty as John Bourchier ('b'. 1604/5), a Lincolnshire clergyman and a moderate Calvinist with polished calligraphic skills and some poetic ability. Elizabeth Middleton's role, if any, was probably as commissioner of the manuscript volume: in that she would embody another important contribution of women to early modern literature -- that of patronage. 


@@@@@


doc= 68076


Paget, Briget (b. 1570, d. in or after 1647), literary editor, was born in Nantwich, Cheshire, the daughter of Richard Masterson and Elizabeth Grosvenor. There is no record of her education but her preface to 'Meditations of Death' shows her as literate and engaged in political and theological ideas. Its author, her husband, John Paget (d. 1638), was rector of Nantwich from 1598 to 1604, and their marriage must have taken place during this time. He was ejected for nonconformity, and the couple moved to the Netherlands, where he worked as an army pastor. They had no children of their own, but adopted John Paget's nephew Robert, who later became an English minister in the Netherlands. In 1607 John Paget was offered the pastorship of the newly opened Begynhof Church, Amsterdam, an English Reformed church under the aegis of the Dutch church. He retained this post until 1637, when he retired, owing to ill health, and died in 1638. 
Most of what is known about Briget Paget is contained in her preface to her publication of her husband's posthumous work, 'Meditations of death, wherein a Christian is taught how to remember and prepare for his latter end' (Dort, 1639). John Paget was active in the politics of the English church abroad, many of his publications being directed against Separatists, but he remained a strict Calvinist. Briget's support for his views is borne out by the contents of her preface; she speaks, for example, of 'those large lessons which by Divine providence have been dispensed to teach and affect with what may be helpful to mortification' (sig. A1). The Pagets actively supported the protestant and political cause of Elizabeth of Bohemia and her husband, both of whom attended services at Paget's church and remarked on his sermons. Briget dedicates her preface and edition of her husband's work 'To the most illustrious and most excellent lady, Elizabeth queene of Bohemia, Countess Palatine of the Rhine etc' and suggests that they had a more intimate relationship when she speaks of 'the gentle and propitious respects your Majesty hath at sundry times manifested unto the author and sometimes also unto myselfe' (sig. A1). She makes an explicit and overt political prayer for their restoration to the Bohemian crown: 'The most high who ruleth in the kingdomes of men and giveth them to whomsoever he will, [may] he rayse and establish your throne and confirm it unto your princely progeny, that with his blessing the house of your Majesty may be blessed forever. (sig. A1)' Briget Paget's preface to 'Meditations of Death' shows that she was responsible for editing her husband's sermons for the purposes of publication, suggesting her active, intellectual engagement with his life and work. She frames her boldness in publishing within the conventional feminine modesty topos: the publication is primarily to salve her own loss, and is directly addressed to Elizabeth of Bohemia, rather than to a public audience. 
After her husband's death in 1638 Briget Paget moved to live with her adopted son, Robert Paget, in Dordrecht, where he was minister. She managed her own money, since her name is on the sale, in 1647, of two properties previously owned by her husband in Amsterdam. In or after that year she died in Dordrecht. Her will echoed that of her husband's, leaving legacies to nephews and nieces, and to Robert Paget. 


@@@@@


doc= 68082


Dixon, John (fl. 1574-1597), annotator of Faerie Queene, was the eldest of the three sons of Humphry Dixon ('fl'. 1538-1555) of Hilden Manor, near Tonbridge, Kent, and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1540-1555), a daughter of the Stace family of Hallenden. Dixon was born into a landowning family, originating in Scotland but established at least since his grandfather's time in Kent. He may, like his younger brother William, have attended Tonbridge School and gone on to university (it is just possible that he is the same 'John Dixon' who matriculated at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1573). He married Joan Launce of Stanstead, Kent, and had two sons, Henry and William -- the first born about 1574. John Dixon inherited Hilden Manor from his father and was able to pass it on to his elder son. 
Dixon is of significance today solely as the presumed author of the copious annotations to be found in a copy of Edmund Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' (1590) now in the possession of the Stansted Park Foundation in Hampshire. The volume has the name 'John Dixon' written on its title-page, but the specific connection to the resident of Hilden can be established only through the book's provenance. The annotations show John Dixon to have been of nationalist and puritan sympathies -- a man very familiar with the 'Bible' but not, apparently, with Spenser's Latin or Italian models. Dixon interprets Book I in the context of the prophecies of 'Revelation'. In addition, he links episodes in the poem to recent history (sometimes making use of a basic letter-substitution code). The Redcrosse Knight is, for example, identified as the earl of Leicester, while his betrothal to Una is (with no apparent sense of contradiction) later paralleled with the accession of Elizabeth. Although Dixon displays a sound grasp of Spenser's didactic intentions (for instance glossing the reconciliation of Guyon and Britomart as 'unitie between Temperance and Chastitie'; III.i.12) his understanding of plot is often less secure. In this, as in other ways, his priorities sometimes appear the reverse of those of modern readers. The annotations are the only trace which remains of Dixon's character. It is possible to determine that he wrote them in 1597. We do not know his date of death, but a document showing that his son had inherited Hilden Manor by 1642 does give a late date by which that event had occurred (Almack). 


@@@@@


doc= 68083


Vavasour, Anne (fl. 1580-1621), lady of the royal household, was the daughter of Henry Vavasour of Copmanthorpe, Yorkshire, and Margaret Knyvet. Sworn as a gentlewoman of the bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth in 1580, she was serving within the year as one of the six maids of honour. This title proved all too ephemeral, for shortly after her arrival at court she became the mistress of Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford (1550-1604), and on 23 March 1581 gave birth to his son in the maidens' chamber. The queen sent both parents to the Tower. Their son, Edward Vere, went on to a military career in the Netherlands and a knighthood (1607), probably under the tutelage of his paternal relatives Sir Francis and Sir Horace Vere. 
By 1590 Anne had married one John Finch, but was probably already the mistress of the queen's champion at tilt, Sir Henry Lee (1533-1611), with whom she also had a son, Thomas Vavasour, alias Freeman. Anne and Sir Henry lived openly together at Ditchley in Oxfordshire and his other country houses; indeed, they entertained Queen Anne at a lodge near Woodstock in September 1608. At Lee's death in 1611 Anne inherited a jointure worth $700. By 1618 she had married a John Richardson, unmindful, apparently, that her first husband, Finch, was yet living. Lee's heir sued her for bigamy in the court of high commission, where she was fined $2000 in 1621. A tomb with a quatrain verse epitaph was prepared for Anne in St Peter's Chapel at Quarrendon, where Sir Henry was buried: '
Under this stone entombed lies a fair & worthy Dame 

Daughter to Henry Vavasour, Anne Vavasour her name. 

She living with Sir Henry Lee, for love long time did dwell 

Death could not part them but here they rest within one cell. 
(Lysons, and Lysons, 624)' No further details of her career or death have come to light. 
Anne is associated with several Elizabethan lyrics, none of which she is likely to have written. The text of 'Though I seem strange, sweet friend, be thou not so' in Folger MS V.a.89, pages 8-9, is subscribed 'Vavaser', but 'La. B. to N.' in the British Library's Harley MS 6910, folio 145'r'- 'v'. A partial text in Harley MS 7392 (2), folio 40, was at first assigned to 'H W'; the initials were later crossed out in favour of 'Ball.', quite possibly an abbreviation for 'ballad' in this anthology. The Folger manuscript also ascribes its copy of a poem on the Oxford-Vavasour liaison (beginning 'Sitting alone upon my thought') to Anne; she and Oxford are named in connection with other manuscript versions of the poem, apparently to identify them as the principals in the work rather than its authors. 
Anne is often confused with her niece, also Anne Vavasour who served as a gentlewoman of the privy chamber, 'c'.1601-3. In 1603 she married Sir Richard Warburton of London (died 1610), the third son of Peter Warburton of Hefferston Grange, Weaversham, Cheshire, with Alice, daughter of John Cooper. Their son Cecil was Warburton's heir. This Anne was related to Anne Clifford and in the service of Lucy, countess of Bedford, before coming to court. She attended Elizabeth's funeral and received a pension of $66 13's'. 4died early in James's reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 68084


Southwell, Anne, Lady Southwell (bap. 1574, d. 1636), poet, was born at Cornworthy Priory, Cornworthy, Devon, the eldest child of Elizabeth Pomeroy (died 1634) and Thomas Harris MP (1547-1610, knighted by 1604). She was baptized at St Peter's, Cornworthy, on 22 August 1574. Her siblings included Sir Edward, who became chief justice of the king's bench in Munster, Ireland; Sir Christopher, who was killed at Ostend, and Honor, who married Sir Hugh Harris of Scotland. Because Thomas Harris was serjeant-at-law at the Middle Temple Inn and MP for four towns, the family may have lived in London occasionally. No record of Anne's education remains, although her compositions illustrate an understanding of theology, literature, rhetoric, and music. 
Anne married Thomas Southwell (1575?-1626), of Spixworth, Norfolk, at the church of St Clement Danes in London on 24 June 1594. He was knighted on 23 July 1603 and at a later date sent to Munster for the plantation of Ireland. Through Thomas's mother, Alice Southwell ('nee' Cornwallis), Anne may have met the essayist William Cornwallis and his friends John Donne and Thomas Overbury. The Southwell family also enjoyed other literary and courtly connections, the most famous being Robert Southwell, poet and martyr for the Roman cause. Anne Southwell, however, was herself a staunch protestant who mocked Roman 'Popelings'. Her early writing included 'Answere[s]' to two 'Newes' reports, one by Donne and the other by Overbury, that were published, with her initials, in Overbury's notorious book 'A Wife now the Widow of Sir Thomas Overburye' (1614). 
After Sir Thomas's death in 1626 Anne married Captain Henry Sibthorpe, who probably gave her the folios of Folger, MS V.b.198 that with his help she turned into an uncommon commonplace book. The two collected her compositions as well as works they liked by others, some of which could prove useful as models. Occasionally Sibthorpe served as a scribe and, as is clear from marginalia (fol. 49'r'), he also mentored his wife's writing. After Anne's death he may have added some explanatory titles and inserted a few of the works, especially those to or about prestigious people, to make the volume a 'monument of an Endlesse affection', as he described it on the folios he added (fols. 73 and 74). 
In 1628 Anne and Henry Sibthorpe settled in Clerkenwell, Middlesex, and, in 1631, they moved to Acton. They lived near St Mary's Church, in 'tenaments' rented from Robert Johnson, court lutenist and composer. Entries in the commonplace book show Anne's interaction with her neighbours, and especially with the curate Roger Cocks. 
Lady Southwell's compositions suggest that she was an intelligent and spirited woman. She claimed lethal ladies of the 'Bible', Jael and Judith, as her role models. With a voice of authority, she wrote to and about people such as Henry Cary, Viscount Falkland; Bishop Adams of Limerick; the duchess of Lennox; and the kings of Bohemia and Sweden. She could also banter with politicians, as she did in petitioning Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, for the land rights of Sir Richard Edgcumbe (Chatsworth, Lismore MSS, box 14, fol. 160; see also fol. 174). Her greatest contribution may be the way that she often urged mutuality in marriage, based on Christ's example with his spouse, the church. She warned against dangers such as the 'heresy' that females have so little wit, 'as but to serve men they are only fitt' (Folger MS V.b.198, fol. 26'v'). BL, MS Lansdowne 740, fols. 142-167'v', includes Anne's two long meditations on the third and fourth commandments, expansions from poems in the Folger volume. Although at first the meditations probably were meant to honour James I, the final dedication evidently addressed Charles I. Lady Southwell died at the home owned by Robert Johnson's widow in Acton on 2 October 1636 and was buried on 5 October in the chancel of St Mary's Church, where a plaque on the back wall still commemorates her. Her husband survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 68085


Shelton, Mary (1510x15-1570/71), contributor to manuscript miscellany, was the youngest daughter of Sir John Shelton (1476/7-1539) of Norfolk ['see under 'Shelton family], and his wife, Anne Boleyn (died 1555) ['see 'Shelton, Anne, 'under' Shelton family], aunt of Queen Anne Boleyn, who with her husband, from 1533 supervised the royal princesses. Mary attended on her cousin, the queen, playing a lively part in the amorous pastimes of the court. Queen Anne reportedly rebuked her for writing 'ydill poesies' in her prayerbook ('William Latymer's chronicklle', 62) and in frantic 'confessions' before her execution, linked Mary, or her sister Margaret, with two of the queen's 'lovers' (Strype, 1, pt 1, 433). Rumour twice linked Mary amorously with Henry VIII ('LP Henry VIII', 8, 263; 13, pt 1, 24). Mary contributed to the important 'Devonshire' album of Tudor courtly verse (BL, Add. MS 17492): she signs a sharp answer to a poem addressed to her, and her hand can be identified copying, and perhaps composing, fashionable balets into the album. Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, named Mary as the beloved of Sir Thomas Clere in the epitaph he composed to commemorate Clere's death on 14 April 1545. By 1546 she had married Sir Anthony Heveningham (1507-1557). The same year, the suggestion that 'menye secrettes' had passed between her and the earl of Surrey was noted for further investigation by a privy council suspicious of Surrey ('LP Henry VIII', 21, pt 1, 1426). Mary and Sir Anthony had five children, the eldest being Arthur Heveningham, and the youngest of whom, Abigail (who married Sir George Digby of Coleshill, Warwickshire), was in attendance on Queen Elizabeth in 1588. In 1558 Mary married Philip Appleyard ('b'. 'c'.1528). A probable portrait of Mary by Hans Holbein is in the collection of Her Majesty the Queen at Windsor. Mary was buried in Heveningham church, Suffolk, on 8 January 1571. 


@@@@@


doc= 68087


Blage, Sir George (c.1512-1551), courtier, was the younger son of Sir Robert Blage of Broke Montagu, Somerset (died 1522), and of Mary, the daughter of John Brooke, seventh Baron Cobham. He is said to have been educated at Cambridge. By 1535 he was in diplomatic service, working in France under Bishop Stephen Gardiner. He was already friendly with Sir Thomas Wyatt the elder, his cousin by marriage. During 1538-9 he again served on a diplomatic mission, working for Wyatt himself in Spain. He was back in London by July 1540, when he was licensed to export bell-metal with a group of other courtiers. It is likely that about this time he secured an appointment in the king's privy chamber. He fought in the French campaigns of 1543-5, and was nicknamed Tom Trubbe by the soldiers for reasons that are not now clear. He began to collect other dignities: he was made chief steward and bailiff of Maidstone in 1544 and comptroller of the petty custom of London in 1546. He sat in parliament in 1545 and in 1547, for Bedford and Westminster respectively. During the Scottish campaign of September 1547 he was knighted by Protector Somerset. In 1548 Sir Thomas Seymour tried to recruit Blage as an ally against his brother the protector, but Blage refused and in due course testified against Seymour. Favours continued: he and his associate Richard Goodricke (who later married his widow) received a grant of former chantry lands in Dartford and Maidstone in 1550. Later the same year Blage testified against his old master Gardiner. He died at Stanmore, Middlesex, on 17 June 1551, perhaps a victim of the sweating sickness. He was survived by a widow, Dorothy, daughter of William Badby of Essex, and four children: Henry, Hester, Judith, and Jane. 
It was Blage's relationship with Wyatt and his circle, and what followed from it, that distinguished him from the ordinary run of courtiers. Blage shared his friend's love for poetry, and surpassed him in zeal for the protestant cause. During Wyatt's imprisonment in 1541 he cited Blage as one who would vouch for him; Leland later wrote that Wyatt 'took delight in Blage's subtle mind' (Muir, 'Life and Letters', 264). Blage received the stewardship of Maidstone in succession to Wyatt after the latter's death in 1542. Blage also, it seems, inherited Wyatt's antipathy to Thomas Wriothesley, earl of Southampton. He wrote a vicious epitaph crowing over the former lord chancellor's death in 1549: 'The dog is dead; his soul is down to hell' ('Works of Henry Howard', 1.xcvii). Most of Blage's own poetry was indifferent, but he did preserve a good deal of Wyatt's verse alongside his own in what became an important manuscript (now in Trinity College, Dublin). 
Blage had a more troubled relationship with Wyatt's literary successor, Henry Howard, earl of Surrey. When Surrey led a group of young bloods on a rampage through London in January 1543, Blage rebuked him for his folly; Surrey's whole circle was tainted by this incident, and it may have cost Blage a promotion. They remained friends, however, and he accompanied Surrey to the siege of Landrecy later that year, where Blage 'escaped very hardly from a piece of ordnance that was shot towards him' ('Works of Henry Howard', 1, appx, xxxix). By 1545 the two men had fallen out more seriously. It was rumoured that Surrey was plotting to usurp the throne after Henry VIII's death, and the religious conservatism of his father, the duke of Norfolk, was well known. Blage did not wish the Howards to have any role in a prospective regency government. He claimed afterwards that he would rather have killed Surrey with his own hands than see this happen, and he may have testified against Surrey at his treason trial in January 1547. Surrey was executed, but not before making peace with his friend. Writing from prison, he reaffirmed his evangelical faith, and added: 'now, my Blage, mine error well I see' (ibid., 1.80). 
Those evangelical convictions were held much more strongly by Blage himself. In 1542 he had become involved in an attempt to free the protestant agitator John Porter from prison. In 1546 he walked to the stake with the convicted sacramentaries Anne Askew and John Lassells. He had nearly burned with them. In May 1546 he had allegedly denounced the mass in the hearing of two of his fellow MPs. He was accused of posing the familiar heretic's trick question of the validity of the consecrated host which is eaten by a mouse, and of adding 'that in his opinion it were well done that the mouse were taken and put in the pix', that is, held up for adoration ('LP Henry VIII', 21/1, no. 1383 [72]). He was arrested in July, and despite his denials and attempts at legal manoeuvres, was condemned to death. Awaiting execution, he too wrote a poem, resigning his soul to God and meditating on how, despite his obedience to the law, the clergy had sought his blood. It now seemed to him that his effort 'to plees bothe god and kynge' had been vain (Muir, 'Life and Letters', 273). 
However, Blage spoke too soon. Henry VIII personally intervened to pardon him. He was too fond of the man to see him burn. According to John Foxe's account, when the king saw Blage soon afterwards: 'Ah my pig sayth the king to him, (for so he was wont to call him.) Yea sayd he, if your maiestie had not bene better to me then your Bishops were, your pig had bene rosted ere this time. (Foxe, 'Actes and Monuments', 1583, 1246)' The 'king's pig' lived to see the beliefs for which he had been condemned become established orthodoxy. After his death Thomas Lever mourned him as 'gentle Blage', a 'singular ornament' whose 'courtship' was a loss to England (Strype, 89). 


@@@@@


doc= 68089


Wigmore, Winefrid (1585-1657), Roman Catholic religious sister and schoolmistress, was born at Lucton, Herefordshire, one of twelve children of Sir William Wigmore and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Throckmorton. William Wigmore (c.1599-1665) was one of three of her brothers who joined the Society of Jesus, while one of her sisters (Elizabeth in baptism), joined the English Benedictine convent at Ghent, and another (Helen in baptism), joined the Carmelites at Antwerp. Few details are known about Winefrid's early life, although later sources suggest that she was a pious child who was given an extensive education by her parents, learning to speak and write five languages including Latin. 
In 1605, while visiting her Throckmorton cousins at Coughton, Warwickshire, Winefrid encountered in this staunchly Catholic household her equally devout contemporary Mary Ward, shortly to become a nun at St Omer. Following Mary's return to London in 1609 with a vision for a new religious community, Winefrid was one of a group of five young women who joined her at a house in the Strand to participate in the apostolic work being undertaken among persecuted Catholic women. These 'companions' remained with Mary, sharing the hardships of the venture then known as the 'English ladies' or Mary Ward's institute. Mary shared with Winefrid her deepest concerns and a close friendship developed between the two women. Winefrid remained a loyal companion, sharing the lengthy journeys across Europe and the uncertainties of new foundations. Her linguistic skills were of particular importance to Mary as the institute spread from Flanders into Italy and even further afield. In 1622-3 she became headmistress of schools that were established first in Rome and later in Naples. Mary commented on the fine quality of the Latin teaching in the Naples school. Winefrid was appointed superior in Naples in 1624, although contemporary documents suggest that she was happiest as a deputy rather than a leader. 
Winefrid Wigmore has come in for criticism from recent biographers of Mary Ward for the role she played in the events leading to the suppression of the institute. Evidence of the mounting pressure on the papacy in the 1620s to impose enclosure on Mary and her followers can be seen in Flanders as well as Italy. There was a dissatisfied group of members within the Liege foundation opposed to their foundress and by 1630 the house had been operating for nine years without a visit from Mary. When Winefrid was sent by Mary as visitor, only diplomatic negotiations could have prevented serious difficulties. Unfortunately her overwhelming loyalty to Ward and her determination to impose obedience to the founder led to open hostility in Liege. Winefrid deposed the superior, Mary Copley, and the ensuing rows were investigated by the papal nuncio and reported to Rome. The result gave ammunition to those in the Catholic church who sought the suppression of the institute on the grounds that its continuation would directly challenge papal authority as well as break the Tridentine ruling on enclosure. The institute was suppressed by papal bull in 1631 and Winefrid was temporarily imprisoned. Many of the members at Liege left, although a few transferred to Munich, which like the house in Rome remained open but severely restricted in its activities. 
However, in the longer term Winefrid, together with Mary Poyntz and the other companions, was important in keeping the institute together after Mary Ward's death in 1645. The suppression by papal bull should have ended the institute but in practice, while it had an immediate and catastrophic effect at Liege and seriously damaged other houses, the 'English ladies' were able to negotiate the survival of both the Paradeiser House in Munich and the house in Rome. Provided they acted circumspectly and lived with the appearance of being lay women in tiny groups, members of the institute were permitted to live communally. In the 1630s Winefrid remained in Rome with Mary Ward, acting as novice mistress, secretary, and Mary's nurse. The house seems to have had about twenty members in this period. 
Winefrid accompanied Mary on her last journey to England in 1637, remaining with her, first in London and then in Yorkshire, until the latter's death in 1645. In spite of her length of service to Mary Ward, it was not Winefrid who was appointed to head the next stage in the institute's existence: she was always happier in a subsidiary role. Initially permitted to remain at Hewarth by their Catholic landlord, his later decision to reclaim the house occasioned new moves. The defeat of the royalists and the execution of the king in January 1649 increased the dangers of remaining in England. The gift of 500 pistols by the exiled royalist Edward Somerset, second marquess of Worcester, to Mary Poyntz enabled the remaining members under the leadership of Barbara Babthorpe to relocate to Paris in 1650. Here a school was established for English girls with Winefrid as headmistress. She died in April 1657 and was buried in the cemetery of the Bernadine nuns in Paris. 
Winefrid Wigmore was self-effacing and left few records of her own contribution to the foundation of the institute that can be clearly identified, choosing to focus on the leadership of Mary Ward. Shortly after the foundress's death, Winefrid and Mary Poyntz composed the first biography of Mary Ward (the 'Brief relation' or 'Vita E') and chose the subjects for the 'Painted Life', a series of fifty oils with captions giving an account of significant events in her religious life. Probably of continental provenance, the latter works represented a remarkable and original choice of medium. A set of reproductions survive at the Bar convent in York. The Mary Ward sisters are now the Congregation of Jesus. 


@@@@@


doc= 68090


Hill, Richard (fl. 1508-1536), merchant, was born at Hillend, in Hitchin, Hertfordshire. He was made a freeman of the Merchant Adventurers in May 1508, and from the entries in his commonplace book, appears to have travelled to markets at Antwerp and Bruges. He married Elizabeth Wyngar, daughter of a London haberdasher. Between the birth of the first son (John) in November 1518 and the second (Thomas) in May 1520, the Hill family seems to have moved from Hitchin to London, where they stayed until at least 1526 (when Hill's last and seventh child, Robert, was born). 
Over the years Hill compiled a commonplace book (Balliol College, MS 354). The manuscript is a varied collection of sacred and secular poetry and prose. It combines carols and medieval poetry (e.g. selections from Lydgate, John Gower's 'Confessio amantis', and 'The Nut Brown Mayde') with extracts from the 'Gesta Romanorum', practical treatises (on breaking horses and grafting trees), recipes (for brewing, making ink, killing rats, and so on), puzzles and card tricks, and two books on courtesy (one of which doubles as an English-French conversation manual). There is also a series of ecclesiastical entries (mainly Latin), including graces, a paraphrase of the ten commandments, and a formula of questions to be asked by a confessor. 
Hill's manuscript shows an interest in history and contemporary affairs. Besides a chronicle (beginning in 1413, and growing in detail in later years as Hill drew on his own experience), the book contains several historical and occasional poems, such as the lament of Eleanor Cobham, duchess of Gloucester, Thomas More's elegy on Elizabeth of York, and William Dunbar's (?) 'Praise of London', annotated in the manuscript as being 'made at Mr Shaas table when he was mayre'. 
The collection reflects the life and interests of a London merchant. As well as commercial notes (on taxation, purchasing land and so on), and entries describing protocol and household stuff used at the lord mayor's banquet, the manuscript also records an extensive kin network of London merchants, compounded and celebrated through marriage and god-parenting. The last distinct entry in the chronicle is dated 1536. 


@@@@@


doc= 68092


Major, Elizabeth (fl. 1656), religious writer, was the author of a single volume, entitled 'Honey on the rod, or, A comfortable contemplation for one in affliction; with sundry poems on several subjects' (1656). 
Major's identity is unknown, and there is little to be done but quote from her preface to the second part of 'Honey on the Rod': 'I was, till the fifteenth or sixteenth year of my age, brought up by a godly and careful Father (my Mother being taken from me in my infancy) from whom I went to a great and honorable Family, where no vice I think was tolerated; and under a wise and vertuous Governness I lived nere ten years, til God was pleased to visit me with Lameness... Then I was forc't to repair home to my Father again, where I was persued with an inordinate desire of recovery; and having some money in my own hands, I endeavored the accomplishing of that desire, without an humble and obedient submission to the will of God... 
... upon serious consideration I saw my folly, and found that I had lost much time, in which I had offended God, and deprived my self of that little health I enjoyed, spent my money, and onely gaining a sight and knowledge of those things, I humbly desire my soul may ever abhor; therefore I had no rest in me, till I had shewed my indignation against what so much offended me. (Major, unpaginated prefatory page)' 
'Honey on the Rod' was published under the imprimatur of Joseph Caryl, the leading nonconformist divine and rector of St Magnus, London, during the civil wars and interregnum. Caryl's three-page prefatory recommendation of the volume has led to speculation that Major was a parishioner and protegee of Caryl. Caryl's role as licenser for printing books of divinity from 14 June 1643, however, is enough to explain his involvement in the publication, and there is no evidence that he knew Major personally. Major is likely to have dwelt in London, and it is possible that she was, as some have speculated, the daughter of John Major and Mary Allton of Blackfriars, in which case she was born about 1628. 
Major's volume consists of meditations in prose, largely constructed as dialogues between Consolation and the Soul; verses which explore the sins of pride, drunkenness, covetousness, prodigality, and of profaning the sabbath and the name of God; and several acrostics based on her name. Major styles her volume as a child sent forth into the world, and she writes 'onely this may cause some trouble in me, I think it will finde none of so low a birth as it self' (Major, unpaginated prefatory page). 


