@@@@@


doc= 68093


Isham, Elizabeth (bap. 1608, d. 1654), diarist, was baptized on 5 February 1608 at Lamport, Northamptonshire, the daughter of Sir John Isham, first baronet (1582-1651), and Judith (1590-1625), daughter of William Lewin, ecclesiastical lawyer, of Otterden, Kent. Her younger brother was the scholar and politician Justinian Isham. She was educated at home, her curriculum consisting mainly of religious readings, needlework, some poetry reading, and some physical exercise. Her father and grandfather were learned men who collected a library that included many continental works as well as ones of natural science; her own reading, described in her two diaries, indirectly suggests that she had good access to this library, but only via her father and brother. As she wrote in 1638: 'my brother lent me Sir Philip Sidney's book (after Spencer), which I heard much commended by some, and others again discommended the reading of such books of love, but I found no such hurt. But I suppose there are play books which are far worse than these which my father would lend me none of ('Book of Remembraunce', fol. 26'r')' Isham's early education, directed by her mother, focused on habits of writing and reading for spiritual development, memorizing catechism, Biblical stories and prayers, and learning intricate stitching patterns. Later in life she commented on her wish to learn Latin, but 'could not so well' (ibid., fol. 28'r'), and turned instead to the virtues of herbs and flowers. She was extremely close to her mother, Lady Isham, who died when Elizabeth was seventeen; from then on, as the eldest daughter, Elizabeth took on the responsibilities of the domestic management of the house and estate. 
Most existing knowledge of Elizabeth Isham's life comes from two sources: a short almanac-type diary that she left (preserved among the Isham papers at Northamptonshire Record Office) and a longer confessional 'Book of Remembraunce' which was rediscovered among Princeton's manuscript collection in the early twenty-first century. She never married, although serious negotiations were continued between her father and Sir Erasmus Driden on behalf of his grandson John Driden between April 1630 and May 1631 ('Now my father thought to marry me' (diary, fol. 2, entry 22)). Agreement foundered because Sir John Isham felt that the amount that the Dridens were offering for her annual income was not sufficient in the light of her dowry, which was to have been $4000. Extant letters from John Driden and Elizabeth's own 'Book of Remembraunce' suggest the couple were eager to marry, although Elizabeth displayed conflicting feelings about both the courtship and the marriage. She later described marriage as 'not to be agreeable to my natural inclination' (ibid., fol. 72'r'), but simultaneously expressed a wistful regret for a lost life. Thereafter her life was spent in helping with the responsibilities of the Lamport estate, including some charity visiting, helping with the accounts, a huge amount of intricate sewing for her family, and, after her brother's marriage, helping to educate his young daughters, who are mentioned with great affection in the diary. She was responsible for the beehives on the estate, and records regular swarming and the volume of honey collected. During the years of the civil war she and her father were left at Lamport while Justinian was at Oxford with the king, and she educated and cared for his daughters. Her diary does record a few of the political events of these years. For example to her catalogue of the weather in 1642 she adds visitors, deaths, teaching her niece, sewing, and that the 'King fled to London' (ibid., fol. 4); in 1645 she notes simply 'Naseby field', although she later annotates 'God be praised at [his] scaping' (ibid.). It is known, from a letter of her brother's, that in 1644 parliamentary forces broke into the house, disturbing her and the children. She mentions this only obliquely: 'soldiers 3 or 4 days' (ibid.). 
Elizabeth Isham's two diaries seem to have served different functions, reflected in their form and appearance. The sketchier diary (held in Northamptonshire Record Office) is composed in the manner and form of an almanac or aide-memoire, divided into small squares, each representing a year of her life. The first three squares -- for the years between four and seven -- are relatively empty. Subsequently each year from eight to forty is described, with later additions for some of the early and middle years, particularly as regards religious reading and spiritual feelings. It is unclear when exactly she began the diary but each basic annual entry is given retrospectively, perhaps at the end of the year, while both the earliest entries and some of the spiritual observations are clearly made much later. Her key reading is noted in both diaries, and became increasingly religious as she aged, although she also records reading Sidney, Spenser, and Chaucer. The 'Book of Remembraunce' is a discursive spiritual and biographical reflection, consisting of 38 handwritten folios, produced in 1638, for personal self-reflection and familial education: 'not that I intend to have this published, but to this end I have it in praise a than[k]fulness to God and for my own benefit, which it may do my brother or his children any pleasure, I think to leave it to them'. The spiritual diary models itself on St Augustine's 'Confessions' and engages in the habit of puritan self-examination. It records key moments in her spiritual development, her reading, and emotions and feelings about her family and suitor. It is a rare and valuable insight into the interior life of a seventeenth-century noblewoman. Both diaries record the spiritual and domestic life and responsibilities of the sister of a more famous brother. Isham died on 11 April 1654, after a short illness, and was buried at Lamport church. 


@@@@@


doc= 68094


Pulter, Lady Hester (1595/6-1678), poet, was born probably at Westbury, Wiltshire, the daughter of James Ley (1550-1629), judge and politician, who was created first earl of Marlborough in 1626. Her mother was his first wife, Mary (died 1613), daughter of John Pettie (or Pettey) of Stoke Talmage, Oxfordshire. 
It is only relatively recently that Lady Hester has come to public attention, and until the emergence of a manuscript held by the Brotherton Collection at the University of Leeds, she was not the most famous of Ley's daughters. Notably, her father is the subject of a sonnet by John Milton which is addressed to her sister, Lady Margaret Ley (Sonnet 10, 'Daughter to that good earl'). In 1623 Lady Hester married Arthur Pulter (1603-1689) of Broadfield (or Bradfield) in Hertfordshire. The couple had seven sons (Jacob, James, William, Arthur, Edward, Charles, and John) and eight daughters (Margaret, Mary, Jane, Hester, Penelope, Ann, Elizabeth, and Mary). The Pulter manuscript includes comments to the effect that she wrote during her periods of confinement. Her husband was born at Hadham Hall, Hertfordshire, in August 1603, the son of Lytton Pulter (1575-1626) and Penelope Capel (1581-1611). He was a justice of the peace, a captain in the militia, and, in 1641, high sheriff of Hertfordshire. He apparently withdrew from public life during the civil war period, dedicating himself to the building of a house at Broadfield, which no longer stands. Details of the Pulters are contained in Sir Henry Chauncy's 'The Historical Antiquities of Hertfordshire' (1700), and clearly Chauncy was a family friend. 
The Leeds manuscript contains about 120 poems under the title 'Poems Breathed Forth by the Noble Hadassas' (Hadassas being a biblical synonym for Esther), and a prose romance, 'The Unfortunate Florinda', in two parts, the second of which is incomplete. From the dates given in the manuscript, this material appears to have been brought together between 1645 and 1665. Pulter's writings were produced by an educated and highly literate woman. The connection that her sister Margaret had to the London literary world through Milton might have been a route for Hester to keep in touch with the poetry of the period, and her connection to this milieu is marked in the subject matter of some of the poems. She also writes about and for members of her family, and there are many devotional poems in a meditative, metaphysical mode. The poetry reveals a strong involvement in public affairs, including a substantial number of polemical poems on the events of the civil war, all of which are characterized by her commitment to the royalist cause. 
Pulter's work seems set to attain a prominent place within the canon of seventeenth-century women writers, and the volume and variety of her output makes her a figure of importance comparable only to Lady Mary Wroth. That she did not publish in her lifetime, and that her work does not appear to have circulated widely, is not an indication of the texts' quality. While it is inevitable that the standard is various, the best of her work will assure her continued presence in considerations of the literature of the period. 
Pulter outlived all but two of her fifteen children, and the records of Cottered in Hertfordshire show that she was buried on 9 April 1678, at the age of eighty-two. Arthur Pulter died, having outlived his wife and all his children, on 27 January 1689. Their only grandson and sole heir was James Forester (1660-1696). 


@@@@@


doc= 68095


Sadleir, Anne (1585-1671/2), literary patron, was born on 1 March 1585 at Huntingfield Manor, Suffolk, the second of the ten children of Sir Edward Coke (1552-1634), judge and law writer, and his wife, Bridget (died 1598), daughter and coheir of John Paston. In a short autograph poem on her life she writes that she was educated at Elsing, Norfolk, but gives no more details (Trinity College, Cambridge, MS R.13.74, fol. 97). After her marriage to Ralph Sadleir (1579-1661) on 13 September 1601 she lived at Standon Lordship in Hertfordshire, where her dowry was $3000. The suggestion that her childless marriage was not a happy one is found in the aforementioned poem: 'Standon Brought Affliction which Made Heaven my Meditation'. Sadleir was very close to her father and there are records of his visits to Standon in 1603 and again in 1616, after his dismissal from office. She was granted permission to visit him in the Tower in 1622, 'being a discrete woman, and likely to endeavour to bring him to more conformity' ('CSP dom.', '1619-23', 347). At least two elegies on Coke were dedicated to Sadleir (BL, Add. MS 37484, and Harvard Law Library, MS 4125). 
Several volumes of Sadleir's personal papers survive in the library of Trinity College, Cambridge, including religious and autobiographical meditations (MS R.13.74) and letters from leading Anglican divines and other correspondents (MS R.5.5). As a staunch supporter of the Church of England she continued to use the prayer book during its proscription in the 1650s and carried on vigorous epistolary disputes with her Roman Catholic nephew Herbert Aston and the New England puritan divine Roger Williams. Sadleir gave large bequests to the libraries at Trinity College, Cambridge, and the Inner Temple, institutions attended by her father and by other family members. In 1649 and 1664 she presented Trinity with her letters and notebooks, her coins, and several illuminated manuscripts; in 1661 the Inner Temple Library received two portraits, thirteen manuscripts (Petyt MSS 530/A-F and 531/A-G), including a sermon dedicated to Sadleir by Andrew Marvell, father of the poet, and many books from her library. Standon Lordship passed to her husband's nephew on his death in 1661 but Sadleir continued to live there until her own death in late 1671 or early 1672. 


@@@@@


doc= 68096


Stafford, Lady Dorothy (1600-1636), literary patron and poet, was born about 20 December 1600 at Walsingham House, Seething Lane, London, the youngest of the five children of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex (1565-1601), and his wife, Frances (1567-1632), daughter of Sir Francis Walsingham and formerly the wife of Sir Philip Sidney. 
On 18 May 1615 Lady Dorothy married Sir Henry Shirley, second baronet ('c'.1592-1633), of Staunton Harold, Leicestershire, and of Astwell, Northamptonshire, at St Laurence Pountney, London. The Shirleys were both Roman Catholics, though they were never convicted of recusancy. They had three children: Charles, third baronet (1623-1646); Robert, fourth baronet (died 1656), who died in the Tower, where he had been imprisoned seven times for his support of the king; and Lettice (or Leta), who married William De Burgh, later seventh earl of Clanricarde. After twelve years of marriage Sir Henry was publicly disgraced before the privy council and imprisoned for slighting the earl of Huntingdon, one of the earl of Essex's political allies ('APC', '1627-8', 201; 'Hastings MSS', 4.212). Soon after his release in 1627 he was accused of adultery, whereupon Lady Dorothy, 'both for safeguard of her honour, blemished by him scandalously, and for her alimony or maintenance (being glad to get from him)... was forced to endure a suit in the High Commission Court' ('State trials', 2.1456). She later took Shirley to court for non-payment of maintenance (BL, Add. MS 46189, fol. 30). 
After Henry Shirley's death on 8 February 1633 the third earl of Essex became the guardian of Shirley's heir ('Clarendon State Papers', 1.81). At that time Lady Dorothy was described by Henry Cary, Viscount Falkland, as 'one of the fayrest, wittiest and newest widdowes of our time'. In February 1635 she married, as his second wife, William Stafford ('c'.1604-1637) of Blatherwyck, Northamptonshire, in a Roman Catholic ceremony, though Stafford 'was never known to be popishly affected' ('Hastings MSS', 2.76-7). On 1 March 1635 the newsletter writer George Gerrard wrote to the earl of Strafford, 'And here is also one Mr. Stafford, who buried but two Months since his Wife, married in Queen's Chapel at Somerset-House to the Lady Dorothy Shirley, sister to my Lord of Essex, and I hear they both repent it already' (Radcliffe, 373). The marriage was celebrated by Thomas Randolph, a poet in Stafford's patronage, in a pastoral eclogue entitled 'The Constant Lovers' (Hunt. L., HM 904, fols. 189'r'-195'v'). 
Lady Dorothy was the dedicatee of James Shirley's comedy 'Changes, or, Love in a Maze' (1632) and of Thomas Fitzherbert's translation of Orazio Torsellino's life of St Francis Xavier of the same year, in which she was praised for her 'Resolution and Constancy' in the Catholic faith 'in the middst of strongest Reasons, Tryalls, & Provocations to the contrary' (T. Fitzherbert, 'The Admirable Life', sig. A1'v'-A2'r'). She evidently followed the taste of the court, for a contemporary recorded that she longed to read Walter Montagu's play 'The Shepherds' Paradise', performed by Queen Henrietta Maria and the ladies of her court in 1633 (Montagu, xiv). John Eliot and Owen Felltham addressed poems to her but she also wrote her own verse and was a participant in the Aston family's group of Catholic poets at Tixall, Staffordshire. Her contact with this group most likely came about through the proximity of the Aston estates to Chartley Castle, which belonged to her brother, the third earl of Essex, and which descended to her grandson Robert. She wrote a poem in response to Katherine Thimelby's 'upon the LD saying KT could be sad in her company', in which she expresses her pleasure in her friend's society (Hunt. L., HM 904, fols. 158'r'-158'v'), and another addressed to an inconstant lover (ibid., fols. 136'r'-136'v', also in Harvard MS Eng. 626, fols. 17'v'-18'r'); this was in turn answered by a subsequent poem. 
Lady Dorothy died on 30 March 1636 at Blatherwyck, where she was buried on 5 April. Her death was lamented in a pastoral eclogue written by Sir William Pershall, in which Amyntas (Stafford) mourns Lawra (Lady Dorothy) (Hunt. L., HM 904, fols. 196'r'-200'v'). William Stafford died on 3 July 1637. 


@@@@@


doc= 68097


L'Estrange, Alice, Lady L'Estrange (1585-1656), keeper of household and estate accounts, was the only child of Richard Stubbe (died 1619), a lawyer, and his second wife, Anne Goding, formerly widow of John Le Strange (died 1582). Richard Stubbe had two distinct families and estates. His elder daughter Dionsina, from his first marriage to Elizabeth, the daughter of Anthony Gurney of Ellingham, married Henry Yelverton (1558-1631) of Rougham in 1589. Alice clearly harboured some resentment of her 'sister Yelverton'. In one of her account books Alice recorded the details of her father's estate. While her sister received lands worth $498 a year, Alice's estate at Sedgeford which her mother brought to Richard Stubbe at marriage, with property in Kings Lynn and Holme Parsonage, was worth $473. On marriage, both were given cash sums and continuing assistance until Stubbe's death in 1619, but Alice's total of $4669 13's'. 4died was substantially less than the $6392 allowed to the Yelvertons, largely for the repayment of debt. Despite the apparent unfairness, the entries in the accounts show a close relationship between father and daughter; from her father Alice acquired a sophisticated knowledge of farming and an aptitude for accounting. 
Richard Stubbe also played a formative role in the upbringing of Sir Hamon L'Estrange (1583-1654), son of Sir Nicholas L'Estrange (1562-1592) and nephew of Anne Stubbe's first husband. Alice and Hamon were married on 8 June 1602 and appear to have enjoyed a highly successful marriage; the paintings they commissioned from John Hoskins in 1617 portray a lively and attractive couple. Hamon frequently prefaced her accounts with encouraging biblical quotations, describing her as a 'pearl above price' and one who 'overseeth the ways of her household & eateth not the brede of idleness' (allusions to the virtuous woman of 'Proverbs': 31) and pointing out that 'He that contemneth small things shall fall little by little [as found in] 'ecclesiasticus'' (Norfolk RO, LEST/P8). In his will he thanked her for her 'ever incessant industry to the just, faithful and laudable advantage and advancement of my estate' and for 'the most pious and painful care in the education of my children' (ibid., LEST/AE8). They had eight children, of whom four survived to adulthood: Sir Nicholas L'Estrange (bap. 1604, d. 1655); Hamon L'Estrange (1605-1660); Dorothy (1608-1609); Jane (1611-1620); Elizabeth ('b'. 1613), who in 1636 married William Spring, bt, of Pakenham, Suffolk; Sir Roger L'Estrange (1616-1704); John (1618-1619); and Mary ('b'. and died 1621). The sons, like their father, all produced published work: Roger became an accomplished pamphleteer, Hamon specialized in theological works, while Nicholas compiled a jest book which attributes forty-three jokes and anecdotes, some of them quite bawdy, to his mother, Alice. 
Methodical bookkeeping was Alice's principal contribution to the management of the household and the estate. She began in 1609, taking over the household accounts from Hamon, following the death of their daughter Dorothy. Over the years she branched out into supplementary accounts and estate records. From 1613 she kept weekly kitchen accounts itemizing the purchase, production, and consumption of food and drink by the household, and from 1617 she recorded the profits of her dairy. In 1618, as her father's health declined and he was less able to continue his practice of collecting their rents, auditing accounts, giving them sheep, and offering advice, she assumed responsibility for the Sedgeford estate. This involved not only receiving rents, but keeping the intricate sheep accounts, organizing grazing regimes and crop rotations, drawing up rentals and field books, and commissioning a survey. From 1621 she kept building accounts for Hamon, and from 1631 she rationalized and maintained the records for the entire estate at Hunstanton, Heacham, and Ringstead. During the civil war, when husband and sons were heavily committed to the royalist cause, Alice managed the household and estate single-handed, recording their losses and rising debts. Her accounts only ceased in 1654 on Hamon's death. She died in 1656 at Hunstanton Hall and was buried at Hunstanton church on 9 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 68102


Balfour, Nancy (1911-1997), journalist and arts administrator, was born near San Francisco, California, USA, on 17 May 1911, the daughter of Alexander Balfour and his wife, Ruth Macfarland. Brought up in England, she was educated at High Wycombe School, and Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, where she read philosophy, politics, and economics: she later gave significant works of modern British art to her Oxford college. She worked at the research department of the Foreign Office during the war, and subsequently at the North American desk of the BBC until 1948. But the majority of her professional career as a journalist and editor was devoted to 'The Economist', where she was to become assistant editor in charge of the American survey, and was nicknamed Colonel Balfour; she was abrasive, frank, and hectoring, and particularly enjoyed a good argument with no holds barred. Although not a gourmet, she entertained extensively: small dinner parties and larger cocktail gatherings; a guest, apologizing the day after a discussion at one of her gatherings had seemed to get out of hand, was reassured by Nancy that the noisy argument had been immensely enjoyable, and just what she liked. Surprisingly, for all her frankness in private she was often muted in public, and could quite calmly sit silent through an entire committee meeting, returning to the fray behind the scenes. She was awarded the OBE in 1967. 
Nancy Balfour retired at just over sixty to devote herself to the cause of contemporary art, and to continue to follow her other passion, that of an international tourist and traveller: her recreations, self-defined in her 'Who's Who' entry, were 'sightseeing, ancient and modern; viewing work by living artists'. She set up the Nancy Balfour charitable trust to support working artists. Her vocation was to support contemporary art, in which activity Nancy was both officially and unofficially involved: as a member, honorary secretary, chairman (1976-82), and president of the Contemporary Art Society, founded in 1910 by Roger Fry and other Bloomsbury luminaries to purchase and present contemporary works of art to public museums and galleries. She was an ardent collector. With independent means, she lived in a comfortable flat in Eaton Square, Westminster, London, surrounded by contemporary works of art, some major, but a great many in a minor key in terms of size, and sometimes of quality: charming, delightful, but inconsequential. 'I know what I like and that is why I buy -- if I can afford it. As I live alone, I have no one to consult but myself.' She described herself as 'a compulsive, but perhaps not very discriminating collector'. She always bought work by living artists, and sometimes bought work purely as a gesture of support. She never bought in auctions, but deliberately bought from galleries as a gesture of support to the market which often took risks on the young unknowns, and occasionally from artists' studios, although she disliked having to approve or disapprove in front of the artist himself. She had an interest in contemporary decorative arts and served on the Crafts Council, where she was vice-chairman from 1983 to 1985. She was also a founder member of the British American Arts Association. 
Those who worked with Nancy at times compared her to a very small terrier, nipping at their heels to make sure that they did what she saw not only as necessary, but as essential. In this context her irreverent nickname was Gnasher and little was beyond her to make sure the job was done: she was not above going through the desk of her administrator at the Contemporary Art Society. She preferred to work behind the scenes, not only chivvying, but bringing people together who would not otherwise have met for their mutual benefit. 
Nancy also chaired SPACE, an organization dedicated to finding workable studio space for artists, often in schools and warehouses awaiting redevelopment; she was on the board of the Public Art Development Trust (1983-91), the moving force behind the arts committee of 'The Economist', encouraging temporary exhibitions of sculpture on its plazas in St James's and works of art on its walls, a tradition carried on by the Contemporary Art Society after her death. In old age she was still a determined city walker, visiting East End studios and West End galleries. She took no pleasure in country life, and was bemused when her niece became involved with the Ramblers Association. When she retired from 'The Economist' she became a visiting fellow of the Kennedy Center for Government at Harvard University (1973-4). 
Under Nancy's leadership the Contemporary Art Society pioneered specialist cultural travel for its members and set up a consultancy to advise businesses on corporate art collections, both innovations taken up in the wider art world. She was numerate, realistic, and practical, the least sentimental of characters: it was typical that not only should she leave, after personal bequests, her art collection to the Contemporary Art Society but that she left to the society's discretion what should be given to museums and galleries and what should be sold to benefit the society. She died at her home, 36E Eaton Square, Westminster, on 29 August 1997. She was unmarried. 
Nancy was short of stature, extremely hard-working, indefatigably curious, and possessed of unusual tenacity and determination. She dressed elegantly in couture clothes tailored to her diminutive but full-busted figure and until the end of her life kept her neatly coiffed hair ash blonde. She was unusually robust: until her final illness she had been in hospital only once as an adult. 


@@@@@


doc= 68103


Bantock, Geoffrey Herman (1914-1997), educationist, was born at 22 Layton Avenue, Blackpool, on 12 October 1914, the only child of Herman Sutherland Bantock (1874-1965), musician, and his first wife, Annie, 'nee' Bailey (1885-1936). His father, a viola player, was a cousin of the composer Sir Granville Bantock. At Wallasey grammar school from 1924 to 1933 he gained distinctions in English and history, became head of school, and won borough and state scholarships to Cambridge. At Emmanuel College, Cambridge, he read history followed by English literature, was awarded an honorary senior exhibition in 1936, and completed his degree with an upper second in 1937. Like many contemporary students of English at Cambridge he was inspired by the reform of literary studies under the embattled F. R. Leavis and carried those ideals into the world of education, as a teacher at boys' grammar schools in Ealing and Ilford before his appointment in 1946 to a lectureship in English at the City of Leeds Training College. On 6 January 1950 he married one of his students at Leeds, who was to become a teacher, (Dorothy) Jean Pick ('b'. 1927), daughter of Robert Pick, master tailor. 
While at Leeds, Bantock contributed to the journal 'Scrutiny', becoming its dominant voice on educational matters, and challenging concepts of planning, popularization, and freedom. These articles formed the core of his first book, 'Freedom and Authority in Education: a Criticism of Modern Cultural and Educational Assumptions' (1952), which achieved what he described as 'a minor 'succes de scandale''. Meanwhile he had been appointed to a lectureship at University College, Leicester, in 1950, in an education department which was soon to become notable for its progressive outlook and its leadership of the national campaign for comprehensive secondary schools. Bantock, however, stood his ground in defence of selective grammar schools for the intellectual elite, and in opposition to progressivism. He was appointed reader in education in 1954, published a study of the novelist L. H. Myers (1956), and continued to write, for the educational press and for academic journals, philosophical critiques of progressivist educational thought and of modern educational methods. In his second major book, 'Education in an Industrial Society' (1963), consolidating some of his previously published papers, he sought to define a differentiated curriculum appropriate to varying capacities. Against the background of a growing campaign for greater equality of opportunity in secondary schools this book was widely reviewed and generated considerable debate. In the following year he was promoted to the chair of education at Leicester. Bantock published further books and numerous articles in the later 1960s and 1970s. 
Bantock's participation in educational campaigns from 1969 projected him into the fray of an impassioned public debate on educational policy. The 'Critical Quarterly' had taken up the baton of cultural criticism laid down by 'Scrutiny', and, responding to a cultural crisis symbolized by the campus unrest of 1968, began to publish its polemical 'Black Papers' on education, in which Bantock came to write regularly. His contributions over the years 1969 to 1977 included critiques of 'discovery methods' and of teacher education. In this connection he was also a founding sponsor in 1972 of the National Council for Education Standards, a pressure group led by university lecturers and independent school headmasters. In 1975 he retired from his university post to bring to fruition his major research project, intended from early in his career, a history of progressive education. This work appeared as the two-volume 'Studies in the History of Educational Theory', vol. 1: 'Artifice and Nature, 1350-1765' (1980), and vol. 2: 'The Minds and the Masses, 1760-1980' (1984). Volume 2 was awarded a prize by the standing conference on studies in education. 
The Leavisian influence on education in post-war Britain was great, effected in part through a number of prominent educationists, of whom Bantock became perhaps the best known. Other professors of education who had been touched by Leavis included William Walsh and Boris Ford, and, of a younger generation, Brian Cox and A. E. Dyson, originators of the 'Black Papers'. Although differing from this group in many particulars, Bantock shared with them a belief in the values of high culture conveyed supremely in literature, and accessible only to a small elite. He considered that in the humanities and especially in literature 'is to be found the morality appropriate to a modern, decision-making, sophisticated minority', set against the 'vulgarised cultural order of the industrial-bureaucratic state' (Bantock, 'Education in an Industrial Society', 1963, 227, 202). In the course of his writing he dealt critically with Rousseau for his 'child-centredness' and with Dewey for his egalitarianism. 'The equality we need is that which reverently accepts the essential nature and uniqueness of every human being; the hierarchy, one which recognises different levels of intelligence and sensitivity and recruits itself on this basis' (ibid., 224). He wrote appreciatively of Matthew Arnold and Cardinal Newman, but drew inspiration above all from D. H. Lawrence and T. S. Eliot. Eliot offered personal support, sympathizing strongly with Bantock's arguments and recommending the publication of his first book by Faber and Faber; he encouraged him to produce his second major book on education, and Bantock made fulsome acknowledgement in 'Education and Values' (1965), published shortly after Eliot's death. Bantock also published 'T. S. Eliot and Education' (1969); a further volume, 'Education, Culture and the Emotions' (1967), was dedicated to Leavis, who had also supported Bantock in his academic career. 
Bantock described himself as an educationist, resisting classification as either an English scholar or a philosopher of education. Sincere and tenacious in his views, he made contributions which lent academic authority to the 'Black Papers', but the debate unleashed a reaction in educational policy, aspects of which ran counter to his ideals. A quiet, retiring man, he was hurt by the opprobrium which his ideas attracted. He collected antiques and enjoyed drama, music, and dance, which he promoted as curriculum subjects. He died of lung cancer at his home, the Old Rectory, 1807 Melton Road, Rearsby, Leicestershire, on 1 September 1997, and was buried on 4 September at St Michael and All Angels Church, Rearsby. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 68104


Bernard, Jeffrey Joseph (1932-1997), journalist, was born on 27 May 1932 at 11 Hampstead Square, London, the youngest of the three sons and the four surviving children of Oliver Percy Bernard (1881-1939), stage designer and architect, and his second wife, (Edith) Dora Hodges (1896-1950), an opera singer with the stage name Fedora Roselli. At birth he was given the name Jerry, but from childhood he was always known as Jeffrey. After attending a series of preparatory schools he was sent to the Nautical College, at Pangbourne, Berkshire, but was removed after two years at the request of the college commandant, as 'psychologically unsuitable for public school life' ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Sept 1997). During the school holidays he had discovered the delights of Soho, where his brother Bruce Bonus Bernard was studying at St Martin's School of Art. From that point on, as Bernard was to write in a spoof obituary of himself (published in 'The Spectator' in 1978), 'he was never to look upward. It was here in the cafes and pubs of Dean Street and Old Compton Street that he was to develop his remarkable sloth, envy and self-pity' ('The Independent', 6 Sept 1997). 
Using the Coach and Horses public house as his base, Bernard worked erratically at a series of mainly artisan jobs, usually in the orbit of Soho, in the course of which he built up an impressive list of acquaintances and drinking companions, including Dylan Thomas, Francis Bacon, John Minton, Nina Hamnett, Dan Farson, and a motley company of the flotsam and jetsam of Soho and Fitzrovia. It was the poet Elizabeth Smart who persuaded him to take up journalism. She suggested a racing column in 'Queen' magazine. Racing being his other passion in life next to drinking vodka, he accepted the challenge with alacrity. Before long he was writing for other publications, and within a year he had begun to be noticed in Fleet Street. 
In 1973 Bernard was paid $30 for an article on alcohol addiction in the 'New Statesman', and this led to a series of articles for the magazine stretching to 1975, when he was poached by the 'Spectator'. Thus began the 'Low Life' column which ran for twenty-one years, and made his name. The column did not necessarily appear week in week out. The author was drinking heavily by now, with consequent deterioration of his health, and occasionally the 'Spectator' was obliged to announce, in the absence of his contribution: 'Jeffrey Bernard is unwell.' This tag -- chosen by Keith Waterhouse as the title of a play based on Bernard's life and writings, which, starring Peter O'Toole, became a West End hit and turned Bernard into something of a celebrity -- gave him a not altogether justified reputation for being unreliable. Although he sometimes missed deadlines and his copy often had to be coaxed out of him, Bernard managed to produce some 1000 'Low Life' columns over the years, as well as numerous articles and columns for other papers, notably the 'Sporting Life', from which he was eventually dismissed for 'unpardonable behaviour' at a point-to-point dinner. But while several collections of his writings were published, he never wrote a book. He was essentially a sprinter rather than a long-distance runner. 
Described by Jonathan Meades (in a 'Tatler' review) as 'a suicide note in weekly instalments' ('The Times', 8 Sept 1997), Bernard's column was an intensely personal letter to the reader. He was called the Boswell of Soho but really he wrote about himself -- 'a series of personal and, at times, embarrassing columns about his own wretched life', to quote his mock obituary again ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Sept 1997). Apart from some Runyonesque set pieces -- his account of cat racing at Battersea is a classic -- he did not tell stories but simply rambled on, with each funny or profound (or funnily profound) thought leading to the next. The apparent effortlessness of his work led many to think it was produced by instinct, that Bernard was the writing equivalent of a naive painter. In fact he knew exactly what he was doing. The appeal of his 'Sporting Life' column, he once said, was that he was the first racing correspondent to take the part of the loser. The devastatingly yet selectively honest 'Low Life' column, too, was about losing. 
Bernard's ramshackle life furnished him with ample material. Living always in one room, he spent most of his waking hours in the pubs and clubs of Soho. He could grow irascible as the day wore on, but was otherwise a most engaging companion, with a surprisingly cultured mind. He married four times. His first wife was Mary Patricia (Anna) Grice, a market research interviewer. They married on 18 September 1951 but separated shortly thereafter; she died in 1959. On 13 November the same year Bernard married Jacqueline Sheelagh (Jacki) Ellis ('b'. 'c'.1934), an actress; they were divorced in 1964. Bernard's third wife was Gillian Dorothy (Jill) Stanley ('b'. 1942/3), a seamstress and dressmaker; they married on 23 August 1966 and divorced in 1973. Bernard married, finally, on 15 May 1978, Sue Ashley 
(later Sue Gluck; 'b'. 'c'.1948)
, an advertising worker; they divorced in 1981. There was one daughter by his third marriage. Bernard also had numerous affairs. But drink, he said more than once (he recycled much of his material), was the other woman. Inevitably the raffish lifestyle took its toll. There were spells in the alcoholic ward. Pancreatitis developed into chronic diabetes. His right leg was amputated below the knee and he finished his days in a wheelchair. He died at his home, 45 Kemp House, Berwick Street, Soho, on 4 September 1997, of renal failure; he was cremated at Kensal Green. Most of the reprobates of Soho attended his funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 68105


Bing, Sir Rudolf Franz Joseph (1902-1997), opera manager, was born in Vienna on 9 January 1902, the son of Ernst Hoenigsvald Bing, head of the Austro-Hungarian Steel and Iron Trust, and his wife, Stefanie. The youngest of four children, he left school at the age of sixteen. He trained his attractive light baritone voice, but did not consider becoming a professional. In 1919 he obtained a job with the Viennese booksellers Gilhofer and Ranschburg. A year later he moved to Hugo Heller's bookshop, which also ran a concert agency, and Bing was soon working on that side of the business. In 1923 the Heller agency moved to larger premises and began dealing with operatic as well as concert artists. Bing managed two concerts given by the British tenor Alfred Piccaver at the Albert Hall, London. He left Vienna in 1927 for Berlin, where he married the Russian dancer Nina Schelemskaya-Schelesnaya in the same year and met the great German actor Carl Ebert, who was retiring from the stage to take up direction. 
In 1928 Ebert became general manager of the Hessisches Staatstheater, Darmstadt, and Bing was appointed his assistant. 'The techniques of organising I acquired in Darmstadt stood me in good stead all my life', he wrote later (Bing, 23). Bing spent two fruitful years in Darmstadt, where Karl Bohm was musical director and Max Rudolf the second conductor, but he found the small town frustrating, so in 1930 he moved back to Berlin, where he worked for six months for a film company. Then in 1931 he became assistant administrator of the Charlottenburg opera (Stadtische Oper), with Ebert as general manager. To open his first season, Ebert directed Verdi's 'Macbeth', scoring a huge success; the following season Fritz Busch conducted Verdi's 'Un ballo in maschera'. 
In 1933 both Ebert and Bing (who, though a Roman Catholic, was of Jewish descent) were dismissed by order of the Nazi party, which had gained power in Berlin. Bing was unemployed in Vienna when he heard from Busch in England: he and Ebert were working at Glyndebourne in Sussex, where a bold Englishman, John Christie, had built an opera house for his singer wife. The first season took place in the summer of 1934, presenting two operas by Mozart. Bing was engaged as talent scout and general dogsbody; in 1935 he became general manager of the Glyndebourne festival, with year-round employment and a London office. 
Bing's skills as an organizer were extremely useful to Glyndebourne in its early years, and the festival grew from the original twelve performances of two operas to thirty-eight performances of five operas in 1939. With the outbreak of the Second World War, future plans were shelved. Evacuees descended on Glyndebourne, but the company ran a tour of John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' in the spring of 1940, which ended at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket. Though Bing and his wife were technically enemy aliens -- their British citizenship came through in 1946 -- they were not interned. Bing worked as divisional manager at the department store Peter Jones. 
Bing conceived the idea of an Edinburgh international festival in 1945. He realized that Glyndebourne was not sustainable in its pre-war format, but that as part of a larger festival devoted to opera, concerts, ballet, and theatre it would be viable. After two years' hard work, Bing presented the first Edinburgh festival in August 1947. Glyndebourne offered 'Le nozze di Figaro' and 'Macbeth' while there were concerts by the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Bruno Walter, in one of which Kathleen Ferrier sang in 'Das Lied von der Erde' by Gustav Mahler. The Glyndebourne company continued to appear at Edinburgh in 1948 and 1949. 
In March 1949 Bing, visiting New York to raise funds for Glyndebourne, met Edward Johnson, the Canadian tenor who had been general manager of the Metropolitan Opera since 1935 and now wished to retire. With the Edinburgh festival successfully launched, Bing could not resist the challenge, and Johnson promised to support him as his successor. The Metropolitan secured Bing's release from his Edinburgh contract, and in November 1949 he and his wife arrived in New York for an 'observation year'. 
The Metropolitan Opera at that time was on the verge of collapse. There were many good singers, mostly American, on the roster, but a serious shortage of good conductors, while production values were non-existent; operas were thrown on stage with little or no rehearsal. The board, which held the purse strings, considered money spent on designers and new scenery a complete waste. Some of the ancient sets were extremely shaky. According to Bing, 'when the soprano took a deep breath on the Met stage [in 'Il trovatore'] the whole castle behind her would be seen to tremble' (Bing, 106). 
Bing appointed Max Rudolf, an excellent administrator and conductor, as his assistant, and started planning his first season immediately. He intended to open with Verdi's 'Don Carlos', directed by Margaret Webster and designed by Rolf Gerard. The board jibbed at the cost of the production and of a three-week rehearsal period, but one of the sponsors, a supporter of Bing, sold a Rembrandt to cover the cost. This 'Don Carlos' was still in good shape eighty performances and twenty-two years later when Bing retired. 
Among Bing's most consequential innovations at the Metropolitan was to introduce black singers. Marian Anderson, the great contralto, sang Ulrica in 'Un ballo in maschera' in 1955. She was no longer in her prime vocally, but her symbolic appearance paved the way for many fine American artists to sing there. The Italian soprano Renata Tebaldi, who sang with the company for twenty years, also made her debut that year, and in the following season Bing engaged Maria Callas. 
Perhaps the most important event during Bing's years at the Metropolitan was the move to the Lincoln Center, New York. The old house closed on 16 April 1966, and the new 'Met' opened on 16 September 1966 with the premiere of 'Antony and Cleopatra' by Samuel Barber. In 1958 Barber's 'Vanessa' had been successful, but the new opera was a disaster, despite Leontyne Price's fine Cleopatra. Bing had planned nine new productions for the opening season -- several too many, as he later admitted. The New York premiere of Richard Strauss's 'Die Frau ohne Schatten', conducted by Karl Bohm, was a triumph, but another new opera, 'Mourning Becomes Electra' by Marvin Davy Levy, was less popular. In 1968 Bing inaugurated a cycle of Wagner's 'Ring', conducted and directed by Herbert von Karajan, but only the first two operas were given, and the cycle was not completed until after Bing had left the Metropolitan in 1972. He had achieved most of his aims, dragging the company into the twentieth century; in his book '5000 Nights at the Opera' (1972), Bing graphically describes the many battles he fought and the difficulties he overcame. 
Bing was appointed CBE in 1956 and promoted KBE in 1971. After his retirement he remained in New York, teaching and lecturing at Brooklyn College, the City University of New York, and elsewhere. His wife, Nina, died in 1983, and soon afterwards he became ill with Alzheimer's disease. In January 1987 he married Carroll Lee Douglas ('b'. 1939/40), who had nursed him in hospital. She spent nearly all his money before he was declared incompetent by the court; the marriage was annulled in 1989. He died on 2 September 1997 at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in the Bronx, New York. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 68106


Whitshed, William (1679-1727), judge and politician, was the eldest son of Thomas Whitshed MP (1645-1697) and his wife, Mary Quin. He probably never married since his property was inherited by the Hawkins family, who changed their name to Whitshed; Admiral Sir James Hawkins Whitshed was perhaps the most prominent member of that family. He entered the Middle Temple on 16 June 1694. He was returned for co. Wicklow in the first parliament of Queen Anne. Like many politicians of this period he tried to have a bet both ways; he was considered a whig until October 1707 when he began to waver. However, he returned to the fold after 1709 and was appointed solicitor-general on 5 January 1710, during the whig administration of Lord Lieutenant Wharton, only to be dismissed the following year by the tory Lord Lieutenant Ormond. Whitshed was one of the leaders of the whig party in 1713 and was again returned for Wicklow at the general election of that year. He was a member of the 1713 Commons committee appointed to report on the 'misconduct' of Sir Constantine Phipps. The 1713 parliament was brief and was subsequently dissolved by the queen's death on 1 August 1714. Following the Hanoverian succession Whitshed was appointed, on 14 October 1714, lord chief justice of the king's bench. He was sworn of the privy council on 11 November 1714. 
On 7 July 1719 Whitshed was one of those summoned by the lord lieutenant on the eve of parliament to consider how far the relief of dissenters should be pressed (the penal laws of Queen Anne's reign also affected dissenters). Whitshed and Jonathan Swift were enemies. Whitshed pronounced Swift's tract in favour of Irish manufactures a seditious publication but was himself the butt of Swift's cruel lampooning. Whitshed had gained the inheritance of an estate worth some $1000 from the Quin family of High Street, Dublin, by proving the illegitimacy of a son, James. Swift fastened on the 'chicanery' which the Whitsheds were reputed to have used in excluding James Quin from his inheritance to satirize their family motto: '
Libertas et Natale Solum: 

Fine words! I wonder where you stole 'em. 
(Woolley, 181, n. 52)' But perhaps the most interesting event of Whitshed's judicial career was that which occurred on 16 June 1721: 'During the trial [in the court of king's bench] a neighbouring chimney took fire, blew the smoke into the court and gave a panick to all the people who crowded to get out. Many were actually killed on the spot, and many desperately wounded. Among the first Mr John Ormsby, Member of Parliament and a wealthy man of above $1,800 p.a., was killed. Judge Caulfield got half in and half out of a window, but could not pass through, lost his wig and at last was forced back. Lord Chief Justice Whitshed kept his place and temper till at last the truth was known. (BL, Add. MS 34778, fol. 51)' On 20 December 1726, following the resignation of Lord Chancellor Broderick and the appointment of Chief Justice Wyndham as his successor, Primate Boulter wrote to the duke of Newcastle: 'my Lord Chief Justice 'Whitshed' has been with me, to desire that he may be recommended to succeed Lord Chief Justice 'Wyndham' in the Common Pleas. He complains that he finds the business of his present station very fatiguing as he advances in life, and says the two stations are about the same value; but the Common Pleas is a place of less trouble: he represents that he has with great zeal and fidelity served his Majesty, and made himself many enemies by so doing, and would hope for this favour as a reward for his services. I must do him the justice to say, that he has certainly served his Majesty with great zeal and affection, and has drawn upon himself the anger of the Jacobites by so doing, and the malice of other discontented persons here, by discountenancing seditious writings in the affair of the halfpence: and if we may have another person of worth from 'England' to succeed him, I think he may deserve the favour he desires. ('Boulter Letters', 1.89-90)' Whitshed had supported the government over Wood's halfpence and had generally behaved in a quiet and loyal fashion; he was duly appointed lord chief justice of the common pleas on 10 February 1727. He died six months later, on 19 August 1727, at Mary Street, Dublin, and was buried in St Michael's Church, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 68109


Singleton, Henry (1682-1759), judge, was the fourth son of Edward Singleton, alderman of Drogheda, co. Louth, and member of parliament for that town. He went to school in Drogheda, matriculated from Dublin University in 1698, entered the Inner Temple in 1702, and graduated as bachelor of arts in 1703. He was called to the Irish bar in 1707. In the same year his sister married Robert Lindsay, later judge of the Irish common pleas. Singleton is mentioned as recorder of Drogheda in 1708, and was returned as its MP in 1713 and in 1715. 
In politics Singleton was a tory, a friend of the Foster family of Drogheda, and also of Dean Swift and of Bishop Berkeley. He became prime serjeant, the chief law officer in Ireland, in 1726 and acted continuously as a justice of assize. Returned as MP for Drogheda and Dunleer, in 1727 he elected to sit for Drogheda. He was strongly supported for the position of speaker of the Irish Commons in 1733. In the following year he received an honorary LLD from Trinity College, Dublin. He was appointed chief justice of the Irish court of common pleas in 1740; this was seen as a victory for the Irish bar at the time, since it was then common to appoint Englishmen to the Irish bench. There was no question of his qualification for the post; he had been a barrister for over thirty years, a member of the Irish House of Commons for over twenty-five years, and the chief law officer for fourteen years. He was also sworn of the privy council. In 1753 he surrendered his seat as chief justice, and in 1754 he became master of the rolls (not a judicial office in Ireland at this time). 
According to a report in the 'Dublin Evening Post' of 14 June 1740: 'although to those who did not enjoy a close acquaintance he appeared proud and haughty... [Singleton] was far from deserving that character, and such was his benevolence that within a few weeks of his elevation to the bench, he is mentioned as having expended over four hundred pounds in purchasing oatmeal for the inhabitants of Drogheda, who were suffering, in common with the whole of Ireland, from the terrible famine by which the country was then devastated. (Ball, 2.131)' He was fortunate to survive the subsequent fever, which in 1741 carried off two of his contemporaries on the bench, John Rogerson, chief justice of the king's bench, and John Wainwright, baron of the exchequer. 
Singleton died, unmarried, in 1759; he was buried on 12 November in Drogheda in St Peter's Church, where there is a memorial to him, erected by his nephew Sydenham Singleton. The memorial, which includes a bust, was made in 1787 in London by John Hickey, an Irishman and sculptor to the prince of Wales. He lived in Dublin in Jervis Street, in Drogheda in Lawrence Street, and near Dublin at Drumcondra in Belvedere House, which he leased from Sir Marmaduke Coghill, judge of the prerogative court and later chancellor of the exchequer. His house in Lawrence Street, Drogheda, became Drogheda grammar school; in 1989, despite its being a listed building, it was demolished by an impatient and unscrupulous developer. The development company was later prosecuted and subsequently the judge ordered that the parts of the demolished building be preserved so that the house might be reconstructed at some time in the future ('Irish Times', 24 Aug 1989). His law library, mostly manuscript works, was acquired by Columbia University, New York, in 1937. It includes a notebook of cases (MS 71) in the Irish courts of chancery and exchequer heard in the years 1716 to 1734, in which Singleton appeared as prime serjeant. 


@@@@@


doc= 68111


Willes, Edward (1704-1768), judge, was the only son of Edward Willes of Newbold Comyn, Leamington, Warwickshire, and his wife, Bridget Murcott of Cubington, Warwickshire. Though descended from 'an antient gentleman's family' (Willes papers, 'Apology for my own circumstances', 1) the Willes' family income from land was insufficient to enable them to sustain a gentry lifestyle with any comfort. Edward's grandfather Peter Willes (died 1656), 'an attorney of the greatest eminence in the middle of England... was reputed very rich' (ibid.) but Edward's father inherited only debts. Moreover, he was not of 'a method of creating a fortune' with the result that it was determined that Edward should 'go to the university to be either a physician or a lawyer' (ibid., 2). He was admitted as a pensioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, on 24 August 1719. Two years later, on the advice of his cousin Edward Willes, then an ambitious young king's counsel who offered 'his patronage and protection' (ibid., 3), Edward entered Lincoln's Inn, without having graduated from Cambridge, and in 1727 he was called to the bar. 
Though Willes's primary motive was to secure a lucrative position that would allow him to repay family debts which, on his father's death, amounted to $5000 (his income when his obligations to his mother, sister, and half-sister were deducted was only $200 per annum), he made slow progress. His marriage to Mary Denny of Norfolk eased his financial problems somewhat but it was essential that he should succeed at the law if he was to avoid the indignity of selling the family estate. Having commenced on the midland circuit he also appeared for a time at Chester, while his cousin was a judge there. Having been made a serjeant-at-law in 1740 and a king's counsel in 1745, he appeared as attorney-general for the duchy of Lancaster and recorder at Coventry until, by the early 1750s, he was 'the first man in business in the Midland Circuit' (Willes papers, 'Apology for my own circumstances'). Advised that a position on the judicial bench in Ireland would be more 'preferable in all respects to what... you must... be... appointed to' in England, and promoted by his cousin, who was now chief justice of the common pleas, he accepted the position of chief baron of the Irish court of exchequer when it fell vacant in 1757 (Willes papers, Brooke to Willes, 7 Sept 1757). 
Though he joined other judges of English origin Willes had a difficult introduction to the Irish bench. His problems derived in the main from the decision of the Irish chancellor of the exchequer, Anthony Malone, to assert a right, which his predecessors had declined, to sit 'on the bench in all equity cases as the head of the court' (BL, Hardwicke MSS, Add. MS 35595, fol. 214). Overshadowed by the ebullient and talented chancellor, it was not until Malone was induced, by the failure of his banking ventures in 1758, to curtail his judicial activities that Willes was enabled to demonstrate the diligence and integrity that were the hallmarks of his judicial career in Ireland. These qualities were displayed particularly vividly when he was on circuit, as he did his utmost 'to acquaint the people (many of whom know little of government but what they see at the assizes) of the nature of laws and the necessity there is for the public good to enforce obedience to them' ('Letters', 29). It was on circuit too that he made most of the observations he recorded in the valuable epistolary description of Ireland that he relayed between 1757 and 1762 to his friend and patron, the earl of Warwick. These constitute the best-known part of his surviving papers, but he also penned a number of other narratives that, as well as providing important insights into the operations of law and government, indicate that when obliged in his capacity as privy councillor to make political decisions Willes was guided by what best served the interests of the British government in Ireland and the protestant religion. 
In 1766 ill health compelled Willes to resign his judgeship. He returned to England with an annual pension of $1000, a host of friends, and fond memories of nine years that were financially as well as professionally the most satisfying of his life. He died at Newbold Comyn in 1768, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 68113


Dolmetsch, Carl Frederick (1911-1997), musician, was born on 23 August 1911 at 3 rue de l'Audience, Fontenay-sous-Bois, near Paris, the younger son and youngest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of (Eugene) Arnold Dolmetsch (1858-1940), a musician and musical instrument maker of Swiss descent, and his third wife, Mabel Johnston (1874-1963), bass viol player and thirteenth of the fourteen children of John Brookes Johnston, a Scottish insurance broker, of Denmark Hill, London. He had an elder half-sister, Helene, from his father's first marriage, but saw little of her. From the age of four he was taught the viol and recorder by his father, and as a member of the family viol consort took part, with his sisters Cecile and Nathalie and brother Rudolph, in his first concert tour at the age of eight. For a time he took violin lessons with Carl Flesch and Antonio Brosa. It was he who left the bag containing his father's early eighteenth-century Bressan treble recorder on the platform at Waterloo Station in London in 1919, leading Arnold Dolmetsch, who had taken measurements of the instrument, to experiment until he was able to make his own recorder, marking the beginning of recorder making in England in the twentieth century. Although the family moved to Hampstead in 1914 they spoke French at home, and Dolmetsch never lost his Swiss accent. He was naturalized in 1931. When the Zeppelin raids began in 1917 the family moved to Jesses, Haslemere, Surrey, which remained Dolmetsch's home for the rest of his life. He was educated at St George's Wood, a girls' school in Haslemere, before leaving to work alongside his father in the Dolmetsch workshops. He took part in the first of the Haslemere festivals of early music, started by his father in 1925. On 24 February 1937 he married Mary Douglas Ferguson (1915/16-1995), daughter of James Alexander Ferguson, of Dumfries; they had twin daughters and two sons, one of whom committed suicide in 1966 at the age of twenty-one. 
In 1926 Dolmetsch was put in charge of the development and production of recorders in the Haslemere workshops. From the start he experimented with ways of 'improving' the design of the recorder, and he invented a number of mechanical devices, including the tone projector, the bell key for high Fsharp, and the echo key: this was operated by the chin, opening a hole in the head joint, thus sharpening the pitch and making it possible to blow softly but remain in tune. He fitted these gadgets to his own instruments for his recitals. Dolmetsch made these improvements in the belief that the recorder needed to evolve if it was to survive in the modern world. In 1939 he restored the Chester recorders, four Bressan instruments discovered in 1886, to playing condition. 
Dolmetsch gave his first Wigmore Hall recital on 1 February 1939 with a programme including his own 'Theme and Variations' for descant recorder and piano, the first solo work written for the recorder in the twentieth century. After this concert the music critic Manuel Jacobs, a pupil of Edgar Hunt, asked ten young British composers to write solo works for the recorder, with the promise of publication by Schotts. A few months later, at the London Contemporary Music Centre, Dolmetsch, with other members of his family and Edgar Hunt, performed a whole concert of modern music for the recorder, including four of these works, most notably Lennox Berkeley's sonatina. 
During the Second World War the Dolmetsch workshops were turned over to the mass production of plastic aircraft components. With the death of Arnold Dolmetsch in 1940 and the loss of his brother Rudolph at sea in 1942, Dolmetsch took on full responsibility for the Haslemere workshops. After the war he was able to use his wartime experience to begin mass production of plastic recorders, to meet the growing demand from schools, while continuing to make hand-crafted wooden recorders for the increasing number of amateur players. He became chairman and managing director of Arnold Dolmetsch Ltd in 1963. When a boardroom dispute led to his ejection in 1978, the Dolmetsch family established a rival firm, J. and M. Dolmetsch Ltd, in Haslemere, making wooden recorders and early bows, until the liquidation of Arnold Dolmetsch Ltd in 1982, when they bought back the recorder, early keyboard, and string businesses and the Dolmetsch trade marks, to form Dolmetsch Musical Instruments. Dolmetsch remained chairman until his death. 
After the war Dolmetsch, encouraged by Manuel Jacobs, renewed his efforts to get leading British composers interested in writing for the recorder. Each year from 1947 to 1989 (except 1948), accompanied by Joseph Saxby (1910-1997), he gave a recital in the Wigmore Hall which included (except in 1951) at least one specially commissioned work by a British composer. Those who wrote for Dolmetsch included Edmund Rubbra, Arnold Cooke, Robert Simpson, Gordon Jacob, Alan Ridout, Alan Hoddinott, Nicholas Maw, and Michael Berkeley; forty-nine new works were composed in all. From 1955 many were for recorder and strings, or other instruments, performed by members of the Dolmetsch family and others. In response to Dolmetsch's suggestion of a work using the recorder as an obbligato instrument, Rubbra wrote 'Cantata pastorale' (1957). In 1982 Donald Swann wrote 'Rhapsody from Within' to celebrate the fifty years' partnership of Dolmetsch and Saxby. Although not all these pieces worked, because some composers did not understand the instrument, they were enormously important in building up a modern recorder repertory. Dolmetsch recorded many of the works, most of which were published. Although at first he was open-minded about the avant-garde music written on the continent from the 1960s for a new generation of players such as Frans Bruggen, he later came to hate it, and told his composers he did not want any avant-garde gimmicks. He also lost touch with developments on the continent in the 1960s in the performance of early music, and the style of Dolmetsch and his followers came to seem very old-fashioned to adherents of the Dutch school of recorder playing. 
Dolmetsch was the first virtuoso recorder player in England in the twentieth century, and through his recitals, broadcasts, and lecture tours in England and abroad, especially in North America, which he first visited in 1935 and where he toured annually between 1961 and 1981, he did more than anyone else to establish the recorder as a serious musical instrument. In addition to making and performing on recorders, he contributed articles to journals, wrote the widely used 'School Recorder Book', and with Layton Ring edited the series 'Il Flauto Dolce' for Universal Edition. He played in every one of the seventy-two Haslemere festivals, where he had a devoted following, from 1925 until a few weeks before his death, and was director from 1940 to 1996, for many years leading the orchestra from the violin. He also started the Dolmetsch summer school in 1948. He was one of the founders of the Society of Recorder Players in 1937, and its joint musical director. 
Dolmetsch was appointed CBE in 1954. After 1960, when he was given an honorary DLitt by the University of Exeter, he was always referred to as Dr Carl. He was divorced from his first wife, Mary, in 1961. On 15 May 1997 he married Greta Florence Matthews ('b'. 1918/19), daughter of William Matthews, soldier. She had been his secretary for nearly sixty years. He died of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma at Haslemere Hospital on 11 July 1997, and was buried at St Bartholomew's Church, Haslemere, on 17 July. He was survived by his second wife, Greta. 

Cecile Dolmetsch (1904-1997), musician, the eldest child of Arnold and Mabel Dolmetsch, was born on 22 March 1904 at 5 Lincoln Road, Dorking, Surrey, just before the family moved abroad to spend seven years in the United States followed by three years in France. She began viol and recorder lessons with her father at an early age, played in the family consort as a child, and performed at the Haslemere festival every year until 1990. She married Charles Leslie Clifford Ward (1901/2-1989?), a craftsman employed in the Dolmetsch workshops, on 7 September 1925; they had two sons and two adopted daughters. She became an expert on the 'pardessus de viole', a descant viol, and was for many years the only person to perform on it in public. Through her research in French libraries she found music by composers such as Thomas Marc and Jean Barriere and was able to build up a repertory for the instrument. With her sister Nathalie she founded the Viola da Gamba Society in 1948, and she became president after her sister's death in 1989. She remained active until her death from heart failure on 9 August 1997 at the Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, and was buried at St Bartholomew's Church, Haslemere, on 20 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 68118


Garnett, (William) John Poulton Maxwell (1921-1997), industrial relations officer, was born on 6 August 1921 in Hampstead, London, into the family of four sons and three daughters of (James Clerk) Maxwell Garnett (1880-1958), educationist and peace campaigner, and his wife, Margaret Lucy (1887-1965), second daughter of Sir Edward Bagnall Poulton, Hope professor of zoology at Oxford. William Garnett, physicist and educational administrator, was his paternal grandfather, and Margaret Christian (Peggy) Jay (died 1996), first wife of Douglas Patrick Thomas Jay, Baron Jay, politician, was the eldest of his three sisters. He was educated at Rugby School and at Kent School in the USA before becoming an undergraduate at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1940. In 1941 he volunteered to join the Royal Navy and served briefly as a rating on the battleship 'Malaya'. He was asked to volunteer for special service and joined the inshore patrol as a lieutenant. The patrol was engaged in difficult and dangerous work, taking agents and supplies to and fro across the English Channel. These experiences introduced him to the problems and opportunities of leadership, to which he was to devote the rest of his life. On 7 April 1943 he married (Kathleen) Barbara Rutherford Smith ('b'. 1918/19), schoolteacher, daughter of Reginald Rutherford Smith, medical practitioner. There were two sons and two daughters of the marriage, including Virginia ('b'. 1948), who in 1967 married Peter Bottomley and was secretary of state for health (1992-5) and for national heritage (1995-7). After the war Garnett returned to Cambridge and was awarded an upper second-class degree in economics. He then joined Imperial Chemical Industries in Glasgow as a clerk, and in due course was promoted to be personnel manager at their plastics factory in Blackpool. For a short time he was in charge of the communications unit at the head office in London. 
In 1962 Garnett became director of the Industrial Welfare Society (later renamed the Industrial Society). The society provided him with the platform and opportunity he needed. For twenty-five years he developed the style, the ideas, and the convictions which influenced so many managers and supervisors throughout the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. In the words of one observer, 'he lit a torch for management'. The Industrial Society proved to be the ideal vehicle for the propagation of his ideas about management and industrial relations, which, although not entirely original, were innovatory at the time. When he joined as director 48 staff were employed with a turnover of $165,000; in 1986, when he retired, 380 staff managed a $10 million turnover. He was appointed CBE in 1970. 
Garnett's messages were simple, clear, direct, and forceful. He believed in managers 'walking the job', and communicating regularly through 'team briefings' in groups with no more than fifteen people. He emphasized the accountability of leaders for involving people in their work. He hated waste of any kind -- by which he meant the underutilization of people's skills and experience. He had a special regard for the role and function of the supervisor, whose importance he never forgot. All this and more he set out in detail in his book 'The Work Challenge' (1973) and summarized on a plastic card listing leadership action points. In his own words: 'the leader's job is to call forth the gifts of people and help them to work for a common task... A crucial function of the leader is to take decisions. It is not just a question of taking the best decision but also taking it in a way which will obtain the best possible cooperation of the people who have to carry it out... We shall fulfil our place in history if we carry out the common sense actions contained in this book with courage, humility and hope. (Garnett, 'The Work Challenge', 1973, 11, 53, 105)' All along Garnett was driven by his Christian faith and by his belief in the ability of the individual. 
Garnett was a handsome man with a classical profile and a shock of unruly hair which in later life was still present, though white. He held his audiences by the force and charm of his personality and the appeal of his ideas. At conferences he could be relied on to inspire and energize the participants. There were many firms and individuals who had reason to be grateful to him. Throughout a life of exceptional commitment, he proclaimed tirelessly the significance and importance of work in industry and commerce. Essentially an evangelical Christian, he was a crusader for the causes and the messages he believed in. He was a passionate man with strong yet practical ideas, which he expressed in thousands of speeches he made throughout the country. Both during his working life and in retirement he was asked to serve on many public bodies. He was a member of the Wilberforce inquiry into the miners' strike in 1972; arbitrator for a long-running Transport and General Workers' Union lorry drivers' strike in 1979; a member of the Churches' Council on Gambling (chair 1965-71); and chair of the West Lambeth Health Authority from 1986 to 1990 (being largely responsible for saving St Thomas's Hospital). 
Garnett's first marriage was dissolved in 1985, and on 2 April that year he married Julia Charity ('b'. 1950), industrial relations officer, daughter of (Thomas) Douglas James Cleverdon, BBC producer and publisher, and former wife of Martin Christopher Ollard. She had joined the Industrial Society in 1975, and was head of its common purpose campaign from 1977 to 1979, director of its communications and publicity division from 1979 to 1981, and founding head of its Pepperell department for inner cities and education work from 1981 to 1988; she was subsequently chief executive of Business in the Community from 1992. There were two daughters of this second marriage. With his second family Garnett continued to enjoy holidays on the Isle of Wight, where he was able to indulge his passion for sailing, and where he had built with his own hands a house (Stone House) and a Greek amphitheatre. In later life he became a regular visitor to the Greek islands, where he died on holiday on 14 August 1997. He was survived by his second wife and his six children. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 4 December 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 68121


Hackett, Sir John Winthrop (1910-1997), army officer, was born on 5 November 1910 in Perth, Western Australia, the only son and one of five children of Sir (John) Winthrop Hackett (1848-1916), newspaper proprietor and politician, and his wife, Deborah Vernon (1887-1965), daughter of Frederick Slade Drake-Brockman and his wife, Grace Vernon ('nee' Bussell). The family was of Norman-Irish origin, descended from a William de Haket who had accompanied King John to Ireland and settled in co. Tipperary. Hackett's father had graduated at Trinity College, Dublin, and emigrated to Sydney in 1875. A lawyer and journalist, he became a wealthy newspaper proprietor in Western Australia, assisted in drafting the commonwealth constitution, and became the first chancellor of the University of Western Australia, an institution he richly endowed with buildings and scholarships. Hackett's mother was not only a leading society hostess and active welfare worker but a metallurgist and mining company director, who explored Australia for mineral resources in a single-seater plane and was instrumental in the development of tantalite and wolfram for industrial purposes. This formidable parentage was a major factor in young Hackett's decision to make his career outside his native country. 
Hackett was educated at Geelong grammar school, Melbourne, from 1921 to 1928, and at New College, Oxford (1929-33), which was to elect him to an honorary fellowship in 1972. He gained a second-class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1932, and another in modern history the following year. Dissatisfied with an academic performance that he felt had not done him justice, and pursuing an intellectual interest fired by the career of T. E. Lawrence, he began research on Saladin's campaign in northern Syria during the third crusade for a BLitt degree that was eventually awarded in 1945. He never abandoned his academic ambitions: in later life he used to remark, to somewhat sceptical audiences, that his military career was simply the result of 'forty years' absence of mind' (personal knowledge). 
Yet even before graduating Hackett had been commissioned, in 1931, into the 8th King's Royal Irish Hussars, a regiment with which he had a close family connection. Having been posted to Egypt, he was seconded in 1937 to the trans-Jordan frontier force, which enabled him to research the subject of his thesis on the ground, and to learn Arabic -- he was already fluent in German, French, and Italian -- in the intervals of campaigning at the height of the Arab uprising. After the outbreak of the Second World War he fought in the Syrian campaign in 1941, in which he was wounded, and was awarded a Military Cross. While convalescing on the shores of Lake Galilee he met Margaret, widow of Friedrich Grossman and daughter of Joseph Peter Frena of Graz, Austria. The fact that she was an 'enemy alien' did not prevent him from wooing, winning, and marrying her in high style in St George's Cathedral, Jerusalem, on 21 March 1942. They had one daughter, Susan Veronica, and Hackett adopted his wife's two daughters from her first marriage, Bridget and Elizabeth. 
After rejoining his regiment in the western desert Hackett was again wounded, and was appointed DSO. For a time he was occupied in organizing the light raiding forces such as the long range desert group and the Special Air Service, which were to play so distinctive a part in the campaign, before being selected, at the age of thirty-three, to raise and command the 4th Parachute brigade. The sequel was to be tragic. After briefly seeing action in Italy in September 1943 the brigade was posted back to the United Kingdom, only to be committed to the disastrous Arnhem operation in September 1944 and destroyed in a matter of hours. As Hackett himself put it, 'I had been its midwife and was now to be its sexton' (Hackett, 9). He himself was gravely wounded but escaped capture, to be hidden and nursed back to health by a friendly Dutch family, and eventually smuggled back to the British lines by the Dutch resistance. His account of his experiences, 'I was a Stranger' (1977), was one of the most moving works of literature to emerge from the Second World War. For his exploits at Arnhem he was awarded a bar to his DSO. 
After the war Hackett was posted back to the Middle East to command and, sadly, to disband the trans-Jordan frontier force. Typically he chose to spend his leave attending a postgraduate seminar in medieval studies on his wife's home territory at the University of Graz. The rest of his military career was to be spent in Europe, divided between postings in the United Kingdom and Germany, where he commanded 20th armoured brigade in 1954 and 7th armoured division in 1956-8, before becoming commander-in-chief, British army of the Rhine, from 1966 to 1968. To each level of command he brought a quick, iconoclastic intelligence; a reluctance to suffer fools gladly, irrespective of their rank, that did not endear him either to his seniors or to some of his contemporaries; and a deep concern for the welfare of all under his command that made him immensely popular with his juniors -- and, no less important, their wives. In Germany he saw his task as being as much political as military, cementing Anglo-German friendship by encouraging links between the units under his command and the people among whom they lived. The command of the British army of the Rhine carried with it a NATO command, that of northern army group, which gave Hackett a degree of independence from his political masters in London that he relished and never hesitated to exploit when he thought it necessary. By the end of his career he was regarded throughout the army with admiration and affection, but his independence of spirit and unpredictability was probably to deny him the final accolade of becoming chief of the general staff. 
Hackett was thus able in 1968, at the age of fifty-eight, to take up the academic career after which he had sometimes hankered. His appointment as principal of King's College, London, caused some surprise; but some senior members of the college had known and admired him when he had commanded the Royal Military College of Science between 1958 and 1961, while others hoped that the political skills he had honed in the corridors of Whitehall might be exercised to similar effect in the no less byzantine environment of the University of London. They were not to be disappointed, but Hackett himself did not find that the appointment provided the opportunity for scholarly research for which he had hoped. In addition to his heavy administrative responsibilities he found himself plunged into the thick of the student revolts that were sweeping Europe and the United States between 1967 and 1974. It was a challenge that he welcomed. He soaked himself in subversive literature, outwitted the radicals, astonished the student body by his deep interest in their affairs, and made the headlines by leading a march down Whitehall, immaculate in bowler hat and furled umbrella, demanding higher student grants. At the same time he became much in demand for lectures and media comments on military affairs -- a demand that he took relish in satisfying. 
These demands absorbed Hackett's time after his retirement in 1975, though he staunchly denied that he had ever retired: he had, as he put it, 'simply withdrawn to a flank and regrouped' (personal knowledge). In 1978 he published a futuristic study, 'The Third World War', which, with its successor, 'The Third World War: the Untold Story' (1981), enjoyed worldwide sales. He also published an illustrated edition of the elegant Lees Knowles lectures he had given in Cambridge in 1962, 'The Profession of Arms' (1983). But he did not abandon his classical studies: he remained visiting professor in classics at King's College, and became president of both the Classical Association and the English Association. (His insistence on the correct use of the English language had not been the least of the qualities that had intimidated his military staffs.) Further honours were rained on him: he became colonel of his own regiment, the Queen's Royal Irish Hussars, and others, an honorary liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Dyers, a freeman of the City of London, and a deputy lieutenant of Gloucestershire. Honorary doctorates were bestowed on him by the universities of Western Australia, Exeter, and Buckingham. In 1985 he was awarded the Chesney gold medal of the Royal United Services Institution. He was a member of the lord chancellor's committee on reform of the law of contempt (1971-4) and of the disciplinary tribunal of the inns of court and the bar (1972-83). 
Hackett looked every inch the professional soldier: short, compact, elegant, with a high colour and clipped moustache. Only his twinkling blue eyes hinted at the spirit of mischief lurking within that orthodox exterior. By the time of his death he had become a national figure, and -- in the words of his 'Times' obituarist -- 'probably no man did as much as he to dispel the widely-held British belief that most generals are fools, and ignorant fools at that' ('The Times', 10 Sept 1997). A portrait of him in uniform by Brenda Bury hangs in the regimental headquarters of the Queen's Royal Hussars, and one in academic robes by Michael Noakes at King's College, London. 
In retirement Hackett lived at Coberley Mill, Gloucestershire, indulging in recreations he listed in 'Who's Who' as 'fishing, wine, music and the pursuit of exactitude, called by some pedantry', while, in his own words, 'having to do a fair bit of work more appropriate to a middle-aged peasant than to an elderly intellectual' (personal knowledge). He died at Coberley Mill on 9 September 1997 at the age of eighty-seven. His ashes were interred in the Hackett mausoleum at Karrakatta cemetery at Claremont, Perth. He was survived by his wife and two adopted daughters, the daughter of his marriage having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 68122


Hardisty, Roger Michael (1922-1997), haematologist, was born on 19 September 1922 in Finchley, Middlesex, the only child of William Henry Hardisty (1878-1938), insurance assessor, and his wife, Ada Winifred, 'nee' Woodcock (1882-1972). Educated at Oundle School and at St Thomas's Hospital medical school, London, he qualified in 1944. After house appointments he did his national service, mostly in Germany and Denmark, as medical officer to the Welsh Guards and the British mission in Denmark. While stationed in Hamburg he met his future wife Jytte Jarnum ('b'. 1924), of Copenhagen. They married on 24 March 1947 and had two children, Jan Botli, later a photographer, and Jocelyn Sandra, later a music teacher. Following the completion of his national service Hardisty returned to work as a junior clinical pathologist at St Thomas's. He became MRCP in 1949 and proceeded MD in 1950. In 1950-51 he held a University of London travelling scholarship to Arhus, Denmark. 
From 1956 to 1958 Hardisty was senior lecturer in clinical pathology at the Welsh National Medical School in Cardiff. In 1958, despite having had no formal training in paediatrics, he was appointed consultant haematologist at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London. Over the next thirty years he built up the first paediatric haematology department in Britain. This rapidly acquired an international reputation, and Hardisty trained many young paediatric haematologists from Britain and overseas. His own interests were in platelets, both in haemostasis and in initiating the processes that lead to the formation of a blood clot. In addition he ran a major centre for the treatment of haemophilia and similar disorders, and he also became involved in the management of childhood leukaemia. 
By the time Hardisty was appointed to Great Ormond Street it was known that leukaemia might respond to treatment with drugs such as steroids or antimetabolites. Nevertheless, the disease inevitably recurred within a short period. The suggestion was then made that a positive response might be prolonged if more than one drug was administered at a time, and even that carefully controlled schedules might eventually produce cures. Hardisty became one of the prime movers in the development of clinical trials to determine the best combination of agents, serving first as secretary and then as chairman of the Medical Research Council's working party on childhood leukaemia. The initial difficulties were formidable: the toxic effects of the drugs added to the miseries of the disease, which might anyway recur a few months later in another guise -- as a lump in the testicle or ovary, for instance, or as leukaemic meningitis (which Hardisty was the first to describe). As a result both the parents and the medical carers of the children involved were sometimes reluctant to have them treated with the new agents. Nevertheless, Hardisty showed the same attributes as his pioneering colleagues in transplantation surgery, termed 'the courage to fail'. His humane but obsessive persistence was rewarded when a trial disclosed that 70 per cent of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia had survived long term. Another reward came at his retirement in 1987: a secretly organized tea party held in the Great Ormond Street boardroom attended by many survivors from leukaemia. 
Hardisty was also highly influential in the development of the wider aspects of the emerging new specialism of clinical haematology. He was a founder member and later president of two societies in the field, as well as vice-president of the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis. The co-author of two notable books, 'Bleeding Disorders: Investigation and Management' (1965) and 'Blood and its Disorders' (1974), he was an outstanding editor of the 'British Journal of Haematology'. He loved pellucid prose, and would spend hours revising his own and his juniors' drafts (and shunned the reprehensible but common practice of gift authorship -- the mere addition of the chief of department's name to papers with which he had not been directly concerned). He could also conduct seminars in Danish and French (for example, during his sabbatical as visiting professor at the University of Paris in 1978-9), and the French government made him a 'chevalier' of the national Order of Merit in 1988. 
Hardisty was quintessentially a Thomas's intellectual -- irreverent, disdaining the then division between juniors and consultants, wearing bright clothes, and respecting the primacy of the National Health Service. Above all, throughout his life he saw research, followed by more research, as the priority. His outside interests were in photography, the theatre and music (Sir Thomas Beecham being a lifelong hero), travel, and food and wine. Although he continued some research into platelets as emeritus professor at the Royal Free Hospital, London, after retirement, he also devoted much time to bookbinding, which he took up with the same obsession that he had formerly devoted to his department. He died of stomach cancer at his home, 4 Ruskin Close, Hampstead, London, on 18 September 1997, and was cremated seven days later. He was survived by his wife, two children, and four grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 68123


Algarotti, Francesco, Count Algarotti in the Prussian nobility (1712-1764), poet and scholar, was born on 11 December 1712 in the family home in Venice on the Fondamenta Nuove, the second son of Rocco Algarotti (died 1726) and his wife, Maria Mercati. His father was a prosperous merchant of Paduan origin, settled in Venice. His elder brother, Bonomo, was very close to him throughout his lifetime, both as a partner in many of his undertakings and as his main link with Venice during many years of absence. 
Algarotti's education began in Venice, under the tutorship of Carlo Lodoli, but on his father's death in 1726 he was sent to Bologna, where he studied natural science and mathematics and established lifelong friendships with his tutors, Eustachio Manfredi and the Zanottis. It was here that Algarotti was first introduced to Newtonian optics. On leaving Bologna he went to Rome, where he met Martin Folkes, vice-president of the Royal Society of Arts, whose introductions facilitated his stay on his first visit to London in 1736. It was on his way to England that he met Mme du Chatelet and Voltaire, both of whom shared his Newtonian interests and were impressed by the young Venetian. 
Algarotti's first London visit was a triumph. Through Voltaire he met Lord Hervey, who opened many doors for him, including that of Queen Caroline, and his other introductions led to a fellowship of the Royal Society and of the Society of Antiquaries. During his lifetime Algarotti enjoyed a vast acquaintance with contemporaries throughout Europe, but his appreciation of England was of a special nature. His relationship with England originated from his Newtonian studies in the 1720s and 1730s, culminating in his 'Newtonianismo per le dame' (1737), translated into English two years later by Elizabeth Carter. It developed during his three visits to London into an involvement in the English literary and artistic milieu of the period, and a lasting correspondence with many of its leading figures. Several of his works were dedicated to Englishmen, including the politicians Thomas Hollis and William Pitt and the diplomat Thomas Villiers; another was dedicated to W. T. How, through whom he became acquainted with the poet Thomas Gray. Algarotti's admiration for Palladio made him a natural friend of Lord Burlington, and he stayed at Chiswick House in 1739. 
The youthful Algarotti was considered to be an engaging and outstandingly good-looking young man. The courtier Lord Hervey especially appreciated his combination of vivacity and mature taste. Algarotti's charm smoothed his way into the highest social circles (Voltaire called him the Swan of Padua) and into the affections of both men and women. Lord Hervey and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu were both deeply attracted to him and quickly became rivals for his affection. Lady Mary's infatuation for Algarotti subsequently directed the course of her life, prompting her move to Venice (1739) and Turin two years later. Here the relationship ended before a correspondence and friendship resumed fifteen years later. Despite his attractions, Algarotti's weaknesses did not escape the attention of his critics: his supposed snobbery, apparent frivolity, and the standard of his scholarship aroused criticism. His indecision and unwillingness to displease left his conclusions surrounded by qualifications. Such qualities did not sit comfortably with nineteenth-century English sensibilities. Thomas Carlyle, for example, dismissed him as 'a wearisome literary man... one of those half-remembered men whose books seem to claim a reading and do not pay you when given' (T. Carlyle, 'History of Frederick the Great', 1897, 3.327). 
After his initial visit to England, Algarotti withdrew to France to complete his 'Newtonianismo' and later to Italy to arrange for its publication in 1737. One of the best-known of Algarotti's works, the 'Newtonianismo' appeared in Italy (the Naples edition of 1737 had a commissioned frontispiece by Piazzetta), in France, and in England (in Carter's translation). Despite its sound scholarship, this elegant popularization met with some complaints of inadequacy and of frivolity -- not unexpectedly from Horace Walpole. Disappointed, Algarotti did nothing serious until his return to England in 1739, facilitated by the generosity of Lady Mary. Here he repeated his earlier successes, culminating in an invitation from Lord Baltimore to accompany him on a diplomatic mission to Russia. This trip produced not only a series of letters to Lord Hervey (later to appear as 'Viaggi di Russia') but also, on his return journey, an introduction to Crown Prince Frederick of Prussia. Frederick was much taken with him, and on succeeding to the throne in 1740 immediately entreated him to return to Berlin. Welcomed into the king's inner circle, he was created a count in December and sent on a diplomatic mission to Turin in 1741. This proved unsuccessful, and when misunderstandings with the king arose in 1742 he left Berlin for several years. 
It was now Algarotti's good fortune to be invited to Dresden by Augustus III, elector of Saxony and king of Poland, who created him a councillor of war and entrusted him with the reorganization and extension of the Dresden Gallery of Paintings. This involved spending time in Venice acquiring existing works and commissioning new ones, not least from Tiepolo. Algarotti's approach to the reorganization was highly innovative: rather than follow the personal tastes of the sovereign, he selected works to illustrate the development of the history of painting. The newly commissioned works were based on Algarotti's scholarship and on his assessment of each painter's individual style. 
In 1746 Algarotti returned to Berlin; welcomed by the king, he was then made a chamberlain and a knight of the Order of Merit. His years here were a period of literary activity, which continued after his return in 1753 to Italy: to Venice, Bologna, and finally Pisa, where he found the climate beneficial to his failing health. It was in these later years that he encouraged and supported the young painter Mauro Tesi, of whom he was particularly fond, and to whom he left a generous bequest. 
Algarotti died in Pisa on 23 May 1764 and was buried there in the campo Santo. His tomb was designed by Tesi and paid for by Frederick the Great, bearing the significant motto 'Algarottus non omnis' (Haskell, 360). His will included bequests to the eminent, including William Pitt and Frederick the Great, as well as to servants and friends. His collection of paintings, drawings, and books acquired jointly with his brother became the property of his niece Maria Corniani Algarotti and were catalogued for sale in 1776. 
Algarotti's was a many-sided personality: he was both poet and scientist, scholar and writer. He remained in sympathy with the past yet was very conscious of the current trends of the Enlightenment and of neo-classicism, and it was these interests, together with his charming physical presence, which made him such a figure of both celebrity and controversy within the English cultural elite of the mid-eighteenth century. Algarotti enjoyed considerable fame during his lifetime, and his works continue to be read with interest by historians of art and literature. Scholarship on him is vast and continuing, expanding far beyond the 'aemulus' 'Ovidii' and 'Neutoni' 'discipulus' of Frederick the Great's epitaph on him. 


@@@@@


doc= 68126


Scott, Mary, countess of Deloraine (bap. 1703, d. 1744), courtier and royal mistress, was baptized at Winchester Cathedral, Hampshire, on 28 February 1703, the daughter of Charles Howard ('b'. 1681), a naval officer, and his wife, Elizabeth Batten. Her father was a grandson of Thomas Howard, first earl of Berkshire, and a great-grandson of Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk. By 1723 she had become a maid of honour to Caroline, princess of Wales. She lost that post when, on 14 March 1726, she married Henry Scott, first earl of Deloraine (1676-1730). They had two daughters, Georgia Caroline ('bap'. 1727), who married Sir James Peachey, master of the robes, and Elizabeth Henrietta ('bap'. 1729). At the time of their marriage her husband was lord of the bedchamber to George Augustus, prince of Wales ['see 'George II (1683-1760)], and he continued in the prince's service as a gentleman of the bedchamber when the prince became king. It was probably following her husband's death that she was appointed governess to the king's youngest daughters, Mary and Louisa. She held the post on the condition that she did not marry again, but through negotiations with Queen Caroline and the older princesses, in April 1734 she was allowed to marry William Wyndham (died 1743), of Ersham, Norfolk, eldest son of Colonel Thomas Wyndham. Wyndham was deputy governor to George II's youngest son, William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, and had formerly been the governor of Chelsea Hospital. 
Lady Deloraine's likeness appears in William Hogarth's conversation piece 'A Performance of 'The Indian Emperor, or, The Conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards'' (1732-5). She is depicted leaning forward, encouraging one of her children to pick up a fallen fan during a children's performance of John Dryden's play, at the home of John Conduitt, master of the Royal Mint. Her royal charges, Mary and Louisa, stand near her in front of the fireplace. Hogarth's intention may have been to suggest 'the tangle of passion, conquest and deception' (Uglow, 170) that the children in the painting will encounter in adult life. This tangle was evident in Lady Deloraine's career. For example, the nineteenth-century anecdotist, William Drogo Montagu, seventh duke of Manchester, repeated gossip that the countess of Deloraine, whom he described as the 'King's Concubine' (Manchester, 2.330), had poisoned Queen Caroline's maid of honour Mary McKenzie. The motive appears to have been jealousy as a Mr Price, for whom the countess was said to entertain a 'tendre', was in love with McKenzie. According to Manchester, McKenzie recovered and, the day before her marriage to Price, was persuaded by Queen Caroline to meet the countess at supper, as public proof either of the countess's innocence or of Mary's forgiveness of her. 
In 1735 George II boasted to Lord Hervey that he had seduced Lady Deloraine the winter before, prompting Hervey to note that the king had made 'the governess of his two youngest daughters his whore and the guardian-director of his son's youth and morals his cuckold' ('Hervey's Memoirs', 196). Lady Deloraine does not seem to have become a serious contender for the king's affections until the summer of 1737, when the king had become separated from his recognized mistress, Amalie von Wallmoden, who was living in Hanover. Then, she was denying to Charlotte Clayton, Lady Sundon, among others, that she had bowed to royal demands and was hinting to prime minister Sir Robert Walpole that if she did consent, she would be well paid for it. None the less, Hervey reported it as common knowledge that the king was 'tasting all the pleasures with Lady Deloraine which she was capable of bestowing' (ibid., 195). He noted that when Walpole questioned the paternity of her son, she teased that it was her husband's 'but I will not promise whose the next shall be' (ibid., 196). Walpole feared that with 'a lying tongue and a false heart' (Hardy, 84) Lady Deloraine might exert political influence: she had already boasted that she alone had kept the king from travelling abroad when the pleas of Walpole and the queen had failed. 
Hervey recognized that she was politically harmless, regarding her as a vain and simple woman with a 'wretched head' ('Hervey's Memoirs', 196). Following the death of Queen Caroline in November 1737, some ministers thought that Lady Deloraine could be used to help them influence the king as the queen had done, but both Walpole and Hervey recognized that the king regarded Lady Deloraine as a sexual conquest rather than companion, and Walpole arranged for Amalie von Wallmoden to be brought over from Hanover. Lady Deloraine, who had never been regarded highly by the princesses, was eclipsed as a royal favourite. She died in London on 12 November 1744 and was buried at Windsor. She left $8000 capital bank stock in trust for her daughters; her son with William Wyndham is not mentioned in the will, and must have predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 68128


Brayne, John (c.1541-1586), grocer and financier, was the eldest child of Thomas Brayne (died 1562), a tailor (nominally a girdler), and his wife, Alice Barlow (died 1566), of the parish of St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, who married on 22 January 1541. John Brayne was apprenticed on 13 March 1554 to John Bull, a grocer in Bucklersbury, London. He completed his apprenticeship, married Margaret Stowers (died 1593) ['see below'] at St Dionis Backchurch on 14 January 1565, and became a successful grocer with a house and business in Bucklersbury. By 1573 the Braynes had had four children, Robert ('b'. 1565), Roger ('b'. 1566), Rebecca ('b'. 1568), and John ('b'. 1573). All were baptized at St Stephen Walbrook, the church for the eastern half of Bucklersbury, and all soon died, at least three of them in infancy. Fatefully for Brayne, his sister Ellen had married the joiner turned player James Burbage, also of St Stephen, Coleman Street, on 23 April 1559. 
Brayne undertook financial ventures that had nothing to do with groceries, and it is for two of these that he is remembered. The earlier of the two was the building in 1567 of a professional playhouse, apparently the first purpose-built one in the British Isles since Roman times. It was east of Aldgate, near Mile End, in a court or yard belonging to a farmhouse called the Red Lion. Brayne hired one carpenter to build scaffolds for spectators and another to build the stage, and he quarrelled with both. The playhouse was not elaborate, since he probably spent only about $15 on it. It was to be ready by 8 July 1567 so that a play called 'The Story of Sampson' could take place there, but nothing more is known about the place, or whether James Burbage had anything to do with it. Brayne's first known financial involvement with Burbage is a loan they made jointly in 1568. 
Burbage was instrumental in Brayne's later memorable venture. Burbage bought a lease, dated 13 April 1576, on part of the dissolved priory of Holywell in Shoreditch. There, in an open space, he meant to build the first large and costly public playhouse, to be called The Theatre. The lease ran until 25 March 1597, but Burbage probably thought of it as running until 1607, because a clause provided that he could have up to ten more years if he spent $200 on old buildings there during the first ten years. Also, he could dismantle and remove the playhouse while the lease was in force. However, because Burbage had nothing like enough money for the scheme, he took in Brayne, who joined him without a written contract. Brayne was to supply most of the funds needed to erect the building, and Burbage was to have the lease put into both their names. Once the playhouse was open, the takings would pay the running costs and yield profits, most of which would go to Brayne until his investment and Burbage's were the same; then the two would share costs and profits. Brayne, now childless, spoke, according to Burbage, of leaving his share of the enterprise to Burbage's children. 
The scheme went awry from the beginning. Burbage and Brayne planned to spend about $200 but actually spent about $700. They had to borrow money, then mortgage the lease. Brayne, and even his wife, had to join in putting up the building. He had to sell his house and business in Bucklersbury and moved to Shoreditch; in 1577-8 he ceased to be active as a grocer. He and Burbage soon fell into bitter and occasionally violent quarrels about who had spent how much and taken how much in profits. Because the lease was mortgaged, Burbage could not add Brayne's name to it. Instead, he gave Brayne bonds worth $600 guaranteeing that he would do so. The name was never added, however, and the bonds proved uncollectable. Brayne drew up a will in 1578 and left the Burbages out of it. Neither he nor his wife ever recouped his losses on The Theatre, but the Burbages prospered. 
Brayne tried another investment in January 1580 with at least some help from Burbage. He acquired a lease for twenty-four years on The George inn in Whitechapel, into which he moved. This venture, however, came to echo that at The Theatre, and proved as disastrous to Brayne. Since the place was not functioning as an inn, Brayne, without a written contract, took an old friend, Robert Miles, goldsmith, as a partner; Miles was to restore the inn trade and share expenses and profits with Brayne. Miles also moved into the place, which did become an inn again, but not for long. Brayne quarrelled as bitterly with Miles as he did with Burbage, and eventually Miles controlled the lease. Brayne died, partly at least, because of a violent quarrel with Miles, and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary Matfelon, Whitechapel, on 15 June 1586. He was bankrupt and had hidden his goods and himself from creditors. 
Brayne's widow, 
The Burbages squeezed Margaret Brayne out of the ownership of The Theatre in 1589. The mortgage had long been forfeit, and the mortgagee, John Hyde, legally owned the lease. He, however, was ready to return it to Burbage and Brayne's widow in return for his money, of which only about $30 was still owing. Burbage's son, Cuthbert, got his patron, Walter Cope, an official in the entourage of the lord treasurer, to ask Hyde to give the lease to Cuthbert if Cuthbert paid the money. Cuthbert did so, and Hyde gave him the lease on condition that the Burbages give Margaret Brayne a proper share in the place. The Burbages became owners outright but did not honour the condition. 
Margaret Brayne died of plague and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary Matfelon on 13 April 1593. In her will (8 April) she made Miles her heir. She left him not only her goods and her lawsuits but also Katherine Brayne, insisting that the child was her husband's and hoping that Miles would be good to her. She owed Miles so much money, she said, that all her goods 'will nothinge countervaile' (Wallace, 153-4). Katherine Brayne also died of plague three months later; she was buried in the churchyard of St Mary Matfelon on 23 July. Miles carried on Margaret Brayne's lawsuits until 1595, when the court decided that it would not continue to hear the case until Miles had pursued the bonds of 1578 in the common law courts. This was apparently not worth his while, and, in effect, the Burbages had won. In 1597 Miles began another lawsuit against them on Margaret Brayne's behalf but soon dropped it. Because the landlord of The Theatre refused to renew the lease after the first ten years or on favourable terms in 1597-8, Burbage's sons had The Theatre pulled down in the Christmas season of 1598-9 and its timbers carried to Bankside for use in building the Globe. 


@@@@@


doc= 68130


Margaret Brayne (d. 1593), convinced herself that Miles was responsible for her husband's death, and Miles ejected her from The George. She pursued him at law for murder and sued him for a share in The George. Soon she evidently gave birth to a child, Katherine, and she and Miles became close friends. He readmitted her to The George, though not to a share in it, and in 1588, supported and financed by Miles, she sued Burbage for half The Theatre or the $600 that Burbage's bonds to Brayne were in theory worth. The Burbages counter-sued, claiming that Brayne was childless when he died. They called Miles an adulterer and a 'murdring knave' and Margaret Brayne a 'murdring hor' (Wallace, 100, 105, 115, 121). They believed, apparently, that Miles was Katherine Brayne's father and that he and Margaret Brayne had conspired to kill her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 68131


Langley, Francis (1548-1602), businessman and moneylender, was born near Althorpe, Lincolnshire, one of the seven children of Thomas Langley, a tenant farmer, and his wife, Agnes. Orphaned at the age of eight, Francis and his younger brother Thomas were brought up by their uncle John Langley, a prosperous London goldsmith who later became prime warden of his company, sheriff, alderman, and lord mayor (1576-7). A country youth suddenly in a prosperous household in a new urban environment, Francis soon developed a taste for the perquisites of power and affluence. Having been apprenticed to a draper, he was before long censured for taking inappropriate liberties and was finally turned out by his master. By unknown means Langley did secure his freedom in the Company of Drapers many years later, along with a reversion to the office of alnager, or searcher and sealer of woollen cloths, for the City. He took up this office in 1585 and was promptly embroiled in lawsuits charging him with extortion and fraud. 
During these same years Langley also learned how the City money market worked and began a long career as a moneylender. He soon became quite adept at using loans to ensnare gullible borrowers, to their loss and his gain. When Thomas Cure defaulted on one such series of loans in the late 1580s, Langley acquired from him the lordship and manor of Paris Garden, a 100 acre tract on the south side of the Thames across from London. Langley built rental tenements on the western edge of this property, and in 1594-5 erected the Swan playhouse on its eastern edge, near the manorial millpond and the Falcon landing stairs on the riverside. 
The Swan was the fifth playhouse in the environs of London and the second on the Bankside; it joined its neighbour the Rose, built almost a decade earlier by Philip Henslowe, and the two Shoreditch playhouses, the Theatre and the Curtain, built in 1576-7. (The fifth playhouse, at Newington Butts, was being dismantled even as the Swan was being built.) A year or so after its erection the Swan was described by the Dutch traveller Johannes de Witt as the largest and most magnificent of London's playhouses. But its success as a business venture never matched its opulence, and the reason for this failing lay most probably in the personality of its owner. Langley was an ambitious entrepreneur and speculator, not at all a patron of drama. His chief ambition was to be wealthy and respected; he pursued wealth on many fronts, moneylending chief among them. The ownership of a playhouse was but one move -- and by no means the best move -- towards his goal. 
The Swan playhouse was itself built on speculation. In London at the time there were three or four companies of stage players for every available playhouse, and the imminent prohibition of inn yards as places of performance was soon to make the shortage of playing space even more acute. Langley was certain that if he built a playhouse he would attract companies of players wishing to become tenants, and he appears, initially at least, to have been right. The Swan was occupied almost immediately, though the identity of its occupants during its first year or two is unknown. Speculation has suggested that Shakespeare's company, the Lord Chamberlain's players, may have used the Swan for a time in 1596 as a way of testing out a Bankside location for their own anticipated move from Shoreditch. Indeed, Langley's name is curiously joined with Shakespeare's in a writ of attachment sworn out in 1596 by one William Wayte against 'Willelmum Shakspere Franciscum Langley' and two otherwise unknown women; Wayte claimed that these four people constituted a threat to his life and safety. Nothing further is known about this teasing claim. 
The first occupants of the Swan of whom we have any record, the earl of Pembroke's players, became a topic of controversy in July and August 1597 for having performed a play called 'The Isle of Dogs' that was reported to the privy council as being seditious. The charge resulted in the arrests of Gabriel Spencer, Robert Shaa, and Ben Jonson -- all players in the Pembroke company, and one a playwright as well -- and in the hasty flight from London of Thomas Nashe, one of the play's authors. After a few weeks the arrested players were released and the matter was quietly dropped, suggesting that the charge of sedition had been found baseless. As the play itself has not survived, there is only circumstantial evidence and the testimony of self-interested witnesses to go on. But there is strong evidence that during 1596 and 1597 Langley himself had fallen into disfavour and had incurred the enmity of Robert Cecil. Given those circumstances, the Swan was perceived from that point onwards as an undesirable playhouse, and its tenants tended more towards the transient than the stable. It was used by the Masters of Defence for exhibitions of sword-fighting from time to time and was the site of Richard Vennar's fraudulent non-performance of 'England's Joy' in 1602. Before long the Swan fell into decay. 
Robert Cecil's animosity towards Langley had begun when Langley became implicated in the theft of an enormous diamond from a Spanish carrack, the 'Madre de Dios', captured by English seamen in 1592. Most of the ship's cargo was plundered by its captors, and the diamond, a special prize, soon came into Langley's hands. Cecil pursued Langley for many years in an effort to recover the stone in the queen's name (the harassment at the Swan over 'The Isle of Dogs' in 1597 may have been part of this pursuit). But Langley managed somehow to stay just beyond Cecil's grasp, though his evasiveness contributed to his eventual impoverishment and also destroyed the career of his brother-in-law Anthony Ashley, one of the clerks of the privy council. 
Langley overreached himself in other arenas as well. After fourteen years of disgraceful performance in his post as City alnager, marked by numerous lawsuits, he was ejected from the office in 1599 by the court of aldermen. By the following year his financial adventurism had brought him into serious debt, and he was forced to sell the manor of Paris Garden, with its playhouse, to Hugh Browker, a perennially hostile neighbour. 
Langley was by now in his early fifties and on the verge of bankruptcy. His final failed adventure was in Cardiganshire, where he nourished hopes of extracting silver from an abandoned lead mine which he believed he had acquired. But he was ill, and his old shrewdness was gone. Sir Lewis Lewkenor got the better of him in this scheme, and at the age of fifty-four Langley died penniless, leaving his widow, Jane, 'nee' Ashley (died after 1608), with six children and a swarm of lawsuits to contend with. He was buried on 9 July 1602 in St Saviour's Church (now Southwark Cathedral). 


@@@@@


doc= 68135


Kelland, Gilbert James (1924-1997), police officer, was born on 17 March 1924 at Pickwell, near Georgeham, Devon, the only child of Edith Kelland, an unmarried domestic servant. Brought up by his grandparents, he attended Georgeham village school and Braunton secondary school before starting work at fourteen as a clerk at a local firm of agricultural merchants. 
The Second World War took Kelland away from his rural background. He joined the Fleet Air Arm in May 1942 and served as a mechanic with 824 squadron aboard HMS 'Striker' on Atlantic convoy duty. At demobilization, his career choice was made: he went to London to be sworn in as a constable of the Metropolitan Police on 1 July 1946. Kelland passed his probationary period on the Whitehall beat and became station cyclist at Rochester Row. Lean, dark, and over 6 feet tall, he excelled at long-distance running for the Metropolitan Police Athletic Club (which he chaired from 1964 to 1984). He was advanced to sergeant after four years and on 12 August 1950 married Edith Ellen Marshall ('b'. 1927/8), a typist, with whom he had two daughters. 
From 1950 to 1955 Kelland worked in south London, initially in the Elephant and Castle area. He was dissuaded from writing his thesis on corruption when he attended the National Police Staff College in 1955 before being appointed an inspector. There was no busier police station than West End central, Savile Row, his posting from December 1955. Mayfair and Soho were notorious for a high incidence of shoplifting, drunkenness, and living off immoral earnings. Some 5000 prostitutes operated there before the 'Street Offences Act' (1959). Inspector Kelland looked on his chief superintendent, Arthur Townsend, as a role model. His own reputation for fair and fearless policing was made as a chief inspector in Notting Hill between June 1959 and September 1961. Feeling still ran high after the race riots of 1958, but he encouraged stability by improving police relations with West Indian immigrants, closing illegal drinking dens, and trying to curb the profiteering slum-landlord Peter Rachman. The High Court case 'Kelland v. de Freitas' (1961) was concerned with defining a landlord. 
After two months at Lavender Hill station, Kelland returned to West End central as a superintendent in November 1961 and took charge of its anti-vice unit, the clubs office (1962-4). 'Clip joints' and gambling rackets were the latest problems in Soho; 'Kelland v. Raymond' (1964) exposed loopholes in the 'Betting and Gaming Act' (1960). He amassed evidence for the Denning inquiry into the Profumo affair (1963). Promoted to commander in 1965, Kelland combated violent crime in Tower Hamlets, worked in the management services department at Scotland Yard (1968-70), and led all uniformed police in the West End, before being transferred in June 1971 to the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) as commander of north-west London. He became the deputy assistant commissioner responsible for south London six months later. 
On 19 April 1973 Kelland was chosen by Commissioner Sir Robert Mark to investigate charges of corruption against the obscene publications squad (OPS), which had failed to halt the proliferation of pornographic bookshops in Soho. gaoled pornographer Jimmy Humphreys alleged that OPS officers had connived at his trade in return for large bribes. It took Kelland and his team of eight detectives almost three years to find independent corroboration. Their dogged struggle against insidious obstruction exposed a long-established criminal conspiracy. Of seventy-four policemen examined, twelve resigned, twenty-eight retired, and eight were dismissed. The biggest scandal in the Metropolitan Police for a century saw a dozen officers -- including a chief superintendent and a commander -- sentenced to prison in three highly publicized trials (1976-8). 
Praised for his thoroughness, Kelland became one of the top five policemen in London on 1 February 1977 when he was appointed as assistant commissioner 'A' department, responsible for uniformed policing. Maintaining order at the mass picket of Grunwick Processing Ltd was a major task. Fears that OPS corruption might have infected other units of the CID prompted the new commissioner, David McNee, to transfer him to assistant commissioner (crime) on 1 August 1977. This placed him in control of over 3500 detectives, some of whom did not welcome his appointment. His fatherly demeanour and readiness to delegate won over subordinates, however, while his unforgiving glance was usually enough to silence the merest suggestion of rule bending. If anyone protested that his anxiety about misconduct verged on obsession, Kelland took it as a compliment. He reformed the drugs squad and flying squad, secured closer liaison between uniformed and plain-clothed officers, and devised formal codes of procedure to regulate potentially compromising operations. The careful use of resident informants ('supergrasses') led to signal successes against organized crime, especially armed robbery. Voluntary blackouts of news proved helpful in kidnap cases. IRA bombing campaigns were a grave concern. Controversially, he published a racial breakdown of reported crime in March 1982 as a contribution to the public debate on policing and the black community which followed the Brixton riots of 1981. 
Kelland was the longest serving officer in the metropolitan force by his retirement on 16 March 1984. He had received the queen's police medal in 1975 and a CBE in 1978. A member of the Parole Board (1986-9), he aided an Amateur Athletic Association inquiry into drug abuse in 1988 and advised Consolidated Safeguards, a private security firm. He died of prostate cancer at his home, 9 Croft Lane, Henfield, Sussex, on 30 August 1997. 
With his erect carriage, immaculate uniform, and neat moustache, Gilbert Kelland appeared a copper of the old school. He was an unashamed patriot and an active freemason who feared that modern youngsters lacked a proper sense of shame. His traditional ideas of service and undisputed integrity helped to restore confidence in the Metropolitan Police during a troubled period in its history. 


@@@@@


doc= 68136


Essen, Louis (1908-1997), physicist, was born on 6 September 1908 in Nottingham, the younger son and second of the three children of Fred Essen, bespoke bootmaker, and his wife, Ada, daughter of Fred Edson, builder and joiner. Both parents were Strict Baptists (his grandfather Fred Edson had built the Nottingham Strict Baptist Chapel), but Essen 'rejected this strict form of religion from an early age', and 'gradually rejected all religion, forming the view that irrational beliefs lead to intolerance and bigotry causing many of the world's problems' (Essen). He was educated first at a local board school; he then won a scholarship to the Stanley Road preparatory school in Nottingham, and a county scholarship to the High Pavement School, which was then co-educational. At school he was a keen sportsman, walker, and athlete, as he remained throughout his life. He was head boy at the age of sixteen. He won a scholarship to University College, Nottingham, and graduated with a first-class London external BSc degree in 1928, aged nineteen. He began research, but left in 1929 for the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington, Middlesex. There he remained until he retired in 1970. He married Joan Margery Greenhalgh, a school chemistry teacher, on 6 November 1937; there were four daughters of the marriage. 
When Essen joined the National Physical Laboratory, D. W. Dye FRS, a brilliant metrologist, was developing electrical measurements urgently needed in the infant radio industry. Essen joined him to study quartz crystal oscillators as frequency standards and to compare frequencies of radio transmitters; in one form or another frequency standards and their comparisons were his life's work and his fundamental contributions to modern electronic engineering and metrology. Dye died young in 1932, and Essen continued his work. At the outset of the Second World War, Essen's quartz crystal oscillator, with some modifications by the Post Office, was the most reliable of all sources of standard radio frequencies, and it controlled radio frequencies broadcast by the National Physical Laboratory up to 1939. Essen had also made fundamental measurements in physics. When he rotated a horizontal quartz bar oscillator about a vertical axis and found no change in the resonant frequency, he confirmed the result that Michelson and Morley found with an optical interferometer. During the war he developed ways of measuring frequencies and parameters of devices up to 30,000 MHz, the highest used in radar systems. That experience was invaluable after the war. 
Essen exploited his wartime work to determine the speed of light. The accepted value largely depended on an extended series of experiments by Michelson over very long paths in air. Essen had investigated metal resonant cavities used in wartime as wavemeters in the field, and he pointed out that the speed of light 'in vacuo' might be derived from the resonant frequency of an evacuated cavity of measured dimensions. With a cylindrical cavity resonant at about 3000 MHz he obtained a value some 16 km/sec. greater than Michelson's. That large discrepancy, the result of a novel method, was strongly doubted by some, but Essen confirmed it with an improved cavity, while K. D. Froome did so with a microwave interferometer. Essen's value was very close to the value later adopted by international convention. 
Essen already had a high reputation when, in 1950, he visited the United States and saw work under way to establish standards of frequency based on transitions between states in atoms and molecules. He could not start immediately to build apparatus in the National Physical Laboratory, but when he and Froome determined refractive indices of atmospheric gases they did so at a frequency close to that of the hyperfine transition in caesium at about 10,000 MHz that he had selected for his proposed standard. Thus when he could begin construction, he already had a great deal of experience and equipment to hand. In less than a year he and J. V. (Jack) Parry were operating their apparatus as a regular source of standard frequencies, not just for experiments. So he was able, with W. Markowitz of the naval observatory in the USA, to relate the caesium frequency definitively to the astronomical unit of time, the ephemeris second. 
Essen strongly advocated replacing the ephemeris second by the atomic standard of frequency and the corresponding unit of time as fundamental units, and so it was done by international agreement in 1968. The standard of length was then a wavelength in the visible spectrum of krypton; its defined value, like that of the standard of frequency, was arbitrary, and the two entailed a value of the speed of light that was subject to experimental uncertainty. Frequencies of atomic transitions can be compared with far finer discrimination than can wavelengths of atomic transitions. Essen pointed out that the speed of light might be taken to have an arbitrary conventional value, with values of lengths being derived from the times taken by electromagnetic signals to traverse them. His observation formed the basis of the modern system of standards in which fundamental quantities, electrical and mechanical, are related to frequency through quantum phenomena. His measurement of the speed of light and his establishment of the atomic frequency standard are at its heart. 
Essen was sceptical of the accepted basis and interpretation of Einstein's special theory of relativity, but many found his criticisms unacceptable. Some of his points were valid, and although much of the discussion later seemed misguided, Essen's own experimental work and the basis he established for quantum metrology clarified the status of special relativity, namely that it expresses the fact that the only information we have of distant events is that obtained through electromagnetic signals. 
In 1960 Essen was promoted to deputy chief scientific officer by special merit, one of very few at that time in the whole civil service. He was elected to the Royal Society in the same year. He was appointed OBE in 1959 and, among other distinctions, was the first recipient of the Wolfe award of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and the first foreign recipient of the Popov gold medal of the USSR Academy of Sciences. He died in Great Bookham, Surrey, on 24 August 1997, and was survived by his wife and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 68141


Matonabbee (1736/7-1782/3), fur trader and explorer, was born near Churchill Fort, in what is now Churchill, Manitoba, the son of Chipewyan parents; his father was a hunter for the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC). His mother and father had met on the west coast of Hudson Bay when his mother was freed from the captivity of Cree fur traders by Richard Norton, chief factor of the HBC's post at Churchill. Matonabbee's background gave him the rare ability to move smoothly between British and Chipewyan cultures. Orphaned at an early age, he was adopted by Richard Norton, who introduced him to the fur trade. On Norton's retirement in 1741 Matonabbee's father's relatives took him to their homeland north-west of Hudson Bay. There he learned the survival skills he would use later in life. In 1752 he returned to Churchill, where he worked as a hunter to supply HBC company employees with fresh meat. Later he began forays into the Cree territory around Lake Athabasca. The Cree and the Chipewyans were long-standing enemies; however, Matonabbee was able to broker a peace with the encouragement of the HBC, which believed that warfare interfered with trading opportunities. Although the peace was temporary, its impact on Matonabbee's reputation was permanent. At Churchill he received the titles ambassador and mediator (Hearne, 'Journey', 225). 
In 1762 Matonabbee was asked by Moses Norton, Richard's son, to find the northern copper mines, rumours of which had been heard at Churchill since 1716. Matonabbee and a companion, Idotyazee, returned to Churchill five years later with a copper sample. Together, Matonabbee, Idotyazee, and Norton created a map to guide an HBC expedition to the mine. However, by the time Norton had finished the preparations, Matonabbee, his choice for expedition leader, had disappeared. 
Beginning in 1769, the explorer, fur trader, and HBC employee Samuel Hearne twice tried and failed to reach the copper source. Matonabbee met Hearne as he returned from the second attempt, and quickly attributed previous failures to the lack of Chipewyan women. Matonabbee told Hearne: 'there is no such thing as travelling any considerable distance, or for any length of time, in this country, without their assistance' (Hearne, 'Journey', 35). Matonabbee agreed to lead a third expedition, which included his seven wives. The eighteen-month trek became one of the most celebrated Arctic adventures, unique because Hearne acquiesced to Matonabbee's seasoned knowledge of geography, diplomacy, and survival. In one of its best-known episodes a group of Chipewyan joined the expedition to attack a group of Inuit, camped by the mouth of the Coppermine River, in revenge for recent unexplained illnesses; twenty-one Inuit were killed. The expedition reached the mythic source of copper soon after but, as Matonabbee and others had intimated before to the HBC, the mines were of little commercial value. Hearne and Matonabbee searched for more than four hours to find one sizeable piece. When the expedition returned to Churchill on 30 June 1772 Norton immediately proclaimed Matonabbee chief of all the Chipewyans. 
Matonabbee's prominence as a trader ended prematurely in the autumn of 1782 or winter of 1782-3 when he arrived with furs at Churchill to discover the settlement in ruins and abandoned following an attack by two French frigates returning from the American War of Independence. One year later Hearne and a small crew returned to reopen Churchill. It was, however, too late for Matonabbee. On seeing the basis of his livelihood and reputation reduced to rubble, he had hanged himself. As testimony to Matonabbee's indelible influence, Hearne devoted much of his published narrative about the journey to the Coppermine River to expressions of admiration for the abilities and character of the Chipewyan chief. 


@@@@@


doc= 68142


Norton, John (1770-1831?), leader of the Mohawk Indians, was born on 16 December 1770 at Crail, Fifeshire, the son of John Norton ('b'. 'c'.1750, died before 1809), printer and soldier. His father was most likely a Cherokee from North Carolina who had been adopted by a soldier in 1760 and taken to Scotland. There he became a printer and married a Scottish woman from Salen, Christian Anderson. 
The younger John Norton probably grew up in the Crail-Salen-Dunfermline area, then moved to Edinburgh about 1781, either to advance his education or to learn the printing trade. In 1784 he joined the 65th foot. His father enlisted in 1786 and both men were posted to Canada. Norton's mother came with them and worked as a servant. In 1787 Norton deserted from Fort Niagara, but received a discharge in 1788, apparently with the help of his mother's employer. His father deserted in 1789. Norton subsequently lived in the aboriginal-white middle ground of the lower Great Lakes region; learned several Native languages; worked as a schoolteacher, trader, and interpreter; and became 'at once as perfect an Indian as ran in the woods, having his ears cut & his nose bored' ('Missouri Gazette', 15 June 1816). 
Norton impressed the Mohawk leader Joseph Brant, who adopted him as his 'nephew' about 1798. Shortly afterwards he was given the Mohawk chiefly name Teyoninhokarawen. He settled on the Six Nations Iroquois tract on the Grand River in Upper Canada, became a diplomatic and war chief, and had at least two successive marriages to now unknown aboriginal women with whom he had two children. In July 1813 Norton married again, this time to Karighwaycagh or Catherine ('c'.1797-1827), who probably was a Delaware. 
Norton was active in the pro-British party on the politically-divided Grand, and succeeded Brant as its principal leader when the latter died in 1807. Norton favoured good Anglo-Iroquois relations, but wanted to ensure that the Six Nations Mohawks, Oneidas, Tuscaroras, Onondagas, Cayugas, and Senecas enjoyed as much freedom from unwanted European and American influence as possible, in order to make the transition on their own terms, to plough agriculture from traditional horticultural and forest subsistence patterns. His demand for full Native control over Grand River land in particular annoyed colonial officials, who sought to undermine his authority by claiming that he had no aboriginal ancestry (a view that some modern scholars have accepted). The historical record, however, suggests that Norton was half Cherokee; nevertheless Native origins were not necessary for him to have been adopted as a Mohawk. 
Frustrated by internal Grand River politics and by the hostility of government officials, Norton journeyed to England in 1804-5 to seek a commission in the army and to represent Iroquois interests at the imperial centre. He failed on both missions. Yet, because of his interest in promoting Christianity and European and American agricultural practices among the tribes, he was befriended by a number of prominent Quakers and evangelical Anglicans, as well as by the duke of Northumberland. During this visit Norton, an Anglican, translated the gospel of 'St John' into Mohawk for the British and Foreign Bible Society. He returned to Canada in 1805, and then travelled to Tennessee and neighbouring regions in 1809-10 to visit his Cherokee relatives and honour his father's grave. 
When the United States declared war on Britain in 1812, most Grand River people chose to remain neutral, while others favoured an alliance with the Americans. Norton's pro-British party had difficulty mustering support because of long-standing problems in crown-Iroquois relations and because many people assumed the Americans would conquer Canada quickly. However, the king's forces won some unexpected early victories, which helped bring most of the Grand River community into the war on the British side. Norton, with considerable support from the army, worked to recruit warriors and maintain the Iroquois-crown alliance. As 'captain of the Confederate Indians' he regularly saw action and proved to be an outstanding combat commander. Perhaps his most important contribution to Canadian defence occurred at Queenston Heights in 1812, where his badly outnumbered warriors helped keep the American army pinned down in a precarious position for several hours until the British could deploy their troops to repel the invaders. However, his political and diplomatic aspirations were frustrated because of both the divisions on the Grand and the animosity of civil officials, especially in the Indian department. Consequently, he retired from public life at the end of the war. 
In 1815 Norton and his family sailed to England where he sought preferment (being given the local Canadian rank of major). In Britain, he finished a manuscript he had been working on for a number of years, which now is housed at Alnwick Castle. Although intended for publication, it was not published until 1970, as 'The Journal of Major John Norton'. It describes his journey to the Cherokee country, recounts his adventures in the Anglo-American War, assesses aboriginal-white issues in the period between 1783 and 1815, and presents a history of the Six Nations based on published European and American, and oral Iroquois, sources. It is a rare and extensive aboriginal-centred document, containing detailed ethnographic information presented by a reliable observer. 
Norton returned to Canada in 1816 to farm his land. In 1823 he mortally wounded a man in a duel to protect his wife's honour. After the courts fined him $25 for manslaughter, he left Karighwaycagh and travelled to the Cherokee settlements in Arkansas. He is known to have been in Laredo, then in Mexican territory, in 1825, but afterwards he disappeared. A nephew thought he lived until October 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 68143


Stewart, John, of Baldynneis (c.1545-c.1605), courtier and writer, was the second son of John Stewart, the fourth Lord Innermeith (died 'c'.1570), member of the privy council of Scotland (1565-9), and Elizabeth Betoun (the mistress of James V, who 'gifted' her the marriage). It is probable that he attended the University of St Andrews, graduated in the 1560s, and spent a substantial period of time in France and Italy. After his father's death, Stewart became involved in the personal and political controversies of his mother's second marriage, to James Gray, brother of the fifth Lord Gray, which was subsequently dissolved at the instigation of Elizabeth Stewart on grounds of adultery on 10 June 1581. Stewart, acting as one of the executors of the paternal estate, took possession of Red Castle in Perthshire in opposition to the property claims of his stepfather. This led to a series of direct conflicts in which Stewart, with the aid of Andrew Gray of Dunninald, defended Red Castle, and his mother's right to it, against the attacks of Gray. Gray charged Stewart before the privy council at Stirling with unlawful seizure of Red Castle. Stewart failed to appear at trial. On 1 April 1579 he was ordered to surrender the castle to Gray. In May Stewart sought legal redress and Robert Erskine of Dun was solicited to ensure that the castle would be defended and Stewart brought safely before the council. The protection of Erskine's forces was not sufficient to prevent Gray's pillaging of the Red Castle estate. In September Stewart pleaded his mother's financial distress before the council and ensured temporary residence for the family at Red Castle until the divorce was granted. 
Possibly in order to secure the protective alliance with Andrew Gray of Dunninald, Stewart entered a marriage contract at Red Castle on 19 November 1579 with Catherine Gray, his daughter. This alliance, however, was broken on 27 February 1580 and, despite the marriage which took place on 25 July 1580, again a year later when both Andrew and James Gray with impunity attacked Red Castle. On 26 April 1580 Stewart inherited the estate of Baldynneis in the parish of Dunning in Perthshire from his brother James, Lord Innermeith. Stewart's financial and material situation improved between 1582 and 1583 as he won legal proceedings against Andrew and William Gray. In 1585 Stewart and his mother entered a contract with his brother's widow to obtain an income from estates in Perthshire and Stirlingshire, while he appears to have forfeited his rights to the properties of Laithers and Durlaithers in Aberdeenshire. 
Stewart's subsequent material and political circumstances until his death 'c'.1605 are unknown. From his marriage with Catherine Gray he had one son, David. The domestic and political trouble that he endured through the legal controversies of his mother's divorce may be partly responsible for the markedly anxious, placatory relationship with James that his writing portrays. 
Stewart was a significant literary member of the court of James VI. His poetry illustrates the precarious literary and political 'contract' between the poet-courtier and the sovereign who 'prescribed' the poetic renaissance of which Stewart sought to be part. Stewart is the most rhetorically innovative and experimental of the Jacobean, or self-declared 'Castalian', writers of this period ['see 'Castalian band]. His poetry survives in a single manuscript folio which, through its careful and embellished inscription, was probably intended as a presentation gift to the king. It contains a partial translation of Ariosto's 'Orlando Furioso' (the 'Roland Furious'), a collection of lyrics entitled 'The Rapsodies of the Authors Youthfull Braine', and a religious allegory, 'Ane Schersing out of Trew Felicitie'. No work can be dated precisely, but the dedication alludes to James's 'Reulis and Cautelis', published in 1584, and the 'Rapsodies' contain similarly dedicatory 'new year' lyrics inscribed 1582 and 1583. Stewart's most prolific period of production can be placed within this decade. 
Stewart's poetry as a whole shows the important role of translation in the Scottish Jacobean Renaissance, reflecting a bias towards French sources. Many sonnets in the 'Rapsodies' collection are modelled on those of Philippe Desportes (1546-1606). The rhetorically experimental quality of Stewart's virtuosic lyrics shapes the mannerist aesthetic of contemporary Castalian writing. Stewart's Ariostian translation is also indebted to French intermediaries: not only to Desportes's 'Roland furieux' but in particular to the earlier translations of Jean Martin and Gabriele Chappuys. Stewart's mode of translation illustrates the concepts of elaboration and expansion which James outlined in the 'Reulis and Cautelis', and, given the provisionality of dating in this period, may even have defined the parameters of translation to the king. 
The 'Rapsodies' is an excellent exemplar of the nature of Castalian coterie poetry. Stewart's poetry is courtly and occasional (it includes an epithalamion). Sexual satire, secular love poetry, lyrics on the art of poetry, and kingly eulogies form a heterogeneous collection. 
'Ane Schersing out of Trew Felicitie' closes the manuscript as a recantation or moral epilogue to the manuscript's largely secular nature. The poem exemplifies the Castalian vogue for allegory and is an important text in the evolution of protestant poetics in Renaissance Scotland. The poem sustains Stewart's conventional rhetoric of praise, supplication, and apologia to James, while the manifestation of the goddess Urania alludes to the king's translation of Du Bartas's 'Uranie'. The poem concludes by blending both monarchical and divine praise, as adoration of God fuses with that of Stewart's 'godlie king'. 


@@@@@


doc= 68145


Thomas Maitland (c.1548-1572), already referred to, seems to have been at least as brilliant as his brothers; he matriculated at St Mary's College, St Andrews, in 1559 (and was probably therefore born about 1548) and later studied at Paris. George Buchanan made him the prolocutor in his 'De jure regni apud Scotos' of 1579, and he was credited by his contemporaries with the authorship of an anonymous pasquinade satirizing the Regent Moray and his advisers after Moray's assassination (1570). He acted as a courier for the queen's party, and died in north Italy early in 1572 while on his way to Rome with the Jesuit Thomas Smeaton. An account of his life has been written by W. S. McKechnie. 


@@@@@


doc= 68146


Maitland, Mary (d. 1596), writer, was the daughter of Sir Richard Maitland of Lethington (1496-1586), poet and keeper of the privy seal, and Mary or Mariota Cranstoun (died 1586). John Maitland and William Maitland were her brothers. She is conventionally understood as the copyist of the Maitland quarto (CUL, Pepys 1408), a collection of religious, moral, political, and amatory poems dating from the mid-sixteenth century (including a copy of a poem by James VI and I) and associated with the Maitland family and circle. In comparison with the Maitland folio, its 'companion' manuscript, it can in part be regarded as a commonplace book, a celebration or commemoration of the Maitland family, closing with a series of laudatory epitaphs and funerary poems on the death of Maitland's wife. Mary Maitland was considered to have acted as 'secretary' to her father, a significant moral and political poet whose work substantially occupies both folio and quarto, and former keeper of the privy seal. On 9 August 1586 she married Alexander Lauder (died 1622x5), son and heir to Sir William Lauder of Hatton. They had a son, George Lauder, who became a political and military poet (he was the author of 'The Scottish Souldier', 1629). She died in 1596, and Alexander Lauder remarried. 
The inscription 'Mary Maitland 1586', which appears twice on the manuscript's first folio, suggests the date of its completion (appropriately, the year of her parents' death and of her marriage; there is no reference to the latter). The extent of her role as transcriber is undetermined. On the assumption that the italic hand was traditionally taught to women, it is probable that Mary Maitland was responsible for transcribing the manuscript's poetry in italic as opposed to the other secretary hand in evidence. Maitland's importance as transcriber is substantiated by what appears to be several dedicatory poems which pun on the name 'Marie Maitland', and contain a suggestive symbolism of virginity and female creativity. One lyric, inscribed 'To Your Self', alludes to the promise of fame -- the poetic crown of immortality -- after the labour of the book's compilation is complete, and implies that Mary Maitland is a poet manque: 'a pleasant poet perfyte sall ye be'. The lyric constructs a literary triumvirate of female poets to whom Mary Maitland is implied as a successor. The lyricist's comparison of 'Marie' to 'sapho saige' seems to endorse the implication of Maitland's own creativity and, in turn, makes more persuasive the case for her actual authorship of several anonymous poems in the quarto, notably one lyric of female homoeroticism, a rare Renaissance poetic example of such desire. A substantial number of secular love poems in the quarto, combined with those written in the female voice, also might suggest Maitland's creative as well as scribal presence. The Maitland quarto is rich in implications regarding women's creative role in manuscript compilation in Renaissance Scotland, and the scope and extent of that expression as dictated by social, moral, and literary orthodoxy. 


@@@@@


doc= 68147


Lambert, Harold Ernest (1893-1967), Swahili scholar and ethnographer, was born on 4 September 1893 at Pield Heath, Hillingdon, Middlesex, the second of three sons of George Lambert (1863-1915), gardener, and Amy Hearn (1868/9-1937), both of Hillingdon. Lambert attended Bournemouth School from 1905 to 1912 when he was admitted to Queens' College, Cambridge, as a minor scholar. On the outbreak of the First World War he was commissioned temporary lieutenant in the Gloucestershire regiment in 1916; in 1917 he was seconded to the King's African rifles. His name remained on the college books for the duration, but it seems that he never took his degree. 
In April 1919 Lambert was appointed temporary assistant district commissioner in the East Africa Protectorate (renamed the colony and protectorate of Kenya in the following year), the appointment being confirmed in 1923. For the next two years he was stationed at Shimoni, which was close to the island of Wasini, a stronghold of Swahili culture, where Lambert acquired his mastery of kiVumba (the local dialect of Swahili), composed poetry in that dialect, and learned to write Swahili in Swahili-Arabic script. He was referred to by the local literati as Shaykh Lambert, and people later recalled with approval that during the fasting month of Ramadan he did not eat, drink, or smoke in public during the hours of daylight. He also had a reputation for being neatly dressed. On 9 June 1925, while on leave in England, he married Grace Beatrice (1885-1972), daughter of Tom Firr, formerly huntsman with the Quorn hounds. In 1929, for some six months, he was district commissioner of Lamu, on the coast north of Mombasa and, like Wasini, a stronghold of Swahili culture. There he sat at the feet of Muhammad Kijumwa al-Bakri, an exceptional poet and scholar. In 1939 Lambert was made OBE; in his recommendation, the governor, Sir Robert Brooke-Popham, wrote: 'Wherever he serves he succeeds in winning the full confidence of Settlers and Natives alike.' From 1944 until his retirement in 1950 he was seconded to the African settlement and land utilization board in Nairobi, during which time he prepared ethnographic material on the peoples of the Meru and Embu districts, and on the Kikuyu. A good example of this phase is his 'Social and Political Institutions of the Kikuyu' (1955). During Lambert's career he trained a number of colonial administrators, such as Richard Turnbull and Walter Coutts, who later held important posts. 
Able though Lambert was in matters anthropological, it was his mastery of Swahili as spoken by the Swahili people on which his claim to fame rests (a mastery which was all the more amazing since he had served only twice at the coast, and then for comparatively short periods). He began to make his erudite contributions to the 'Journal of the East African Swahili Committee' only in the early 1950s, after his retirement. His three 'Studies in Swahili Dialects' (1956-8) remain, like the 'Grammaire des dialectes swahilis' (1909) by Charles Sacleux, outstanding; and 'Wimbo wa kiEbrania' ('Hebraic Songs'), based on the erotic 'Song of Solomon', is a clever 'jeu d'esprit'. A collection of Lambert's Swahili poems appeared posthumously in 1971. He and W. E. Taylor were the only Europeans ever to have published Swahili poetry acceptable to the Swahili. 
H. E. died in Nairobi on 28 May 1967. Grace died in Nairobi on 15 April 1972. There were no children. It is relevant to add that few foreign scholars have any reputation among the Swahili people themselves, although the names of Krapf and Taylor are invariably recognized. It is with these that H. E. will be remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 68148


Phillips, Augustine (d. 1605), actor, was the son of Agnes Phillips and her second husband. Nothing else is known of his antecedents or of the route along which he entered the emergent professional theatre, but the wording of his will makes it clear that he considered himself a gentleman, and he was one of a number of players who applied for, and may have acquired, a coat of arms. There is an intriguing reference to this in a complaint by William Smith, a pursuivant in the College of Heralds, that 'Phillips the player had graven in a gold ring armes of Sr Wm Phillipp, Lord Bardolph, with the said L. Bardolph's cote quartred' (Nungezer, 282). It may well be that Phillips claimed kinship, fraudulently or authentically, with Lord Bardolph, perhaps furnishing Shakespeare with an in-house joke in the naming of characters in 'Henry IV'. He was one of the first generation of actors to claim social status for the profession. 
Phillips is first mentioned in the surviving playhouse synopsis of the lost play 'The Seven Deadly Sins'. Probably written by Richard Tarlton, this play was in the repertory of Lord Strange's Men between 1590 and 1592, when the synopsis was prepared. Phillips had already high standing as an actor when 'The Seven Deadly Sins' was played. Cast as Sardanapalus, he was one of only two players not required to take more than one part. His name appears again on the travelling licence granted by the privy council to Strange's Men on 6 May 1593. After touring the provinces through the summer and autumn of 1593, when Londoners were dying of the plague, Lord Strange's Men returned to the city in time for the reopening of the playhouses in December. Perhaps because touring had unduly strained company relationships, they were in some disarray, and the untimely death of their aristocratic patron in April 1594 confirmed the company's dissolution. Almost certainly Phillips was among the small band of actors who regrouped under the patronage of Henry Carey, Lord Hunsdon. As the Lord Chamberlain's Men, they rose to supremacy between 1594 and 1603, performing initially at the Theatre and then, after 1599, at the Globe. There is only presumptive evidence that Phillips was a founder member, with William Shakespeare and others, of this outstanding company. The 1616 folio edition of Ben Jonson's 'Works' names him third among the 'principall Comoedians' who performed 'Every Man in his Humour' in 1598, and that is the earliest dated reference to his prominent place in the company, in which he may have been a shareholder. He was certainly one of five actors (Shakespeare was another) to have purchased a 10 per cent share in the Globe enterprise in 1599, and to have remained a sharer until his death. 
Since Sardanapalus is the only part with which he is certainly identified, attempts to categorize Phillips's acting style are necessarily speculative. His profound involvement in and with the company is, however, certain. Among the legatees named in his will, eleven were fellow actors. In an uncommonly generous gesture he also bequeathed $5 to be shared among the unnamed hired men. Of particular interest is the gift of theatrical costumes to 'my late apprentice' Samuel Gilburne, and of musical instruments to James Sands 'at thexpiracon of his yeares in his Indentur or Aprenticehood' (Honigmann and Brock, 73). This is the best evidence we have of an established apprenticeship system in the Elizabethan theatre. 
On the reasonable assumption that Phillips could himself play the instruments he left to Sands, it can fairly be claimed that he was a versatile performer, skilled enough to sing and dance in the popular post-play jigs ('Phillips his Gigg of the Slyppers' was entered in the Stationers' register on 26 May 1595) and effective in both tragedy and comedy. He was also sufficiently authoritative in the company to have been the negotiator with the earl of Essex's party over the notorious revival of 'Richard II' at the Globe on 7 February 1601, the eve of Essex's ill-fated uprising. Phillips's protestations of innocence at the Essex trial, which may have helped to save the Chamberlain's Men from punishment, are not entirely convincing, but they provide additional evidence of his loyalty to his colleagues. 
Phillips's professional life exemplifies the intricate network of Elizabethan theatrical connections, an intricacy reflected in his own domestic circumstance. Through the first of his mother's four marriages he was probably a stepbrother of the clown Thomas Pope. His sister was married to Robert Goughe, who joined the company shortly after James I had taken it into his patronage as the King's Men. The apprentices named in his will were brought up as members of his household, a contrast if not an antidote to female dominance. Of the several children born to Phillips and his wife, Anne, only daughters (and not all of them) survived infancy. The three eldest are named in his will. The firstborn, Magdalen, was baptized in St Saviour's Church, Southwark, on 29 September 1594, when her perhaps recently married parents were living in Horseshoe Court. 
For the next ten years, as the family grew, Phillips continued to live close to the playhouse where he worked. He handled his increasing wealth wisely and in 1604 was able to purchase a country house in Mortlake, not far from Richmond Palace. Andrew Gurr has plausibly argued that the King's Men assembled there, out of reach of the plague, before making their visit to Wilton House to perform before the new king, who had not yet risked entering the disease-ridden capital (Gurr, 54). It was in his Mortlake home that Phillips, 'sick and weake in body, but of good and perfecte mynde and Remembraunce', made his will on 4 May 1605, instructing that his body be buried in the chancel of the parish church. By 13 May he was dead. The will, proved by his widow on that day, testifies to the warmth of his playhouse friendships. From the little available evidence, Phillips seems to have merited the description of 'deserving man' accorded to him by his fellow sharer Cuthbert Burbage in 1635 (Bentley, 136). His widow made an unfortunate second marriage, to John Witter, who squandered her inheritance. After litigation Phillips's share in the Globe reverted to his former associates, Heminges and Condell, the first of whom was one of his executors. Condell, like Shakespeare, was one of the King's Men to be made 30's'. richer by Phillips's will. 


@@@@@


doc= 68150


Korner, Alexis (1928-1984), blues singer and guitarist, was born in Paris on 19 April 1928. His father was a former Austrian cavalry officer, and his mother was Greek. He was brought up in France, Switzerland, and north Africa. The family left France in 1940 in one of the last ships to leave the country during the Second World War and settled in London. Korner studied at St Paul's School and while there developed a keen interest in jazz and blues, mainly by way of gramophone records, with a special liking for the music of such pianists as Albert Ammons and Jimmy Yancey. He had learned the piano from the age of five but, with his growing interest in the blues, took to the guitar and did his utmost to emulate the American blues singers in spite of a current conviction in those days that it was essentially the province of black musicians. On leaving school he served for a while in the army, then had various short-lived jobs with a shipping firm, the BBC, and several record companies -- including Decca, where he worked in the catalogue section. Friendships formed at this time led to his contributing some valuable blues sections to 'Jazz on Record' (1960) by Charles Fox, Peter Gammond, and Alun Morgan. In 1951 Korner married Roberta Melville, the daughter of the art critic Robert Melville; they had three children, Sappho, Nicholas, and Damian, and settled in a flat in Bayswater. Anyone who evinced any interest in the blues was invited to the flat for long and smoke-laden sessions at the turntable and was inevitably introduced to a lot of names on race record labels that were still unfamiliar to most people in Britain. When Big Bill Broonzy visited London in October 1955 (and recorded two albums for the Nixa label) he stayed at the Korners' home. 
From 1948 to 1950 Korner led his own blues quartet, which played as an intermission group with Chris Barber in 1949. He was a member of Barber's skiffle group in 1952-4 and recorded with Ken Colyer in 1954-5 (including such works as 'Midnight Special'). During the mid-fifties, in partnership with the harmonica player Cyril Davies (who died of leukaemia in 1963), he ran the Roundhouse Blues Club in an upstairs room above the pub in Brewer Street, where he not only supplied his own blues but also lured such prestigious guests as Muddy Waters, Sonny Terry, Jimmy Rushing, and Brownie McGhee. It was there that rhythm and blues first found an outlet in London. Korner and Davies founded the band Blues Incorporated in 1961 and in 1962, on St Patrick's day, opened the Ealing Rhythm and Blues Club in a basement beneath a cinema, which became their centre of operation. Other players included the saxophonist Dick Heckstall-Smith and the drummer Charlie Watts. Mick Jagger was in attendance and soon became a regular singer with the band, as did Brian Jones. The Rolling Stones was formed as a group to deputize for Blues Incorporated when the group was engaged elsewhere. As Blues Incorporated became better known it moved to the Marquee Club under the Academy Cinema, where it played a music that, as one obituary put it, 'merged Charlie Mingus with Muddy Waters'. Musicians who played with the group during the next few years included Graham Bond, Jack Bruce, Eric Clapton, Paul Jones, John Mayall, Phil Seamen, Art Themen, and Danny Thompson, some making their first mark with the band. The LPs 'R & B from the Marquee', 'Red Hot from Alex', 'At the Cavern', and 'Alexis Korner's Blues Incorporated' were recorded in 1962 and 1964 for Decca. Korner never sought popularity or played anything other than the music he believed in, which made him always a little ahead of his time and never 'Top of the Pops' material. The strong jazz influence always remained as evident in his 'Red Hot from Alex', and his own liking was for guitarists like Lonnie Johnson and Big Bill Broonzy. He was hailed as the 'father of modern British rhythm and blues', though he strongly disclaimed any such distinction and amended it to 'grandfather', meanwhile steering clear of the excessive displays of the pop world, preferring a sustained family life, much of it spent in a converted Methodist chapel in Wales, and enthusiastic discourse with friends. He never became as famous or as rich as some of his proteges, but earned the solid respect that he deserved. 
Korner left the band in 1968 to work as a soloist; he recorded 'I Wonder Who' (1967), 'A New Generation of Blues', and 'Both Sides of Alexis Korner' (1969); then there were periods with the groups New Church (1969-70), with whom he recorded, and CCS (1970-73), featuring the singer Peter Thorup and Korner himself in some typical gruff vocals; and for a time he was resident bandleader for the children's television show 'Five O'Clock Club'. In 1972 Korner and Thorup toured the USA with the group Humble Pie. This was followed by a fruitful musical partnership with the bass player Colin Hodgkinson from 1973 to 1980, during which he worked both in Britain and abroad, and always preferring the intimate live performance. Recordings from this period included 'Mr Blues' (1974), 'Alexis Korner' (1974), 'Get off my Cloud' (1975), and 'Just Easy' (1978). In the latter years much of his time was taken up by broadcasting, his BBC Radio 1 programme being a model of erudition, wit, and the well-turned phrase. He was an elegant writer and a man of great courtesy and charm. His gravelly voice was frequently used to good effect as the background to television commercials. He was always a smart dresser, a great connoisseur of food, drink, and art, and a keen follower of cricket and rugby, having played the latter in his early army days. His heavy smoking habits took their eventual toll, and he died of lung cancer in the Westminster Hospital, London, on 1 January 1984, aged fifty-five; he was survived by his wife. A number of compilations of his recordings appeared in the 1980s. 


@@@@@


doc= 68151


Bowery, Leigh (1961-1994), designer and performance artist, was born in Sunshine, a suburb of Melbourne, Australia, on 26 March 1961, the son of Tom Bowery, accountant, and his wife, Evelyn (died 1994). Born into a middle-class family, he was an intelligent and confident boy who excelled at school and achieved grade 8 at piano. Highly creative, he learned to knit and crochet at a young age and went on to study fashion at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology. However, he soon tired of the commercialism of his course and the parochialism of his environment and resolved to travel to London, an ambition that he achieved in October 1980. On arriving he focused his energies on joining the capital's alternative nightclub set, who were then wearing the 'new romantic' look, incorporating frills and makeup for women and men. Soon he was designing and selling clothes in Kensington market. In 1984 he moved to what became his main home -- a council flat in Farrell House, Ronald Street, in the East End of London. This was initially shared with his close friend Trojan (born Gary Barnes), an artist who collaborated in its bright and elaborate decoration. 
Bowery was one of the first fashion designers to promote the 1970s revival, and incorporated into his designs glam-rock elements such as platform shoes, bright colours, fine fabrics, and glitter, which allowed feminine and androgynous looks for men. His costumes were always beautifully made, employing his many crafts and involving long hours of close work. In one of his earliest and best documented designs (which he called 'Pakis from outer space') he began to experiment with full-face makeup in red, green, or blue, which was decorated with jewels and a chain from nose to ear, evocative of Hindu images. The effort that went into both creating and wearing his 'looks' was such that they were not viable commercially, and Bowery was in any case ambivalent towards spreading them widely. His initial model was Trojan, but seeing the attention that his designs created Bowery began to wear them himself. He was a large man, and his clothes achieved additional shock value on his tall, 16 stone frame. 
Bowery had by now emerged as a well-known character in London's nightclubs, and in 1985 he consolidated his influence by becoming a partner in a new nightclub, Taboo. He was its public face and centre of attention. Each week he focused on preparing a new outfit for his next appearance. Many were exquisitely tailored, and while emphasizing his bulk they also incorporated traditionally feminine elements. Examples included large polka dots that extended across his yellow-painted face, bustle skirts worn with a First World War German tin helmet, and Lycra costumes with exposed buttocks, worn with high-heeled shoes. All incorporated heavy makeup, generally exaggerating the eyes and lips, and in one memorable look extending over Bowery's entire shaved head, on which coloured paint was dripped from the crown, akin to a broken fluorescent egg. But at Taboo, Bowery was more than just an exhibit; he was also its social centre. His wide networks, wit, charm, and easy sociability attracted a core clientele of designers, artists, and performers, as well as others drawn by the spectacle or who simply wanted to dress up. The club's culture was one of sexual permissiveness, and (like Bowery's looks) of transgressing accepted boundaries of gender and sexuality. As he remarked, 'the name Taboo is a joke really, because there's nothing you can't do there' (Tilley, 61). The culture of permissiveness also extended to drugs, which claimed the lives of Trojan and the club's flamboyant doorman Mark Vautier, both aged twenty, in 1986. 
Bowery himself was tremendously strong both physically and mentally -- something that he demonstrated by dancing all night in his increasingly constricting outfits, often hoisting others off the floor. After Taboo's closure, in 1986, his looks developed to concentrate increasingly on physical distortion -- using corsets and gaffer tape to compress and move his flesh, and sculpted foam to extend it. This was achieved only at the cost of huge physical discomfort. He continued to explore issues of gender and sexuality but his designs became more threatening and disturbing, often incorporating masks or other headwear. Through this work he explored his favourite emotion -- embarrassment -- and overcame his earlier feelings of physical inadequacy. 'The idea of transforming oneself', he commented, 'gives courage and vigour... Things that used to embarrass me like nudity and gender confusion don't any more' (Tilley, 112). 
Bowery had long been an exhibitionist, but in 1988 he was accepted into the art world as a formal exhibit. At the Anthony d'Offay gallery in London he appeared daily, for a week, in a different outfit behind a one-way mirror. Later he began a collaboration with the artist Lucian Freud, for whom he modelled regularly from 1990 until his death. The relationship started in confusion, as Freud assumed that Bowery would pose dressed, and Bowery that Freud wanted him nude. As Bowery stripped fast at his first appointment it was his expectation that prevailed. He found this showing of his private self profoundly liberating, but Freud's paintings depicted a man whom most people who met Bowery would not recognize. Another artistic collaboration, with the photographer Fergus Greer, showed the more familiar Bowery, while cataloguing a large number of his looks and demonstrating their variety, complexity, and artistry. 
Bowery's anonymous daytime appearance (generally including a short wig to cover his baldness) enabled him to carry on a sexual life that since his schooldays had centred on casual encounters with men in public toilets and parks. Although entirely open about his sexuality, he found this an efficient way of feeding his considerable sexual appetite, and he entertained friends with many tales of his conquests (although he was also known for his lies and exaggeration). Once diagnosed as HIV-positive, in 1988, he may have been truthful in citing 'unsafe sex with over 1,000 men' as his greatest regret. He had few, if any, conventional relationships, although he married his assistant Nicola Joy Ann Bateman on 13 May 1994. His friend and biographer Sue Tilley later suggested that Trojan was 'the true love of Leigh's life' (Tilley, 77). 
Bowery once remarked that 'every time I go out it turns into a performance' (Tilley, 195). Alongside modelling, in his later years he concentrated on formalizing this activity. His first stage appearances were with the dancer and choreographer Michael Clark, for whom he had been designing costumes since 1983. Although large and clumsy, Bowery began dancing with Clark's group in 1987, and sometimes played piano. His independent performances began as repeats of his nightclub appearances but were increasingly designed to shock. He enjoyed incorporating bodily functions, and on one occasion a water enema, which he had administered to himself, went spectacularly wrong on stage. In another celebrated show he 'gave birth' to a naked Nicola Bateman, covered in slime, who had been strapped under his dress throughout a vigorous hour-long performance. Bowery also sang -- in his groups the Quality Street Wrappers, Raw Sewage, and Minty -- and aspired to release a record of his song 'Useless Man'. 
Leigh Bowery's last performance was on 24 November 1994. The authorities shut the show down, somewhat to his relief, as he had been feeling unwell. Four days later he was hospitalized with meningitis -- a product of his HIV-positive status, which he had divulged only to Sue Tilley. Still remarkably strong, he fought his illness, but died at the Middlesex Hospital, Westminster, on 31 December 1994. His body was flown to Australia to be buried at Macedon, Victoria, next to that of his mother. As if in final proof of his nonconformism his coffin proved too large for the hole that initially had been dug for it. Certainly not to everybody's taste, Bowery's contribution to design, performance, and art, as well as to the culture of gender and sexuality, was remarkable for his thirty-three years, and after his death has reached a wider audience through a series of exhibitions, publications, and documentaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 68153


Ashbridge, Elizabeth (1713-1755), Quaker minister and writer, was born in Middlewich, Cheshire, the daughter of Thomas Sampson, a ship's surgeon, and his wife, Mary. Few details are known about Elizabeth's early life, parents, and family; indeed, most of the information about her later life and career is taken from her spiritual autobiography (composed about 1745), which records her 'remarkable experiences' (the title of some versions of the narrative indicated) after she left home aged fourteen. About 1727 she eloped with, and married, a stocking weaver, who died within the year. Elizabeth now estranged herself from her father and travelled from Cheshire to Ireland, where she lived with relatives. Here she may have earned a living by working as a servant or, perhaps, in prostitution. In 1732 she left for America; having landed at New York she signed as an indentured servant for four years. Her autobiography records how this period was taken up with an exploration of several religious denominations, culminating in her departure from the Anglican faith of her childhood for the Quakers. Having escaped the possibility of sexual abuse from her American master, Elizabeth bought her freedom through work as a seamstress. She also flirted for a brief period with a theatrical career in New York, having joined with a group of actors who promised she would 'live like a lady' if she devoted herself to the stage. Her second marriage was to a man by the name of Sullivan (further details are unknown), who was attracted by her blithe spirit and her dancing; the couple supported themselves as teachers. 
During visits to relatives who were Friends, Elizabeth came into close contact with a wide range of Quakers. She now began to adopt the outward signs of belief such as plain speech and clothing, and almost immediately began to endure persecution from her husband. On one of these occasions, cited as the infamous tavern scene in Philadelphia, Sullivan forced her to dance with him as she did before she became 'a Stiff Quaker'. As he 'pluck'd [her] round the Room till Tears affected [her] eyes', the musician was moved to stop his playing ('Some account', reprinted in Andrews, 162). Although scenes of verbal and physical abuse continued throughout her marriage, Elizabeth remained faithful to Sullivan, believing he would eventually convert. He did finally claim membership of the Society of Friends, as indicated by his refusal to fight in Cuba in 1740 when he claimed that he had only enlisted as a soldier 'in a drunken frolick' (ibid., 170). Sullivan apparently died nine months later as a result of the abuse he received from the military authorities following his refusal to fight. He died $80 in debt, obligations which Elizabeth paid off by teaching and sewing. Her spiritual autobiography concludes with the death of her second husband. In 1746 she married Aaron Ashbridge (died 1776), a member of a comfortable Quaker farming family from Pennsylvania. 
This union appears to have provided Elizabeth Ashbridge with the financial, emotional, and community support she needed to thrive as a Quaker preacher. In 1753 she chose to travel as a minister to Ireland, perhaps to escape what may have been becoming an increasingly unhappy marriage. During the late 1740s Aaron Ashbridge had risen to prominence in the local community as an overseer of the Society of Friends' Goshen meeting (1748) and a justice of the peace a year later. However, he was accused of public drunkenness and was removed from the Goshen meeting in 1755. On his death he left $300 for the education of poor children, an indication of the financial comfort Elizabeth enjoyed. 
Elizabeth Ashbridge's autobiography enjoyed sufficient popularity to circulate in several manuscript copies in the first couple of decades after its completion. The first printed version was published in England at Nantwich, Cheshire, in 1774; numerous British and American editions appeared during the nineteenth century. Elizabeth's life and testimony gained wider scholarly attention in the late twentieth century as women's studies and the study of life-writing became increasingly popular. The autobiography has been republished in several anthologies, and Ashbridge is now the subject of studies on eighteenth-century women's lives and Quaker culture. She died on 16 May 1755 in the home of Robert Lecky at Kilnock, co. Carlow, Ireland, after contracting a 'severe illness', and was interred in the Quaker burial-ground, Ballybromhill, co. Carlow. 


@@@@@


doc= 68154


Barrington, John (1764-1824), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 9 October 1764 in Dublin, the first of three children of John Barrington (1723-1784) and his second wife, Mary Anne ('fl'. 1763-1789), daughter of William Plummer of Enniscorthy, co. Wexford. He was brought up in the Quaker faith to which the Barringtons had adhered since the seventeenth century. Following his father's death Barrington carried on the family business as a chandler in partnership with his mother. He later entered into a succession of other partnerships before he joined with his sons to form John Barrington & Sons, wholesale soap and candlemakers, a firm which endured through several generations. 
In 1787 Barrington married Thomasina ('c'.1767-1788), daughter of Thomas and Eleanor Burton; she died on 15 July in the following year. His second wife, whom he married on 7 November 1792, was Margaret Manliffe (1773-1869) of Edenderry, King's county, and they had thirteen children, eleven of whom survived to adulthood. Over time, his business built up and the company moved to progressively larger premises. Barrington lived in a succession of houses -- firstly alongside the factory at Bellview, by Dublin's Grand Canal Harbour, then in suburban locations outside the city at Rathfarnham and Blackrock. Finally, in 1808, he acquired about 150 acres at Glendruid, near Cabinteely, 9 miles south of Dublin, and built a substantial house with outhouses and a viewing tower. 
As Barrington's fortunes increased he became involved with a number of charitable or philanthropic projects. The earliest of these was the fever hospital in Dublin's Cork Street, which opened in 1804 and for which he was active in fund-raising. Over its nearly one and a half centuries the hospital always had a number of Quakers, including John Barrington and his son Edward, on its board. In 1808 John Barrington was among those who established the Dublin Free School in School Street, close to his business premises in Bellview. This establishment was founded to give instruction to poor children of both sexes and was largely supported by subscriptions. Three years later, in a further attempt to foster the intellectual growth of the citizens of Dublin, Barrington and others established the Dublin Institution, operating from a house in Sackville Street, where there was a library and a lecture room. The aim of this foundation was to promote science, literature, and the arts, and it was funded by shares held by a group of individuals who also subscribed a small sum each year. Finally, at the close of his life, Barrington became a founder member of the Patriotic Assurance Company, a body which, like the others in which he was involved, included a substantial Quaker element among its promoters. 
Though born and brought up as a member of the Religious Society of Friends, Barrington (according to the family biographer) left the society about 1801. However, he continued to attend the society's meetings, and his affiliations to organizations in which there was Quaker involvement show that he remained close to the society. Barrington's philanthropy also earned him an esteemed reputation beyond Quaker circles. According to his son Richard: 'my father, indeed, was no common man. I scarcely think I exaggerate when I give it as my opinion that he was very highly respected, not only by those in his own mercantile class, but also by those other classes with whom his activity in furthering objects for the common good brought him into contact. His well-known integrity and independence of opinion... were highly appreciated. (Barrington, 177)' John Barrington died of typhus fever on 2 April 1824 and was buried in the ancient churchyard of Tullagh, close to his home at Glendruid. In 1846 the Barrington family established a private burial-ground within the grounds of Glendruid, and Barrington's remains were exhumed from Tullagh and reburied in the family plot. 


@@@@@


doc= 68156


Brown, Henton (1697/8-1775), Quaker minister and banker, of unknown parentage, was born in London. He was educated by Friends, and in 1718 he married Sarah, of whom further details are unknown, in an Anglican ceremony, contrary to the beliefs of the society. The couple repented this action and their acknowledgement of wrongdoing was accepted by the society on 20 January 1720. The couple had eleven children, many of whom died in infancy. 
When he was twenty-five Brown made his first public testimony of his faith and was 'measurably preserved in faithfulness' (Testimonies, 3.97). On 28 November 1731 he was accepted as a minister of the society, following a recommendation by the Horsleydown meeting, Southwark. Brown's ministry was nevertheless commented upon by William Gibson in his 'Saul's Errand to Damascus' (1728), in which he criticized Brown's reflections upon 'Inward and Spiritual Grace' (Gibson, 11). Between 1726 and 1735 Brown wrote several treatises defending the Society of Friends from attacks by William Bromfield and by William Notcutt, notably 'An Examination of William Bromfield's Principles' (1726) and 'A Vindication of Robert Barclay's Apology... Against the Attempts of William Notcut' (1732). In 1727 a manuscript written by Brown against Bromfield was submitted to the morning meeting but, on 16 October 1727, was rejected by Friends who thought it more prudent to stay out of the argument. This presumably was Brown's 'The Divine and Human Natures United in the Person of Jesus Christ' (1727). In 1735 Brown again attacked Bromfield in 'An Examination of William Notcutt's Reply to H.B.'s Vindication'. In this period Brown, along with other Friends, warmly congratulated the prince of Orange on his marriage to the princess royal. Between 1743 and 1763 Brown wrote several addresses to the crown, including commentaries on the Jacobite rising, the accession of George III, the king's marriage to Queen Charlotte and the royal birth, and on the negotiation of peace with France in 1763. Brown was also interested in issues which affected the Quaker community and was an influential member of the yearly meeting and meeting for sufferings. 
In 1744 Brown travelled, as a Quaker minister, through Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, visiting Friends, where, 'being a man of strong natural parts, and having acquired reputation on this account, he became acquainted with several persons of considerable rank, and gradually fell into much business, and a variety of worldly engagements' (Testimonies, 3.97; 'Dictionary of Quaker biography'). By 1748 Brown, with his son James (1721-1781), had established his own bank, Henton Brown & Son. Benjamin Franklin became an important client during his first visit to Britain as a provincial agent for Pennsylvania. Later Thomas Collinson (1727-1803), the husband of Brown's youngest daughter, Sarah, became a partner, and the bank changed its name to Brown and Collinson in 1770. His grandson John Henton Tritton (1753-1833), the son of his second daughter, Anna Maria, and her husband, Thomas Tritton (1717-1786), was left a partnership in the bank in Brown's will. Tritton's right to a quarter share of the business was nevertheless conditional on his completion of an apprenticeship and his reaching his majority. 
Brown also participated in a lively correspondence with John Fothergill (1712-1780) and the Philadelphian James Pemberton (1723-1809) on the issues affecting the society in America. In May 1754 Brown waited on the new governor of Pennsylvania, Robert Hunter Morris, and on 21 March 1755, along with Fothergill, David Barclay, Silvanus Bevan, and Capel Hanbury, he became a committee member appointed by the meeting for sufferings to examine Friends' needs in the state. On 8 April 1766, with John Fothergill, he also wrote a formal attestation on behalf of Benjamin Franklin, to reassure the German community in Pennsylvania of Franklin's 'loyalty to the colonial cause' (Corner and Booth, 262). 
By May 1750 Brown had obtained permission from Friends at the Horsleydown monthly meeting to move, with his family, to the monthly meeting at Gracechurch Street, London. This action was presumably taken in order to be nearer to his bank on Lombard Street. By 1754, however, Brown had also become prosperous enough to own the leasehold of a country house on Clapham Common, near Mount Pond. His good fortune clearly troubled his conscience, as he complained to a friend, in 1764, that he had spent too much time acquiring material wealth, commenting, 'What end will it answer, what end will it answer? It may possibly find wings for my children to fly from the blessed truth' (Testimonies, 3.98; 'Dictionary of Quaker biography'). Although Brown was a 'pretty constant attender of... [Wandsworth] meeting, as well as a benefactor to it' ('Dictionary of Quaker biography'), he retained his membership of the Gracechurch Street meeting, and it is possible that he may have attended the London two weeks meeting for Gracechurch Street. It is further known that as a member of the Horsleydown monthly meeting between 1728 and 1743 he was on the committee concerned with the Friends' workhouse, and he attended London yearly meeting in 1735, 1754, and 1759. He may well have attended more meetings than this, for in 1775, in spite of ill health and the need to be supported by two other Friends, he is noted as having attended yearly meeting. 
Henton Brown died of dropsy at his country residence, near Mount Pond, Clapham Common, on 23 September 1775 aged seventy-seven, after a long illness, and was interred at the Quaker burial-ground at Long Lane, Southwark, on 1 October 1775. His will, which was proved on 23 October 1775, included a $100 bequest for building a new meeting-house at Wandsworth, but this was cancelled by the addition of a codicil, written in 1774, which acknowledged that Brown had paid $40 towards the repairs of the old meeting-house. Brown's total bequests were in excess of $30,000 (excluding properties) and he bequeathed $100 for the Friends' workhouse at Clerkenwell, and $50 and $20 respectively for poor members at the Gracechurch Street and Wandsworth meetings. 


@@@@@


doc= 68157


Chamber, Grace (1676-1762), Quaker minister, was born on 15 October 1676 at Monk Hesledon, co. Durham, the only child of James Hall and his second wife, Grace, widow of Anthony Pearson and daughter of Thomas and Grace Lamplough. Her father and his first wife, Frances Walker, had five other children. Brought up in an established Quaker household Grace was intelligent and 'endowed with an excellent understanding' (Testimony of Kendal monthly meeting). Although not formally educated she managed to acquire considerable medical skill, which she put to good use without ever asking for a fee or other reward. On 13 January 1704, when she was twenty-seven, Grace married Robert Chamber (died 1753), a substantial Friend, and moved to his family home at Sedgwick, near Kendal, in Westmorland. At the age of thirty-five she was recognized as having a gift of ministry among Friends, although she did not speak frequently or at length. Her travel in the ministry was mainly local and in the company of her husband. 
Grace Chamber had an extensive acquaintance among all classes in her local community and she concerned herself with the lives of her friends. She arranged for the widowed Abiah Sinclair, a fellow Quaker minister, to meet the ironmaster Abraham Darby (1711-1763), who became Abiah's second husband, and she remained a constant friend to the whole Darby family. There is no record that Grace and Robert had any children of their own but Grace acted as a mother, nurse, and friend to all who needed her. Robert supported her ministry and her benevolent and medical activities up to a point. After his death in April 1753 she said of him: '[although] one of the best of husbands, he was very unwilling to want me, but I think he made that up as much as any man in his circumstance could have done in letting his house be free and open to sick and lame, poor and rich. If I were but there it was mostly well. (Grace Chamber to J. Wilson, 18 Oct 1753, RS Friends, Lond., MS 334/63)' Grace was aware of links between the physical, mental, and spiritual; she sent Thomas Story (1670?-1742), a travelling minister who visited the area in 1715, not only religious encouragement but a sample of a powder as a remedy for coughing and shortness of breath, which she thought he might need. Another who benefited from Grace's benevolence was Frances Henshaw (1714-1793), a convert to Quakerism from the established church. She was rejected by her family and became a Quaker minister, but was criticized by some Friends for her popularity. By 1743 she had reached a point of physical and mental collapse. Grace took Frances into her home for an extended period, giving her rest, good advice, and fresh- and salt-water baths so that eventually she recovered and continued her ministry. 
In her widowhood Grace Chamber continued to travel in the ministry, often with her lifelong friend Lydia Lancaster. Together they visited the Darby family at Coalbrookdale and attended local Quaker meetings. In 1760, at the very end of their lives, they went on a more extensive journey, first to Welsh yearly meeting, as they often had before, but then on to Bath, Bristol, and London. Contemporaries wondered at their taking on so much when so advanced in years but characterized them both as 'green in old age'. On her return Grace became more infirm, finding it difficult to get even to local Quaker meetings. She died on 22 September 1762, aged eighty-five, at Sedgwick, in the house to which she had come on her marriage nearly sixty years before; she was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Preston Patrick, Westmorland. 
Grace Chamber was not an eloquent minister or an extensive traveller in the ministry, and she wrote nothing for publication. She was notable as a companion and friend, one who tended the sick and cared for those who were sorrowful and troubled in mind. She shared her wisdom and her skills freely and was universally valued by her local and religious community. In the letters, diaries, and journals of contemporaries she emerges as 'dear Grace' -- a fitting memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 68158


Churchman, John (1705-1775), Quaker minister and journal writer, was born on 4 August 1705 at Nottingham, Chester county, Pennsylvania, the son of John Churchman (died 1724), farmer, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Cerie. He was a lifelong resident of Nottingham and deeply involved with the Religious Society of Friends. In his journal he said that he 'was born in a wilderness place' and, of his education, that he 'had been at a school but about three months, and the man I went to being a weaver, sat in his loom and heard his scholars read' ('Account', 73). 
At the age of nineteen Churchman said he was concerned for 'the good order of the church' and became conscientious in attending meetings for business and discipline, both in his neighbourhood and elsewhere. Aged twenty-six he reluctantly became an elder but was so scrupulous in the administration of his duties that he was replaced at the next quarterly meeting. On 27 November 1729 he married Margaret Brown (1707-1770), daughter of William and Esther Brown of Chester county, Pennsylvania. 
After suffering a fit of despondency in 1748 Churchman was promoted for justice of peace by some of his associates. However, he declined the honour 'because God wanted him to avoid worldly cumbers' (Marietta, 33). In the same year Churchman addressed the assembly at the state house in Philadelphia on the subject of the war tax and slavery. Churchman was concerned that Quakers should in no way be involved with King George's War and joined those who refused to pay the tax levied by Pennsylvania to conduct the war on the grounds that it was inconsistent with the Quaker peace testimony. 
The next year (1749) Churchman felt compelled to visit Britain and the Netherlands in the service of 'Truth'. He spent four years abroad and attended numerous Quaker gatherings; it is estimated that he covered over 9000 miles by land and was present at more than 1000 meetings. In England, as in America, Churchman felt that Friends too often had modified traditional values. Some English Friends found him 'singular and narrow' and expected from one who had travelled so far some verbal ministry. However, Churchman often decided to remain silent. He was steadfast in his anxiety over a growing worldliness among Friends, and favoured a strict enforcement of Quaker discipline, which some felt was unbending. 
One English Friend who shared Churchman's views was Samuel Fothergill (1715-1772), brother of the famous physician John Fothergill. When Churchman returned to America, Fothergill went with him. Unlike Churchman, Fothergill was an eloquent preacher, who in his time in America (1754-6) joined Churchman in strengthening discipline among Friends. With Fothergill and other English Friends, Churchman also succeeded in 1754 in creating yearly meetings for ministers and elders. 
In 1759 Churchman visited some active members of the society who kept slaves to confront them with the implications of their practice; he was accompanied by the Quaker essayist and anti-slavery campaigner John Woolman. Churchman and Woolman shared many attitudes and cares, and both left important religious autobiographies. Sometimes their writing overlapped, and there is some evidence that Churchman was a little jealous of the younger and more charismatic Woolman. Whereas Woolman's 'Journal' remains a delight to read Churchman's 'Account' is too often unimaginative and excessively didactic. Comparing the two, Daniel B. Shea jun. says that Churchman remained a 'peerless didact... whose intention in writing was 'to encourage the humbled, carefull traveller in the way of his duty'' (Shea, 257-8). 
In his 'Journal' Woolman honoured Churchman by including long extracts of unpublished notes from his 'beloved friend'. Many of these concerned Churchman's 1748 appearance at the state house. There Churchman eloquently reminded the representatives: 'May it with gratitude be ever remembered how remarkably we have been preserved in peace and tranquillity for more than fifty years: no invasion by foreign enemies, and the treaties of peace with the natives, wisely begun by our proprietor William Penn, preserved inviolable to this day. ('Journal and Essays of John Woolman', ed. Gummere, 80)' Seven years later matters had changed drastically and the non-Quaker authorities were basically at war with the Native Americans in Pennsylvania. Churchman and like-minded Friends were 'raising money to cultivate our friendship with our Indian neighbours, and to support such of our fellow subjects who are or may be in distress' (ibid., 82). It was a policy few non-Quakers were willing to join and the sad future destiny of the Native Americans was set. 
For a long time Churchman, like Woolman, had accepted the Native Americans as equals. In a dream of angels, recorded in his 'Account', Churchman recalled that 'the complexion of the angelic apparition... was not much different from one of the Indians clear washed from his grease and filth' ('Account', 185). Unlike those who viewed the Native Americans as basically subhuman Churchman believed that the Spirit dwelt in men of all colours; his dream signified that man should examine deeper than outward appearance. 
In general Churchman's reputation suffers by comparison with Woolman; Churchman's tensions between the personal and the didactic impersonal are far less resolved and, though both men were notably self-effacing, somehow Woolman reveals himself more fully, and a more accessible soul emerges. Both men were dedicated to particular causes; Woolman's was the abolition of slavery, and Churchman's was the discipline of the Society of Friends. Daniel Shea writes, 'A good life preaches its own sermon Churchman seems to say' (Shea, 12). Few others of his time were more exemplary in their conduct, and Jack Marietta credits Churchman with being 'the first person to have expressed a hope to reform the Society and to have begun working at it' (Marietta, 32). 
Like Woolman, Churchman had always suffered from a weak constitution; he was ill for three weeks with fever before his death on 24 July 1775. He died in his chair, apparently declaring near the time, 'I feel that which lies beyond death and the grave, which is now an inexpressible comfort to me' ('Journal and Essays of John Woolman', ed. Gummere, 542). He was buried at East Nottingham Friends' burial-ground two days later. Churchman's legacy continued in his son George (1730-1814), who became a leading force among Pennsylvania Quakers. George Churchman was inspired by Samuel Fothergill's preaching and was both a pioneer in promoting Friends' schools as well as clerk of Philadelphia yearly meeting. 


@@@@@


doc= 68159


Drummond, May (1709/10-1772), Quaker minister, was born in Edinburgh, the daughter of John Drummond (died 1709), a factor and merchant, and his wife, who died in 1736. Her brother George Drummond (1687-1766) was lord provost of Edinburgh six times and another brother, Alexander Drummond (d. 1769), was consul in Aleppo. In 1731 May attended the Quaker yearly meeting in Edinburgh and was convinced by the travelling minister Thomas Story that she should become a Quaker. Her family, members of the Church of Scotland, were very much against her choice but she persevered and was soon recognized as a minister. She began to travel extensively in the ministry in Scotland and then, about 1735, she moved to England, where she created a stir among the general public. 
May Drummond was a tall, handsome woman, who spoke very eloquently and drew large crowds, on much the same scale as John Wesley, from all social classes. She was even granted an audience by Queen Caroline, which increased her fame. She was particularly appealing to young women, for whom she held special, often very emotional meetings. A poem by 'a young lady', published in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1735, gives some idea of her impact: '
No more O Spain! thy saint Teresa boast, 

There's one outshines her on the British coast... 

Too long indeed, our sex has been deny'd, 

And ridiculed by men's malignant pride... 

That woman had no soul was their pretence, 

And woman's spelling past for woman's sense 

'Til you, most generous heroine, stood forth, 

And shew'd your sex's aptitude and worth. 
('GM')' In 1736 May published, first in Reading and then in Bristol, a book of letters, 'Internal Revelation the Source of Saving Knowledge'. She travelled widely in England, and visited Ireland in 1738 and again in 1753. Some Friends, however, distrusted her eloquence and her popularity, fearing that she was in danger of acting for her own glory rather than God's. 
William Cookworthy (1705-1780) of Plymouth met May in 1744 and was kinder in his estimation. Writing to a friend he said that she was: 'one of a surprising genius, her apprehension being quick, lively, penetrating... a great connoisseur of the human heart in all its emotions, passions and foibles, her own open, generous, tender and humane... I had forgotten her person which seems contrived to enforce and embellish truth, not excite desire. Her face and gesture are aimed at the mind. (Miller, 60-61)' He approved the religious content of her speech but was critical of her style: 'rather too learned; her epithets rather swell too much' (ibid.). 'But', he adds, 'I really believe all this to be owing to her education and not to any affectation or want of simplicity' (ibid.). May continued to travel but gradually more doubts were raised about her ministry. Her habit of often mentioning her noble relatives and acquaintances made Friends uneasy and there was a feeling that she demanded too much attention for herself. 
In the late 1750s May Drummond returned to Scotland but she was not welcomed in her own country. Edinburgh Quakers felt that she spoke in meeting too often and refused to accept their discipline. Rumours circulated that May, having fallen upon hard times financially, had stooped to pilfering food from the houses of Friends whom she visited. It was also insinuated that she had become a drunkard. Eventually, in 1764, she was officially requested not to preach and her certificate as a minister was withdrawn. She returned to England and continued to travel, becoming a shadow of her former self. Friends treated her kindly but could not acknowledge her ministry. In May 1772 she was in London but later that year she made her way back to Edinburgh, where she died, unmarried, aged sixty-two. Her family forgave her sufficiently to allow her to be buried in the family vault. 


@@@@@


doc= 68160


Elam, Gervase (1681-1771), merchant and Quaker minister, was born on 3 October 1681 at Heath, Skircoates Moor, Halifax, the only child of John Elam (1639/40-1730), a card-maker, and his second wife, Katherine (died 1682) of Kendal, daughter of Gervase Benson of Borratt, Sedbergh. Born into a devout Quaker family Elam remained a constant member of the Society of Friends throughout his life. 
Little is known of Elam's early years and education aside from his having had one half-brother and a half-sister. In 1703 he moved to Leeds, where in the following year he gave notice to the Leeds meeting of the Society of Friends that he intended to set up as a clothier in Armley, where he was until at least 1750. On 26 August 1715 he married Elizabeth (1694-1777), daughter of John and Mercy Smith of Wortley, at the Meadow Lane meeting-house, Leeds. The couple had eleven children, including seven sons, six of whom went on to develop Elam's diverse trading interests during his lifetime. The success of Elam's business rested on his investment in an expanding American market previously dominated by merchants from continental Europe. Variously working alone, with family, or with other members of the Quaker merchant community he exported a range of goods, of which the most significant was cloth, and imported tobacco with the help of family members resident in the American colonies. Elam may himself have visited Virginia in 1744. Opportunities at home were also grasped with the purchase of land and a number of properties in Leeds and the surrounding area. 
Throughout his life Elam was an active and conscientious member of the Leeds Friends' meeting. As a young man he accompanied 'travelling Friends' to their meetings so as to acquire the opportunity for business and social contact with fellow Quakers. He suffered frequent financial losses both in money and goods because he refused to pay tithes and other dues to the Church of England. Between 1712 and 1749 he represented the Leeds meeting on more than forty occasions at monthly meetings of the society. A generous contributor to Quaker causes and concerns, his first donation was of 15's'. towards building a stable at the Quaker school at Camp Lane. In 1732 he was made an elder of the meeting; his duties, faithfully fulfilled, included vetting couples intending to marry, signing testimonies, and giving advice on the cloth trade. 
Of Elam's home life little is known. His family supported him in business and religion until his death in Leeds on 14 November 1771. He was buried at the Leeds meeting burial-ground, in Meadow Lane, on 17 November and was survived by his wife and five of their children. Obituary notices appeared in 'A testament to public Friends dead' (RS Friends, Lond.), which remarked on his 'late call to the Ministry', as well as in the 'Leeds Intelligencer' (19 November 1771) and the 'Providence and Rhode Island Gazette' (14 March 1772). Though no will has been found his son Joseph is known to have inherited Elam's property at Armley. 


@@@@@


doc= 68161


Estaugh, Elizabeth (1680-1762), Quaker leader and colonial landowner, was born on 5 July 1680 in Bermondsey, Surrey, the second daughter and third child of John Haddon (1654-1724) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Clarke (1651?-1724). John Haddon was a convinced Quaker and twice had been fined for voicing his religious views. Like other Quakers he was persuaded by William Penn to look to America for sanctuary. In 1701 he purchased hundreds of acres of land in West Jersey across from Philadelphia. At the time that he signed a land settlement agreement Haddon was a blacksmith in London and unable to accept business offers, which required the taking of oaths of allegiance. The situation changed with the acceptance of affirmations; moreover, Haddon was appointed officer for the Pennsylvania Land Company as well as for the London Lead Company. The latter position made him reluctant to occupy his new property, and indeed he never left England. 
Elizabeth Haddon, only nineteen at the time, 'felt a drawing' to fulfil her father's land settlement and was given full power of attorney to transact business in West Jersey. Before she arrived in 1701 her father had already had a dwelling built for her at Cooper's Creek, Newtown township; this now became her home. Elizabeth arrived, thinking that eventually some of her immediate family would follow. This, however, never happened, and with the care of a widowed friend and two faithful manservants she was left to develop what became the large plantation of Haddonfield, an instance 'unique in Quaker records' (Jones, 389). 
Auspiciously, Elizabeth Haddon became reacquainted with a Quaker leader John Estaugh (1676-1742), whom she had met at Bermondsey some years earlier and who had arrived in America in 1700 on a religious visit. John and Elizabeth's courtship was celebrated in 'Elizabeth', the only story of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's 'Tales of a Wayside Inn' (1863) to be set outside his native New England. The couple were married in Quaker fashion at Haddonfield on 1 December 1702. Elizabeth said of their forty-year marriage: 'few if any in a married state ever lived in sweeter harmony than we did' ('Journal and Essays of John Woolman', 532). In 1713 work began on New Haddonfield, the couple's second residence, around which the town of Haddonfield was founded. Though Elizabeth and John Estaugh had no children of their own they were joined, in 1723, by Ebenezer Hopkins, Elizabeth's nephew. 
Over the years the Estaughs entertained many Quakers, including John Haslam, a Yorkshire preacher of fifty years' standing. Elizabeth formed a special friendship with Elizabeth Woolman, the sister of John Woolman, a leading Quaker author and an anti-slavery pioneer. Elizabeth Estaugh stayed with Elizabeth Woolman during the latter's final illness, and in 1747 witnessed her will. Elizabeth had long taken an interest in the sick and to this day, at Haddonfield, can be seen her old brewhouse, where she made many 'simples and remedies' to treat inhabitants of her vast settlement. She remained active in Friends' meetings up to her death; for fifty years she was clerk of the women's monthly meeting and so vast was her correspondence that she had to employ several secretaries. 
John Estaugh became an agent in his father-in-law's business in the land company in West Jersey; he also undertook a number of visits in the religious ministry of Friends. During one of these, to the small island of Tortola in the West Indies in 1742, he died. After her husband's death Elizabeth maintained her church work and continued to manage the family's estate. She died on 30 March 1762, on Haddonfield plantation, and was buried in the cemetery of the local Friends' meeting-house. Much of her property subsequently passed to the children of Ebenezer Hopkins. 
In the testimony of Haddonfield monthly meeting, after Elizabeth's death, it was written: 'Her heart and house were open to her friends, whom to entertain, seemed one of her greatest pleasures' ('Journal and Essays of John Woolman', 532). Today Elizabeth Estaugh, who is also known by her maiden name of Elizabeth Haddon, is recognized as the founder of the town of Haddonfield, New Jersey, which has a population of 15,000, and is remembered by the state as one of its most significant pioneers. 


@@@@@


doc= 68164


Thompson, Muriel Annie (1875-1939), volunteer ambulance driver and member of the FANY, was born on 10 June 1875 at 17 Albyn Place, Aberdeen, the fifth of the eight children of Cornelius Thompson (1843-1894), shipowner and marine architect, and the only daughter of his second marriage, to Agnes Marion Williamson (1846-1926). Her grandfather was George Thompson junior (1804-1895), laird of Pitmeddon, deputy lieutenant of Aberdeenshire, provost of Aberdeen, member of parliament for Aberdeen (1852), and founder of the George Thompson Shipping Company, later the Aberdeen White Star Line. She was educated at Blackheath high school and Hacking College, north London. After the death of her father she lived with her mother at 48 Queensgate, London. 
Muriel and her two full brothers, Walter and Oscar, were early and keen motor vehicle drivers. They were involved in the foundation of the Brooklands Automobile Racing Club, and on 4 July 1908 Muriel Thompson won the Ladies Bracelet Handicap at Brooklands, the first race held there for women drivers. She was driving Oscar's Austin racing car, nicknamed Pobble. Her speed over 3 miles was 50 m.p.h. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Oscar joined one of the several volunteer ambulance convoys raised to help the French, taking Pobble, splendidly converted into an ambulance, with him. Women were not welcomed so Thompson turned to the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry corps (FANY). This was founded in 1907 by a former cavalry sergeant-major, Edward Baker, as an all-female mounted ambulance unit. By 1914 the FANY had moved to mechanized transport and on 27 October 1914 was the first women's organization to go to France. Their services having been firmly refused by the British authorities, they drove ambulances and ran hospitals and casualty clearing stations for the Belgian and French armies all along the western front. On 1 January 1916 British resistance was finally overcome and the members of FANY Calais convoy became the first women to drive officially for the British army. 
Thompson joined the FANY as a driver in January 1915. On 8 February she crossed to Calais to a Belgian military hospital called Lamarck which the corps was running. On 29 March she was personally decorated by King Albert with the chevalier of the order of Leopold II for evacuating wounded Belgian soldiers under fire near Dixmude. She served as second in command to Lilian Franklin on the Calais convoy, and was mentioned in dispatches on 9 April 1917. On 1 January 1918 she was appointed officer commanding of a new joint FANY-VAD (Voluntary Aid Detachment) convoy based at St Omer near the front line. The St Omer convoy became officially part of the Second Army on 4 May, choosing a perky-looking red fish as its official insignia in memory of the surgeon-general's description of the corps in 1915, then in battle with British officialdom, as 'neither fish, flesh nor fowl... but damned good red herrings'. 
During the prolonged German spring counter-offensive in 1918 the St Omer convoy worked day and night under heavy bombardment evacuating the dead and wounded. On 18 May they were called out following a bombing raid on Arques, including one on an ammunition dump. A second raid came over and, with shells exploding all around, they were ordered to take cover. The women worked on regardless, moving the injured to safety. For their coolness and courage under fire they were awarded a total of sixteen military medals and three Croix de Guerre. According to an unpublished memoir by Beryl Hutchinson, all the decorations were questioned, as there were too many for such a small unit; but each one was so strongly supported by the British and French officers on the scene that all were allowed. Muriel Thompson was decorated with her Military Medal in the field by the general officer commanding, Second Army, General Sir Herbert Plumer, and with her Croix de Guerre in the main square of St Omer by General de la Guiche. Her medals were subsequently given to the National Army Museum. 
Muriel Thompson was a tall, dark-haired woman as evidenced by the photograph showing her towering over General de la Guiche as she received her medal. Handsome rather than beautiful, other photographs capture her looking out of the many cars she drove over the years, Pobble the Austin racing car, Flossie the Ford ambulance, and Kangaroo, her own Cadillac. Badly affected by the death at Passchendaele in 1917 of her nephew Logie Colin Leggatt, a lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards, and exhausted after nearly four years of continuous service, she returned to England on 2 September 1918. After a month's recuperation, she joined the Women's Royal Air Force as a recruiting officer. She was demobilized on 1 October 1919. She resigned from the FANY in 1922 in a policy disagreement over the corps' post-war role. Muriel Thompson, who never married, spent the next two decades at her London home, 30 The Grove, Boltons, Kensington, where she died on 3 March 1939 of encephalitis lethargica, an epidemic form of inflammation of the brain, of which there were several outbreaks between the wars. She was buried in Brompton cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 68165


Du Cros, Rosemary Theresa, Lady Du Cros (1901-1994), aviator, was born at 2 Walton Street, Brompton, London, on 23 September 1901, the daughter of Sir John David Rees, first baronet (1854-1922), and his wife, Mary Catherine Dormer. She had an older brother, Richard. Having already retired from the Indian Civil Service her father became Conservative MP for East Nottingham, and remained in the House of Commons until his death. Rosemary always maintained that she had no formal education other than that gained from listening to her parents' conversation and from avid reading. However, while living for a short time at Harrow on the Hill she joined the daughters of housemasters at Harrow School for tuition in French, German, and English by visiting governesses. She also attended ballet classes in Chelsea, and later pursued a career as a dancer in revue. For most of the 1920s she travelled the country with concert parties and musical comedies. 
In 1932 Rees travelled round the world with her brother, Richard. On their return they renewed acquaintance with Gordon Selfridge junior, a former fellow undergraduate of Richard's at Cambridge. A keen aviator, Selfridge owned an aeroplane and persuaded Rees to have a trial flight. So began her second obsession. Though still dancing she had to decide between the two careers: she chose aviation, and obtained a pilot's licence in 1933. The 1930s were the palmy days of aviation, when the air over Europe was free; aircraft owners could fly to parties given by European aero clubs where they were wined and dined by the local mayors. Having bought a Miles Hawk Major aircraft (to be replaced later by a Miles Whitney Straight) Rees could spend the summers touring and the winters skiing in Europe. In this way she accrued over 600 hours' flying time. 
With war on the horizon this hedonistic existence ended in 1938. The Civil Air Guard was formed to train more pilots through subsidies to aero clubs. The need for more instructors gave experienced women pilots, who had previously had little chance of a career in aviation, the opportunity of obtaining an instructor's licence. Having done this Rees was employed by army co-operation; this entailed flying her aircraft to and fro while anti-aircraft gunners practised aiming their guns. For this she was paid $10 per hour. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Gerard d'Erlanger, a director of British Overseas Airways Corporation, persuaded the government to make use of experienced civilian pilots not eligible for the armed forces. Forty male pilots were recruited initially to ferry aircraft from the factories to the squadrons in what became the Air Transport Auxiliary (ATA). Meanwhile an equally persuasive woman pilot, Pauline Gower, had lobbied on behalf of women. When she was allowed to choose eight pilots to form a small women's section Rees became one of these first eight so-called ATA girls, caught up in an unwelcome storm of publicity and even antagonism from some quarters. 
At first cleared only to fly open-cockpit Tiger Moths (the RAF's elementary trainer) in the freezing winter of 1939-40 Rees was far from happy. Yet her situation improved when she was sent to the RAF Central Flying School at Upavon for training on more advanced twin-engine trainers. In July 1941 women were cleared to fly operational aircraft in consequence of the pressing need for more experienced ferry pilots. Rees was one of four women chosen to convert to flying Hurricanes. 
In September 1941 no. 15 Ferry Pool, Hamble, became an all-woman pool under the command of Captain Margot Gore, with Flight Captain Rees as her deputy. Rees remained there for the duration of the war, qualifying to fly all five classes of operational aircraft from light singles through to heavy, four-engine bombers. Towards the end of the war she was lucky enough to ferry a Vampire and a Meteor jet aircraft. She was appointed MBE in 1945 for her wartime services and later joined the volunteer reserve of the RAF, gaining her commission. 
On leaving the ATA after six and a half years Rees bought a war-surplus Percival Proctor and obtained a commercial flying licence in order to fly for hire and reward. She operated her air-taxi charter firm, Ski Taxi, for five years until increasing post-war bureaucracy and deteriorating eyesight eventually terminated her flying career. 
Rees married, as his second wife, Sir Philip Harvey Du Cros, second baronet (1898-1975), at Westminster register office on 3 November 1950 and went to live with him in Parkham, north Devon, where he was an active member of the Torrington parliamentary constituency. She involved herself in politics and became chairman of the Bideford area Conservative Association. Her husband died in 1975, but she remained mentally and physically active well into old age. She died at Little Bocombe, Parkham, on 8 March 1994, aged ninety-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 68166


Griffith, John (1713-1776), Quaker minister, was born in Radnor on 21 July 1713, the son of John Griffith (died 1745), and Amy, whose maiden name was possibly Morgan of Radnor. He was 'favoured with parents who had the substance of religion in themselves, and were conscientiously concerned to train up their children in the fear of God' ('Journal of the Life', 14). His mother was a Quaker and Griffith records that she was 'a steady valuable Friend... having at times a few words, by way of testimony, tenderly to drop in religious meetings; which were acceptable to Friends' (ibid.). His father also became a member by convincement and, later, a minister among the Friends, who left 'a good report behind him among all sorts of people' (ibid., 15). 
In his youth Griffith was inclined to fill his mind with 'vain, unprofitable, and sometimes wicked and blasphemous thoughts' which were 'a great affliction to him' ('Journal of the Life', 16). As a consequence, and in spite of his parents best intentions, he fell into bad company before embarking for America from Milford Haven in 1726, aged thirteen. He wrote in his journal that the passage took eight weeks, during which time three babies were born and none of the eighty to ninety passengers died. On his arrival in America he was greeted by his uncle John Morgan, who lived 12 miles from Philadelphia. Griffith then lodged with him while his brother, who presumably emigrated at the same time, lived with his aunt Mary Parnel and followed his trade as a weaver. Griffith at this time had not reformed his character and was prepared to 'gratify a vain mind in the foolish amusements of a transitory world', and attended Friends' meetings from habit rather than from conviction (ibid., 19). He continued to act in such a manner until one of his companions came close to dying after a serious incident occurred in which Griffith was the ringleader. This had a dramatic effect upon his life, as he commented in his journal that his conversion 'struck them with some awe, for I observed they had not the boldness to mock or deride me before my face' (ibid., 24-5). 
In July 1734, when he was twenty-one, Griffith became a Quaker minister and gifted speaker at the Abingdon meeting in Pennsylvania. He remained faithful to his calling for the next forty-two years and began his first missionary journey around America in October 1736. On 30 December 1737 he married Rebekah Fearn (died in or after 1750), the Quaker daughter of Josiah and Sarah Fearn, and settled at Lower Darby in Pennsylvania. He continued his missionary work, and in September 1741 he visited Long Island, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts, where he was 'attacked divers times by some of them [Presbyterians] on religious subjects' ('Journal of the Life', 63). Griffith conducted further missionary work around America before he returned to Britain. During his voyage he was captured by a privateer and taken to Spain, and later to France, before escaping to England in 1748. While in Britain he visited his mother and close relatives in Radnor, he travelled to Ireland, and then he went back to Wales, where he had 'several large, though serviceable meetings amongst Friends, my old neighbours and acquaintances; their hearts being tendered and some much affected' (ibid., 204). In May 1750 Griffith returned to America but, following the death of his wife, he returned to England again, with his daughter, and settled at Chelmsford. 
While at Chelmsford, Griffith met and married his second wife, Frances Wyatt, a Quaker minister, in January 1751. He continued his missionary visits around Britain, and in 1760 he helped to organize committees to visit Friends' meetings, which, coupled with his writings, prompted a revival in Quaker discipline. In July 1765 Griffith paid his last visit to America and attended large meetings of Friends in Pennsylvania. The following year he returned to England and, as a consequence of an asthmatic complaint, gave up his missionary work. On 17 June 1776 Griffith died, aged sixty-two, at Chelmsford and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground in the town on 23 June. He was survived by his wife. His most important works include 'Brief Remarks upon Sundry Important Subjects, &c.', published posthumously in 1764, and his autobiography, 'Journal of the Life, Travels and Labours in the Work of the Ministry of John Griffith', which was first published in 1779. 


@@@@@


doc= 68167


Jones, Herbert (1940-1982), army officer, was born in Putney on 14 May 1940, the eldest of three sons of Herbert Jones, artist (1888-1957), and his wife, Olwen Pritchard (1902-1990), nurse. He was educated at St Peter's School, Seaford (1948-53), and Eton College (1953-8) before going to the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, as an officer cadet in September 1958. In July 1960 he was commissioned into the Devon and Dorset regiment. On 20 June 1964 he married Sara de Upaugh ('b'. 1941), a secretary and later a magistrate. They had two sons: David ('b'. 1966) and Rupert ('b'. 1969). Since boyhood Jones had never wanted any career except the army and had developed an enthusiasm for all things military, including war gaming. He was also a keen sportsman with a passion for physical fitness. He rowed for Eton, sailed, skied, and enjoyed motor-racing while in the army. 
After five years with the Devon and Dorset regiment Jones was seconded to the 3rd battalion, the Parachute regiment, where he commanded the mortar platoon. The next fourteen years saw the normal sequence of regimental or staff appointments -- adjutant of his battalion, junior staff officer at the headquarters of the UK land forces, a student at the Camberley Staff College, company commander, brigade major in Northern Ireland (which earned him an MBE), and instructor at the School of Infantry, Warminster. Promoted lieutenant-colonel in June 1979 he took up a senior staff post back at UK land forces and was appointed OBE for his part in planning the introduction of a peace-keeping force into Zimbabwe. In April 1981 he achieved his ultimate ambition when he was appointed commanding officer of the 2nd battalion, the Parachute regiment -- '2 Para'. 
Jones, who disliked being called Herbert, preferring his nickname of H, moulded 2 Para into a formidable fighting unit with a zest for soldiering that mirrored his own. He was a fervent advocate of fitness and shooting, and was described as a person who did not recognize compromise. He was also an impatient man, quick to anger when thwarted. On exercises he was always to be found in front, often with the leading section, always pushing to keep things moving. On several such occasions, exercise umpires had ruled him 'dead'. There is no doubt that the way he subsequently died was typical of the man. 
When Britain decided to send an expeditionary force to retake the Falkland Islands in the south Atlantic, which had been invaded by Argentina in 1982, Jones abandoned a skiing holiday to rush to the Ministry of Defence to persuade the authorities that 2 Para must go. He succeeded; his battalion became part of the 3rd commando brigade, an elite formation under Brigadier Julian Thompson, Royal Marines. On 28 May 1982 Jones led 2 Para in an attack on the Argentinian position at Goose Green. It was the first land battle of the campaign, but one that Thompson had been ordered from London to carry out for political reasons -- against his professional advice. After a difficult 3000 metre night advance the battalion was held up in daylight by a strong enemy position on a ridge covering the settlement of Goose Green. Jones was concerned with the delay to A company, which was pinned down in a gorse gully. He went forward under fire to join them. For over an hour he tried to organize artillery and mortar fire support to get the attack moving, becoming increasingly frustrated when his efforts were unavailing. Finally, he stood up, yelled 'Follow me!', and dashed to his right up a re-entrant to try to get behind the enemy trenches. Unfortunately few heard his shout apart from his bodyguard, Sergeant Norman, who followed him round. Jones was shot from behind as he made a courageous solo charge on an enemy trench, dying soon afterwards. Within fifteen minutes the position was taken. For his gallantry and leadership Jones was awarded the Victoria Cross. 
Whether he was, at that moment, doing the job of a commanding officer is arguable, but there was no doubt as to the personal courage, disregard for danger, and forceful leadership that won Jones the Victoria Cross, which is kept in the National Army Museum, London. He is buried at Blue Beach military cemetery, Falkland Islands. 


@@@@@


doc= 68168


George White (fl. c.1665-1702), who entered the service of the East India Company as a young man and in the 1660s travelled to India accompanied by Constant Phaulkon, an adventurer from Cephalonia who at first acted as the older White's assistant. George White detached himself from the East India Company and worked as an independent trader. He was not strictly an 'interloper' as he did not encroach on the company's monopoly of trade with Europe, but sold his goods at ports from the Persian Gulf to Indo-China and established a good reputation in Siam. 


@@@@@


doc= 68169


Welsh, Dame (Ruth) Mary Eldridge (1896-1986), director of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force, was born on 2 August 1896 at 22 Slatey Road, Claughton, Birkenhead, one of two children of William Robert Dalzell, a medical practitioner, and his wife, Ruth Mary Frances Annie Elizabeth Goldsworth Kirkpatrick ('b'. 1872). She attended a local high school, but the First World War precluded attendance at a French finishing school. Instead she went to France in October 1918 as a driver in the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry, remaining until June 1919. 
On 2 October 1922 she married Squadron Leader William Lawrie Welsh (1891-1962) of the Royal Air Force, and in 1926 her only child, Michael, was born. She travelled widely with her husband's RAF postings, and also gained six years' business experience. When in 1937 her husband was promoted to the Air Council, she joined the Emergency Service, a body, set up in response to the growing German threat, to train women as officers in case of war. The 1938 Munich crisis precipitated the forming of the Auxiliary Territorial Service, for which she volunteered in December 1938. Shortly afterwards she was appointed senior commandant, with thirty-two London companies under her command. Welsh later recalled watching the women 'in dusty unromantic drill halls, drilling in high heels and tight skirts... I really did admire them' (Welsh, 12). 
When war broke out, Mary Welsh transferred in October 1939 to the newly formed Women's Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF), initially as squadron officer responsible for recruiting, then as staff officer to a London balloon group. In spring 1940 -- the eve of the battle of Britain -- she became senior WAAF officer to Fighter Command, where her husband described her, at the start, as 'looking like a hunted hare' (Welsh, 14). Nevertheless, by 1942 she was able triumphantly to outface a critic on the Marham committee inquiring into WAAF conditions. The strain of continual travel throughout the country necessitated three months' sick leave. After her husband's knighthood in 1941 she also became sensitive to accusations of nepotism in her career. 
Despite her misgivings, Mary Welsh was appointed to the newly created office of inspector-general WAAF, in December 1942. The post took her to commands up and down the country, where she had to break down a wall of suspicion and mistrust. However, being now experienced, conscientious, extremely smart in uniform, having an easy and approachable manner, and with a saving sense of humour, she proved to be very effective. Welsh thus became the natural choice as director of the WAAF, in succession to Air Chief Commandant Katherine Trefusis-Forbes, who was being seconded to special duties overseas. The latter kept her rank as senior officer, which was not achieved by Mary Welsh until August 1944. Nor did Welsh accept the post willingly, refusing it twice before it was finally gazetted on 4 October 1943. By this time she was in her forty-eighth year, tall and slim, with dark eyes and hair, and a husband head of the RAF delegation in Washington, DC. 
Plans were already afoot for airwomen to be posted overseas, a move bitterly resisted by the Air Ministry. In January 1944 a tri-service agreement settled shipping, conditions, and accommodation abroad for women. This in turn led to controversy on overseas warm-weather WAAF uniforms. The army could not understand why airwomen objected to wearing khaki, but khaki it became, until autumn 1945, when the director won her case. 
'Concern for women serving overseas was very real', Welsh later wrote (Beauman, 232); and her duties necessitated frequent inspections of units and stations at home and abroad. She was involved also in discussions about the continuation of women's services after the war, to provide a nucleus of trained women for expansion against future emergencies. As the war drew to a close, the director also had to consider demobilization arrangements for the WAAF, and was to oversee the gradual reduction of a force of 180,339 when she took over to about 32,590 when she left. She turned the new advisory council into a powerful instrument of administration, and gradually strengthened the director's role. The myriad of other matters with which she dealt included a general merging of messing, and sometimes living accommodation, for the WAAF and the RAF, the further extension of the duties of specialist officers and non-commissioned officers into administration and welfare, and the substitution in trades of WAAF for RAF (which was almost 100 per cent in mechanical transport and meteorology). 
By late 1946, aged fifty, tiring from the strain, often putting in a seventeen-hour day, and with her marriage falling apart, Mary Welsh asked to be relieved of her post. She was sometimes criticized for preferring the 'status quo' to reform, and being overinfluenced by her staff; but she had seen the WAAF through three momentous years covering the transition from war to peace, and under her the WAAF had settled down and matured. Welsh retired on 30 November 1946, being created a DBE that year. Her marriage was dissolved in October 1947. Later Dame Mary settled in Odiham, Hampshire, where she was secretary of the local British Legion and first president of the Odiham Society; in the latter role she helped to save the pest house, used during the great plague of 1665, from demolition. She died from bronchopneumonia aged eighty-nine on 25 June 1986, at 26 Fleet Road, Cove, Farnborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 68170


Grubb, Sarah (1756-1790), Quaker minister and author, was born on 20 June 1756 in York, the second of the five children of William Tuke (1732-1822), philanthropist and founder of the York Retreat, and his first wife, Elizabeth (1729-1760), daughter of John Hoyland of Woodhouse, Yorkshire. One of her brothers, Henry Tuke (1755-1814), also became a prominent Quaker minister. Following her mother's death, her father married Esther Maud (1727-1794). Sarah and her siblings were grateful to Esther for her tenderness and care for them and for the fact that they were treated no differently from their stepmother's own children. Aged sixteen, Sarah helped Esther care for the American Quaker John Woolman during his last illness. His example of resignation and faith made a great impression on her mind and she long remembered his words to her: 'My child, thou seems very kind to me, a poor creature. The Lord will reward you for it' ('Some Account', 3). Sarah first appeared in the ministry, after much hesitation and agonizing, in 1779 at the age of twenty-three. As she describes it, 'I ventured on my knees, and in a manner I believe scarcely intelligible, poured out a few petitions' (ibid., 13). Sarah at once embarked on local journeys in the ministry with her stepmother and other relations. In time these travels became extensive and a dominant part of her religious life. 
In 1782 Sarah married Robert Grubb (1743-1797) of Clonmel, co. Tipperary, who had lived for some time in York, and they settled at the village of Foston, 10 miles away. However, almost at once Sarah left on a visit to Scotland with Mary Proud, which she found 'a painful exercising time'. On her return she settled into a domestic life which involved frequent travel, sometimes with her husband, but also with female companions. In 1786 Sarah accompanied Rebecca Jones of Philadelphia on a visit to Wales, and in the following year went to Ireland, again with Rebecca Jones. 
Grubb also found time to act as clerk of the women's yearly meeting in London in both 1786 and 1787. During this period Sarah felt called to leave the security of York and her family, and in 1787 she and Robert moved to Ireland and settled near Clonmel. A year later they went with other Friends, including George and Sarah Dillwyn of America, to the Netherlands, Germany, and France. Although she had no children of her own, Sarah had decided views on education. She believed that children needed both discipline and respect and should be taught useful skills. In York in 1784 she had helped her stepmother to establish a school for girls, and when they moved to Ireland she and Robert founded Suir Island Girls' School at their home on the same principles. 
In 1790 Grubb, together with her husband and the Dillwyns, again travelled in the ministry on the continent. When Sarah returned she was physically exhausted and ill but, pausing only to visit her family in York for a few days, she went straight to Dublin for the Ireland half-yearly meeting to report on her travels to Friends. On returning home still weak and unwell she stayed only two weeks before travelling to Cork to attend the quarterly meeting. Here she collapsed and, after ten days' illness, died on 8 December 1790 at the age of thirty-four. She was buried four days later. Her journal, 'Some Account of the Life and Religious Labours of Sarah Grubb', was published in 1792 along with writings on religion and education, including 'Some Remarks on Christian Discipline' (1795) and 'A Serious Meditation' (n.d.). A collection of her correspondence appeared in 1848. Although she experienced spiritual struggles in her youth, once she had dedicated her life to the service of God, Sarah Grubb never spared herself, while remaining modest about her efforts. 'We have done little,' she told Irish friends at the end of her life, 'but the Lord is doing much' (Bevan, 58). 


@@@@@


doc= 68171


Hall, David (1683-1756), schoolmaster and Quaker minister, was born on 22 December 1683 at Skipton in Craven, West Riding of Yorkshire, the fourth of the five children of John Hall ('c'.1637-1719), tailor, innkeeper, and Quaker, and his wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1644-1725), daughter of Adam Payteffeild of Skipton. He was brought up within the dissenting network of first-generation Quakers who had experienced persecution. His own parents suffered during the 1680s. With easier times after 1689 his father organized the erection in 1693 of Skipton's Quaker meeting-house. Smallpox struck in the same year. Hall's two brothers had died in infancy; now his two sisters succumbed to the disease. He himself was incapacitated for five years, and to the end he 'could rarely walk steddily' ('A Collection of Testimonies', 1760, 328-31). Eventually he resumed at Ermysted's Grammar School, Skipton, and did well. 
In 1703, excluded from university by his dissent and unfit for a manual trade, Hall set up a school in his parents' home, which until then had been an inn. It had twelve rooms, with stabling and a smallholding. Here, with the meeting-house near by, he ran a boarding-school for Quaker boys for the next fifty years. Such schools were in demand by Friends. The number of pupils varied from more than forty to fewer than a dozen, 'many Friends from different parts of the nation sending their children' ('A Collection of Testimonies', 1760), including 'south-country boys' (Hall, 'Memoirs', 11). The annual fee was $8. The school's influence also spread through his young assistants or ushers, four of whom -- James Gough, Robert Proud, George Routh, and Abraham Shackleton -- became noted Quaker schoolmasters elsewhere. On 24 February 1717 Hall married Mary Storrs (1686-1717), a Quaker from Todmorden; she died during pregnancy on 10 October of that year. His second wife was Ann Foster ('bap'. 1698, died 1736), a Quaker from Rylstone, near Skipton, whom he married on 17 November 1725; the couple had nine children, three of whom reached adulthood. 
Hall's vocal ministry in meetings was welcomed as plain and simple. He had a talent for using his intimate 'Bible' knowledge, and from his early thirties he was a recognized minister. In 1736, retaining an apartment in the house, he put the school under the care of George and Elizabeth Routh. Soon after, on 8 July, Ann died. Hall had always travelled widely to Friends' meetings, and there now came five busy years of visiting, counselling, and speaking among Friends in Scotland, Ireland, and many parts of England. As was the custom he liked to be accompanied by a young Friend, maybe a former pupil, for whom it was a fine experience. He doubtless travelled on horseback; certainly his father had kept two riding horses. Other travelling Friends liked to call at the school and to attend the Skipton meeting. Such visits gave strength to the Society of Friends. 
A bent for teasing spiced the social morality in Hall's school rules. He wrote playful doggerel celebrating a Quaker anniversary at Preston and a whimsical letter recalling his visit to the London yearly meeting. In a pencil-drawn caricature of Hall a severe mouth is balanced by twinkling eyes. 
Hall's published works, written between 1738 and 1753, reveal his perception of the current state of the society. His life bridged what he saw as its inspired simplicity under persecution to its easier times when he felt Friends' conduct often fell short. So his messages spoke of their lifestyle, discussing standards of conduct for their varied roles of parent, employer, trader, servant, and child, and exploring the problems of disownment from membership, mere nominal membership, and marrying out or mixed marriage. Memoirs by him of his own and his father's lives, with most of his printed writings, were published in one volume in 1758, with a second edition in 1799. 
After the death of his second wife, Hall married again on 5 November 1740; his third wife was Deborah Atkinson, 'nee' Story (1705-1767), a Quaker originally coming from Preston Patrick, near Kendal, and the widow of Thomas Atkinson. Hall died at Skipton on 16 September 1756 and his body was interred in the burial-ground adjoining Skipton meeting-house. He was survived by his wife, who now returned to Kendal, where she remained until her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 68172


Hume, Sophia (1702/3-1774), Quaker minister and writer, was born in Charles Town, South Carolina, one of the two children of Henry Wigington (died 1722), deputy secretary of South Carolina, and his wife, Susanna, 'nee' Bayley (died 1733). Sophia's maternal grandmother was Mary Fisher, one of the first two Quakers to come to Massachusetts in 1656. On her arrival Fisher and her companion, Ann Austin, had suffered the indignity of having their books burnt and their bodies searched for 'witch-marks' before being banished from Massachusetts. Four years later, on a religious journey, Fisher met the young Sultan Mohammed IV, who was encamped near Adrianople. Unlike the Boston Calvinists he was moved by the visit and impressed by their spirit. One of the important early Quaker 'publishers of truth', Fisher's example and the events of her life had a lasting effect upon her granddaughter. Another influence on Sophia's early life was her father. Though her mother was a Friend, Henry and Susanna Wigington had been married according to the Anglican rite, and Sophia was educated to appreciate 'the pleasures and delusive amusements of this world'. 
In 1721 Sophia married Robert Hume (died 1737), a prominent Charles Town lawyer, landowner, and public official. A year later, when Sophia's father died, the couple inherited all his black slaves and 'all moneys due in the province'; as a result they became very wealthy. Sophia's husband died on 1 October 1737 and four years later, aged thirty-eight, Sophia turned her back on Anglicanism and her life as a rich landowner and joined the Society of Friends. Since there were very few Quakers in Charles Town she moved to London. 
Like her grandmother Mary Fisher, Sophia Hume was soon drawn to make a religious visit to her natal land, which she did in 1748, despite the fact that her family, friends, and two children -- Alexander and Susanna -- greatly disapproved of the step that she had taken. While in South Carolina she became convinced of the impossibility for her of accepting a 'pleasure-loving life made possible by slavery'. The result was what became her best-known work, 'An Exhortation to the Inhabitants of the Province of South Carolina', published in Philadelphia in 1748 by Benjamin Franklin and reprinted several times. According to the Quaker historian Rufus Jones the work: 'is a simple little book, with some chaff, but with some real wheat in it, and it gives a clear idea of the type of preaching which was heard in all the meetings of the South as the itinerant messenger came upon them. (Jones, 300-01)' It is said that the anti-slavery pioneer John Woolman (1720-1772) was on the committee of Philadelphia Friends to whom the 'Exhortation' was submitted. Like Woolman, Sophia believed that there was 'one truth on which all I have to say to you greatly depends, namely that 'all mankind' have within them a measure and manifestation of the Light, Spirit or Grace of God'. 
In Philadelphia, aside from Woolman, Sophia Hume came to know other noteworthy Friends; John Smith speaks of her often in his diary and she made Israel Pemberton's home her residence. She is also credited with an anonymous pamphlet on the practice of inoculation of smallpox, and if this is so it suggests that in her youth she 'languished under a great degree of infection from smallpox'. Ironically on her return to England, by 1772, she again encountered John Woolman, on his fateful journey that ended in York with his death from the disease. Doubtless the two had much to discuss concerning the slave trade, with Sophia having valuable experience of the situation in South Carolina, where large numbers of slaves were an important aspect of the plantation economy. In a letter of 7 July 1772 she said that she had 'great unity with Woolman' and that it was to her that he entrusted the final portions (the 'sea journey') of his remarkable 'Journal', with permission to revise and reorder his text. 
When Sophia Hume was in London in 1772 William Forster (1747-1824), a leading Quaker, described her as 'plain in dress as John Woolman for a man since her convincement'. For Rufus Jones she was 'a person of some refinement and culture, and a woman of very unusual religious experience' (Jones, 300). In addition to the 'Exhortation' she published several more religious essays, including 'A Caution to such as Observe Days and Times' ('c'.1763) and 'Extracts from Divers Antient Testimonies' (1766). She died suddenly, of apoplexy, on 26 January 1774 at White Hart Court, Gracechurch Street, London; she was buried at the Quaker burial-ground at Bunhill Fields. Her son, Alexander, was present but her daughter and son-in-law were in France at the time. William Forster said that the memorial meeting was 'the largest concourse of people I ever saw (at Gracechurch Street Meeting) except at Yearly Meeting' (testimony, RS Friends, Lond.). 


@@@@@


doc= 68173


Tallents, William Edward (1780-1837), political agent and lawyer, was born on 9 February 1780 and baptized at Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, on 31 August 1780, the youngest of the eight children (five sons and three daughters) of Philip Tallents (1741-1789), attorney, and Elizabeth Webster (1740-1827). He was articled to Samuel Allen, a solicitor in Newark, on 5 January 1796, and entered the firm of Godfrey and Tallents (established by his father with the influential Newark banker Edward Smith Godfrey) in 1801. 
Tallents married Elizabeth Tomlinson (1787-1850), one of the fourteen children of William Tomlinson and Elizabeth Broadhurst of Newark, on 13 October 1806. The couple established a family home at Cartergate in Newark and had seven children (three sons and four daughters). The eldest, Elizabeth (1807-1858), married into the Godfrey family. The youngest daughter, Mary Ann (1817-1839), married, on 24 January 1837, John Hartpole Lecky of Cullenwood House in Dublin. They had one child, William Edward Hartpole Lecky (1838-1903), the historian. 
Obituarists and admirers have often referred to Tallents as 'indefatigable' (see Heron, 234) in the range and capacity of his work. His leading place in Nottinghamshire (especially Newark) politics and society for over thirty years was secured by his association with Godfrey, personal capabilities, and, as critics put it, the 'possession of every... public appointment which this Town and District have the disposal of' ('Nottingham Journal'). Chief among these were Tallents's period as town clerk of Newark from 15 April 1806 to 3 May 1833 and his subsequent appointment as alderman; he also served as councillor (east ward) from 1 January 1836. He was deputy clerk of the peace for Nottinghamshire from February 1834. Many of Tallents's positions were assumed on his death by his eldest son, Godfrey Tallents (1812-1877). 
Tallents's services as a political agent were in continual demand from aristocrats and candidates; his appointment as land steward and political agent to the fourth duke of Newcastle on 26 April 1826 is the principal example. His role as superintendent of the family's substantial estate and electoral influence in the Newark constituency and (after 1832) south Nottinghamshire brought him into close working contact with successive MPs in the Newcastle interest, and in particular, from 1832 to 1837, with W. E. Gladstone. Tallents acted as Gladstone's counsellor and mentor in maintaining his often fragile relations with Godfrey and other leading Conservatives, represented in the Red Club at Newark. In the dispute over the publicans' bills arising from the 1832 election, Tallents sided with Gladstone against many of his colleagues: 'notwithstanding my near connection with some of the Parties... I cannot avoid seeing & deeply regretting the course they pursue' (Tallents to Lord Lincoln, 13 May 1835, Nottingham University, MS Ne C 11825). Gladstone himself found Tallents to be 'a cultivated & very agreeable man' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 3 Oct 1832) and, together with Newcastle, presented him with a pair of silver wine coolers for his dedicated service. On Tallents's death Newcastle stated that he had 'lost a real & valuable friend as well as a man upon whose judgment & ability I could confidently rely' (Nottingham University, MS Ne 2 F5, 24 Dec 1837). 
Although Tallents was most closely associated with defending Newcastle's power and influence in the period when it was threatened by a whig government (1830-34), his services were not confined by partisanship. He maintained a long-standing connection with the whig Yarborough family and superintended their electoral influence in Lincolnshire and at Great Grimsby (among whose members was Sir Robert Heron). Despite his local allegiance to Newcastle, he assisted Serjeant Thomas Wilde (Gladstone's opponent at Newark) in prosecuting the Swing rioters at Salisbury in December 1830, and worked with Wilde's agent, Charles Pearson, on electoral matters at Great Grimsby. Tallents was Brougham's choice in August 1831 as boundary commissioner for the 'Reform Bill', and Lord John Russell consulted him on municipal corporation reform in June 1835 (G. Tallents, diary, 2 June 1835). Despite Newcastle's chagrin, Tallents stated that he had 'always thought it better to take the helm out of the hands of those who would steer an evil course and man the Decks with those who can and will direct it for the good of Society' (Tallents to Newcastle, 27 July 1836, Nottinghamshire Archives, MS 3937). 
On 11 November 1835 Tallents purchased a London home at 26 Great George Street, Westminster, as a preparation for cultivating his national connections. It was there, on 22 December 1837, that he died from complaints associated with asthma, from which he had suffered for many years. He was buried in the family vault in the parish church at Newark-on-Trent (St Mary Magdalene) on 30 December. A tablet on the wall of the north chancel aisle records a tribute to Tallents's 'ability... integrity and... industry', qualities which are well reflected in his portrait by Thomas Barber. 


@@@@@


doc= 68174


Master, Sir Streynsham (1640-1724), administrator in India, was born on 28 October 1640, probably at the family home of East Langdon, near Deal, Kent, the thirteenth child and eighth son of the twenty children of Richard Master (1604-1669), landed gentleman, and his wife, Anne (1606-1705), daughter of Sir James Oxenden. Master was relatively well educated. At the age of eight he attended Mr Latham's school at Sutton, and in 1654 he was taught by a Mr Cullen and a Mr Brett. He went to Canterbury in 1655 to study under a Mr Powndall, and in the same year proceeded to London, where he was taught by Mr Thomas Fox. 
On 4 April 1656, at age fifteen, Master proceeded to India with his uncle and godfather George Oxenden, arriving at the East India Company's Surat factory (trading station) in November. In January 1659 Oxenden returned to England, leaving Streynsham under the charge of his brother Christopher Oxenden. That year Master was employed as cape-merchant on a voyage to the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea, returning to Surat in December. There, in January 1660, he was appointed a company factor, and was employed subsequently both at Surat and, from May to December 1662, at Ahmadabad. 
In 1668 Master was appointed warehouse keeper and a member of the Surat council, and in September 1668 he was one of the company's commissioners who received the charge of the island of Bombay from the king's officers. At Surat, where the company's accounts were in a state of confusion, Master devised a new, efficient system of bookkeeping that was subsequently adopted at other factories and 'had a commanding influence on the public accounts of the English in India for a long time afterwards' ('Diaries', 1.2). 
Later in 1668 Master sailed south to resettle the company's factors at Karwar and Calicut, where he narrowly escaped with his life during a Moplah riot. In 1664, and again in October 1670, he was involved in the defence of Surat from the attacks of the Maratha leader Shivaji. On Master's return to England in June 1672 he was awarded a gold medal by the company in recognition of his gallant defence of the factory during the 1670 attack. Soon after his arrival in England he purchased the estate of Wallett's Court, near Dover, and on 17 May 1674 he married Diana, daughter of Sir Thomas Bendyshe, bt, of Bumsted, Essex. However, she died later that same year. 
On 10 September 1675 Master was appointed to succeed Sir William Langhorne as agent and governor of Fort St George (Madras) when the latter's term of office expired in January 1677, until which time Master was to serve as second in council. Master sailed for India on 8 January 1676, and arrived at Fort St George on 7 July. His own proposals for the better administration and regulation of the company's factories were incorporated into his commission, and shortly after his arrival he set off again on a tour of inspection of the factories at Masulipatam and Bengal, not arriving back at Madras until 17 January 1677. When Langhorne returned to England at the end of that year Master formally succeeded him and made significant improvements in the administration at Madras. Perhaps his two most enduring accomplishments at Madras were the founding, in 1678, of the Anglican church of St Mary in the Fort, the first English church in India, and, secondly, the establishment in August 1683 of a court of judicature. 
In common with many other company employees at this time, Master engaged in considerable private trading. In particular, he dealt in diamonds, and built up a considerable fortune thereby. In 1679 he again visited Masulipatam, and on 1 August of that year embarked for a tour to Bengal. The extravagant nature of these tours was one reason, or perhaps excuse, for the court's subsequent condemnation of him. Indeed, there is evidence of a largely unwarranted conspiratorial opposition to Master within East India House, an opposition which even gained the support of the king at one time. As a consequence, Master was formally dismissed his post on 3 July 1681 and the agency transferred to William Gyfford. Master was permitted to remain at Madras one year longer in order to settle his affairs before returning to England a wealthy man. However, he was never able to recover the substantial sums of money which were left owing to him at Madras. In September 1682 the company filed a suit in chancery against him, and it was not until October 1691 that the case was settled out of court to Master's advantage. 
On 25 September 1690 he married, secondly, Elizabeth (died 1714), daughter of Richard Legh of Lyme, Cheshire. They had three children: Anne (1691-1788) ['see 'Coventry, Anne], Legh (1694-1750), and Streynsham (1697-1759). Although Master and his family resided mainly at their house in Red Lion Square, Holborn, London, in 1692 he also purchased the estate of Codnor Park, Derbyshire, and in 1698 he sold Wallett's Court and acquired Stanley Grange, near Morley, Derbyshire. Also in 1698 he was appointed one of the directors of the 'new' or 'English' East India Company, and on 14 December of that year -- at which time Master happened to be chairman of the court of directors -- he was knighted by King William at Kensington Palace. Master is also recorded as one of the trustees in the building of the church of St George the Martyr, Bloomsbury, London. 
Sir Streynsham Master died on 28 April 1724 at New Hall in Lancashire, and was buried in a chapel of Macclesfield church. As Henry Yule concluded, he 'was a worthy, religious, methodical, and liberal man, and one of strong family affection' ('Diary of William Hedges', 2.cclv). However, he was also clearly 'a strong man, who went his own way' ('Diaries', 1.129) and made enemies thereby. 


@@@@@


doc= 68175


Kinsey, John (1693-1750), politician and lawyer, was born in Philadelphia, the son of John Kinsey, politician and Quaker minister, and Sarah, 'nee' Stevens. Kinsey probably attended Philadelphia's Friends' public school until the family moved to Woodbridge, New Jersey, about 1703. Kinsey then began an apprenticeship with a joiner in New York. However, his 'Inquisitive disposition, and a Genius for something above his then employ' prompted him to study law, probably in Philadelphia with David Lloyd. He was admitted to the bar there in 1724 and to that at New Jersey in 1725, before settling in Woodbridge to practise law. On 9 September 1725 he married Mary Kearney, daughter of Philp Kearney of Philadelphia. During the 1720s and early 1730s he served as a legislator in the New Jersey assembly. He was named speaker of the house in 1730, a position formerly held by his father. In addition, he is often credited with preparing the first compilation of New Jersey laws in the year 1732. 
Kinsey moved to Philadelphia in 1730 and was immediately elected to the Pennsylvania legislature. He held seats concurrently in the Pennsylvania and New Jersey assemblies during the 1730s. In 1739 he obtained the position of speaker in the Pennsylvania house, which he retained, bar a short interlude, for the remainder of his life. Between 1738 and 1741 Kinsey also served as attorney-general and as chief justice of the supreme court of Pennsylvania (1743-50). In addition, he was named acting trustee of the Pennsylvania general loan office in 1739, another position which he held until his death. Named in 1737 as a commissioner to settle the boundary dispute between Maryland and Pennsylvania, he also served as a representative to the Albany Convention with the Six Nations in 1745. 
Alongside these offices, Kinsey was also a prominent member of the Philadelphia Quaker community. Between 1730 and 1750 he was the presiding clerk of the Philadelphia yearly meeting, the most important position within the Quaker denomination. As both chief clerk of the Friends' meeting and speaker of the Pennsylvania house, Kinsey had attained the highest leadership role in both of these institutions. He further served the Quakers as correspondent to the London meeting and overseer of the press. 
On 11 May 1750, while trying a case in Burlington before the New Jersey supreme court, Kinsey suffered what may have been a stroke. He died that evening and was buried two days later. It was later discovered that his estate owed $3000 to the general loan office, a sum -- fifteen times his salary as chief justice -- that he had taken for his own use. Disclosure of Kinsey's misappropriation of government finances came as a severe blow to the Quaker denomination, coming as it did after Friends had been warned in 1746 not to dishonour the community through corrupt business practices. Kinsey's posthumous reputation means that he has been invariably overlooked in histories of Quakerism in Philadelphia. More recently the work of Edwin B. Bronner and others has focused attention on Kinsey's contribution as one of the most significant Quaker political and religious leaders in colonial America. 


@@@@@


doc= 68176


Lancaster, Lydia (1683-1761), Quaker minister, was born on 8 March 1683 at Graithwaite, Lancashire, the seventh of the eight children of Thomas Rawlinson (died 1689) and Dorothy (1644-1737), only daughter of Thomas Hutton of Rampside. Brought up in a Quaker family Lydia described herself as one drawn to thoughts of God from infancy. When she was about seven years old she was moved to floods of tears by the ministry of a visiting Friend, and from the age of fourteen she struggled with the conviction that she was being called to be a minister herself. She resisted this calling for ten years -- a period which her contemporaries saw approvingly as a time when she grew in wisdom and experience but which she herself remembered as a 'long howling wilderness' of unfaithfulness ('Extracts from the Letters'). 
Soon after the beginning of her ministry, in 1708, Lydia began to travel, at first to local meetings and then, in 1710, as far as London. In 1712 she went to Ireland, in 1717 to Scotland, and in 1718 she visited America in the company of her brother Abraham's wife, Elizabeth Beck Rawlinson (1670-1750), and Thomas Chalkley, among several others. Lydia's travels, however, although undertaken under a sense of religious duty, were, as she says herself, 'sometimes pretty trying, not having such care taken at home in my absence as might have been desired' ('Extracts from the Letters'). She had married, on 21 January 1707, Bryan Lancaster (1686-1747), a tanner of Kendal. There were no children of the marriage and there are hints in contemporary records of sorrows and affliction, some of it possibly financial, brought upon Lydia by her 'nearest temporal connexion', her husband (testimony to Lydia Lancaster from Lancaster monthly meeting, 1762, Lancs. RO, Preston). Bryan Lancaster's name is conspicuous in its absence from Quaker records. In 1729 Lydia moved with her aged mother to Colthouse, near Hawkshead, a small rural settlement next to a Quaker meeting-house, but there is no mention of her husband on the removal certificate. Her mother died in 1737, and by 1743 Lydia was evidently living at Colthouse with her husband, who died in 1747. 
Lydia Lancaster's ministry was generally acknowledged to be expressive and powerful but her experience gave her another dimension for 'being instructed in sorrow she was favoured with a sympathizing heart and knew how to partake in the affliction of others' (testimony to Lydia Lancaster from Lancaster monthly meeting, 1762, Lancs. RO, Preston). Throughout her ministry Lydia was a staunch supporter of Quaker women's meetings for business at local level. In 1746 she put her name to a petition aimed at extending them to national level, although this was not accepted and no such body was set up until 1784. Lydia was not concerned with the equality of women as such but that they might be encouraged to take up their religious duties as much as the men were. In her local meetings Lydia, drawing on her own experience, was both stern and encouraging, 'particularly to the timorous and backward' (ibid.). She is remembered as always bidding farewell with a sort of blessing to those women who made the effort to come to women's meetings, and she continued to attend meetings herself right up to her last days. 
At the end of her life Lydia lived in Lancaster, free from financial worries and, she says, 'mostly alone, for that is what I most delight in and have done most of my time' ('Extracts from the Letters'). She still travelled in the ministry, taking long journeys in 1749 and in 1754. In 1760 she and Grace Chamber travelled together to Welsh yearly meeting, to Bath, Bristol, and to London. Lydia died on 30 May 1761 at Lancaster and was buried there in the Quaker burial-ground. Though she published nothing in her lifetime her influence continued. Many years after her death, in 1840, her family descendant and namesake, Lydia Ann Barclay, edited and published a selection of extracts from her letters, feeling that they might be of use to future generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 68177


Lloyd, David (1656-1731), lawyer and politician in America, was born at Manafon, Montgomeryshire, the son of Thomas Lloyd (1640-1694). Having left grammar school in the 1670s he trained under the infamous George Jeffreys. From the 1680s he was legal adviser to William Penn, at that time managing the colony of Pennsylvania, and he converted to Quakerism in 1692. Under Penn he was responsible for drawing up deeds, warrants, and sundry documents for the colony's purchasers. Having moved to Pennsylvania in 1686 he became the colony's first attorney-general. Although he held other offices throughout his career -- for instance as a member of the assembly and of the provincial council, and as clerk of the Philadelphia county court -- it was his superb legal abilities that were his making and his undoing. His aim to increase Pennsylvanian autonomy brought him into conflict with its deputy governors and, finally, with Penn. 
Although Lloyd remained in Pennsylvania for the rest of his life his prominence in the colony's politics involved him in imperial affairs. Elected to the general assembly in 1693, when the proprietorship of Pennsylvania was taken over by Benjamin Fletcher, he played a significant role in the review and negotiations to bring the colony's laws in line with English law. He was also at the forefront in writing a petition to William III protesting against Anglican attempts at overthrowing Quaker hegemony. In 1698 he emerged as the ablest defender against charges made by the surveyor-general, Edmund Randolph, that Pennsylvania was not enforcing the navigation laws and was, as a result, colluding with smuggling. Moreover he was accused by the vice-Admiralty judge Robert Quary of defying the order of the crown in open court and of having 'affronted his Majty in their open Court' by ridiculing the king's picture ('Papers of William Penn', 3.572). This last incident resulted in an order from the Board of Trade demanding the removal of the colony's deputy governor, William Markham, a justice of the peace, Anthony Morris, and particularly David Lloyd 'not only from the place of Attorney General, but from all public Imployments whatsoever' (ibid., 3.576-7). His removal embittered him against Penn, whom he blamed for not defending his fellow Quakers against the likes of Randolph and Quary. Earlier Lloyd had been responsible, as an assemblyman, for drafting a petition demanding changes in the land policy and the regulation of drinking-houses. He also drafted the new frame of government (1696) in an effort to diminish the power of the Philadelphia merchants, who were seen as a conduit for British control. However, from 1698 all Lloyd's efforts were directed against Penn, whom he accused of lying and of undermining the government of the colony, and he opposed Penn's efforts to sell the right of government to the crown. His opposition to Penn did not deter his re-election to the assembly, his election as its speaker, or his appointment as recorder for Philadelphia. His fight against Penn was given an added boost when he was recruited by the Ford family as their agent in their suit against the proprietor. The appointment gave Lloyd power to prohibit Penn from selling land and collecting quitrents, thus weakening the proprietor's bargaining position with the crown. 
Lloyd's fortunes changed when the 1710 elections resulted in his removal from government. Though he was elected to subsequent assemblies he no longer played as powerful a role in politics. Nevertheless he continued to promote Pennsylvania's government over British law. In 1725 he issued 'A Vindication of the Legislative Power', in which he criticized proprietary attempts to revive the role of the provincial council as a second chamber. It was also part of an ongoing attack against Penn's agent, James Logan, who condemned the unicameral assembly conceded by Penn in 1701. Logan accused Lloyd of being hypocritical in his legal judgments. He was not above compromising his defence of the colonial rights when he negotiated the passage of the 'Affirmation Act' through the assembly. In doing so he introduced English statutes enacting the death penalty for minor crimes. In turn Lloyd denounced Logan as 'an Evil Minister, and ungrateful Servant' ('Papers of William Penn', 3.502). 
Though Lloyd intended to retire from politics the feud with Logan and the critical issue of paper money saw him stand for office and returned as member for Chester county in 1725. By this time he was in his sixties. His last years were spent in a number of roles. He remained chief justice of Pennsylvania (to which he had been appointed in 1717) and participated in the state supreme court. At the same time he acted as recorder of Chester county. He kept his ties with the Society of Friends as an archivist for the Philadelphia yearly meeting, where he collected historical records. He also edited and promoted the publication of books from Europe. His encouragement in the literary sphere was recognized by the Baptist minister Abel Morgan, who dedicated the first Welsh concordance of the 'Bible' to him. Lloyd, who died at Chester, Pennsylvania, on 6 April 1731, was twice married. Details of his first wife, Sarah ('b'. 'c'.1661), are unknown; his second wife, Grace Growdon, whom he married in 1697, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 68179


Norris, Isaac (1701-1766), landowner and politician in America, was born on 3 December 1701 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, one of fourteen children of Isaac Norris (1671-1735), and his wife, Mary (1674-1748), daughter of Thomas Lloyd, president of the council of Pennsylvania. A lifelong resident of Philadelphia, he entered the Pennsylvania assembly at a pivotal time, when pacifist principles caused many Quakers to withdraw from active participation in politics. Norris's father was born in London but his grandparents moved to Jamaica in 1678 and were involved in the slave trade. After some doubts about this traffic the elder Isaac Norris moved to Philadelphia; there, if still ambivalent, he remained involved in the use of slaves and became an extremely successful and wealthy merchant, and one of the most extensive landowners in Pennsylvania. His marriage secured his place in the Quaker establishment. He built a splendid home, Fairhill, north of Philadelphia, and there he established an elegant lifestyle and a fine library. Next to James Logan, secretary to William Penn, he was the chief representative of Penn's interests in the Pennsylvanian colony and an executor of Penn's will. 
The younger Isaac Norris attended a Friends' school in Philadelphia but also had private tutoring, which meant that he had 'an excellent classical education' ('Norris, Isaac'). He could read and write French, Latin, and some Hebrew and, as a final polish to his education, he was sent to England in 1722 and later made a tour of Europe. Perhaps chastened by criticisms of his own conspicuous lifestyle, his father advised him: 'Thou must remember that the more frugal thou art the more will be thy stock... Come back plain. This will be a reputation to thee and recommend thee to the best and most sensible people' (Norris papers, letter-book, April 1719). 
On 6 June 1739 Norris married Sarah (died 1744), daughter of Penn's secretary James Logan, a union that further secured his own standing in the Philadelphia Quaker aristocracy. Sarah was an accomplished mistress of Fairhill, to which the couple moved in 1741; they had four children, of whom two daughters survived them. 
In political terms the period 1736 to 1756 was a troubled one that witnessed the rise of strong anti-proprietary feeling among the Friends. William Penn's successor as proprietor, Thomas Penn, managed his father's affairs from 1732 to 1741 but, as a tory and an Anglican, he was a bitter disappointment to the Quakers. In 1737 he violated the spirit of previous agreements with the Native Americans. Alienated by these and other actions, radical and conservative Friends joined forces to create a united political party -- the 'Quaker party' -- of which Isaac Norris emerged as a leader, with John Kinsey. The party, fiercely critical of the Penn family, embodied whig devotion to liberty and property. 
Like his father, Norris entered the Pennsylvania assembly as representative (from 1735) for Philadelphia county; he was also speaker from 1750 to 1764. These were years during which reform-minded Quakers such as John Woolman and John Churchman were worried about conspicuous Quaker affluence, some of it based on the slave trade. At the Philadelphia yearly meeting of 1758 Woolman began a process that involved Friends in the abolition of the trade. More troubling for commercially active Quakers like Norris was Friends' perfectionist attitude towards war and the defence of the colony. Caught between these two views, on 18 May 1755 Norris wrote to an English Friend that '[we] have very much Thrown our Disputes from being a Quaker cause to a Cause for Liberty' (Norris papers, letter-book). Like his father and father-in-law, James Logan, Norris was not a strict pacificist, being 'satisfied [that] the Law of Nature and perhaps the Christian system leaves us a right to defend ourselves as well against the Enemies who are within the reach of our Laws, as those who owe no subjection to them' (ibid.). 
Unlike his good friends James and Israel Pemberton (and many other Quakers), who resigned from the assembly because of their pacifist principles, Norris remained as speaker of the assembly until two years before his death. In this role he attempted to reconcile Quaker convictions with actions that most Friends considered warlike. Like his father he also steered clear of moves toward the abolition of slavery. In the end he remained the product of a family whose wealth had originated in slave commerce. 
Alongside his political career Norris, in common with his father-in-law, was a noted book collector. Following his wife's death in 1744 he found consolation in the development of his library; in 1750-1, for example, he purchased 335 volumes, many bought from the London bookseller Thomas Osborne. Norris died on 13 July 1766 at Fairhill, of heart failure, and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground in Philadelphia. By the end of the decade his library had become the sole property of his last surviving daughter, Mary, who in 1770 married John Dickinson, the benefactor of Benjamin Rush's Dickinson College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania. Housed at Fairhill the collection, described by John Adams as 'very grand' (Korey, 8), survived the destruction of Norris's residence by the British in 1777. In 1784 some 1902 titles in 1750 volumes were donated by Mary Dickinson to the college that bore her married name. This gift, which formed only part of Norris's total collection, comprised a large number of heavily annotated Latin and French texts; it remains a testimony to the broad intellectual interests, energy, and wealth of an influential Quaker politician and businessman. 


@@@@@


doc= 68180


Pemberton, Israel (1715-1779), merchant and politician in America, was born on 19 May 1715 in Philadelphia, the first son of Israel Pemberton and his wife, Rachel, daughter of Charles Read of Burlington, New Jersey. The elder Israel was a leading Philadelphia merchant, Pennsylvania legislator, and Quaker meeting clerk. Rachel Pemberton was active in the Philadelphia women's meeting. Israel junior's grandparents Phineas and Phoebe Pemberton were among the original Quaker founders of Pennsylvania. 
Brought up to strict Quaker principles, Israel attended the Friends' school in Philadelphia and displayed aptitudes for learning and leadership at an early age. He also revealed an impetuous nature. In 1735 the tall, slender, dark-haired, blue-eyed youth went to England to represent his father's business. Pemberton engaged in some risky mercantile practices, and received his father's censure for buying too many goods on credit. Just as troubling to his family, Pemberton's rash courtship violated Quaker etiquette. Before leaving for England, Israel had become close to Sarah Kirkbride of Pennsbury in Bucks county. But when Israel left without making an official proposal, another Quaker, Anthony Morris, pursued Kirkbride's hand. Instead of waiting for Kirkbride officially to turn Morris down, Pemberton continued his own pursuit and caused a family feud that culminated in Morris's claim that he had been too 'free' with Kirkbride for her to be 'fit for anyone else' (Thayer, 8). Ultimately the controversy did not irreparably tarnish Israel's and Sarah's standing, for on 30 March 1737 the Philadelphia meeting approved and oversaw their marriage. 
By 1745 Pemberton had become a leading Philadelphia merchant. His ships transported flour, rice, tobacco, sugar, molasses, rum, butter, other foodstuffs, lumber, other wood products, cloth, and even servants on transatlantic circuits that made stops in the British Isles, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Italy, the Madeira Islands, the middle colonies, the Chesapeake, South Carolina, Georgia, and the West Indies. In his early days as a merchant, despite his Quaker commitment to pacifism, Pemberton supplied naval fleets and used military escorts. He also developed schemes to avoid or minimize insurance payments to British and Dutch bankers. Although Pemberton continued to trade, by the 1750s he had turned his attention away from transatlantic shipping and instead concentrated on land and the financial markets. 
Pemberton lived in the most fashionable district in Philadelphia on the corner of Chestnut and Third streets, occupying a large brick building that was noted for its carefully manicured garden. He also owned several other estates near Philadelphia, including a country home in New Jersey called Bolton. His wife, Sarah, died in 1746, leaving him with seven children. Shortly thereafter, in 1747, Pemberton married the twice-widowed, older, and wealthy Mary Jordan, 'nee' Stanbury (died 1778). Like his first marriage, this one caused some grumbling in the Quaker community when Samuel Jordan, Mary's brother-in-law, complained that the couple had been too hasty. But again, as with his first marriage, the Quaker meeting approved the wedding. 
Pemberton was very active in Philadelphia's civic affairs and especially the Quaker church. He supported the Library Company, bringing in books, serving briefly as president, and revising the charter. Pemberton was appointed clerk of the Friends' public school in 1743 and managed its finances until his death. In 1752 Pemberton helped found the Pennsylvania Hospital and acted as a manager throughout his life. He also joined the Union Fire Company and made many contributions to private charity. His greatest influence came as a pilot of the Philadelphia Quaker meeting. In this capacity Pemberton corresponded with British Quakers and accompanied visiting ministers on their itinerant tours of America. Pemberton also served as an overseer of the press in 1743 and, most significantly, as the pre-eminent clerk of the Philadelphia yearly meeting from 1750 to 1759. 
Pemberton was known as a powerful and contentious political leader. He briefly served as a Pennsylvania assemblyman in 1750, but was not re-elected. His political enemies in the colony derisively called him the 'King of the Quakers', and during the American War of Independence John Adams described him as an 'artful Jesuit' who would try to 'break up Congress' (Thayer, 233, 212). Pemberton's biographer, Theodore Thayer, wrote that Pemberton's 'leadership and prominence rest[ed] largely upon the fact that he lacked so many of the qualities of a good Quaker' (ibid., 233). Pemberton did indeed fight hard, and he did so to defend many Quaker principles and interests. 
Most notably, during the French and Indian War Pemberton argued that instead of battling Indians, British Americans should attempt to pacify them through diplomatic agreements. To this end Pemberton protested military tax bills, petitioned government officials, invited Indians to his home, advised Delawares during treaty proceedings, and conferred with colonial governors, Indian agents, and even generals. He helped Delaware leader Teedyuscung accuse Pennsylvania's proprietors of defrauding them. When Pennsylvania's Governor Denny tried to curb Quaker participation at a treaty conference, Pemberton threatened to publish Lord Halifax's letter that referred to Indians as 'foreign princes & an Independent people' (Thayer, 139). Pemberton also founded the Friendly Association for Regaining and Preserving Peace with the Indians by Pacific Measures. This association appealed to Quakers and other pacifist groups to donate money, which was used to conduct Indian diplomacy, buy Indian gifts, support displaced Pennsylvanians, and ransom Pennsylvanian captives. Pemberton also wanted to use the contributions to stock a frontier post at Fort Pitt, which he hoped would enable him to trade fairly with Ohio valley Indians and eliminate French competition. But other trustees in the friendly association vetoed this profit-making venture, and Pemberton set up the business without them. 
Pemberton was also a leader in the early abolitionist movement. In 1773 he unsuccessfully sued to free an enslaved Indian woman and her children. This incident led to the formation of Philadelphia's first abolition society, the Society for the Relief of Free Negroes unlawfully held in Bondage, in 1775. In addition, Pemberton paid visits to individual Quaker slave-owners to urge them to free their slaves. 
During the 1760s and 1770s, Pemberton remained active in Quaker politics, though his brother James became the primary clerk of the Philadelphia meeting. In the 1760s he led a faction that opposed Benjamin Franklin's plan to remove the proprietary government and make Pennsylvania a royal colony. In the 1770s Pemberton urged Quakers to avoid all revolutionary associations, committees, and militias. In September 1777, as British armies closed in on Philadelphia during the revolutionary war, American authorities felt that the neutral Quakers might turn loyalist and exiled several of the most renowned leaders, including Israel Pemberton and his two brothers. The prisoners were escorted to and held in Winchester, Virginia, where three of the exiles died. Pemberton wrote many petitions arguing that they had not been duly charged. In addition he authored the pamphlet 'An Address to the People of Pennsylvania' (1777), which recounted the Quaker side of the story. Pemberton asked his wife, Mary, secretly to distribute the pamphlet, which was also published in German. In April 1778 Mary (now seventy-five) and three other wives crossed to the American side, met George Washington, and petitioned the executive council to release their husbands. The council informed them that their husbands had been freed the previous day. 
Pemberton returned to find his estates ransacked by British soldiers. Inflation and the gambling of his son Joseph further damaged his financial situation and he had to sell off much of his property. In October 1778 his wife died, and Pemberton's death followed soon after, in April 1779. His brother John said Israel had never recovered from the ordeal of exile. His funeral in Philadelphia was reportedly the largest in memory and attended by people of all denominations. Despite his losses during the war, Pemberton died a wealthy man. Anthony Benezet complained that he had willed his fortune of $60,000-70,000 to his profligate children and had left nothing to charity. 


@@@@@


doc= 68181


Shackleton, Abraham (1752-1818), schoolmaster and theologian, was born on 8 December 1752 at Ballitore, co. Kildare, the eldest son of the four children of the Quaker Richard Shackleton (1726-1792) ['see under 'Shackleton, Abraham (1696-1771)], master of Ballitore School, and his first wife, Elizabeth Fuller (1726-1754), who died when Abraham was two years old. He was brought up by his stepmother, Elizabeth Carleton (1726-1804) of Dublin, who married his father in 1755; they had four further children, including the writer Mary Leadbeater (1758-1826), chronicler of Ballitore village. 
Shackleton's home, Ballitore (population 'c'.400), was a Quaker settlement unique in Europe. Founded in the late seventeenth century and situated in a fertile valley 40 miles south of Dublin, it was a prosperous rural community with its meeting-house (1709), gardens, and orchards. The Shackletons were leading members of the community, being farmers, millers, and owners of the famous school founded in 1726 by Abraham's Yorkshire-born grandfather Abraham Shackleton (1696-1771), which offered a liberal education to boy boarders from all religious backgrounds; it included among its alumni the statesman Edmund Burke, the United Irishman James Napper Tandy, and in the nineteenth century Cardinal Paul Cullen. Shackleton's father, Richard, a classical scholar, poet, and letter-writer, was a lifelong friend of Burke and an occasional associate of his circle in London; his stepmother, Elizabeth, the school matron, was an adventurous gardener who corresponded with the Quaker plant collector John Fothergill. 
Shackleton entered Ballitore School in 1756. He too was a classical scholar and also a keen naturalist and amateur astronomer. He became a teacher and succeeded his father as master in 1779. On 23 February of the same year he married Lydia Mellor (1749-1829), an English schoolmaster's daughter from Edenderry, King's county, with whom he had nine children. He was an outspoken, deeply caring man but also a romantic; he rebuilt the family bolting mill as a castle in 1791 and kept a camel next door in the yard of his home, Griesebank. 
Shackleton was a passionate anti-slavery campaigner and pacifist, and he gave up the use of tea, sugar, and all other produce of slave labour in his personal effort to promote the cause of abolition. During the Irish rising of 1798, when Ballitore was occupied by rebel forces, he refused at gunpoint, as a pacifist, to join them, and instead made his house a refuge for the injured of both sides. When the army regained control he negotiated for leniency on behalf of the rebels. His abhorrence of war led him in 1786 to stop teaching certain Latin authors in his school even though this meant a drop in pupil numbers (Latin was then a requirement for university entrance) and eventually the school was forced to close down temporarily in 1801. As his fellow liberal John Hancock wrote, 'to be in extremes was the error of this worthy man' (Hancock, 1). Thereafter he was a successful miller and a farmer given to agricultural improvement. 
For many years Shackleton was an esteemed and active Quaker and he was still young when appointed an elder. However, he developed rationalist opinions about the 'Bible' and matters of faith, similar to other Enlightenment thinkers. While admiring the poetical parts of the 'Old Testament' he rejected many of its historical sections, especially that concerning the Canaanite wars. He similarly cherished the sublime morality taught by Christ but rejected the doctrine of the Trinity, expressing his views vigorously both in speech and in writing. He became identified with the New Lights, a group of liberal Quakers in Ulster who were in open rebellion against the Quaker discipline, particularly the marriage regulations. The movement spread, with Shackleton's help, to Leinster, and he was regarded as a particularly dangerous dissident because of his moral and intellectual eminence. His rebellious stand was reinforced by contact with the American Hannah Barnard, a progressive Quaker minister who was in Ireland between 1798 and 1800, and fierce opposition arose against them spearheaded by another visiting American Quaker, the evangelical David Sands, who 'like too many of his countrymen was fond of pushing the exercise of Church power to the uttermost extreme' ('Records and Collections', 305). Shackleton, the friend of religious and civil liberty, became caught between the opposing forces of Enlightenment on the one hand and of evangelicalism and reaction on the other, and he was disowned by the Carlow monthly meeting in 1801. The wholesale resignations and disownments from the Society of Friends at this time became known as the Irish separation, and the society, considerably weakened by the loss of its spiritual and intellectual elite, fell into a period of stagnation. Shackleton and his fellow liberal John Bewley accompanied Hannah Barnard to England and acted as her counsellors during her dispute with the Quakers in London, but her progress was blocked and she returned to America taking the seeds of discord with her, which in due course led to the Hicksite separation of 1827-8. 
Shackleton, who regretted the consequences of the schism, thereafter lived separate from all societies, writing great numbers of essays on philanthropic subjects, which occasionally appeared in periodicals; he also published a volume of poetry, 'The Court of Apollo' (1815). Shackleton was intelligent and animated, with a light, well-proportioned physique. He died at home on 2 August 1818 after a short but painful illness, secure in his belief that 'God is Love', and, although a non-member, he was buried two days later in the Quaker burial-ground at Ballitore. He was survived by his wife, who died on 5 February 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 68185


Stephenson, Sarah (1738-1802), Quaker minister and autobiographer, was born in Whitehaven, Cumberland, the elder daughter and first of three children of Daniel Stephenson and Sarah Storrs. The only source of information about her life, 'Memoirs of the Life and Travels in the Service of the Gospel of Sarah Stephenson' (1807), was assembled from 'detached pieces' ('Memoirs', vi) by a male editor who, aware of 'the want of exactness in arrangement', cautions the reader not to expect a 'connected narration' (ibid., 25). Her father was a prosperous merchant and the family lived a genteel existence until financial losses forced them to separate. For seven years Stephenson lived with a maternal aunt, Hannah Corbyn, in Worcester; she recalled how the Quaker Elizabeth Ashbridge had visited and disapproved of a ribbon in her hair. At her father's request she was reunited with her sister and brother in Douglas, on the Isle of Man; she was disappointed to find two female Quaker visitors to the island 'playing at cards' (ibid., 9). Her father died while she was in Liverpool, where she had 'a prospect of the awful service of ministry' (ibid., 13). 
After her cousin Katherine Fry's marriage to Edward Jeffreys, Stephenson accompanied the couple to their new home at or near Melksham, in Wiltshire. In 1767, at the age of twenty-nine, she first served as a public minister at Worcester. The bulk of 'Memoirs' is taken up with the itinerary of her visits and ministries, first in her native county of Cumberland, then in Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall. Despite periods of sickness and dejection she was 'an indefatigable laborer' ('Memoirs', 171) and visited Ireland and Scotland twice. In 1801 she answered the call to travel with her cousin Mary Jeffreys to North America, recording her surprise 'that such a poor creature should be called to service of such magnitude' (ibid., 173). The sixty-three-year-old Stephenson recounted the hot weather and the inconvenience of mosquitoes in Long Island. Having attended Quaker meetings in Flushing, Westbury, Newtown, Plainfield, Stoneybrook, and Trenton, and noting that 'she was but 'where' and 'what' she ought to be' (ibid., 201), she died in Philadelphia on 26 April 1802. 


@@@@@


doc= 68186


Wilson, Rachel (1720-1775), Quaker minister, was born in Highgate, Kendal, in Westmorland on 8 April 1720. In a family of girls she was the second child of John Wilson (1692-1752), a tanner, and his wife, Deborah, 'nee' Wilson (1687-1754), the daughter of a tanner of Stramongate, also in Kendal. By about 1739, when Rachel was eighteen, she was already acknowledged as a minister. On 18 February 1740 she married, in the Friends' meeting-house, Kendal, a fellow Quaker Isaac Wilson (1715-1785), who was a shearman dyer in that town. They lived at 21 Stramongate, Kendal, and had seven daughters and three sons. Despite the demands of her household and a large family Rachel not only shared the ministry in Kendal and district but also travelled widely in the British Isles. A little journal, written in her 'scrawly hand and with extraordinarily phonetic spelling' (Somervell, 30), gives the bare details of a long journey she made in 1744-5. Accompanied by her young friend Jane Rowlandson she visited many towns throughout England and Wales. After about nine months the two women returned home suddenly, possibly on hearing of an expected march southward by Charles Edward Stuart, the Jacobite Young Pretender. At all events, when his officers were passing through Kendal they were quartered at Isaac and Rachel's house. 
It was probably in 1765 that Rachel held several public meetings in Bristol, one of which was attended by George Whitefield, who was much impressed. The next morning they met and conversed, and parted on terms of mutual respect. Rachel is best known, however, for a visit she made to American Friends. Having set sail in August 1768 the ship cast anchor in Delaware Bay on 14 October. Travelling almost entirely on horseback Rachel covered nearly 2000 miles through imperfectly cleared districts in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Virginia, North and South Carolina, New York, and New England. Her simple narrative vividly conveys the toil and occasional peril encountered in passing through dense forests, in fording deep rivers, and in many other hardships. When she arrived in Philadelphia in 1768 she was, according to a contemporary, 'a remarkably interesting and eloquent speaker... much admired by people of all classes' ('The Friend'). Among others she met Deborah Franklin, the wife of Benjamin Franklin, and the Franklin children. 
In the autumn of 1769 Rachel attended Philadelphia's yearly meeting. On rising to speak about herself she suddenly felt compelled to address words of encouragement to the prominent Quaker John Woolman, who was then deeply concerned about his impending departure for the West Indies. She also gave the elders solid advice; she compared them to 'the golden snuffers under the law', which helped the light to burn 'clearer and brighter', although 'some were so fond of snuffing, that they... wasted the life of the Candle, and had sometimes put it out' ('Bulletin of the Friends' Historical Society of Philadelphia'). On 20 May 1769 fifty-one students of Princeton University wrote to Rachel asking her to preach to them; the ensuing meeting was so crowded that many had to stand. She also visited Rhode Island and helped to settle a long-standing dispute which had brought discredit to the Society of Friends. Moses Brown (1738-1836), the Quaker benefactor of Brown University, paid warm tribute to 'her wise and discreet management and influence' (Somervell, 62). 
Rachel Wilson arrived back in England on 10 December 1769. In 1772 Woolman visited Rachel's family in Kendal during her absence, but he wrote to her on 30 August of that year. In 1774 her health began to fail although she could still attend a number of meetings. On 4 February 1775, while on a visit to London, she was taken seriously ill at the house of Richard Chester in Stoke Newington. She died there on 18 March. On 23 March a meeting was held in Devonshire House, after which she was buried at Bunhill Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 68189


Baillie, Charles William (1844-1899), inventor of the Baillie sounder and marine meteorologist, was born in Greenwich, Kent, the eldest son of Henry Robert Baillie (1808/9-1882), a master of the nautical school in Greenwich, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Haselar. He entered the Royal Navy in 1859, being promoted in 1870 to navigating lieutenant and first-class surveyor. He was serving on HMS 'Sylvia' in the China seas when he devised the deep-sea sounder that was to bear his name. There were several types of such sounders employed for hydrography; in ideal conditions a weighted tube was sent down, the weight caused the tube to detach when the device reached the bottom, and the tube, containing a sample of the sea bed, was hauled in, but in practice the operation was often a failure. Baillie sent a model and drawings to the hydrographer of the navy; in June 1873 the first example was made at Chatham Dockyard, and others were then sent out to HMS 'Challenger', then on her circumnavigation. The Baillie sounder was far sturdier and heavier than its predecessors; it was able to function correctly in the deepest waters encountered by 'Challenger', and penetrated into soft sediments to capture a long core before slipping the iron weights and being hauled in. 
In 1870 plans had been laid to establish a Japanese navy modelled on that of Britain. The following year a number of young Japanese officers went aboard 'Sylvia' to learn about surveying, and in 1873 Baillie took employment at the Imperial Naval College, Hokei, being appointed naval director in 1877. Before leaving Britain he had married Helen Mary Sargent ('b'. 1848/9), born in Bermuda. Their eldest daughter was born in Brixham, their next three children were born in Japan, and a son was born in Greenwich after their return. Baillie retired from the Royal Navy in 1878 and resigned his college directorship in 1879. 
During these years Baillie did not lose sight of his sounder, and in July 1874 he wrote to the hydrographer to ask about its performance. The department responded in August in its usual verbose style, 'The sounding machine known by Mr Baillie's name... has been very successfully used in the 'Challenger' and therefore if their Lordships so approve, Mr Baillie's question might be answered in the affirmative' (TNA: PRO, HO, MB19, p. 72). Thus encouraged, Baillie wrote in October asking for a reward for his invention, which had not been patented. He was awarded 30 guineas, the hydrographer adding, 'Navigating Lt Baillie's invention is one of the most simple and efficient that has yet been made in connection with disengaging the sinker in deep sea sounding. It is the machine now used in all our surveying ships and throughout a three years' trial in the 'Challenger' it has not once been found wanting, and it has been selected by the German and Norwegian governments for deep sea exploration. (ibid., p. 521)' Baillie was back in England by July 1879 and was recruited as an assistant in the marine department of the meteorological council, at an annual salary of $200. His first task was to continue and complete the study of sea temperatures and currents of the Pacific Ocean, as reported by ships' captains. In March 1888 he succeeded Henry Toynbee as marine superintendent, with a salary of $350. In February 1892 he was working on charts of the Red Sea and proposing a new method of depicting wind frequency, speed, and direction. He then dealt with similar charts of the Indian Ocean, and by June 1899 was submitting specimen charts of the south Atlantic. 
In July 1899 Baillie's son Conyers Baillie wrote to the council to announce his father's sudden death at Albion Street, Broadstairs, on 24 June 1899. He was buried in the Royal Naval cemetery at Greenwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 68190


Amy, Sir John (d. 1621), civil lawyer, was the sixth son of John Amye (died 1589), yeoman, of Great Abington, Cambridgeshire, and Joan, daughter of Nicholas Smith of Walden, Essex. He matriculated at Clare College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1564 and received the degrees of BA in 1568, MA in 1571, and LLD in 1583. He was admitted as an advocate in the court of arches on 13 October 1585, and on 3 October 1590 he entered the college of civilians at Doctors' Commons in London. In that same year he was also made an honorary member of Gray's Inn. Amy became one of the most active civil lawyers of his generation, practising in all the London ecclesiastical and admiralty courts. In 1590 he joined seven of his fellow civilians in writing 'Of oaths in ecclesiastical courts' (LPL, MS 2004, fol. 65). One of the most significant cases in which Amy participated was the process for proving the marriage of Richard Sackville and Anne Clifford in the court of arches in 1609. He also served as a master in chancery from 1597 until his death and in that capacity defended the right of clients to sue for legacies in the court of chancery rather than in the ecclesiastical courts. Between 1609 and 1619 he was appointed to various commissions for admiralty criminal causes and commissions for policies and assurances, and in 1620 he was made a member of the court of high commission. He served frequently as a commissioner on the high court of delegates. Between 1605 and 1621 he held the position of chancellor of Worcester diocese, and by virtue of that appointment he was named to the Worcestershire commission of the peace in 1608. 
Amy's career illustrates the upward social mobility that the most active career civilians were capable of achieving at a time when many of his colleagues were complaining about the limited opportunities they had for making a living. Amy had begun his career with a patrimony of $200, but he was successful enough to acquire a substantial income and increased social status. He was able to secure a grant of arms in 1593, eight years after he began to practise in the ecclesiastical courts. He was knighted in 1619. Consequently he leased lands in Great Abington, reinforcing his connection to this locality. Amy died at the beginning of June 1621 and was buried in St Gregory, London, on the 3rd. By the terms of his will, which was proved on 5 June 1621, he appointed his wife, Elizabeth, his executor and made bequests to their son Edward and their other children, including their daughter Elizabeth, to whom he had given a sufficient portion in marriage. He also left bequests to Clare College and Doctors' Commons. 


@@@@@


doc= 68191


William Aubrey (1562-1626), second son of Richard Aubrey of Abercynrig in Brecknockshire, followed his illustrious relative into the civil law. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, on 20 November 1581, and graduated BA (22 January 1583) and MA (20 May 1586). He graduated BCL and DCL on 9 July 1597, having been proctor for the year commencing 26 April 1593. Admitted an advocate of the court of arches in 1599, he did not become a full member of Doctors' Commons until 1611, remaining in practice until 1622. Elected MP for Cardigan in 1601, he never took his seat owing to a dispute concerning the election. He was a commissioner for criminal causes in admiralty in Cornwall (1601), south-west Wales (1609), and Middlesex (1614), and a commissioner for piracy in London (1614) and Carmarthen (1616). A JP for Brecon, and chancellor of St David's (1614-26), he married twice, the second time in 1611, his second wife being Anne Bailey, a gentleman's widow of Broxbourne in Hertfordshire where they subsequently lived. He died in 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 68192


Bird, Sir William (1560/61-1624), civil lawyer, was the second son of William Bird, gentleman, of Saffron Walden, Essex, and Maria, daughter of John Woodhall, also of Walden; Bird was born in Walden. He matriculated at All Souls College, Oxford, on 28 November 1581, aged twenty, having become a fellow in 1578. He devoted himself to the study of the civil law, receiving the degrees of BCL in 1583 and DCL in 1588. He was admitted as an advocate of the arches on 27 April 1589 and became a member of Doctors' Commons on 14 October 1590. His early career was spent mainly at Oxford, where he became acting vice-chancellor of the university in 1591 and dean of All Souls in 1593. In 1597 he became more active in the London courts, especially the court of admiralty, where he practised until 1615, and the court of delegates, where he served frequently until 1622. In 1604 he resigned his fellowship at All Souls and took up residence at Doctors' Commons. In 1608 he succeeded Thomas Crompton DCL as MP for the University of Oxford. Bird represented the civil lawyers at the conference with the common law judges concerning prohibitions in 1611, and in the same year he was appointed judge of the prerogative court of Canterbury, together with Sir John Bennet. Bird succeeded to that post by himself in 1622, after Bennet was prosecuted for corruption. In 1615 Bird defended Samuel Pallachia against a $3000 suit brought by the count of Gondomar, the Spanish ambassador. Bird claimed that his client, who had been accused of being an impostor, was a public minister of the king of Barbary and deserved the same respect as the Spanish ambassador. In 1617 he and Sir Edward Conway were sent to survey Jersey, hold a general muster, and inquire into the abuses and defects of its martial and civil government. They also reported on ecclesiastical government, indicating that the ministers of the twelve parishes on the island, which followed the form and discipline of the Reformed churches of France, were ready for conformity with England. The laity, however, according to Bird and Conway, feared the assertion of ecclesiastical authority and the formalities of a law unknown to them. 
Bird was knighted on 22 March 1617. He reached the high point of his career with his appointment as dean of the court of arches on 23 June 1618. Like many civil lawyers, Bird also served as a master in chancery and in that capacity he and three others were accused in the parliament of 1621 of taking improper fees against the terms of the statute of 1 Jac. c. 10. Bird and his colleagues argued that the intent of the statute was not to deprive the masters of their fees. Bird's last judicial appointment was as a member of the high commission in 1620. 
Bird held a house in Walthamstow, Essex, in the right of his wife, Jane, as well as the rectory of Ickleton, Cambridgeshire. Although he had been appointed JP for Essex in 1603, his service as master in chancery and judge of two of the courts of the archbishop of Canterbury allowed him to spend only a few weeks in the year in his home county. In 1623 he petitioned Conway, now secretary of state, for exemption from his duty to show his horse and armour at the county muster. Bird was buried on 5 September 1624 in Christ Church, Newgate, London. By the terms of a signed testament he bequeathed the lease of his house to his wife, who received a renewal of his grant to the rectory of Ickleton in November. He and his wife did not have any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 68193


Crompton, Sir Thomas (1558-1609), civil lawyer, was born in London, the second son of William Crompton (died in or before 1577), a London mercer who had purchased lands in London, Staffordshire, and Kent, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Boughton, of Mardyke, in Essex. He may have attended school in Shrewsbury. The family's landed property was left to his elder brother, William, but Thomas received an annuity of $20 which he used to pay his way through Oxford, where he entered St Alban Hall in 1577. Having graduated BA (1579) and MA (1582), his grace for the degree of DCL (1584) was refused on the grounds of 'suspected backwardness in religion'. Five years later, admitting that he had earlier not been 'so well settled' as he should have been, he was now willing to take the oath of supremacy and to conform to the established church, and was allowed to proceed both BCL and DCL. In the same year, 1589, he married Barbara Hudson of Yorkshire. 
Crompton entered Doctors' Commons and over the next twenty years his name figures in a wide range of administrative and judicial records. James I on one occasion said that he was as good a man as Sir Edward Coke. Expert in maritime law, and proficient in languages, he served both Elizabeth and James as advocate for foreign causes in the admiralty court. He accompanied Cecil to France in 1598 and acted for him in cases involving piracy and shipping disputes. Crompton also specialized in ecclesiastical law, and was personally close to Richard Bancroft, bishop of London and later archbishop of Canterbury, to whom he left a small token in his will. He was advocate-general for ecclesiastical causes (1603); attended the Hampton Court conference as 'a doctor of the Arches' (Cardwell, 85); and served as chancellor of the diocese of London and vicar-general, with Sir Edward Stanhope, of the archbishop of Canterbury (1605-9). 
In the House of Commons, Crompton sat for Shaftesbury, Dorset (1589), by patronage of the earl of Pembroke; Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, through Cecil (1597); Whitchurch, Hampshire (1601), through episcopacy; and Oxford University (1604-9). In the parliament of 1601 he opposed the bill against pluralities, and he met with a hostile reception when in 1604 he spoke in favour of commissaries' courts, narrowly avoiding censure after revealing that he had consulted with some of the bishops about the proposed legislation against them. In these matters as in others Crompton, like other civil lawyers, was a natural ally of the crown and the church against common lawyers and (in his view) anti-clerical reformers in the House of Commons. He criticized the common lawyers for their use of prohibitions which, he argued, conflicted with their oaths to maintain the liberties of the church: as he saw it, the ecclesiastical courts were being hindered from imposing effective church discipline. Similarly, Crompton prepared a wide-ranging defence of the crown's right to impositions (BL, Cotton MS, Titus FIV, fols. 242-3). In the controversy over the oath of allegiance he refuted papist claims that the pope had power to depose princes and their subjects the right to take up arms against them as infidels or heretics. 
Crompton accumulated enough capital to invest in commerce and purchase lands and manors at Millwich and Cresswell in Staffordshire. He was granted arms in 1595 and was knighted in 1603. He left lands to his sons John, Richard, and Thomas after the death of his wife, 1000 marks for the marriage of his first daughter, 500 marks for the marriage of the second, and $200 to his daughter Barbara. Crompton died in January or February 1609. 


@@@@@


doc= 68194


Herbert, Sir John (c.1540-1617), civil lawyer, was the second son of Matthew Herbert of Swansea, gentleman, and Mary, daughter of Sir Thomas Gamage of Coety in Glamorgan. Educated at Christ Church, Oxford, he graduated BA (5 July 1558), MA (12 December 1561), and BCL (9 February 1565). Despite the ruling (6 May 1570) that only advocates of the court of arches should be admitted to Doctors' Commons, Herbert was admitted exceptionally at Archbishop Parker's request (28 November 1573). Noted for his linguistic proficiency, he was employed to interrogate foreign prisoners (1574), was joint commissioner of the admiralty with David Lewis (1575-84), and was master of requests from 1586 to 1601, with William Aubrey (1590-95). 
Herbert's linguistic gifts were also utilized on diplomatic missions to Denmark (1583, 1600, September 1602 to March 1603), Poland (between 1583 and 1585), Brandenburg (1585), and the Netherlands (1587). He sat in every parliament for a quarter of a century, representing Grampound, Cornwall (1586), Gatton, Surrey (1588-9), Christchurch, Hampshire (1593), Bodmin, Cornwall (1597-8), Glamorgan and Wallingford, Berkshire (1601), and Monmouthshire (1604-11). A DCL (23 June 1587), he was chosen to dispute before Elizabeth I on her visit to Oxford of 1592. He was a JP for Glamorgan (1595), Hampshire (1604), and Montgomeryshire under James I. 
Increasingly associated with the Cecils at court, Herbert accompanied Robert Cecil in 1598 on a mission to induce Henri IV of France not to conclude a separate peace with Spain. Although his role was supportive, on his return he became Cecil's secretary and confidant. A clerk to the privy council since 1590, he became a privy councillor in 1600, and obtained the novel position of second secretary of state, earning the jibe 'Mr. Secondary Herbert'. From May to August 1600 he assisted the ambassador to France in negotiations with the Spaniards at Boulogne. He was nominally on the council of the north (1601-4), and, having been knighted (31 January 1602), served on the council in the marches of Wales until his death. He participated in the trial of Sir Gelly Meyrick and others following the earl of Essex's revolt (1601). 
On Elizabeth I's death Herbert was kept in office by James I and served as a commissioner for the Scottish union and for various ecclesiastical causes (1603-6). With Cecil's elevation to the Lords, Herbert was left to defend royal policy in the Commons, for instance defending the king's financial needs in 1606, but he lacked the political acumen for the role. When Cecil died in 1610 his hopes of succeeding him as principal secretary of state were disappointed and he withdrew from public life, nominally retaining his positions. 
Fluent in Welsh, Herbert kept his associations with Wales, marrying in 1591 Margaret, daughter of William Morgan of Pen-clawdd, Glamorgan, and leasing Neath Abbey from 1591 before purchasing it in 1599. They had one child, Mary, who married Sir William Doddington and had ten children. A devoted father, Herbert left court abruptly in 1602 to be with his seriously ill daughter. He inherited family property in Cardiff and Swansea on the death of his elder brother, William, without issue in 1609, and he owned land in fifteen different parts of Wales, as well as being involved in various commercial enterprises. 
Appointed dean of Wells in 1590, Herbert sought to have a fellow civilian appointed chancellor, leading to a dispute with the canons. Like others of his family, he was at times unruly, once being reported to have broken the window of Thomas Basset's Cardiff house in retaliation for the latter having threatened him with a pistol. He is said to have gone abroad to fight a duel with Sir Lewis Tresham in May 1617 shortly before his death at Cardiff on 9 July, which may have resulted from the exertion or from injuries suffered. He was buried in the church of St John the Baptist, Cardiff, in a handsome tomb erected by his wife with full effigies of himself, in his lawyer's gown, and his brother William. 


@@@@@


doc= 68195


Bull, John (supp. fl. 1712-), fictitious epitomist of Englishness and British imperialism, first appeared in print in 'The History of John Bull', a political allegory -- sometimes wrongly attributed to Jonathan Swift, but now accepted as the work of John Arbuthnot, Queen Anne's physician. The 'History' appeared in five parts between March and July 1712 at the time of the War of the Spanish Succession. In this satire John Bull was a small cloth merchant, embroiled in a law suit with his European neighbours, Nicholas Frog (the Dutch), Lewis Baboon (Louis Bourbon of France), Philip Baboon (the king of Spain), Esquire South (the Austrian archduke), Sister Peg (Scotland), and various others. Arbuthnot's work was a thinly veiled attack on whig foreign policy and on the financiers who were benefiting from English intervention in Europe. Arbuthnot's John Bull -- 'an honest plain-dealing Fellow, Cholerick, Bold, and of very unconstant Temper' (Arbuthnot, 9) -- had prospered from trade, but had been duped by his lawyers into a suit which they had promised would be settled in a year or two, but had now dragged on for over a decade, causing him much financial misery. The 'History' was not the first portrayal of the archetypal Englishman as blunt, irritable, and prone to take to the bottle, nor the first association of Englishness with bovine characteristics: the bull, the ox, and beef had often symbolized the English nation. Nor was Arbuthnot's 'History' the first tory allegory on the whig junto which had effectively controlled the country's fortunes since the revolutionary settlement of 1688-9. But Arbuthnot's 'History of John Bull' was the first to combine all these ingredients in the persona of John Bull, and as such it remained a remarkably influential work, reprinted in 1727 and 1751, and still inspiring parodies such as 'Sister Peg' in 1761, once thought the work of David Hume but now identified as that of the historian and philosopher Adam Ferguson. 
From the 1760s onwards John Bull began his long history in the visual media as the embodiment not so much of England, but of the English people. The explosion of political propaganda which accompanied the accession of George III and the ministry of the third earl of Bute saw John Bull being drawn by the caricaturists for the first time, initially sometimes as a bull, but increasingly by the 1780s as a shopkeeper or farmer, depending on the artist. Whatever the preferred depiction of the various cartoonists and print-sellers, the characteristics associated with John Bull remained quite close to the genre established by Arbuthnot. He was a reluctant nationalist -- reluctant because he knew going to war with other countries meant higher taxes. The focus of his nationalism might change -- Bute and the Scots in the 1760s, the Jacobin constitution in the 1790s, Napoleon's nation in arms after 1802 -- but his reputation as a down-to-earth, liberty-loving, beer-drinking, and pugnacious admirer of all things English remained intact. And as in Arbuthnot's original incarnation, the John Bull of the late eighteenth-century print was gullible, lacked much foresight, and was easily led by scheming politicians of all parties (but especially the whigs). But if the proclivities and preoccupations of John Bull remained constant over time, the late eighteenth century did see a concerted attack on his status as the authentic 'everyman' of public opinion. Alarmed at the seizure of power by the demos of Paris, the sansculottes, some caricaturists in 1789 -- particularly James Gillray and Charles Williams -- produced versions of John Bull which made him appear as a sort of Frankenstein's monster of democracy: coarse, plebeian, physically disfigured, and grotesque. Other propagandists -- for example William Jones in his anti-Jacobin Bull family letters -- lauded his loyalism, peasant-like stoicism, and deference, and this stereotype became common during the invasion scares of 1802-3. 
One consequence of Jones's focus on Bull's family was the growing prominence of 
As the Napoleonic wars drew to a close and war in Europe gave way to civil instability at home, radical publishers and prints associated with William Benbow, George Cruikshank, and William Hone appropriated the tax-hating, free-born Englishman that was John Bull for their own purposes, making him the figurehead of their attacks on 'old Corruption', or, as in an 1816 print, the bearer of the establishment's excessive fiscal burden. In this struggle John was once more assisted by Mrs Bull, who over the course of the war emerged as a somewhat more forceful and independent figure: for example, marching beside her husband at Taunton's peace parade in June 1814 or helping him driving away a 'swarm of tax gatherers' in Charles Williams's cartoon 'Blessing of Britain' (1817). Tory writers responded in kind. At the time of the Queen Caroline affair, for example, the 'John Bull' newspaper, established under tory colours and edited by Theodore Hook, took the new king's side in the acrimonious attempt to impose a divorce on the estranged queen. Thus by the early nineteenth century there was as little agreement about who John Bull was as there was consensus about the nation's affairs in general. 
A more stable version of John Bull began to emerge in the middle decades of the nineteenth century. As taxes fell and Britain retreated from military involvement on the European continent, the burdens of John Bull lightened. And as the threat posed by republican democracy eased off, the disputes over John Bull's social origins subsided. By the time of the 'Reform Act' of 1832 the rotund, usually rural, shabby farmer or even squire was beginning to become the dominant depiction of John Bull. In this guise he featured as the bemused but complacent 'everyman' of H. B.'s [John Doyle's] prints in the late 1820s and 1830s, and then in 'Punch' from 1842 onwards. John Leech's and John Tenniel's drawings for 'Punch' provide what remains the best-known and most easily recognizable version of John Bull: a portly, ruddy-cheeked and side-whiskered farmer, with boots and a shabby hat, and an aggressive mastiff at his side. The mid-nineteenth century John Bull was in party terms essentially neutral -- his rural appearance did not indicate a preference for, for instance, a protectionist agenda. And during the heyday of Gladstone and Disraeli the party prints, for example the Liberal 'Punch' and the tory 'Judy' (mainly drawn by William Boucher) and 'Fun' (where he was depicted by J. Gordon Thomson), enlisted John Bull with equal credibility. It was left to foreign commentators to produce more pejorative versions. In 1819 Washington Irving produced a modern rendition of Arbuthnot's original, attributing England's propensity to meddle in the affairs of other countries to being 'a little fond of playing the magnifico abroad' (Irving, 250). Max O'Rell's 'John Bull and his Island' (1883) extended the criticism, dubbing John Bull an aggressive imperialist -- 'a large land-owner, with muscular arms, long, broad, flat, and heavy feet, and an iron jaw that holds fast whatever it seizes upon' (O'Rell, 1). These caricatures began to stick, and overseas representations of John Bull carried in the illustrated press in the last decades of the nineteenth century invariably represented John Bull as a land-grabbing capitalist, annexing more and more of the non-European world. 
In the Edwardian years John Bull shed much of his political and social neutrality. As the notion of the English 'public' expanded, especially after the extension of household suffrage to the counties in 1884, the representation of the typical Englishman as a squire or small landowner became more problematic. Repudiating jingoism in the South African War, Canon Scott Holland pronounced the John Bull stereotype 'ludicrously obsolete' -- fat in an age when 'the fat man's day is past and gone' and when the 'long lean Australian' had become a more accurate image for empire. Scott Holland went on to complain that John Bull 'has no brains. He embodies, in his fatuous good-humour, in his farmer's suit, in his obvious provincialism, the British horror of ideas' (S. Paget, ed., 'Henry Scott Holland', 2nd edn, 1921, 217). The cartoonists of the labour movement -- for example, Will Dyson -- likewise tended to avoid 'John Bull' if they wished to invoke 'everyman'. And some radical cartoonists of the late nineteenth century depicted exploitative employers or inhumane agricultural landlords in caricatures remarkably similar to the stock John Bull. With the massive acceleration of usage of political posters by the two main parties in elections after 1885 (peaking in the three elections of 1906 and 1910), John Bull's image became traded around with the same degree of competition and contestation that had occurred in the 1790s. Perhaps the most famous version of the Edwardian John Bull came in Horatio Bottomley's eponymous newspaper, which he edited from 1906 until 1921. Bottomley's John Bull, now with a union jack waistcoat, and dressed out in a top hat, riding gear, and crop, rather than in the unkempt farming garb of old, was a persistent critic of the state interventionism of Asquith's Liberal government, and in particular of its fiscal policies. Bottomley's John Bull also savaged the venality and corruption of the Liberal Party's relations with big business. The figure featured heavily too in the 'free trade versus protection' election campaigning which dominated the Edwardian years, with the illustrators of both parties using John Bull to support their calls for either greater indirect or greater direct taxation. 
The constitutional crisis over the 'people's budget', which ran from 1909 to 1911, was the climax of the party-political career of John Bull. Thereafter, he still featured in political caricature -- increasingly, but not always on the conservative end of the spectrum -- but more frequently after the First World War as a symbol of imperial nostalgia. John Bull was, for example, a prominent element in the advertising strategy of the Empire Marketing Board in the 1920s and 1930s and was again supported by a middle-aged matronly wife who, in David Low's 'Star' cartoon (24 April 1924), donned Britannia's helmet; both were joined later by Low's youthful Joan Bull, who epitomized the recently enfranchised woman. John Bull ended his active political life very much as he had begun it -- a repository of various meanings and associations, a composite and far from univocal national character. 


@@@@@


doc= 68196


Britannia (fl. 1st-21st cent.), allegory of a nation, emblem of empire, and patriotic icon, is by origin a child of Rome, representing an outpost of the Roman empire. Her earliest known appearances did not augur well for her future: rock reliefs at Aphrodisias in south-west Turkey, dating to the middle of the first century AD, illustrate the conquest of Britain with scenes of the emperor Claudius ('r'. AD 41-54) overpowering a distraught Britannia. Dressed as an Amazon, one breast bared, she is forced to the ground as Claudius grabs her hair and raises his arm to strike her. However, in the following century she was shown in a more positive light on coins of the emperor Hadrian ('r'. AD 117-138), as part of a series minted in Rome personifying the territories of the empire. 
This was Britannia's first portrayal on currency, laying the foundation for a long tradition in the future. As with her sister provinces, she is named by the inscription on the coin. Seated on rocks which are perhaps indicative of Hadrian's projected wall, she leans her bare head on her hand and is armed with a spear and large shield with a spike in the centre. Some commentators have interpreted her bowed head as sorrow at her subjugation, but in Hadrian's view of empire his regions were not slaves but faithful satellites, and Britannia appears on the coins to be vigilant, armed, and secure on her rocky ground, characteristics which remain central to her being. She is also distinguished by native British features such as her tunic and breeches and the spiked shield, in contrast to the classical drapery of the other personifications. Some coins of Antoninus Pius ('r'. AD 138-161), Hadrian's successor, seem to show her downcast and dejected, acknowledgement perhaps of Rome's aggression in crushing native uprisings, but this is not typical -- generally she maintains her watchful stance. One attractive coin design even anticipates Britannia's later role as ruler of an empire: she is seated on a globe above the sea, relaxing against her shield, resting her right foot on the globe and swinging her left above the waves. Later, one of the coins minted in London for the usurper Carausius ('r'. AD 287-293) provided a positive interpretation of his rebellion in Britain by depicting a standing Britannia welcoming him as emperor, with the inscription 'Expectate Veni' ('Come O expected one'). In the eighteenth century the pedestal of an ancient statue with a Latin dedication to Britannia was apparently discovered in York. Unfortunately the statue itself had disappeared and with only the impression of the feet remaining, there is no record of how she was depicted. The base, too, is now lost; however, if genuine, this is the only epigraphic reference from Roman Britain to the person of Britannia. 
These early sightings of Britannia have been associated with the Celtic deity Brigantia, seen in a stone relief from a Roman site in Dumfriesshire, but her lineage may be traced even further back to the Greek goddess Pallas Athene, warrior-queen, guardian, and giver of wise counsel, qualities subsequently ascribed to the Roman goddess Minerva. In later manifestations Britannia is frequently shown with Athene's warrior attributes -- crested helmet, breastplate, spear, and shield, but she is also often bareheaded, holding an olive branch, a reminder of the belief that Athene gave the first olive tree to her city, a source of food and symbol of peace. Often Britannia is summoned to be the champion of heroes, protector of cities, and keeper of the nation's conscience, ever reflecting the polarity of Athene's nature: action and contemplation, strength and compassion. More rarely, she may reveal her wilder aspect, with gorgon's head, or hint at the archetypal female, mysterious source of fertility and nourishment. 
After her first appearance in the Roman world, Britannia did not re-emerge until the late sixteenth century. In the highly symbolic frontispiece of his 'General and Rare Memorials portraying the Perfect Art of Navigation' (1577) John Dee included a small figure of Britannia kneeling by the shore beseeching Elizabeth I, seated in a ship, to protect her empire by strengthening her navy. Here Britannia is clearly in thrall to her glorious monarch, but later images may be seen as a legacy of the Elizabethan age, a period of renaissance inspiring classical ideals, national expansion, and naval triumph, exemplified by the defeat of the Spanish Armada. Elizabeth's long rule may also have encouraged representation of the nation by a female figure after her death. The union of the crowns (1603) by which James VI and I proclaimed himself king of Great Britain may have inspired new expressions of national imagery, among them the union flag which first appeared in 1606. Some early seventeenth-century manifestations of Britannia referred back to her Roman origins, but made it clear that she now assumed a position of authority. Thus in 1607 the title-page of William Camden's 'Britain, or, A chorographicall description of the most flourishing kingdomes, England, Scotland and Ireland' showed a small figure of Britannia similar to that on Roman coins, bareheaded, with tunic and spiked shield, while beneath her figures of Ceres and Neptune point to her dominion over land and sea -- earlier and later editions were adorned simply with emblems or heraldic devices. In 1612 Henry Peacham's book of emblems, 'Minerva Britannia, or, A garden of heroical devises', showed her standing on a shore repelling a Roman ship (emblem 208): the accompanying verse describes how once she was a Roman captive, 'with haire dishevel'd and in mournfull wise', but now Rome stands in awe of her. 
Despite James's personal union of the two kingdoms, regions of Britain retained distinct identities, and both then and in succeeding centuries Britannia served to depict England alone as well as the whole of Britain. In 'Britannia's Pastorals' (1616) William Browne's Devon shepherd singing 'What need I tune the swains of Thessaly?... Thus, dear Britannia, will I sing of thee' may well be praising England, while the lord mayor's show of 1628 featured Britannia as 'a Mother's Counsel', supported by pillars to represent the united realms of York and Lancaster. The same distinction is explicit in the splendid figure adorning the title-page of Michael Drayton's 'Poly-Olbion' in 1612, her robe formed of a topographical map of England reminiscent of that on which Elizabeth I stands in the Ditchley portrait: though some may see her as Britannia, Drayton's work is concerned only with England and Wales, and he names the figure Albion. 
Later in the seventeenth century John Roettier began a long tradition of medallic art featuring Britannia as the guardian of her kingdom. His medals celebrating naval victories and the treaty of Breda between England and the Netherlands in 1667 depicted Britannia seated at the foot of a rock, surveying her fleets at sea; in one she is crowned with laurel by two genii. This association drew on the myth that Neptune had surrendered his sovereignty of the sea to Britannia, who in succeeding centuries has since been regularly portrayed seated by the shore, admiring her navy, guiding sea-borne trade, and above all holding a trident, even when standing on dry land. She may even appear exuberantly riding the waves in a shell chariot drawn by sea horses, sometimes indeed with Neptune as her companion. Here again is a link with Athene, believed in Greek myth to have built the first ship. In 1672 Britannia received official status, being placed on the back of copper coins of Charles II. Designed by Roettier, the coins were clearly derived from Roman prototypes, showing Britannia seated on a globe, with spear and shield, but her profile resembles that on the medals, which was reputed, not least from a reference by Samuel Pepys, to be that of the king's alleged mistress, Frances Teresa Stuart, later the duchess of Lennox and Richmond. Opinion has since been divided as to whether the similarity was intentional, though certainly the features and hairstyle of the Britannia bear comparison with Roettier's elegant bust of Stuart on a portrait medal. In 1694 the newly founded Bank of England chose Britannia for its seal and placed her on all its notes, sitting gazing on a 'bank of mony'. Given this date, before the union of the Scottish and English parliaments in 1707, and the role of the bank in financing English concerns (the Bank of Scotland was founded in 1695), this is perhaps another instance of Britannia representing England rather than a wider Britain. However, from these beginnings Britannia became a constant feature on money, so consolidating her role in daily life as a symbol of authority. 
In the eighteenth century Britannia combined her official role with less formal public appearances as she was swept up in the fervour of popular nationalism, rousingly articulated in Thomas Arne's setting of James Thomson's song 'Rule Britannia', published in 1740. In medals, prints, and broadsheets she was invoked as mentor to the sovereign and the British people, victorious wager of war, and patron of resulting peace and prosperity. On a glorious medal by Thomas Pingo jun. to mark George III's accession in 1760 she serenades king and country, playing a tambourine while her sons and daughters, the children of the land, dance round an oak tree. Throughout succeeding reigns, Britannia's allegiance to the throne continued on commemorative medals showing her attending royal coronations, marriages, births, and deaths. But her protection also extended to her subjects, their welfare and their duty: a print of 1756 entitled 'The acceptable fast, or, Britannia's maternal call to her children to deep humiliation, repentance and amendment in heart and life' shows her with arms outstretched, extolling moral virtue to all classes of society. 
But such virtue was not always practised, even by those in positions of power, and political satire often revealed Britannia beaten and abused, helpless against her enemies. In such cases she may have evoked the defeated majesty of the monarch or the vulnerability of citizens, becoming an emotive vehicle for political protest. Failure to address foreign threats provoked much anger: in 'Britannia: a Poem', written in 1727 and published two years later, James Thomson described her as the queen of nations, despairing as her feeble sons failed to keep the Spanish at bay, in contrast to earlier naval strength: '
Bare was her throbbing bosom to the gale 

That hoarse, and hollow, from the bleak surge blew. 

' A print of 1757 depicted her tied down and mutilated by the French army, while its title, 'A View of the Assassination of the Lady of John Bull', united her with another popular patriotic figure of the age. In 1776 a print entitled 'The Parricide' attacked the radical John Wilkes, shown encouraging the rebellious colonies in America in the form of a Native American woman threatening Britannia with a tomahawk and knife. At home, the domestic violence of internal politics was no less frightful: a print parodying Poussin's 'Martyrdom of St Erasmus' displays Britannia's half-naked body on a table, her mouth stretched in a grimace of horror as she is dismembered by the cut and thrust of corrupt politicians. 
Typically, however, Britannia's breast remained sternly encased in armour as she urged her troops to victory. As early as 1682 the Royal Navy gave the name Britannia to a gunship; in 1707 Queen Anne granted the regiment of English line infantry ultimately known as the Royal Norfolk regiment a figure of Britannia for their badge, in recognition of their bravery at the battle of Almanza during the War of the Spanish Succession. Winning further glory during the Peninsular War, the regiment became known as 'the Holy Boys' reputedly from the Spaniards' rather surprising assumption that Britannia with her helmet, trident, and shield -- and, admittedly, an olive branch -- was the Virgin Mary. In 1716 the decorative artist James Thornhill's ceiling for the Great Hall in Blenheim Palace commemorated victory over the French with Britannia about to crown the duke of Marlborough with laurel, while admiring his battle plans. During the 1750s she appeared on a series of medals marking successful actions, such as that of James Wolfe in Quebec, and in the 1790s she celebrated Nelson's naval triumphs. A medal by Conrad Kuchler for the victories of 1798 shows her seated among trophies of war, holding a small figure of victory in the tradition of classical iconography, while a drawing by Philip James de Loutherbourg places her next to George III, with the British lion fiercely defending his shores as the sun breaks through the clouds. It may be no coincidence that on his new 'cartwheel' copper coinage of 1797 Matthew Boulton depicted her ruling the seas, holding a trident rather than a spear, with waves around her and a ship in the distance. Just as she gloried in Nelson's conquests, so Britannia shared the nation's sorrow at his death at Trafalgar in 1805. Thus James Gillray drew Nelson leaning against a weeping Britannia without her helmet, while broadsides described her tears for a darling son, her hero now at rest. Indeed, the growing cult of popular hero-worship gave her a spiritual role as the embodiment of national consciousness and mourning. In 1852, on a medal for the death of the duke of Wellington, she is draped in mourning, leaning her head on her right hand and attended by her lion, symbol of bravery. In this role Britannia reached beyond official duty to convey the emotions of the people: for example, when Queen Caroline died in 1821, having been reviled by her husband and the government, the public's sympathy was expressed in commemorative pieces such as a glazed dish showing Britannia seated sadly by a sarcophagus with the legend 'To the Memory of Caroline, the injured and persecuted Queen of Great Britain'. 
Above all, however, the nineteenth-century Britannia presided over a nation made richer by the rewards of trade and empire. Her capitalist function as protector of commerce is exemplified by her many appearances on the nation's money. On Bank of England notes her pile of coins had been transformed into a beehive, traditional emblem of industry, while on the notes issued by many hundreds of local banks serving towns across Britain she performed a variety of functions. Usually she is shown with plumed helmet, breastplate, and trident or spear, with a shield bearing the union flag; she was also sometimes accompanied by a lion lying watchfully at her feet. On other occasions she stood alone, next to a landmark of the town, or was the central figure in an elegant triumvirate with Scotia and Hibernia -- a composition pointing up the ambiguity that on some occasions she represents only England. In lending her authority to these private banks, Britannia bestowed upon them desirable classical qualities of wisdom and prudence; she also echoed Athene's role as goddess of the city, thus assuming civic responsibilities as well as her national duties. But there is evidence too of a wider ambition, the expansion of overseas trade and colonization: banks based in coastal towns, and even some that were not, frequently depicted her surrounded by cargo with a background of ships at sea. In the colonies themselves, images of Britannia emphasized British imperial supremacy. On notes for Ceylon in the late 1840s she gestures towards an elephant, palm trees, and the sea symbolizing her territory, while for the Bank of Bengal she accepts the fruits of empire from a cornucopia offered up by a kneeling Indian woman. From 1840 similar imagery was adopted for colonial postage: though William Mulready's postal stationery boasting Britannia and her lion directing commerce to all the peoples of the empire was ridiculed and soon withdrawn, vignettes of Britannia with bales of sugar were adopted for stamps in Mauritius, Trinidad, and Barbados, with variations spreading to other colonies. 
Later images show that the influence of empire was just as strongly felt within Britain. In 'Britannia and her Boys' by G. Durand, printed in 'The Graphic' in 1885, Britannia stands aloft in her chariot, her long hair streaming as she brandishes the union flag above the 'boys', who surround her -- soldiers drawn from every corner of her lands, Sikh turbans marching with Scottish tartans. A year later, a map of the world by the writer on imperial defence J. C. R. Colomb showed her seated on a globe supported by Atlas, gazing down on the peoples and creatures of her empire. By the turn of the century popular sentiment was infused with passion for empire: she appeared on postcards in regal pose, next to patriotic verses, and, in a rare moment of sensuality, adorned a programme of the Empire Theatre in a clinging gown, her hair tumbling loose from her helmet. Inside theatres, the contralto Clara Butt thrilled audiences by dressing as Britannia for her performances of 'Land of Hope and Glory', a practice later adopted by others at the last night of the Proms. At the Devonshire House ball to celebrate Victoria's diamond jubilee in 1897 Edith Amelia, Lady Wolverhampton, attended as Britannia, another splendid indication that Britannia had so successfully represented her people that they now personified her. 
The First World War aroused Britannia's martial character, evident in her defiant stance on treasury 10's'. notes and her helmeted head on national savings stamps. But it awakened sorrow, too, for E. Carter Preston's design for the 800,000 memorial plaques given to the next of kin of all who died in the First World War carried the most poignant and personal image of Britannia in mourning. Her lion beside her, she walks with head bowed, her face sombre, holding out a wreath to honour the fallen. In contrast, during the Second World War, Russell Flint's Britannia for a war savings card was a haughty creature, hand on thigh as she stamped contemptuously on a crumpled Nazi flag. An imperial and naval theme lingered on high-value postage stamps depicting Britannia surging through the waves in a chariot drawn by sea horses, a powerful design reintroduced in 1990 to commemorate the introduction of the Penny Black postage in 1840. A new $10 stamp in 1993 reverted to the stern profile of a classical seated figure, but brought her up to date with a bust size conforming to the national average of 36B. 
In 1951 the Festival of Britain had as its symbol a helmeted profile of Britannia surmounting the points of a compass to represent Britain's contribution to civilization, but with the waning of empire and the weakening of British commercial supremacy Britannia's role in national life diminished in the second half of the twentieth century. She reappears with every burst of popular patriotism: thus a medal commemorating Britain's first referendum on joining the European Union showed a bareheaded figure sitting on a little globe above a map of Europe -- as with the empire, so may Europe be viewed comfortably from a superior vantage point; and during the Falklands War in 1982 Britannia as bringer of victory was invoked on medals and commemorative plate. 
Politics too may generate contemporary versions of earlier imagery, such as the newspaper cartoons and souvenirs marking the Conservatives' three consecutive terms with images of Margaret Thatcher as Britannia in a smart blue suit and high heels. In daily life at the start of the twenty-first century Britannia lived on in the name of institutions and businesses, from the once royal yacht to, appropriately, an archaeological journal, a building society, and even a removal firm, which depicts her seated in classical style on the side of its vans. However, at a time when formality is out of fashion, her chivalrous dignity does not sit easily with the youth culture known as 'cool Britannia', but which by its very nature limits her appearance to traditional contexts, such as currency. On coins she has changed little, though on modern Bank of England notes she has moved through different fashions, from the serene sculptured head of the late 1950s to the demure child Britannia, modelled on the daughter of the artist, Reynolds Stone. Most recent issues have reverted to the mid-nineteenth-century incarnation by Daniel Maclise, a peaceable seated figure, bareheaded and holding an olive branch. Sometimes she takes the form of a reflective foil security feature, now offering practical as well as symbolic guardianship of the nation's wealth -- even allegories, it seems, must work. 
Over two millennia Britannia has matured from allegory of a province to spirit of a nation, variously characterized as subdued or martial, triumphant or compassionate, contemporary or timelessly dignified. Yet as globalization spreads and debate continues on the nature of 'Britishness', or whether such an identity even exists, it remains to be seen what part Britannia may play in her country's future. 


@@@@@


doc= 68197


Jones, John (b. before 1585, d. in or before 1658), copyist and manuscript collector, was born in Gellilyfdy in the parish of Ysgeifiog, Flintshire, the eldest of six sons and three daughters born to William Jones (1527/8-1622) and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Thomas ap Hywel. His father and his grandfather, Sion ap William, were also copyists and patrons of poets. Nothing is known about his education except his year in Shrewsbury School (1595-6). The copying of an arithmetical treatise onto legal documents dated 1598 suggests that he may have been apprenticed to an attorney in Shrewsbury; he may also be the 'John Jones, clerck' mentioned in April 1600 in Llanfair Dyffryn Clwyd. Between 1603 and 1610 he was in Gellilyfdy and the gentry houses of the nearby Vale of Clwyd copying the bulk of twenty-five manuscripts belonging either to members of his family or to neighbouring gentry, clergymen, and scholars. 
In 1611-12 Jones compiled a list of the names of owners of manuscripts and books. In September 1612 he was in Glamorgan copying 'Liber landavensis', compiling another catalogue of the owners of manuscripts in that area, and locating Welsh manuscripts and books on both sides of the border. After that he was in Ludlow, reputedly practising as an attorney; there he would have been ideally placed for hearing about the location of manuscripts from Anglesey to Warwickshire, since it was the seat of the council in the marches and the focus of political and legal life in the principality. In 1617 he was imprisoned by the council and copying again. The pattern of copying between 'c'.1613 and 1621 is revealing and establishes a pattern that remained to the end of his life -- he did little while at liberty, but copied extensively during his frequent periods of incarceration. Consequently there was much copying in 1618 but little in 1620 and 1621, when he was in London dealing with a case in the court of common pleas; back in Ludlow prison by August 1622, the copying began again. But during these years, 1622-4, Jones was only rearranging and recopying manuscripts such as his massive dictionaries, unlike the period before 1610 when he borrowed new manuscripts from other scholars. The apparently obsessive rearranging may simply indicate that he had no new materials at hand. 
His father died in August 1622, and after various bequests the residue of the estate went to Jones, which resulted in almost continuous litigation with his siblings and others between 1624 and 1632, in chancery, the Star Chamber, and other courts. He incurred a fine of $200 in the Star Chamber and was committed to the Fleet prison between 1632 and 1639. Very few manuscripts were copied during 1624-32, but during the Fleet years, 1632-9, Jones worked on fifteen literary manuscripts and put the finishing touches to two others which he had compiled years previously. Some of these are his most accomplished work, but unfortunately many of the most ornamental manuscripts are disfigured by an excess of gall in the ink, which has destroyed the paper, especially where it has been laid on thickly in the ornate capitals. The facility to copy in this period raises the question of his precise status as a prisoner. He always referred to himself as a 'close prisoner' in the Fleet, but those men were usually political prisoners, denied access to pen and paper except to write petitions concerning their cases; such a prohibition did not apply to Jones. However, there are extant drafts of petitions by him to members of the privy council and House of Commons outlining his own grievances and suggesting remedies for general defects of the body politic. 
After 1641 the copying virtually stopped, although Jones may have remained in the Fleet until 1643 when he was released from an unnamed prison and returned to Gellilyfdy. During the civil war Jones was in Flint gaol for refusing to pay a levy of the commissioners of array, and he petitioned the king in June 1643 on behalf of the people of Flintshire about the oppression of the commissioners. He had manuscripts in boxes and bags with him in gaol which were stolen by the parliamentary army. He remained at liberty in Gellilyfdy from the end of 1647 until 1653. In 1648 he started an action in the court of chancery for the recovery of stolen books and manuscripts, and in October 1649 another action in the same court against a Thomas Edwards which dragged on until his death. Meanwhile he was petitioning parliament obsessively. 
In 1651 Jones married Elizabeth, daughter of Peter Griffiths, of Caerwys, Flintshire. Typically, the details of the marriage are known from a chancery case of 1657. In January 1654 he was again in the Fleet, but was home by September. He has left a vivid account of the night of 9 November 1654 when Thomas Edwards, on the pretext of a chancery warrant, broke into Gellilyfdy with five armed soldiers and 'theeves' and attacked Jones and his pregnant wife. He was first taken to Cheshire and afterwards to the Fleet, where he remained until he died intestate, before 6 April 1658. Elizabeth Jones was granted letters of administration in 1659, which revealed that she and her husband had had three girls, referred to as 'infants of 6 yeares or thereabouts'. His grave is unknown and there is no memorial to him save the manuscripts he copied. 
Over eighty manuscripts wholly or partly in Jones's hand survive in various repositories; it is impossible to be more precise since some manuscripts have been broken up and the parts separated. The topics cover all aspects of Welsh history and literature up to the seventeenth century, for example: poetry, from copies of the earliest poems to contemporary collections, often with anecdotes about the poets and/or the circumstances of composition; bardic grammars; vaticinatory poetry and prose works; historical texts, law texts, and religious works of all kinds, including several collections of saints' lives; prose romances and ancillary materials such as triads and folk tales; genealogies and materials for family history; astrological, mathematical, and pseudo-scientific and musical texts, word-lists and dictionaries of Welsh and several other European languages, plus anything and everything else that came his way and that he could copy. Jones was the most prolific and most skilled of all the Welsh copyists. 


@@@@@


doc= 68198


Hughes, Stephen (1622?-1688), nonconformist minister and publisher, was born in Carmarthen, the second son of John Hughes (more traditionally John ap Hugh ap William ap Rhisiart), a puritan silk merchant in comfortable circumstances, who was an alderman and twice mayor of Carmarthen (1650 and 1660, the year of his death), and his wife, Elizabeth Bevan, daughter of Dafydd, a tanner who was himself an alderman and mayor of Carmarthen in 1631 and 1642. Stephen's elder brother, John, was mayor in 1659. 
Hughes was probably educated at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Carmarthen, and from about 1653 he was minister at Merthyr, Carmarthenshire. He removed to Meidrim in 1655 where, loyal to Cromwell and an approver in Carmarthenshire, he ministered until he was ejected in 1661. He returned to his father's house in Carmarthen and was imprisoned for a short period, but on his marriage (after 1655) to an affluent lady (possibly called Catherine) of Swansea, who shared his religious zeal, he moved to that town, where he lived for the rest of his life. 
Hughes continued to minister to a number of dissenting churches in Carmarthenshire in spite of the constraints of the penal laws, avoiding persecution and imprisonment. Hughes was a popular and effective preacher. A moderate puritan and a peaceable man of generous spirit, he was highly regarded and was friendly with many Anglicans. His role in setting up schools in the 1660s to teach children and adults to read Welsh, his pastoral and preaching ministry, and the churches which he established earned for him the popular title the Apostle of Carmarthenshire, and there is no doubt that he laid the foundations of dissent in south-west Wales. 
Like other dissenters Hughes had realized early in his career the advantages of the permanence of print as a source of continuing and renewed edification, notwithstanding the fervour of the spoken word. But he had also seen that if ordinary folk were to benefit from their reading, the books provided should appeal both in content and in style. Hughes began his literary mission with his collections of the poems of the Revd Rees Prichard, 'the Old Vicar', whose homely moralizing and instructional verses were circulating in manuscript and orally. Hughes, assisted by Henry Maurice and Iaco ab Dewi, compiled an edited collection, the first part of which was published in 1659; a second part, now lost, appeared soon after. He returned to this task some ten years later, publishing the third part of Prichard's poems in 1670, and the four parts as a single volume in 1672. 
Henceforth until his death in 1688 Hughes worked closely with Thomas Gouge, Charles Edwards, and others to publish or to reissue a large number of translations of popular English religious works, some under the aegis of the Welsh Trust but others at considerable personal cost, involving extended visits to London to supervise printing and proof-reading during the years of his active pastoral ministry. Hughes edited many of these works, adapting, paraphrasing, and revising them so that they might better meet the needs of his intended readership. He often included in his books the Welsh alphabet and provided glossaries or marginal notes which gave south Wales equivalents for north Wales words or vice versa. A new edition of Rees Prichard's poems appeared in 1681, under the title by which it has been known ever since, 'Cannwyll y Cymru'. This book, fourteen editions of which appeared between 1658 and 1730, became one of the most popular works of Welsh piety ever: Hughes is responsible for the form in which Prichard's poems have been known, and his is the credit for giving these verses such currency, especially in south Wales. 
Hughes's major concern was that the 'Bible' in Welsh should be more generally available. He promoted the publication of the 'New Testament' in 1672 but was acutely conscious that the publishing of the 'Bible' would require substantial capital. Some $2000 was raised and in 1677-8 the co-operation of Hughes, Gouge, and Edwards enabled a corrected version of the Welsh 'Bible' to be published on good paper and in larger, improved type. Eight thousand copies were published to be sold for 4's'. 2died, and 1000 were distributed free. 
In 1672 Hughes also brought out a composite volume, 'Catechism Mr Perkins', which contained in addition to William Perkins's 'Catechism, Sail y grefydd Gristnogol' (Evan Roberts's translation of Perkins's 'The Foundation of Christian Religion'), 'Rhodfa feunyddiol y Christion' (Richard Jones's translation of Henry Oasland's 'Christian's Daily Walk'), and 'Amdo neu amwisc i babyddiaeth' (Jones's translation of Richard Baxter's 'A Winding Sheet for Popery'). This was followed in 1677 by other composite volumes: 'Tryssor i'r Cymru', containing translations of works by Arthur Dent, Oliver Thomas, and Richard Baxter, and 'Cyfarwydd-deb i'r anghyfarwydd', translations of works by Baxter ('Call to the Unconverted', translated by Richard Jones as 'Galwad i'r annychweledig') and others. Hughes himself translated Francis Peraud's 'Adroddiad cywir o'r pethau ar a wnaeth ac a ddwedodd yspryd aflan ym Mascon yn Burgundy' (1681) and published Robert Holland's 'Dau Gymro yn taring yn bell o'u gwlad' (1681), two contemporary accounts of, and warnings against, the wiles of witchcraft and evil spirits. Hughes assisted Charles Edwards in the 1682 publication of 'Llwybr hyffordd... i'r nefoedd' (Arthur Dent's 'The Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven'). 
Hughes published at his own cost Henry Evans's 'Cynghorion tad i'w fab' (1682), moralizing verses in the style of Rees Prichard, but his other most important publication was the translation which he and three others (unnamed but probably including Charles Edwards and less certainly Iaco ab Dewi) produced of Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress', 'Taith neu siwrnai y pererin'. Hughes bore the greatest burden of translating, and the book, published after his death in 1688, reveals him to be a fluent, confident translator. 
Hughes did not claim to be knowledgeable in the Welsh literary tradition, and he was motivated more by his religious fervour and personal love of books than by a deep regard for Welsh literature. Nevertheless, his work on the 1677 edition of the 'Bible' reveals both his scholarship and his familiarity with the standards of Welsh writing. He was himself an effective writer, and some of his comments show that he was not without concern for the well-being of the Welsh language. His efforts to create a literate Welsh peasantry and his success in providing the 'Bible' and other books in Welsh for them were important factors in safeguarding the language in the face of the Anglicizing influences of puritanism and of the Welsh Trust, and contributed to the revival of Welsh literary culture in the eighteenth century. 
Hughes died in Swansea on 16 June 1688. He was buried at St John's Church, Swansea, two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 68199


Lewys Mon (d. 1527), Welsh-language poet, was a native of Anglesey (Mon), and although his birthplace is unknown, references by other poets associate him with the commote of Llifon. The sixteenth-century genealogist Gruffudd Hiraethog names Lewys's parents as Gruffudd ap Dafydd ab Ieuan Finrwth and Angharad ferch Ieuan Goch ap Madog (NL Wales, Peniarth MS 139, ii). Gruffudd ap Dafydd ab Ieuan Finrwth, however, features as early as 1406 in a list of Anglesey submissions during the Glyndwr uprising; this suggests that the Peniarth 139 genealogy has omitted a generation on the paternal side. It has been proposed (Wiliam) that Lewys may be identical with an Anglesey poet called Llywelyn ap Gruffudd ap Gwilym included in a late sixteenth-century list of poets (NL Wales, Cwrtmawr MS 3): no poem is ascribed to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd ap Gwilym, and the names Llywelyn and Lewys are commonly equated (Tudur Aled addresses Lewys Mon as Llywelyn). Significantly perhaps, a Llywelyn ap Gruffudd ap Gwilym appears as a party to a deed concerning land in Llanfair-yng-Nghornwy in the Anglesey commote of Talybolion which bordered on Lewys's commote of Llifon (University of Wales, Bangor, Bodorgan papers, 358). The years in which Llywelyn ap Gruffudd ap Gwilym flourished -- the document is datable to the reign of either Henry VII or Henry VIII -- are compatible with those of Lewys Mon. A Llywelyn ap Gruffudd ap Gwilym cited as a debtor in 1516 (University of Wales, Bangor, Porth yr Aur collection, 161, 166) may also be the Llywelyn ap Gruffudd ap Gwilym of Llanfair-yng-Nghornwy, possibly alias Lewys Mon. 
Apart from the evidence of his poetry, which testifies to his travels among his patrons and to his bardic associates, very little is certainly known about Lewys Mon. He may have spent some time in London practising a craft other than poetry. A poem by Rhys Nanmor ('fl'. 1485-1513) requesting the gift of a buckler was addressed to a Lewys Mon who is described as a blacksmith then resident in Temple Bar, London. That Lewys Mon the poet was also the blacksmith of Temple Bar known to Rhys Nanmor may be indicated by an elegy which Lewys Mon wrote for Rhys Nanmor, which implies that the two poets were acquainted. A jocular reference in a poem by Tudur Aled also implies that Lewys was associated with smithcraft, although, in this instance, he is located as practising his craft in Anglesey. Of all his poetic contemporaries it was Tudur Aled who was most closely associated with Lewys. Satirical quatrains ('englynion') in which they vilified each other were, in reality, jocular exchanges between friends: a highly complimentary verse which Tudur composed on meeting Lewys near Oswestry Castle and Lewys's powerful elegy for Tudur (died 1526) are more reliable indicators of their relationship and of their mutual artistic regard. The two poets are generally acknowledged as the leading practitioners of their craft in early Tudor Wales. 
Just over 100 poems by Lewys are extant, most of them praise poems and elegies composed in honour of gentry patrons. A poem addressed to Sir William Griffith of Penrhyn, Caernarvonshire, referring to Griffith's imprisonment by Richard III in 1485 may be his earliest surviving work. Another early poem is the elegy he composed in 1489 for Elisau ap Gruffudd of Plas-yn-Ial, Bryneglwys, owner of the 'White Book of Rhydderch'. He was evidently closely associated with the Griffith family of Penrhyn: he addressed praise poems to Sir William Griffith (died 1505/6) and his son Sir William Griffith (died 1531), and mourned the latter's wife, Jane Stradling, in an elegy. The Salisbury family of Lleweni, Denbighshire, also featured prominently as recipients of his poems. A clerical patron to whom he was much attracted was Robert ap Rhys of Ysbyty Ifan, chaplain to Cardinal Wolsey; other clerical patrons included Dafydd ab Owain, abbot of Aberconway, Sion Llwyd, abbot of Valle Crucis, and Pirs Conwy, archdeacon of St Asaph. His patrons were largely concentrated in north Wales, his native Anglesey and the north-east march being favourite haunts; it appears that he rarely ventured to south Wales, although he found important patrons there in Sir Rhys ap Thomas and Sir William Herbert of Colebrook. An unusually high proportion of Lewys's extant poems consists of elegies; among them are poems commemorating his bardic contemporaries Dafydd ab Edmwnd, Rhys Nanmor, and Tudur Aled. 
Lewys Mon was a learned, highly allusive poet and a skilled literary craftsman. He and Tudur Aled were masterly exponents of the art of 'cynghanedd': this mandatory feature of classical Welsh verse (involving consonance, sometimes combined with internal rhyme) is seen at its most complex in their work. Lewys, however, lacked Tudur's imaginative force and verbal fluency; his intricate 'cynghanedd' is sometimes too intrusive, his verse too densely textured. Though not in the very front rank of medieval Welsh poets, he nevertheless composed some powerful individual poems. 
An extract from the will, no longer extant, of a Lodowidus Mon, dated 12 April 1527 at Valle Crucis and proved on 28 June 1527, was published in 'Archaeologia Cambrensis' in 1880. The testator was undoubtedly Lewys Mon: the legatees included his former patrons Abbot Sion Llwyd and Robert ap Rhys; one of the witnesses was the Anglesey poet Wiliam Alaw, probably a kinsman of Dafydd Alaw, who commemorated Lewys as a 'chief poet' ('pencerdd') in an elegy. Manuscripts record Valle Crucis Abbey, near Llangollen, as his burial place. 


@@@@@


doc= 68200


Sion Tudur (c.1522-1602), courtier and Welsh-language poet, was born at the family home, Wigfair, St Asaph, Denbighshire, the son of Tudur ap Dafydd Llwyd and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Ieuan ap Hywel of Mostyn, Flintshire; both parents came of local gentry families and he himself was termed 'generosus' ('Wigfair', 497). As a young man he entered the royal household, served the young Prince Edward, and was retained as yeoman extraordinary when Edward became king in 1547 (BL, Royal MS 7 C XVI, fol. 193). He was probably at the court, at least periodically, during Mary's reign, 1553-8, while references in his poems prove he was in London during the early years of Elizabeth's reign. 
As yeoman of the guard, and later yeoman of the crown within the royal palace, Sion Tudur may have witnessed Elizabeth's coronation and accompanied her on some of her progresses. Yeomen of the crown were not obliged to remain at court; they were allowed to retire to their homes provided they were ready at their sovereign's command should their services be needed. They held the fee of the crown for life (Hennell, 303). It is clear from Sion Tudur's own words and those of his contemporaries (Bodl. Oxf., MS Jesus College 15, fols. 273-300; NL Wales, Llanstephan MS 36, fols. 127-31) that in his prime, before he became old and lame, he was broad, tall, and handsome, as befitted a guardsman. He was obviously familiar with the cultural life of the court and the city, which may account for the high quality of his own writings. 
From the mid-1560s Sion Tudur seems to have spent more time at home. He was a member of the official order of Welsh poets referred to as Beirdd yr Uchelwyr ('poets of the gentry') so named from their custom of visiting the homes of the gentry, composing greetings, eulogies, and elegies for a fee. He was taught by the great master poet Gruffudd Hiraethog (died 1564) (Bowen, 'Gruffudd Hiraethog', xxxv-xxxix), and at the Caerwys eisteddfod in 1567 graduated as 'disgybl pencerddaidd' ('apprentice of the master craft'; Bowen, 'Graddedigion', 131). Contemporary poets in their elegies termed him 'pencerdd' ('master craftsman'); if he did acquire this distinction it must have been at a marriage feast as no further eisteddfod was held. He was both poet and patron, visiting the homes of gentry families and welcoming other poets to his home at Wigfair. 
A large corpus of Sion Tudur's poems, from before 1560 to 1601, has survived, scattered, mostly singly, over hundreds of manuscripts in various libraries, mainly the National Library of Wales at Aberystwyth, the British Library, Bangor, Cardiff, and the Bodleian Library, Oxford, with probably no more than three in his own handwriting. Most of his work, in the traditional strict metres, consists of eulogies, elegies, requests, and thanks to some sixty gentry families, together with several love poems. His metrical version of fifteen psalms, composed possibly at the request of Bishop Robinson of Bangor before 1580, was the first attempt in Welsh to versify the psalms. The rest, together with several long poems in free metre, deal with the evils of society, such as usury, avarice, and miserliness, and often bear similarity to the works of London writers such as Robert Greene, Thomas Nash, Thomas Lodge, and Thomas Deloney. However, the fact that some of his poems were written down at an earlier date than the extant published works of the above writers suggests either that all were relying on tracts now lost, or that Sion Tudur was dealing with topics he had heard discussed in London literary circles. His scathing comments on the contemporary Welsh poets, together with his lament over the death of so many poets, harpists, and crowthers, reveal his concern about the deterioration of the traditional poetic and musical arts. His early works give the impression that he adhered to the Roman faith; by the late 1580s he was a zealous protestant. The claim often made that he held an important clerical office at St Asaph Cathedral derived from a misreading of a manuscript by an eighteenth-century scribe. 
Sion Tudur married Mallt (Matilda), daughter of Pyrs Gruffudd of Llwynyglyniau, Caerwys, Flintshire; they had three children: Thomas, Elizabeth, and Margaret. He died at Wigfair on 3 April 1602 and was buried on 5 April, in the south aisle of the parish church of St Asaph (Thomas, 239). Letters of administration were granted to his widow and son on 20 April 1602 ('St Asaph probate act book', 1593-1602). 


@@@@@


doc= 68201


Cynwal, Wiliam (d. 1587/8), Welsh-language poet, the eldest son of John ap Dafydd ap Hywel and his wife, Lowri, daughter of John ap Robert Palcws. He lived at Ysbyty Ifan, Denbighshire, where he combined farming with his profession as a bard; his home in 1567 was Cerrigellgwm. Cynwal married Margred, daughter of Robert Wyn; they had four daughters. Cynwal also had an illegitimate son, Thomas. He was a disciple of Gruffudd Hiraethog, the foremost Welsh bardic teacher of the day; like other of Hiraethog's disciples he inherited some of his manuscripts. Cynwal was awarded the second-highest bardic degree of 'disgybl pencerddaidd' at the Caerwys eisteddfod of 1567; his claim that he was later awarded the premier degree of 'pencerdd' at a nuptial feast accords with known bardic practice. Cynwal's earliest extant work -- an example of the short 'englyn' metre -- is dated to 1561, but a 'cywydd' composed in 1564, described by him as his first ever, marks the beginning of his bardic career proper. 
Cynwal's manuscripts -- containing not only his own poems, but also genealogical and heraldic matter, a bardic grammar, and bruts -- display his familiarity with the main branches of bardic learning; like his teacher, Gruffudd Hiraethog, he possessed particular expertise in genealogy. In addition to over 230 longer poems ('cywyddau' and 'awdlau'), some 500 of his 'englynion' are extant, many of them combined in lengthy sequences. (Manuscripts containing copies of his poems are held by the National Library of Wales, University of Wales, Bangor, Cardiff Central Library, the British Library, and Christ Church, Oxford.) Cynwal was a competent but intensely traditional poet whose work testifies to the stagnation prevalent in contemporary bardism. The bulk of his output consisted of eulogies and elegies addressed almost exclusively to gentry and clergy in north Wales; he also composed request poems, amatory verse, and poems on religious and moral subjects (many of his 'englynion' being in this vein). Among his more interesting poems were two composed in defence of women in response to attacks on the fair sex by other poets; one of these is in the 'free' (accentual) metres, one of only two poems in these metres by Cynwal. 
Cynwal is chiefly renowned as the adversary of Edmwnd Prys, archdeacon of Merioneth, in the longest bardic debate ('ymryson') extant in Welsh. The debate, dated 'c'.1581-7, amounted to fifty-four 'cywyddau', of which Cynwal contributed nineteen ['see 'Cywyddwyr (act. c.1330-c.1650)]. It started with a poem by Prys requesting the gift of a bow from Cynwal for a mutual acquaintance, but the Cambridge-educated archdeacon soon digressed to canvass more important matters. He castigated poets like Cynwal for their mendacious praise poems and for peddling false pedigrees, urging them to displace eulogy with divine poems based on scripture and learned poems based on the arts and sciences. Cynwal's rather limited response to this humanist critique illustrates his conservatism: he deplored Prys's resort to satire, urged him to confine himself to divine matters, decried his lack of a bardic teacher and formal bardic qualifications, and charged him with ignorance of bardic etiquette. 
The debate was ended by Cynwal's death, Prys concluding it by diplomatically composing an elegy praising his adversary's bardic learning. Cynwal's will, dated 22 November 1587, was proved on 16 January 1588. He was buried at the parish church of Ysbyty Ifan. 


@@@@@


doc= 68203


Bedingfield family (per. 1476-1760), gentry, originated from the parish of that name in Suffolk, where a branch of the family continued to reside into the seventeenth century. Their move to Norfolk resulted from the marriage of Margaret Tuddenham (died 1476) to Edmund Bedingfield of Bedingfield (died 1451); she inherited her brother Thomas's estate, which comprised twenty-three manors in Norfolk and Suffolk, following his execution in 1462. On Margaret's death in 1476 the estate, which included the Norfolk manor of Oxburgh, passed to her grandson 


@@@@@


doc= 68204


Anderton, William (1663-1693), printer, was born at Wakefield, Yorkshire, on 29 September 1663, the son of William Anderton (died 1671), a clothier (who claimed kinship with the Lancashire gentry Andertons), and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1660-1693), daughter of Maximilian Topham; he was baptized at All Saints' Church in Wakefield on 14 October. He had a brother and at least two sisters. The parents, strong Anglicans, intended him for the church, but his father's early death (after which his mother married Thomas Ross) greatly reduced the family fortunes. After education at Wakefield grammar school, Anderton had himself bound apprentice on 9 February 1680 to the London printer Thomas Snowden, also from Wakefield. However, after the nonconformist Snowden had persistently beaten him for his loyalty to Anglicanism, the remainder of his indentures was transferred to the more congenial Miles Flesher or Fletcher. Freed in 1687, Anderton became a first-class journeyman printer, and married. He and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1725?), had three daughters. 
Anderton's enemy Robert 'Hog' Stephens, messenger of the press, claimed at Anderton's later trial that Anderton had had a Jacobite press from 1691, and mentioned having earlier seized his equipment: Anderton was presumably therefore the Thomas Topham alias William Anderson whose press Stephens seized in Shoreditch in early June 1692. Anderton (evidently financed by others) then set up a press, where two journeymen assisted him, in a secret room at Scudamore's, a carpenter in St James's Street, Westminster, while posing as a lapidary called Williams -- Jacobite printing was then audaciously concentrating in London's 'Court End'. David Douglas, formerly glovemaker to James II's queen, set up another in Peter Street, Westminster, employing four printers. Charles Leslie transferred the production of his 'Answer' to Dr William King, the most important factual Jacobite propaganda piece of the decade, from the main Jacobite printer, John Redmayne, to these two presses: Anderton's share included the detailed appendices. 
However, the government's alarm at the increase in effective Jacobite pamphleteering led to a crackdown that autumn. The chief victim, Mrs Anne Merryweather, main intermediary between Redmayne and his distributors, was convicted at the Old Bailey sessions in January 1693 for high treason but was reprieved. 
After Leslie's 'Answer' appeared early in 1693, the new whig secretary of state, Sir John Trenchard, launched a more intensive attack on the Jacobite printing organization. Leslie himself was arrested but escaped; he might otherwise have suffered rather than Anderton. Stephens, with Stationers' Company assistance, arrested Anderton, despite his wife's and mother's protests, on 2 May 1693 in Scudamore's house. Copies of thirty-two pamphlets, including Leslie's 'Answer', were seized. Because one anonymous pamphlet virulently attacking William III's generalship and courage, 'Remarks upon the Present Confederacy' (perhaps by the nonjuror John Pitts), was used in Anderton's subsequent indictment, the printer has often groundlessly been called its author. Many of the pamphlets had been brought from other printers for easier mixed distribution, particularly Charlwood Lawton's 'A French Conquest neither Desirable nor Practicable' from Douglas's press (which was seized on 1 June). 
Anderton was at first committed only for misdemeanour, but ministerial attitudes hardened after copies of James II's new 'Declaration', promising major concessions, were scattered through London on 21-22 May, and they realized that Lawton's pamphlet had been its precursor. Anderton was indicted for high treason for printing the 'Remarks' and 'French Conquest'. 
Anderton was tried at the Old Bailey on 3 June 1693 before Lord Chief Justice Sir George Treby and other judges. His legal arguments, drawn up by a pro-Jacobite lawyer, Daniel Thornbury, were that printing, as a post-medieval invention, could not be treason under Edward III's statute (ignoring the precedent provided by the 1664 case of the printer John Twyn); as a mechanical activity, could not prove the necessary malicious intent; and was allotted lesser punishments by recent statutes. Since the factual evidence, though strong, was circumstantial, Stephens invented insults by Anderton against the king; and Snowden and another hostile dissenting printer testified falsely that the same printing type had been used in both pamphlets. Treby and another judge led, and finally bullied, the jury into convicting Anderton. Further legal arguments were dismissed, and Anderton was condemned on 8 June. Luttrell's report that he offered to confess was presumably merely a sop to public unease. Trenchard, issuing many more warrants, wrote that examples were needed; and Mrs Anderton's and others' appeals to the queen and council were rebuffed. Anderton was executed on 16 June 1693 at Tyburn, dying as a nonjuring Anglican. Samuel Grascome, nonjuring cleric and, as a Jacobite pamphleteer, an employer, may have attended on him. Quartering the body was remitted, and Anderton was buried the same day in St Bartholomew-the-Less churchyard, Smithfield. He left a paper for publication, arguing that the injustice at his trial epitomized the general oppressions of William's regime. Grascome's accusatory pamphlet 'An Appeal of Murther' gave the only detailed report of the trial. The government offensive petered out that autumn. 
Of four persons condemned for treason for printing or publishing in William's reign, all in 1692-3, Anderton alone, ironically, had not been involved with James's 'Declarations'. Not, as sometimes claimed, the only person convicted for high treason purely for printing, he was the only printer executed for it between Twyn in 1664 and (under a later law) John Matthews in 1719. 


@@@@@


doc= 68205


Bourne, Nicholas (b. in or before 1584, d. 1660), bookseller, the son of Henry Bourne, a London cordwainer, was apprenticed on 25 March 1601 to the London printer Cuthbert Burby, who had a shop in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. Burby died before Bourne completed his apprenticeship, but bequeathed Bourne the lease of his shop and its stock. Freed by Mrs Burby on 26 March 1608, Bourne spent the rest of his life in those premises. In May 1608 he was granted a loan by the Stationers' Company to assist young members trying to establish themselves in business, and he entered his first title, a religious work, in the Stationers' register on 24 September. Burby's widow signed over part of her husband's copyrights, mostly in religious works, to Bourne the following year, and he was elected to the company's livery in 1616. 
Trained as a printer, described as a bookbinder in later life, Bourne is best known as a bookseller. Like Burby, he specialized in theological works, notably the sermons of Arthur Dent and the writings of Daniel Featley. He held the right to sell printed bills of lading and, according to a former apprentice, refused to deal in plays. He also sold the occasional travel narrative as well as accounts of strange occurrences and news of foreign affairs, predisposing him perhaps, like his later business partner Nathaniel Butter, to an interest in publishing newsbooks, the endeavour in which Bourne would achieve his greatest notoriety, if not his greatest success. In 1620 he borrowed further money from the company, probably to finance a new business venture he had embarked on: the publication of news. Initially he collaborated with his fellow apprentice and neighbour Thomas Archer, who dealt primarily in ephemera, then with a small syndicate of news publishers, from which eventually emerged a partnership between Bourne and Butter that dominated news publishing for roughly two decades. It seems that the more flamboyant Butter was the front man for the operation, while the steadier Bourne looked to the business end of the partnership, especially financing. Together they developed the regular weekly newsbooks, known as corantos, reporting about events in the Thirty Years' War. The newsbooks supported the protestant cause in the war and, like the majority of Bourne's publishing collaborations, were consistent with a Calvinist outlook. 
If Bourne was not as flamboyant or as cantankerous a figure as Butter, he still had brushes with the regulatory authorities. In March 1630 Bourne and two other booksellers were examined by the high commission for selling dangerous books which all three claimed had been left on their doorstep in the night by unknown persons. A privy council order of October 1632 banned publication of the corantos, and Bourne and Butter were explicitly warned to cease publication. Almost exactly one year later the news partners were chosen as members of the Stationers' Company's governing body. In May 1636 Bourne re-entered in the Stationers' register his lucrative copyright to publish bills of lading printed in French, Italian, and Dutch, as well as indentures for Virginia, St Kitts, and the Somers Islands, and bills of debt for money owed on tobacco. In February 1637 he leased additional warehouse space from the company; in June he was named one of the feoffees for property the company owned in Wood Street, London; and in July he was elected to serve as warden of the company. 
The following December Bourne and Butter were granted a royal patent to revive the newsbooks in exchange for $10 a year toward the restoration of St Paul's Cathedral. But the revival was short-lived, and by March 1640 the corantos had folded for good. Bourne and Butter parted ways, and Bourne, focusing on success within the ranks of the company, was re-elected warden in July 1641. A few months later he paid $6 to the company for their attendance at the funeral of his first wife, possibly named Ann, buried on 8 September 1641 at St Michael, Cornhill. In his capacity as warden he seized pirated copies of a work for which he owned the copyright, 'The Holy Table, Name and Thing', but was sued in chancery. He persuaded the company to contribute towards his legal costs, provoking controversy for years. Bourne was elected master of the company in 1643. Throughout the decade he published and republished the popular religious works of Daniel Featley as well as 'Le Mercure Anglois', a news publication for Huguenot exiles in England, and a news serial about the Turks which ran to only four issues. In July 1651 he was again elected master, and during the 1650s he acted as a feoffee for two company properties. 
Bourne prospered as a stationer, paying marriage portions of $300 each for three of his daughters, but as his health began to wane in the late 1650s, so did his career as a stationer. He bound his last apprentice in 1657 and made a will on 2 March 1658. He published with his son-in-law, William Hope, who had married his daughter Etheldred before 1641. The parish register of St Michael, Cornhill, records the burial of Nicholas Bourne on 6 April 1660. His will, proved on 17 April 1660, included bequests to a sister, his mother-in-law, an aunt, a number of grandchildren, and a $5 legacy to the company paid by his widow, Jane, in 1661. He left no surviving son to succeed him in his business and so bequeathed a number of copyrights to Etheldred and William Hope. 


@@@@@


doc= 68206


Gailhard, Jean (fl. 1659-1708), writer and religious controversialist, was a protestant Frenchman whose roots are unknown: a tract of his, published at Geneva in 1663, was addressed to 'les pasteurs et anciens des eglises Reformees en France' ('the ministers and elders of the Reformed church in France') in vindication of the 'Puritains d'Angleterre'. His first known work, in French, dates from 1659. He moved to England probably about 1660, the year when his first English publication appeared, in which he apologizes for 'my unskilfulness in the English tongue (for I am a stranger)'. He then plunges into an eloquent defence of presbyterianism against prelacy, on the authority of the 'incomparable' Calvin ('The Controversie between Episcopacy and Presbytery', 1660, 2, 34). In all he published some eighteen tracts, largely in divinity and many of them signed J. G. G. (Jean Gailhard, gentleman). He was a dogmatic predestinarian Calvinist, virulently hostile to Arminianism and Socinianism, and he despised Catholicism -- the religion of 'wafer-idol-worship' and 'brazen-faced whoredom' ('The Blasphemous Socinian Heresy Disproved', 1697, sig. A3'r'; 'God's Truth Vindicated Against Man's Lies', 1703, 13). 
In 1668-9 Gailhard fed public interest in travel literature with accounts of Italy and Venice, respectively dedicated to the earl of Sunderland and Sir John Trevor. Writing in the 'reason of state' tradition, he provided assessments of the 'politic strength' of those states, their armies, manners, and fiscal systems, spiced with tales of Latin lasciviousness. He wrote that he had travelled 'into most parts of Europe'; that travel completed a gentleman; and that, when travelling, gentlemen needed 'wise counsel, a director' ('The Present State of the Princes and Republicks of Italy', 1668, p. 8, sig. A7'v'). This last was a naked job application. He wrote ingratiating letters to Theophilus, earl of Huntingdon, from Angers in 1670-71 on Huguenot affairs, and from Paris in 1673. From about 1671 to 1675 he travelled as tutor to Sir Thomas Grosvenor in France, Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, Germany, and Switzerland. 
In 1676 Sir Robert Southwell appointed Gailhard tutor to his nephew Sir Philip Percival (1656-1680). Tutor and pupil embarked on a sightseeing tour to the west of England, then visited the Percival seats in Ireland, and then went to Angers. Here Gailhard tried to induce Percival to study civil law seriously, but found him lazy and spendthrift with a preference for dancing, fencing, the guitar and flute, and carousing instead. Gailhard had no objection to physical prowess, but hated debauchery and inattention to books. Exasperated, he told Southwell that 'there is in him things to be rooted out, others levelled, and some others to be polished'; he would try to 'bring him to the practice of Christian and moral virtues' (BL, Add. MS 46953, fols. 112, 207). Gailhard read his pupil Livy and Suetonius in Latin, and made him read the 'London Gazette' with an atlas alongside. 
Gailhard's most sustained work was 'The Compleat Gentleman, or, Directions for the Education of Youth', published in two parts in 1678, with two further parts appearing in 1682; the four parts were dedicated to the earl of Huntingdon, Sir Thomas Grosvenor, Dr Thomas Coxe, and Sir Joseph Williamson respectively. The first two had been written at Angers about 1671. Comparisons have been made between this work and John Locke's 'Some Thoughts Concerning Education' (1693). Gailhard's emphasis is not upon erudition, but upon character, manners, disposition, civility; in a word, virtue. He cites, as Locke did, the Aristotelian maxim that a child is 'a smooth table upon which anything can be written', and he says 'let nature be what it will it may be changed by education' (pp. 4-5). Gailhard warns against undue corporal severity, and against tutors who 'would frighten young men into learning, instead of enticing them to it' (p. 19). He is keen on physical exercise and a capacity for hardship, and deplores the 'effeminacy' of the age. He encourages the virtuosity of gentlemen, rather than bookish pedantry and rote learning, and recommends riding, fencing, dancing, drawing, languages, and music. He is concerned for conversation and oratory, and takes care over posture and demeanour. As to reading, what he commends is almost wholly classical. Gailhard's originality is exhausted in his first discourse. The work then turns to the grand tour and becomes an extended travelogue and itinerary, laced with classical tags and tales to illustrate virtues and vices. Supposing a tour of three years, he recommends eighteen months in France (including nine or ten in Angers), six weeks in Geneva, nine months in Italy, and five in Germany and the Low Countries, rounded off with four months more in Paris. 
In the 1690s Gailhard wrote prolifically on behalf of theological orthodoxy and moral reformation. His intellectual intolerance shines forth, yet he was politically a firm whig. True to his presbyterian roots, in 1694 he defended the Long Parliament's civil war against the popish and persecuting Charles I, though not the regicide itself, and repudiated as an idolatrous fetish the continuing high-church cult of Charles the Martyr. He roundly condemned Charles II's regime, its pensioner parliament, its ambitious and tyrannizing churchmen who preached 'jure divino' monarchy, its persecution of nonconformity, its tolerance of vice and debauchery. Gailhard was in the forefront of the assault on John Toland's 'Christianity not Mysterious' and Locke's 'Reasonableness of Christianity', publicizing the Middlesex grand jury's presentment against them for blasphemy. He gave a copy of his 'Epistle and Preface to the Book Against the... Socinian Heresie' (1698) to his friend the presbyterian judge Sir Thomas Rokeby, who had spurred the grand jury into action. Gailhard and Rokeby shared a passionate providentialist commitment to the campaign for moral reformation. Gailhard was also a whig enemy of the new freedom of the press following the lapse in 1695 of the 'Licensing Act'. What use was it, he asked, if 'Popery or Idolatry [be] expell'd, if Socinianism or Blasphemy be let in?' 'Extream remedies' were needed against 'Atheism, Deism, Prophaneness, Immorality [which] brazen-faced walk in our streets' ('Blasphemous Socinian Heresy', sigs. A2'v', A3'r'). He demanded the death sentence for heretics, approving of Calvin's burning of Servetus, and commending recent Scottish exertions in hanging Thomas Aikenhead for blasphemy. An attack upon Gailhard, 'An apology for the parliament, humbly representing to Mr John Gailhard some reasons why they did not at his request enact sanguinary laws against protestants in their last session', was published in 1697. His last known work is 'Discources on Several Useful Subjects', dated 1708. 


@@@@@


doc= 68208


Elliott, Michael Paul (1931-1984), theatre director, was born at 4 Chester Square, Westminster, London, on 26 June 1931, the second son and third child of the Revd Wallace Harold Elliott (died 1957) of Brook House, Compton, near Guildford, Surrey, and his wife, Edith Evelyn Plaistowe, 'nee' Kilburn (1895-1988). His father, who was vicar of St Michael's, Chester Square, chaplain to George VI and Elizabeth II, and an honorary canon of Coventry Cathedral, was a frequent broadcaster, known for many years as the Radio Parson. Elliott was educated at St Ronan's preparatory school, Worthing, Radley College, and Keble College, Oxford, where he took a third in modern history in 1954. It was at Oxford that he first met Casper Wrede and began an artistic association that lasted until Elliott's death. 
Elliott entered the theatre as a television director and was staff producer with BBC television drama from 1956 to 1960. During this time he co-directed several productions with Wrede and he became his associate for the 59 Theatre Company season at the Lyric Hammersmith. He made his own stage directing debut with an acclaimed production of Ibsen's 'Brand' in 1959: Elliott was an Ibsen specialist and this production, with Patrick McGoohan, had 'a bleak and terrible beauty in performance and decor' ('The Times'). On 25 July 1959 he married Rosalind Marie Knight ('b'. 1933), an actress, the daughter of Esmond Pennington Knight, actor; they had two daughters. 
In 1961 Elliott directed Vanessa Redgrave in 'As You Like It', a landmark in the history of the Royal Shakespeare Company, at Stratford; the play later moved to London. The next year he directed Trevor Howard in John Mortimer's 'Two Stars for Comfort' in the West End. He was appointed artistic director of the Old Vic in 1962, the last year before it became the National, and directed 'Peer Gynt' with Leo McKern, 'The Merchant of Venice', and 'Measure for Measure'. For five years from 1963 he worked as a freelance: notable productions included 'Little Eyolf' at the 1963 Edinburgh Festival, and Strindberg's 'Miss Julie' (1966), with Maggie Smith and Albert Finney, at the National. This phase came to an end when, having turned down the offer to become Olivier's heir apparent at the National, as well as the posts of artistic director of the Royal Court and head of BBC drama, he opted to move to Manchester to form a group theatre, the 69 Theatre Company, with Casper Wrede, James Maxwell, Richard Negri, and Braham Murray. 
Elliott first went to Manchester in 1967 to direct Tom Courtenay in 'The Playboy of the Western World', for Braham Murray's Century Theatre. In the following year he directed one of the 69 Theatre Company's opening productions there, 'When we Dead Awaken', with Wendy Hiller. Subsequently he directed 'Daniel Deronda' with Vanessa Redgrave (1969); 'The Tempest'; 'Peer Gynt' with Tom Courtenay (1970); 'The Family Reunion'; and, in Manchester Cathedral, 'The Cocktail Party'. 
After two extraordinary years at the small university theatre the 69 Theatre Company was invited by Manchester city council to build a new theatre. Elliott was a student of theatre form, especially through his researches into Greek theatre, and together with Negri, the designer, and Wrede, he created an extraordinary space-module theatre-in-the-round in the old Cotton Exchange in Manchester city centre. Like his colleagues he rejected the proscenium arch, the decadent Roman form, and fashioned an auditorium in direct descent from the Greek and Elizabethan forms. In his words: 'Why are we in the round? Because we believe that theatre is a happening and that what happens among people has more effect than what happens the other side of a peep hole'. 
The Royal Exchange Theatre opened in 1976, and Elliott helped to establish its traditions, with an emphasis on the actors being the magnetic point of the 250 people working in the building. He was a founding artistic director of the Royal Exchange Theatre Company and in its first season directed Albert Finney and Leo McKern in 'Uncle Vanya' (1977). Three of his later productions -- 'The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold' (1977) with Michael Hordern, 'The Lady from the Sea' (1978) with Vanessa Redgrave, and 'The Family Reunion' (1979) with Edward Fox -- transferred to London, while 'Crime and Punishment' (1978) was seen in Germany, and 'The Dresser' went on to New York in 1981 after its West End success the previous year. His final productions were 'Philoctetes' (1982); Ronald Harwood's 'After the Lions' (1982); and at Christmas 1983 his own adaptation of 'Moby Dick'. 
Elliott also produced two operas, both world premieres by Gordon Crosse: 'The Story of Vasco' for the English National Opera at the London Coliseum, and 'Potter Thompson' at the Aldeburgh Festival. He was responsible for more than fifty major television productions in Britain, and several in Norway and Sweden, and directed the CBS coast-to-coast spectacular of 'The Glass Menagerie' in New York in 1964. His memorable BBC plays included 'Antigone' with Dorothy Tutin, 'Time Remembered' with Edith Evans, 'The Lower Depths', 'The Cherry Orchard' with John Gielgud and Peggy Ashcroft, and 'Ghosts' with Tom Courtenay, Celia Johnson, and Donald Wolfit. His last television production was the award-winning 'King Lear' with Laurence Olivier for Granada Television. 
Elliott was a member of the Arts Council drama panel from 1963 to 1970, and a member of the Arts Council from 1972 to 1975. He served on the advisory council of the BBC, was a member of the board of governors for the Central School of Speech and Drama, and from 1963 to 1966 sat on the building committee for the National Theatre, where he was 'perhaps the coolest mind... very practical and impatient with dogma' (Elsom and Tomalin, 174). He was appointed OBE in 1980. He died on 30 May 1984 at the Royal Infirmary, Manchester, and was buried on 5 June at the southern cemetery, Barlow Moor Road, Manchester. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. 
Michael Elliott was one of the most admired directors of his day. He combined a daunting intelligence and passionate intensity with breathtaking natural stagecraft. One leading critic said that he was the only director for whom nobody had a bad word. His fierce integrity led him into a counter-movement against the pessimism and nihilism of the established theatre. By selflessly leaving a glittering career in London to break the old pattern of assumption that first-rate theatre could not be created in the provinces, he pioneered the concept of regional theatres of national standards which would later be taken for granted. His legacy lived on with all those who worked with him, and with the new artistic directors at the Royal Exchange, who included his daughter Marianne. 


@@@@@


doc= 68209


Twyn, John (bap. 1619, d. 1664), printer, was the eldest child of Robert Twyn, a yeoman of Kelshall, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Jane Warren. He was baptized at Kelshall on 14 March 1619. He was bound as an apprentice on 24 August 1633 to the London printer William Stansby and he took up his freedom in the trade on 7 September 1640. Little is known of Twyn's personal circumstances, except that he was by 1662 widowed and caring for his four small children. He was also a nonconformist of unknown hue, refusing the sacrament before he was executed as he was against the forms of the Church of England. 
In 1647 Twyn became manager of the king's printing house in Edinburgh following its acquisition by the Stationers' Company. He was still resident in Scotland in 1650 but he had returned by 1658 to London, where he had premises in Cloth Fair. During his career he entered only one work in the Stationers' register, 'The Three Books of Hermas' in 1661, although he was also involved in printing editions of the 'Bible', Hooker's 'Ecclesiastical Polity', and John Chishull's 'The Danger of being Almost a Christian'. 
Twyn was briefly imprisoned and he had a press seized in the early years of the Restoration. In seeking his release he pledged never to print anything against the king, but early on 7 October 1663 his premises were entered by Roger L'Estrange, Charles II's recently appointed surveyor of the press, who discovered printed sheets of 'A Treatise of the Execution of Justice', which asserted the godly duty of the people to oust the 'Bloody and Oppressing' house of Stuart ('Treatise', 15). Twyn's trial for high treason began at the Old Bailey on 20 February 1664, accompanied by the prosecution for seditious libel of bookseller Thomas Brewster, printer Simon Dover, and bookbinder Nathan Brooks for the 'Speeches and Prayers' of the regicides and, in Brewster's case, for 'A Phenix, or, The Solemn League and Covenant': the three men tried for libel were pilloried and fined. 
The trial judge, Sir Robert Hyde, said the 'Treatise of the Execution of Justice' was 'as High a Treason as can be Committed' ('Exact Narrative', 31). The trial evidence and surviving pages of the seized tract (TNA: PRO, SP 29/88/76) indicate that Twyn's version was substantially similar although not identical to the 32-page edition which subsequently circulated. The 'Treatise' used scriptural injunction and Biblical precedent to assert the right and duty of the people to resist a magistrate who contravened the law of God by oppressing the innocent. Charles I had 'made poor England Groan' by episcopal tyranny and illegal taxes, leading to bloody war. But now the people's war against 'Antichrist', to throw off the 'Yoak of this present Tyrant', was close at hand ('Treatise', 15, 25-32; TNA: PRO, SP 29/88/76). Twyn denied having known the content of the book but admitted that he had agreed to print 1000 copies for the publisher Giles Calvert because he needed money. He was said to have received 40's'. in part-payment, having dispatched printed sheets to Calvert's wife, Elizabeth. However, L'Estrange, supported by other witnesses, insisted that Twyn had read the book and had declared it 'mettlesome stuffe, the man was a hot fiery man that wrote it' ('Exact Narrative', 13). It was alleged that the publication of the 'Treatise' was to have been the signal for a rising by waiting rebels on 12 October. Twyn declined to reveal the author of the anonymous work. He was found guilty by a jury that included the printers Richard Royston and Thomas Roycroft and he was sentenced by Hyde to be hanged, disembowelled, and quartered. Twyn was executed at Tyburn on 24 February; his head was displayed over Ludgate and his quarters over other city gates. 


@@@@@


doc= 68210


Jenner, Caryl (1917-1973), theatre director and manager, was born on 19 May 1917 at 45 Ladbroke Grove, London, the daughter of Walter Ripman (1869-1947), an inspector of schools and author of many school textbooks in French and German, and his wife, Constance Brockwill Grier. She was educated at Norland Place School and at St Paul's Girls' School. She studied for the theatre at the Central School of Speech Training and Dramatic Art in London, gaining the Central School and London University diplomas in dramatic art in 1935. 
Caryl Jenner, to use the name she adopted, began her professional career as an actress and assistant stage manager at the Gate Theatre, London. From 1936 to 1938 she worked as a stage manager for various companies in London and the provinces. In December 1938 she became director of the Amersham Repertory Company, where until its closure in March 1949 she worked with the actress Sally Latimer on over 200 productions. During this time she showed a particular gift for creating theatre for young people, in 1948 becoming co-director of the Amersham Playhouse Schools Mobile Unit. 
In November 1949 Caryl Jenner launched her first independent theatrical enterprise, Mobile Theatre Ltd, which was committed to bringing live performance to towns and villages otherwise denied the chance to see theatre. This proved so successful that by 1960 she was managing five touring companies, four of which, jointly named the English Theatre for Children, were exclusively devoted to children's theatre. She ran summer theatre seasons in Seaford, Southwold, Cornwall, and Ayr and toured tirelessly: she visited schools for over fifty education authorities in Britain, extending her tours to include Northern Ireland (January 1960) and Malta (May 1960). She also directed children's plays at various major venues: Sam Wanamaker's New Shakespeare Theatre, Liverpool; the Lyric, Hammersmith; the Yvonne Arnaud, Guildford; the Coventry, Belgrade; and the Toynbee, Questors, and Garrick in London. 
Caryl Jenner's performances for children were distinguished by an appeal to the imagination (e.g. using a simple stepladder for a mountain). They did not involve any physical participation by the children nor post-show discussion, for she believed that this was the task of the teacher. She never avoided confronting difficult topics: one of her productions of this period, 'The Tingalary Bird' by Mary Mellwood, was an absurdist piece, in which an old couple argue their lives away. Many adults thought it too advanced for a child audience, yet it was watched attentively by the children themselves. 
In October 1962 Caryl Jenner renamed her organization Caryl Jenner Productions Ltd, and launched the Unicorn Theatre Club for Young People. It is for her pioneering work with the Unicorn Theatre that she is now best remembered. In October 1964 the Unicorn became a permanent London company of some eight to ten actors, but it almost failed two years later when it ran into serious financial difficulties. It was saved by support from the Gulbenkian Foundation, the Leche Trust, and members of the Unicorn itself. Most importantly, it began to receive grants from the Arts Council, establishing for the first time the principle of subsidizing children's theatre in Britain. The improved financial situation allowed her in July 1967 to take a six-year lease on the Arts Theatre in London. She would present plays and run workshops for children during the day, and let out the theatre for adult performances in the evening. By now she had abandoned touring and could rely on audiences' coming to her: from 1970 to 1973 her audiences at the Arts Theatre averaged 93 per cent, coming from 100 of London's 114 postal districts and from 308 towns outside London. In 1973 the annual audience was over 56,000, with 14,000 children from the inner London education authority attending forty term-time performances a year. In addition to her own productions she invited into the theatre puppet shows, dance pieces, films, and chamber music concerts. 
From 1967 to 1969 Jenner served on the young people's theatre panel of the Arts Council, and in 1970 she became chairman of the young people's theatre executive of the Council of Repertory Theatres. She was also the British representative for the Association Internationale du Theatre pour l'Enfance et la Jeunesse, attending its five-week assembly in Canada and the United States shortly before her death. Gaunt and mannish in appearance, a chain-smoker and extremely active to the point of being domineering, she died, unmarried, of lung cancer at the Middlesex Hospital, London, on 29 January 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 68212


Walker, Anthony (bap. 1622, d. 1692), clergyman, was baptized on 2 April 1622 at Conington, Cambridgeshire, the son of William Walker ('fl'. 1610-1660), a clergyman. While it is possible that his mother was Mary Bois ('bap'. 1599, died 1638), daughter of the biblical scholar John Bois, of whom Walker wrote a brief life, it is more likely that she was his stepmother. Smith suggests she and Walker married in 1618, but a date of 1629 has also been recorded. Walker was educated in Ely, and (from 1638) at St John's College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA in 1642 and MA in 1645. He was incorporated at Oxford in 1657. Ordained in 1644, Walker was appointed as tutor to the stepdaughter of John Gauden in the same year, and Walker also assisted Gauden in his parochial duties at Bocking, Essex. About 1647 Walker became domestic chaplain to the principal patron of East Anglian puritanism, Robert Rich, earl of Warwick, at Lees, Essex. He was intimate with Mary Rich, who described him as 'Good natured' and an 'Ingenious persone' (BL, Add. MS 27357, fols. 22-3). In 1650 Walker was appointed rector of Fyfield, Essex, a living in the disposal of the Rich family. He continued as a spiritual mainstay of the Rich household, providing fellowship and funeral sermons when required. On 22 July 1650 Walker married Elizabeth Sadler ['see 'Walker, Elizabeth (1623-1690)], with whom he had eleven children, all of whom predeceased him. Walker edited her vivid autobiography as 'The Holy Life of Mrs. Elizabeth Walker' (1690). 
Walker welcomed the Restoration, his first published work being a sermon on the occasion. He petitioned Charles II to enable him to receive the degree of DD from Cambridge, from which he had been debarred during the interregnum. In 1662 he conformed to the 'Act of Uniformity', and he remained as incumbent of Fyfield until his death. Additionally he was perpetual curate of St Mary Aldermanbury, London, from 1664 to 1666, and from 1690 to 1691. Owing to the poor health of his wife he became a regular visitor to Tunbridge Wells, where he appears to have occasionally preached. Two of these sermons were published in his 'Fax fonte accensa' (1684), which also included meditations 'for the use of those who attend the Mineral Waters' ('Fax fonte accensa', sig. A9'r'). In 1685 Walker suffered some form of persecution for ten days, perhaps on political grounds: he obliquely refers to being the victim of 'spightful Malice' ('Holy Life of Mrs. Elizabeth Walker', 133). Palgrave alleges that Walker was imprisoned at Tilbury. Walker concurred with the revolution of 1688-9, seeing it as an opportunity for national reformation, as he suggested in 'The True Interest of Nations Impartially Stated', his Chelmsford assize sermon of 1691. Elizabeth Walker died on 23 February 1690 and on 21 September of the following year Walker married Margaret Masham (died 1730) of Oates, Essex, possibly the sister-in-law of Damaris Masham. Walker was dead by 18 April 1692, and was probably buried on that date at Fyfield. He endowed the village with several charities. Josiah Woodward, another spiritual reformer of the 1690s, preached his funeral sermon at Fyfield on 18 April. 
Of his eleven published works Walker is remembered for 'A True Account of the Author of a Book Entituled Eikon basilike' (1692). Here he defended himself from Richard Hollingworth, who had attacked Walker for his belief that it was John Gauden, rather than Charles I, who was author of the 'Eikon basilike'. Walker reiterated his claim, and told how Gauden had discussed the work with him and had claimed that the royal family knew about Gauden's role in the work's composition. Gauden also showed Walker the manuscript, which Walker himself claimed to have delivered to be printed in London in December 1648. The 'True Account' ignited a pamphlet war which raged throughout the 1690s, but Walker himself took no further part in it, having died while the 'True Account' was in publication. 


@@@@@


doc= 68213


Benson, Gervase (d. 1679), Quaker leader, lived at Haygarth in Sedbergh, Yorkshire, and Kendal, Westmorland; he also had a house at Borratt in Sedbergh. A notary public before 1640, and later commissary of the archdeaconry of Richmond at Kendal, Benson was the first ecclesiastical lawyer to join Kendal corporation, which was dominated by mercers. Elected in December 1640, he became an alderman in April 1641, an unusually rapid promotion. 
Early in the civil war the Kendal corporation was subordinated to divisions within the Westmorland gentry between ardent royalists and neutrals. Benson revealed his own political inclinations on 9 May 1644 when he tried unsuccessfully to commit the town to parliament by inviting Lancashire parliamentarian forces to Kendal; however, it was the Scottish invasion of Cumbria in September that brought Kendal under parliamentarian control. Whether or not the Scots' arrival had any influence over his election as mayor of Kendal at Michaelmas 1644, Benson leapfrogged two more senior corporation men into the mayoralty. Thereafter he became a county JP in his own name, despite doubts that he had enough land in Westmorland to qualify, a measure of his rising importance. He was known as Colonel Benson in 1645, and was in command of local forces in the town's small garrison, but recent research has not confirmed twentieth-century claims that he served in the New Model Army. In March 1646 he helped to organize a presbyterian classis in Westmorland. 
Benson was driven out of Kendal during the second civil war. However, after parliament's victory he and other parliamentarian aldermen became more prominent in a county and regional administration purged of royalists, and he became known in London. From this local power base Benson and his allies used the 1650 oath of engagement to attack royalist and conservative members of Kendal corporation; their reports prompted the House of Commons in October to remove corporation men who had not taken the oath. The resort to an outside authority not only challenged the town's charter but also suggests that Benson had enjoyed only minority support in the corporation. 
While Benson evidently favoured the republic it is not clear how far his religious tenets had moved by late 1650, and his signature to a cleric's augmentation in July 1651 does not suggest he was then a sectarian. Nevertheless a year later, on 6 June 1652, George Fox visited a gathered church at Sedbergh led by Benson, whenceforth the colonel is counted a Quaker. He tried to shield James Naylor in the latter's trial at the Westmorland sessions on 11 January 1653, and later that year he advocated Quaker tenets in public debates in Kendal. Benson's sectarianism found little support among his corporation colleagues, who were busy imprisoning Quakers, and they excluded him in September 1653. In the meantime the corporation and local clerics had begun a pamphlet war against Quakers, to which Benson would answer in 1655. He must have been one of the first Quakers to be removed from office on the grounds of religion, though after his dismissal from Kendal corporation he was for some time still able to protect Quakers through his place in county and national affairs. 
The dominance of George Fox in Quaker history has probably undervalued the contribution of Gervase Benson to the early years of Quakerism. Benson was one of the founders of the Friends, and remained involved in the affairs of the notable Quaker Fell family of Swarthmore into the 1670s. He is credited with important early missionary work in London in 1653, and with Quaker fund-raising campaigns. He spoke for northern Quakers in organizational matters, on occasion in opposition to Fox. Benson also had a special interest in tithes. In the autumn of 1653 he and others lobbied parliament for the anti-tithe cause, and with effect: a division in parliament on 10 December 1653, which favoured the abolition of tithes, precipitated the demise of the Nominated Parliament. His wife, Dorothy (died 1656), whom Benson had married before June 1652, was equally active, and, with her neighbour Anne Blaykling, she was imprisoned at York by December 1653 for a period of at least a month. Benson's youngest son, Emanuel, was born during this imprisonment. Gervase wrote against tithes in 1655, and his 'Cry of the Oppressed' (1656) also publicized Quakers who were persecuted for non-payment of tithe. He was again among those who petitioned parliament over tithe in 1659. Benson's legal training and probate office made him particularly valuable to Quakers on trial, and in dealing with oaths, especially in probate. He contributed in 1655 to a printed discussion of Quaker difficulties with the oath of abjuration. 
Benson buried Dorothy at their house at Haygarth on 28 February 1656, and in 1660 he married Mabell, widow of John Camm of Camsgill. After the Restoration, he was credited by the Friends with effective intervention over oaths with Anglican probate officials. He published two books on the issue of oaths, in 1669 and 1675. By about 1678 he had moved back to Kendal; he died there and was buried in the Quaker burial-ground on 5 May 1679. His will, made in 1678, mentions his wife, and three sons and five daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 68215


Delaval, Lady Elizabeth (1648?-1717), memoirist and Jacobite agent, was the only child of James Livingston, first earl of Newburgh (1621/2-1670), nobleman, and his first wife, Catherine (died 1650), eldest daughter of Theophilus Howard, second earl of Suffolk, and widow of George Stuart, ninth seigneur d'Aubigny. Her parents were supporters of Charles I during the civil war and fled from Bagshot, Surrey, to The Hague in 1649. After the death of her mother in 1650, Lady Elizabeth was brought up by her father's sister, Dorothy, wife of the second Lord Stanhope, at Nocton, Lincolnshire, before being appointed in 1662, when she was fourteen, a maid of the privy chamber to Catherine of Braganza through the offices of her half-brother Charles Stuart, third duke of Richmond. 
Lady Elizabeth is of interest as the writer of a manuscript volume of memoirs and meditations, now in the Bodleian Library, whose entries cover events in her personal life between 1663 and 1672. The volume itself appears to have been created many years after the events described, a fair copy transcribed from notes and loose documents. Its contents, which were mistakenly classified by Kirchberger as a 'religious diary' (Kirchberger, 59) and by Craster as a 'common place book' (Craster, 'Notes', 149), consist of a series of long prose entries, prayers, transcribed letters, and a poem. The reader is assisted with dated, descriptive headings and helpful marginal glosses identifying various people mentioned, which suggests the volume was intended for a wider readership than just the author herself. Through her narration of her childhood and her romantic misadventures, the volume sheds light on the upbringing and marriage arrangements of a girl belonging to a prominent royalist family and documents the range and nature of the reading and writing habits of a late seventeenth-century Englishwoman composing her autobiography. 
The early entries, written when Lady Elizabeth was fourteen, described selected events from her childhood that she saw as having shaped her character. She noted that she was very fond of reading romances, and that by the age of ten she had 'red severall great volumns of them; all Casander, the Grand Cyrus, Cleopatra and Astrea' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 78, fol. 15). As a child she also appeared in several theatrical performances staged at Nocton, even persuading the family servants to act in a performance of Guarini's 'Il pastor fido' with herself as Amaryllis. Interspersed among her accounts of the secular events of her life are prayers and meditations on her attempts to control her passions. Her rendering of the events of her life, however, is shaped more by the conventions of romance fiction than religious meditation. 
After becoming a maid in the queen's household Lady Elizabeth quickly became disillusioned with court life, castigating herself for contracting debts she could not pay and flirting with attractive young men. She noted, without apparent irony, that the men behaved and spoke just like her favourite romance characters and described falling in love with James, Lord Annesley, son of the earl of Anglesey; according to her memoirs, it was her aunt and not her father who objected to this match. The conclusion of their relationship resembled a typically tangled seventeenth-century romance plot: Annesley gave way to pressure from his father and in 1669 married Lady Elizabeth Manners, sister of Lord Roos. Roos had, apparently, combined with Lady Stanhope to engineer the marriage with the design of removing Annesley from the scene and marrying Lady Elizabeth himself. The final entries of the memoir chronicled Lady Elizabeth's bitter disappointment with the fickleness of her lover, described her lack of interest in her father's choice for her marriage partner, Robert (1647-1682), son of Sir Ralph Delaval of Seaton Delaval, Northumberland ['see under 'Delaval family], and their subsequent lacklustre marriage, which commenced about July 1670. They had no children. 
Lady Elizabeth did not complete her personal history, leaving the final third of the volume blank, but she lived on for many years. In November 1677 she unsuccessfully sought an appointment with the newly married Mary, princess of Orange, and in January 1682 she was reported to be in London but 'looks very plaine' ('Rutland MSS', 2.64). Her husband died on 1 August 1682 and by a licence of 1 April 1686 Lady Elizabeth married Henry Hatcher of Kirby, Lincolnshire, who was aged about twenty-two. In 1689 she was involved in the so-called Pewter pot plot and a warrant was issued for her arrest for carrying correspondence from the exiled court of James II; the leader of this plot was Edward, Lord Griffin, the husband of her cousin Essex, both of whom are mentioned with affection in her memoirs. Abandoning England for France, Lady Elizabeth is said to have died in Rouen in 1717. 


@@@@@


doc= 68216


Blundell, William (1560-1638), antiquary, was the elder of two sons of Richard Blundell (died 1591/2) and his wife, Anne, of Little Crosby, in the parish of Sefton, near Liverpool. The family, who had been landowners in the area since the thirteenth century, resisted the Reformation and suffered persecution throughout the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Following the regular family practice of education abroad, in 1580 William went to Douai, while his brother, Richard, became a priest. 
Richard Blundell the elder died a prisoner in Lancaster Castle in 1591 or early 1592, accused of harbouring a priest. William was imprisoned at the same time, and subsequently spent two years in prison in London. A search of his home late in the 1590s forced William to flee; his wife, Amelia or Emilia Norris (died 1631), was also committed to prison in Chester and released only on the intercession of friends at court. Both Blundells received pardons at the accession of James, but this did not mitigate the persecutions of protestant neighbours and shrieval officials, who through the next three decades conducted frequent raids on his cattle and searches of the hall, culminating in the sequestration of the estate during the civil wars. 
In addition to collecting a number of family records and several pro-Catholic 'ditties', William Blundell recorded a particularly significant archaeological discovery, a large trove of Anglo-Saxon coins found by accident in 1611, a few months after he had secretly established a cemetery for local Catholics on his own land, because the local puritan minister had refused Catholics the right of burial at Sefton church. The site of the cemetery was known as the Harkirke because oral tradition suggested that a church had once stood there. Blundell's cemetery endured for over a century, though an attempt by the sheriff of Lancashire, Sir Ralph Assheton, to destroy the graveyard in 1624 was met with resistance by Little Crosby's residents. The riot on that occasion resulted in an action against Blundell and his tenants in Star Chamber, and he was fined $2000 by the court in 1629, though this was eventually reduced. 
Blundell took the discovery of the coins as a sign of divine favour of his family's endurance in the face of persecution, and he immediately turned some of his trove into a silver pyx and chalice; the pyx still survives at Little Crosby church. Blundell penned two accounts of his coins, using various medieval and contemporary scholarly and historical sources to identify them. He also had a copperplate reproduction of several of them executed, and this circulated throughout the seventeenth century. The coins themselves were sent to relatives in Wales during the civil wars for safety and were lost soon after. Blundell's account of his coins demonstrates a surprisingly good grasp of Anglo-Saxon history and numismatics. 
Blundell died at Crosby Hall, Little Crosby, on 2 July 1638. He was buried in Little Crosby. His wife, Amelia, and their son, Nicholas, had both died in 1631, while his daughter, Margaret, had entered, under the name of Winifred, the English Augustinian house at Louvain. Blundell was succeeded by Nicholas's son, also William Blundell (1620-1698). 


@@@@@


doc= 68218


Coffin, Richard (1622-1699), book collector and antiquary, was the son of John Coffin (1593-1622) of Portledge, Alwington, north Devon, and Elizabeth, the daughter of Henry Hurding of Dorset. As he was born after his father's death, Coffin immediately succeeded to the house and manor of Alwington, which had been the family's home since the time of Henry II. The extent of his education is unknown. 
Coffin remained in Devon throughout the civil wars. He married first, by licence dated 28 June 1644, Mary Dennis of Orley, and second, on 3 February 1648, Dorothy Rowe (died 1666), with whom he had two sons and nine daughters. Although he had royalist sympathies, Coffin took up Cromwell's invitation in the late 1650s to county gentlemen to sit on the commission of the peace and there was a suggestion in a letter from a J. Hanmer dated 23 March 1659 that he stand for parliament. 
At the Restoration, Coffin was a JP and a commissioner for money for disbanding and paying off. He married, for a third time, by licence dated 29 July 1674, Anne, daughter of Edmund Prideaux of Padstow, Cornwall, and with her he had two more sons and two more daughters. His chief public office was to act as sheriff for Devon during the year 1684-5, when he was required to participate in the bloody assize. Correspondence with his under-sheriff, Thomas Northmore, survives concerning the disposal of the heads and quarters of those executed for their part in the Monmouth rebellion. 
Coffin rarely left Alwington, his chief interests being antiquarian pursuits and book collecting. The historian John Prince (died 1723) wrote of him: 'He hath a noble library and knows well to make use of it' (Prince, 181). Prince was aware of his extensive collections of local genealogical information and, when sending him a manuscript of John Hooker's 'Synopsis chorographical of Devonshire' on 20 March 1686, he suggested that Coffin was 'excellently qualefyed, both with learning judgment, manuscripts leisure and estate' to prepare a historical collection for the press ('Portledge Papers', 6-7). None of his compilations was printed although a manuscript entitled 'Genealogical survey of gentlemen entitled to coat armour in the south-west of England' survives among the Pine Coffin manuscripts in the Devon Record Office. To build up his extensive library, which was especially strong in historical and topographical writings, he used as his London agent the bookdealer Richard Lapthorne, some 400 of whose letters, written between 1683 and 1697, survive in the Pine Coffin manuscripts. 
Coffin died on 25 December 1699 at Portledge, and was buried at Alwington on 4 January 1700. He was survived by his wife, Anne, who died on 10 August 1705, and succeeded by his eldest son, John. Later generations added little to the library, which was sold by the Exeter bookseller Shirley Woolmer in 1801 with a catalogue listing 4515 items. 


@@@@@


doc= 68219


Lewis, John (d. 1615/16), historian, was born in Pencraig, Radnorshire, the son of Hugh Lewis and his wife, Sibyl, daughter of Roger ap Watcyn. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 28 February 1563 and called to the bar after 4 June 1570. Lewis was the author of 'The history of Great Britain, from the first inhabitants thereof, till the death of Cadwalader, last king of the Britains', which he wrote at the encouragement of James I. He sent the king proposals for a history of Britain about 1605, in response to the great interest in British history occasioned by the succession of a Scottish monarch. The king, who was then promoting the fuller union of England and Scotland, encouraged Lewis, and by 1612 the author had submitted, probably through Henry, prince of Wales, some six books. The complete history was first published in 1729, over a century after its author's death, by the antiquary Hugh Thomas, perhaps using the text still extant in Harleian MS 4872 in the British Library. Like earlier Welsh historians, for instance Humphrey Llwyd (whose 'Breviary of Britayne' is appended to the 1729 edition of Lewis's book), Lewis was reluctant to part with the much-criticized legends of ancient British kings, from Brutus the Trojan to King Arthur, as recorded by Geoffrey of Monmouth. Lewis's modern sources included a recent Roman Catholic historian, Richard White of Basingstoke, and he had also read Samuel Daniel's more critical history first published in 1612. He claims in the 'History' (1.39) a personal acquaintance with the great antiquary William Camden, and a collection of manuscripts, largely in his hand, indicates that he was acquainted with other notable Elizabethan intellectual figures such as John Dee. The precise date of Lewis's death is unknown, but was some time between 14 February 1615, when he dated his will, and 12 February 1616, when it was proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 68220


Savile, Henry, of Banke (1568-1617), collector of manuscripts, was born on 20 October 1568 at Blaithroyd (sometimes known as the Banke, or Southowram Bank), Halifax, Yorkshire, the second (but oldest surviving) son of Henry Savile (died 1607) and Frances Moyser. There are hints that some of his family were Catholics, but Savile himself seems to have conformed to the established church. He matriculated from Merton College, Oxford, in 1588, during the wardenship of his distant cousin and namesake, Sir Henry Savile, the translator of Tacitus and editor of Chrysostom. Savile graduated BA from St Alban Hall on 30 May 1592, proceeded MA on 30 June 1595, and was licensed to practise medicine on 28 November 1601. Thereafter, he travelled to France, Germany, and Italy, returning as an accomplished scholar in painting, heraldry, and antiquities. With the exception of one letter to William Camden, such activity has left little trace. 
Savile is best remembered for his collection of manuscripts, which were in part inherited from his father and perhaps from his grandfather; possibly these had been acquired after the dissolution of the Yorkshire monasteries. Another thirty-one manuscripts came from the collection of a fellow Yorkshireman, John Nettleton, who may himself have been holding them in hope of a restoration of Catholicism. In any event, Byland, Fountains, and Rievaulx abbeys were well represented on Savile's shelves. Details of the collection are in two lists (BL, MSS Harley 1879 and Add. 35213) and a letter of William Crashaw to Isaac Casaubon, though Savile's will suggests that the two lists represent no more than a fraction of it. The library was particularly strong in texts of the chroniclers and in works of theology. While Savile's manuscripts were used for antiquarian purposes by Archbishop James Ussher, Lord William Howard, and others, the most famous instance of such use occurred when William Camden published a passage purportedly from Asser's 'Life of Alfred' proving the antiquity of Oxford University, and then claimed that it came from a manuscript in Savile's possession. It is unclear whether Camden was referring to our Henry Savile of Banke or to his father, and the manuscript has disappeared. Though Savile tried to sell his collection during his lifetime, in the end the collection was broken up, with volumes coming to Sir Simonds D'Ewes, Ussher, the earl of Arundel, and Sir Robert Cotton. 
Savile died in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 29 April 1617, and was buried in the old church. There is no record of him having married or had children. 


@@@@@


doc= 68221


Cranston, Andrew (d. 1708), creator of a public library, was born in the late 1650s in Scotland to unknown parents. He was perhaps connected to the lords Cranstoun, for the descendants of his only known brother, James, assumed the same coat of arms. There is a volume in his library inscribed to him from Dr Alexander Cranston of Edinburgh in 1676, who may be another relative. 
Cranston attended Edinburgh University, graduating BA in 1673. In 1681 he was presented to the parish of Greenock, Renfrewshire, by Sir John Schaw. He received a testimonial for ordination from the presbytery at Renfrew on 1 June and was instituted on 5 July 1681. He left the parish after only nine months; he was absent for much of this time, and had refused to subscribe to the 'Test Act'. In May 1683, about to depart a troubled Scotland, he donated 520 books to Edinburgh University Library. The gift was revoked a year later, however, for he had chosen to make his home in England. He may have joined his brother James, a fellow graduate of Edinburgh, who had been ordained at Ely in 1683. 
Cranston settled at Reigate, Surrey, where on 5 May 1687 he married Mary ('c'.1662-1707), daughter of the vicar, John Williamson (died 1697). The marriage licence gave Cranston's age as about twenty-seven. Several children were baptized at Reigate, but only a daughter, Elizabeth, survived infancy. 
In 1693 Cranston was instituted to the parish of Shepton Mallet, Somerset, though it appears he was never resident there. He ceded Shepton when, after his father-in-law's death, he was instituted as vicar of Reigate on 29 October 1697. Cranston also inherited the mastership of Reigate Free School, occupying both offices until his death. In 1697 he was incorporated MA at Cambridge, and from 1699 he was vicar of Newdigate. 
In 1700 Cranston became a correspondent of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) and shortly afterwards began monthly catechism classes and communion services. Early in 1701 he undertook his chief work, the foundation of a lending library, since maintained in the upper vestry of Reigate parish church for over three centuries. It was initially intended for the clergy of Ewell archdeaconry, but its terms were expanded by a deed of 4 November 1708 to establish it as a public library 'for the use and perusal of the Freeholders, Vicar and Inhabitants' of Reigate, 'and of the Gentlemen and Clergymen inhabiting in parts thereunto adjacent' (Hooper, 63). Several local figures donated books, including John Evelyn, the earl of Shaftesbury, and the speaker Arthur Onslow, while Cranston himself gave some seventy works and obtained others from the SPCK. By 1705 the library contained over 1600 volumes, most concerned with contemporary theology. It remains a significant, early example of a public lending library. 
Cranston died on 11 December 1708 and was buried in the vestry of Reigate church, underneath his library. A Latin epitaph claims he 'was indefatigable in his munificence, and even in death does not desist from collecting for coming generations'. 


@@@@@


doc= 68222


Gilliat, Sir Martin John (1913-1993), army officer and courtier, was born on 8 February 1913, the younger son and second of the three children of Lieutenant-Colonel John Babington Gilliat (1868-1949), army officer and landowner, of Hertfordshire, and his wife, Muriel Helen Lycette, 'nee' Grinnell-Milne. Both parents came from banking families and Gilliat's paternal grandfather, John Saunders Gilliat (1829-1912), was governor of the Bank of England. Gilliat was educated at Eton College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, before joining the King's Royal Rifle Corps in 1933. He became his father's heir when a tiger killed his brother in India in 1935. 
During the Second World War, Gilliat served in the British expeditionary force and was mentioned in dispatches, before being captured at Calais in 1940. Until 1945 he was a prisoner of war, escaping four times. His first two escapes were from the marching column, heading to Germany. On his third attempt he remained free for a fortnight, almost reaching Hamburg. In 1943 he tunnelled his way out of Eichstadt, to be recaptured near the River Danube. He was then imprisoned in Colditz Castle, serving as adjutant to the senior British officer. A fellow prisoner, David Walker, noted his qualities of wit and unflappability. Though he remained in touch with his old comrades Gilliat avoided Colditz reunions in later life and was haunted by his memories and the experiences of his fellow prisoners. He suffered recurring nightmares for the rest of his life. He was appointed MBE in 1946. 
Gilliat served in 1947 as deputy military secretary to Lord Mountbatten when he was viceroy and subsequently governor-general of India. He witnessed scenes of inhuman cruelty during the Delhi riots that preceded independence. In September 1947 he was wounded in the ear-pate and back when shots hit his car at point-blank range, during a night-time visit to a trouble spot in the Pahargunj area after dining with Mountbatten. He was invalided back to Britain. In due course he was delighted to be appointed comptroller to Malcolm Macdonald, high commissioner for the United Kingdom in south-east Asia, serving from 1948 to 1951, enjoying Macdonald's relaxed intelligence in contrast to Mountbatten's fussing about protocol and his 'ferocious flapping' (Gilliat to D. Walker, 16 Dec 1949, Walker papers). He then served as military secretary to Field Marshal Sir William Slim, governor-general of Australia from 1953 to 1955. As such he was to the fore during the visit of the queen and the duke of Edinburgh in February 1954, and was appointed CVO. 
On the advice of his friend and contemporary Martin Charteris, a fellow green jacket, Gilliat was appointed private secretary and equerry to Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, in 1956, slipping into the job, as Charteris described it, 'like a prawn into aspic' (Charteris, memorial address). For nearly forty years he was responsible for all the queen mother's official duties, and he was one of the mainstays of her hospitable and almost Edwardian court. Relish for life permeated every quarter of the building, emanating from Queen Elizabeth, whom he invariably called 'my employer'. All invited visitors were made to feel special, and if the hour of the day was appropriate their nerves were relaxed by what Charteris described as 'a fortifying drink pressed into their hands', poured out by Gilliat (Charteris). He was responsible for many aspects of the queen mother's horse-racing career, and was himself an owner, training with Ryan Price. He was also the animateur of many private parties at Royal Lodge. He was particularly energetic at ensuring that Queen Elizabeth met and entertained leading figures from the worlds of the arts, business, the services, and racing, while Ruth, Lady Fermoy, one of her ladies-in-waiting, brought in musicians. He and Lady Fermoy were the leading lights of the queen mother's August house parties at the castle of Mey. 
Gilliat was promoted KCVO in 1962, and GCVO in 1981. He was deputy lieutenant of Hertfordshire from 1963 (vice-lieutenant from 1971 to 1986), and a JP for that county, living for many years at Appletrees, near Welwyn. He was made an honorary bencher of the Middle Temple, and an honorary doctor of laws of the University of London, both in 1977. He held his alma mater, Eton, in high esteem, visiting the college regularly and paying for the painting of three leaving portraits, two by Derek Hill and one by Andrew Festing. He was a steward at Windsor racecourse, and at Kempton Park (later patron). He sat as a magistrate on the bench at St Albans crown court. He was also an 'angel', backing at least thirty plays on the London stage, and to him fell the sometimes complicated task of finding a suitable play for his employer to attend on her birthday. 
By 1979 the possibility of Gilliat retiring was mooted by his friends, but he felt that since he was working for someone thirteen years his senior, he could not do so unless she wanted him to. She did not, and he was soon joking that she looked at him with amazement when at times his energy flagged. When the queen mother celebrated her ninetieth birthday in 1990 he predicted on television that she would reach her century, but wondered how many of the household would still be with her. He continued to serve even after his health collapsed, and he died, in office, of liver cancer, in London on 27 May 1993. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 68225


Gascoigne, Catherine (1601-1676), abbess of Cambrai, was born at Barnbow, west Yorkshire, one of the nine children (four sons and five daughters) of Sir John Gascoigne, first baronet (1557-1637), and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Ingleby (died 1637), of Lawkland, near Settle, Yorkshire. The Gascoignes had been resident in the West Riding of Yorkshire since the late thirteenth century and included among their forebears the early fifteenth-century justice William Gascoigne and the theologian Sir Thomas Gascoigne, who was elected chancellor of Oxford University in 1444. Catherine's mother was a staunch recusant, a position also taken up by her father from about 1604. Four of the couple's children became Benedictines, probably through the influence of the monk Dom Richard Huddleston. Catherine's elder brother John (Dom Placid) was president of the English Benedictine congregation between 1649 and 1653, and the life abbot of the Benedictine monastery of Lamspringe in the bishopric of Hildesheim, Germany, from 1651 to 1681. 
Catherine Gascoigne was drawn to a religious life as a young woman, though initially she was firmly discouraged from leaving the country on account of her beauty. In 1623, following a disfiguring attack of smallpox, she travelled to Douai with the intention of joining a strict French community recommended by her brothers. On reaching Douai she accepted an invitation to join eight young English women then 'en route' for Cambrai to establish a monastery directed by English Benedictine monks. On 24 December 1623 Catherine Gascoigne entered Our Lady of Consolation and all nine founders professed on 1 January 1625. Initially the new community began its religious life under the guidance of three experienced nuns seconded from the English Benedictine community in Brussels. However, the Jesuit-inspired spirituality of these older nuns was not congenial to the new community whose members favoured a Benedictine spirituality at odds with the Jesuits' emphasis on the control of personal spirituality. In July 1624 the Benedictine monk Father Augustine Baker was sent to instruct the English community in a more contemplative form of prayer, by which individual nuns were encouraged to follow a form of devotion best suited to their ability and temperament. Initially he was received enthusiastically and his advice was followed, but in time his teachings provoked resistance, with the convent's founder, Dame Gertrude More, leading the opposition. Only Dame Catherine did not waver in her fidelity to Father Baker's teachings and way of prayer. In May 1628 Dame Catherine's younger sister Margaret (1608-1637) entered the convent at Cambrai and professed in June of the following year; another sibling, Christiana, was also destined for Cambrai, but probably died on the journey from England. 
In 1629 Dame Catherine was appointed abbess of Cambrai, a position to which she was re-elected every four years until her resignation in 1673. Between 1641 and 1645 she and two other nuns were sent by the archbishop of Cambrai to reform the Benedictine monastery at St Lazare in Cambrai where, serving as temporary superior until 1645, she restored regular discipline. As abbess of Our Lady of Consolation, Dame Catherine was responsible for the spiritual and temporal welfare of the community, duties that proved particularly challenging in such unsettled times. During the 1640s the English civil wars significantly reduced the convent's investments, though it was later admitted that what funds they had received were not well managed by the brethren (Father Anselm Crowder to Abbess Catherine Gascoigne, 26 Jan 1655, Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 36, no. 19). By 1650 the community numbered as many as fifty nuns and, with circumstances now so straitened, a filiation was made to Paris in 1651-2. Both communities continue in the twenty-first century at Stanbrook Abbey, Wass, north Yorkshire, and St Mary's Abbey, Colwich, Staffordshire, respectively. 
The chapter of 1629 that oversaw Dame Catherine's appointment as abbess also invited Father Francis Hull to become the convent's chaplain. This led to conflict as Father Hull accused Father Augustine Baker of anti-authoritarian doctrines and sought to pressure the nuns to obey his rule. On 1 August 1633 the general chapter of the English congregation ordered fathers Hull and Baker to submit accounts of their teachings to them. Dame Catherine and Gertrude More were also asked to provide accounts of their manner of prayer. Dame Catherine began her response: 'My prayer I know not how to express, but it seems to me to be a longing and vehement desire of the soul thirsting after the presence of God, seeking and intending only and wholly His will and pleasure with as much purity of intention as my imperfection will permit.(Bibliotheque Mazarine, Paris, MS 1202, quoted in Bowden and Lux-Sterritt, 2.463)' For Dame Catherine the 'exercise of the will taught us by father baker, tends to no other thing... than this, to bring the soule to a total subjection to God, and to others for God and according to his will' (Downside Abbey, Baker MS 33, fol. 343, quoted in Walker, 'Spiritual property', 241). Her account was approved by the English Benedictine congregation's theologians who encouraged her to: 'Goe on couragiously, you have choosen the best way: we beseech Allmighty God to accomplish that union which your hart desireth' (Benedictines of Stanbrook, 17). The chapter also endorsed Father Baker's writings, but both he and Father Hull were removed from Cambrai. Notwithstanding this judgment, in 1655 Dame Catherine was requested by Father Claude White, president of the English Benedictine congregation, to hand over all of Father Baker's manuscripts to be purged of their 'poysonous, pernicious and diabolicall doctrine' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. A 36, fol. 45, quoted in Van Hyning, 289). Dame Catherine politely refused and stood firm, prompting Father White to accuse her of 'in a damnable way running to perdition' (ibid.). In March 1655 she appealed for support from Father Anselm Crowder, her agent in England, and Father Augustine Conyers. Dame Catherine even considered withdrawing the community from the congregation in order to protect the integrity of Father Baker's writings. That proved unnecessary following Father White's death later that year, though she remained protective of the manuscripts which, in 1676, she described to Father Benedict Stapylton as 'the greatest treasures that belongs to this poor community' (St Mary's Abbey, Colwich, MS 43). Stapylton's recommendation was that 'the Ladie Abbesse... put them into such hands as you shall desire that they may be preserved entire and without alteration' (Archives Departmentales du Nord, Lille 20 H10, fol. 505, quoted in Walker 'Spiritual property', 242). 
More than forty years earlier Dame Catherine had embraced Baker's contemplative way of prayer, to which she remained faithful throughout her monastic life. She was the dedicatee of Serenus Cressy's edition of Baker's works, 'Sancta Sophia', and of a collection of Gertrude More's writings, 'The Holy Practices of a Divine Lover', which were both published in 1657. As abbess, Dame Catherine was also an able administrator and adept at marshalling support to defend Baker's teachings. She led by example, 'tempering the severity of a zealous superior, careful to maintain regularity, with the indulgence of a wise and kind Mother... She sought no comfort in creatures, nor to be esteemed or loved of them, but she had recourse to God alone. (Benedictines of Stanbrook, 29)' Following the Father White episode Cambrai suffered a marked decline in admissions and -- with the exception of Dame Catherine's niece Frances (1637-1708), who arrived in July 1655 -- there were no further candidates until 1660, when entrants began to return. Dame Catherine retired as abbess in 1673 and died on 21 May 1676 at Our Lady of Consolation, Cambrai, where she was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 68228


Leigh, Philip (1650/51-1717), Jesuit, was born in February 1650 or 1651 in Lancashire, the youngest of four sons (possibly there were more children) of Alexander Leigh (died in or before 1676) and Anne, 'nee' Taylor, of Orrell, Wigan. An elder brother, John, also became a Jesuit. Educated at the English College at St Omer from 1667 (or earlier) until 1671, he departed in the latter year to the English College, Rome, where he was ordained priest on 13 April 1675. He was a good scholar and defended the theses of theology in a public disputation at the college in Rome. In 1678 he left Rome, and he joined the Jesuits in that year. He was soon appointed to Gateshead in the Durham district where he worked as a missionary for more than twenty years during which he was for some years the local Jesuit superior. From the time of his coming to England he usually went by the names of Layton or Metcalfe. In the reign of James II he had a spacious chapel in Gateshead and opened a classical or grammar school which did not survive the revolution of 1688. When Bishop Leyburn, the vicar apostolic, came to Newcastle and Gateshead in 1687 he confirmed more than 300 persons. In January 1688 Leigh preached a sermon 'on the day of thanksgiving' before the mayor of Newcastle, Sir William Creagh, which was subsequently printed by Henry Hills, the king's printer. It was described early in the nineteenth century by Dr Weedall, president of Oscott, where the library possessed a copy: 'it displays learning, piety and moderation' ('Catholic Miscellany', 1826, 334). After two years in London Leigh moved to Wales about 1710, and became chaplain to the earl of Powis at Powis Castle. From about 1713 he served on the mission at Holywell, where he was superior of the Jesuits in north Wales. During these years he is believed to have edited 'The Life and Miracles of St Wenefride, Virgin, Martyr and Abbess, Patroness of Wales' (1712), originally translated by the Jesuit priest John Falconer and printed by the press of the English College at St Omer in 1635. Leigh died at Holywell on 31 or possibly 1 January 1717, and was probably buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 68229


Lloyd, John (c.1630-1679), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Brecon, the son of Walter Lloyd. He was a brother of William Lloyd, archdeacon of south Wales, and is believed to be the brother of Mother Margaret Bruno Lloyd of Paris. On 16 October 1649 he entered the English College at Valladolid after studying humanities at Ghent and on 7 June 1653 was ordained a secular priest. On 17 April 1654, after the completion of his studies in philosophy and theology, he was sent to conduct missionary work in south Wales and served various Catholic communities on the Glamorgan-Monmouthshire border. From this period he lived at the home of Walter James, a Roman Catholic from 'Treivor' in St Maughan's parish, Monmouthshire, and was also associated with the Turberville family of Pen-llin in Glamorgan, the Carne family of Nash in the same county, and the Williams family of Llan-ffwyst, Monmouthshire. 
With the persecution of Catholics as a result of the Popish Plot accusations Lloyd was arrested at the house of his patron, John Turberville of Pen-llin Castle, near Cowbridge, on 20 November 1678. He was imprisoned in Cardiff and brought before Judge Richard Bassett of Beaupre and charged with saying mass at Llandeilo Gresynni, Pen-Rhos, and Treivor. He was then committed to gaol, possibly in the Black Tower of Cardiff Castle where, shortly afterwards, he was joined by the Jesuit Philip Evans. His persecutors had to wait several months before they found witnesses willing to testify against him or produce any evidence of his being a priest. The gaol calendar for May 1679 names Samuel Hancorne of Colwinston, Benjamin Browne of Cardiff, and Margaret and John Nicholls as those who came forward to testify against him, the witnesses in the original recognizances taken at Monk Nash on 7 April being excused from presenting evidence. It has been conjectured that 'a friend of Lloyd had paid their forfeits of $20 each in the hope of saving the priest's life' (Lewis, 63). In May 1679 Lloyd and Evans were brought before the spring assizes in the shire hall in Cardiff and both were found guilty of high treason as seminary priests under the statute of 27 Eliz. I. 
The execution of Lloyd and Evans was delayed until 22 July 1679, during which time both men were allowed out of prison, and it was believed that they would be reprieved. On 28 May the privy council had nevertheless issued an order to execute all condemned priests, though the two were not informed until 21 July. Consequently on 22 July the two priests were put in a cart and with their arms tied behind them were taken to the gallows field in Cardiff. When the two men arrived at their place of execution they knelt down, kissed the post, and cited a prayer from St Andrew: 'Welcome good Cross' ('Short Memorandums', 5). Evans was the first to be executed and Lloyd shortly afterwards. During the proceedings he 'stood by with as much constancy and cheerfulness as any man could have' and before his execution he addressed the crowd and briefly explained the reason why he was prepared to suffer for his religious beliefs: 'I believe in the Holy Catholick Church, and those three Virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity: I forgive all those that have offended me; and if I have offended any body I am heartily sorry for it, and ask them forgiveness' ('Short Memorandums', 5-6). After this speech he was, like Evans, hanged, disembowelled while still conscious, decapitated, and quartered. 
The executions were to have a significant impact upon the Catholic community in south Wales and 'the total disruption of Catholic life that the persecution caused, was to inflict a grievous blow upon the Church from which it was to take nearly a century to recover' (Lewis, 62). Shortly after the executions 'Short Memorandums', about Evans and Lloyd, was published at London. On 25 October 1970 Pope Paul VI canonized Lloyd as one of the forty martyr saints of England and Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 68230


Loop, George (1648-1716), Discalced Carmelite friar, was born in Herefordshire, the son of George Loop, of a long-established Catholic family from Garway in Herefordshire, and his wife, Winifred. He was sent to Flanders for his education and found his vocation in the order of Discalced Carmelites who maintained a priory at Louvain. He was professed on 22 October 1667 aged nineteen, taking the name Edmund of St Joseph. He continued his studies at Louvain and at the Missionary College of St Pancras in Rome. 
In September 1677, shortly after his ordination as a priest, Loop returned to England to minister in Hereford. He had hardly begun his apostolate when he became a victim of the Popish Plot. His presence in the county became known to John Scudamore of Kentchurch, a justice of the peace, who instigated a search for him. He was forced to take flight, finding refuge in woods and outhouses. He was once hiding in a haystack which the searchers investigated with their swords, but managed to escape detection and injury. He fled disguised as a farmer's wife and reached London where his pursuers soon caught up with him. He had several more remarkable escapes. On one occasion his was the only room in the house where he was lodging which was not searched and another close call came when pursuivants crawled from the roof of an adjoining house and reached his window but were unable to break in. 
In 1680 Loop moved to Worcester where there had been no priest for over a year because of the furore resulting from the plot. He ministered to the scattered Catholic community and was renowned for his poverty of life and generosity to the poor, giving away the alms which richer people gave him for his own subsistence. He travelled on foot and dressed in the rags of a beggar. His austere lifestyle not surprisingly led to a breakdown in health. The Worcester Catholics pleaded that he should not be taken from them and he was given an assistant, Francis of the Child Jesus, who was able to share the labours of the mission. 
The accession of James II in 1685 permitted the provision of a public Catholic chapel in Worcester which was opened with solemn mass on Christmas eve 1686 in a house in Foregate Street. When James II fled in 1688 the priests also had to leave as the mob prepared to attack and wreck the chapel. They were able to return to Worcester about 1690 and the mission remained in their care until about 1720. The English vicar provincial, Lucian of St Teresa, died in 1691 and Loop succeeded him, holding the office for at least twelve years. He moved to London where he also ministered as chaplain to a Catholic family. 
During his early years as provincial Loop wrote 'The Queen of Heaven's Livery', subtitled 'A short treatise of the institution, excellency, priviledges, and indulgencies of the most famous confraternity of our Blessed Lady of Mount Carmel, commonly called the Scapular: together with a brief relation of the antiquity and never-interrupted succession of the religious order of the Carmelites, to whom the B. Virgin Mary gave this her sacred livery', printed in Antwerp in 1709, although a first edition appeared in 1706. A proposal to publish a new edition in 1725 was suppressed by Bonaventure Giffard, vicar apostolic of the London district, in the light of virulent attacks on the work by Richard Jameson, an eccentric secular priest in Lancashire. Jameson published his criticisms in 1726 in a pamphlet entitled 'The Queen of Heaven's Livery is Quite Worn Out with Ould Age, and Past Mending'. Loop died in London on 6 February 1716. 


@@@@@


doc= 68232


Pickering, Thomas (1621?-1679), Benedictine monk and victim of the Popish Plot, was probably born in 1621 as a member of the Pickering family of the barony of Kendal in Westmorland. His father was killed during the civil wars. He made his profession as a lay brother of St Gregory's Priory, Douai, in 1660, and in 1665 was sent to London to assist his fellow monks in the royal chapel at St James's Palace provided by Charles II for his Catholic queen, Catherine of Braganza. He acted as steward and doorkeeper and when Catholic priests were banished in 1675 he, as a lay brother, was allowed to stay, presumably continuing to enjoy his generous stipend of $50 per annum. He was arrested on 29 September 1678, following the accusations of Titus Oates, as being a crucial figure in the supposed Popish Plot, the man chosen to shoot the king, for which he was to have 30,000 masses said for his soul. Put on trial on 17 December 1678 along with John Grove and William Ireland, Pickering was alleged, with Grove, to have lain 'in wait for the King several times in 'St James's Park' and other places' and 'that once in particular, it had been done by 'Pickering'; if it had not pleased God to have prevented it by an Accident unforeseen. The Flint of his Pistol being loose, he durst not then attempt it, though he had an Opportunity; for which neglect... he underwent the penance of 20 or 30 strokes. ('Tryals', 12)' Pickering was an unlikely assassin. 'His conversation was so mild and his constitution so weak and delicate that the Queen speaking of him said she did not believe in the truth of his conspiracy, since they have accused Br Pickering, for added the Queen, 'I should have more fear to be alone in my chamber with a mouse than with him'. (Allanson, 12)' Nevertheless he was found guilty of treason and, after being reprieved many times, was finally hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn on 9 May 1679. He died with a smile on his face, claiming his innocence to the end: 'Is this', said he, 'the countenance of a man that dies under so gross a guilt?' (Allanson, 93). He was buried on the same day in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields and was beatified as a martyr by Pope Pius XI on 15 December 1929. 


@@@@@


doc= 68233


Plessington, John (1636-1679), Roman Catholic priest, was born at Garstang, Lancashire, the son of Robert Plessington of Dimples Hall, Garstang, and his wife, Alice Rawstone, daughter of Laurence Rawstone of Tottington, Bury. His was an old Lancashire family, originating from Pleasington near Blackburn. He was the youngest brother to Robert, Laurence, and Elizabeth, and grew up during the civil war, in which his father surrendered to parliamentarian troops at the capture of nearby Greenhaigh Castle, and became a prisoner. A chaplain to the family, Thomas Whitaker, who was captured and executed in 1646, had been educated at St Omer and Valladolid and John Plessington followed the same route to the priesthood after his first studies locally at a Jesuit school at Scarisbrick Hall, near Ormskirk. 
He studied humanities at St Omer and then theology at Valladolid in 1660, where the college register records his missionary oath, to return to serve in England. He received orders, up to that of deacon, at St Mary Magdalen in Valladolid (under the name Scarisbrick) and was ordained priest in Segovia on 25 March 1662. He returned to England in April 1663 because of ill health. Few details of his life in England are preserved. He was first in Lancashire, possibly at home in Dimples Hall recovering his health, and he seems to have been at Holywell in north Wales for some years before going as chaplain and tutor to the Massey family of Puddington Hall, Burton, Wirral, Cheshire, from about 1669. Edward Massey left him $5 in his will, made on 7 September 1671. 
As a result of the Popish Plot of 1678, which was exploited as a highly successful political weapon, Plessington, though far from the hysteria in London, was arrested by Thomas Dutton, who duly received a reward. At his trial in Chester no connection with the alleged plot could be established and he was charged under the, by then, threadbare act of 27 Elizabeth as a Catholic priest. His trial was in May 1679, and a summary was sent to parliament. During his nine weeks in prison some friends, including Sir James Poole of Poole Hall, a leading recusant, visited him. He remained cheerful and when the executioner came to measure him for his coffin was reported to have remarked to Poole that he was now giving orders for his last suit. 
Plessington was executed at Gallows Hill, Broughton, Chester, on 19 July 1679. His last speech was taken down and later printed as 'The Speech of Mr William Plessington' (1679). His quartered remains were brought to Puddington Hall to be exposed, but this was prevented locally, and after resting on an oak table in the hall they were interred secretly in Burton churchyard. The location, though not marked, was known and a later priest, Ralph Platt, asked to be buried in the same grave. In 1902 the vicar, Mr Morrell, transcribed a half-worn inscription from Platt's gravestone and a modern inscription was later placed to both priests. At the time of Plessington's canonization in 1970 as one of the forty martyrs an attempt was made to exhume his remains, but a number of bodies were found to be intermingled. A breviary he used is preserved at Upholland College, Lancashire, and has a number of marginalia giving the names probably of some of the families he served. 


@@@@@


doc= 68234


Wilmot, William (d. 1720), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Yorkshire and entered the English College at Valladolid in 1670 under the name Quartermain. In view of his already mature age he was ordained priest after a shortened course of studies, and returned to England on 23 February 1676. Titus Oates, who was expelled from that college the following year after only four months there (apparently taking with him part of the college register covering the previous few years), identified Quartermain as Wilmot in his 'Exact narrative of the horrible plot and conspiracy of the popish party against the life of his sacred majesty, the government, and the protestant religion'. Most later references follow Oates in this, and it could be argued that the Gulielmus Quaterman in the college register was nothing more than an alias adopted by Wilmot on arrival at Valladolid. 
During 1685-6, if not for longer, Wilmot acted as secretary to Bishop John Leyburn, the vicar apostolic appointed by Rome for England following the succession of the Catholic James II to the English throne in February 1685. In that capacity he probably lived with Leyburn in Lincoln's Inn Fields and presumably accompanied him to the ceremonies in the new royal chapel in Whitehall on Christmas day 1686, vividly described by John Evelyn. By 1687 Wilmot was sufficiently well known for Oates to imagine that he might become bishop of Carlisle in any Catholic restoration. Despite his reputation, he does not seem ever to have been an elected member of the chapter, but he did attend the important meeting on 9 July 1694 as proxy for George Barrett, the archdeacon of Shropshire. 
Kirk mentions a John Wilmot, secretary to Bishop Leyburn, who wrote a pamphlet in answer to William Sherlock's 'Discourse Concerning the Nature, Unity and Community of the Catholick Church'; translated by William Darrell it was published at St Omer in 1697 as 'Controversial Discourses Relating to the Church', under the initials B. D. Given the link with Leyburn and that no later writers have identified another Wilmot contemporary with William, it may be that William Wilmot (alias Quartermain) was its author. 
In later life Wilmot lived at Holywell, Flintshire. Kirk states that he was already there by 1694, but according to the 1718 deposition of Thomas Parry, innkeeper of the Cross Keys, he came to live there only in 1716, the inn being a front for the Catholic secular chapel in Holywell, just as the Star fronted the Jesuit mission there. The national scare that followed the abortive Jacobite rebellion of 1715 led to an attack on both chapels in the course of 30 June 1718 by a party of dragoons sent from Preston under the direction of the renegade priest Richard Hitchmough. Although the Jesuits managed to save most of their effects, at the secular chapel furniture and other items were seized under the terms of the warrant. Wilmot himself was arrested and charged before the local JP with being a popish priest after identification on oath by Hitchmough. He was bailed soon afterwards and died at Holywell on 2 August 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 68236


Wadding, Luke (1631-1687), Roman Catholic bishop of Ferns, was born in the town of Wexford, the son of Walter Wadding and Mary Sinnott. His father was a younger son of a landed family settled at nearby Ballycogley since the twelfth century. By the 1630s the townspeople of Wexford, with very few exceptions, had opted for the Catholic Counter-Reformation, and the Wadding family were prominent in the affairs of the confederate Catholics during the 1640s. 
However, on 11 October 1649 the town was stormed by Oliver Cromwell; the army ran amok and there was much loss of life and damage to property. Two years later, on 7 October 1651, Wadding was, in his own words, 'banished' and went into exile (Corish, 51). He studied at the University of Paris, was ordained priest, and taught for some time in Paris in some capacity. In 1667 his name was among those put forward for the presidency of the Irish College in Louvain. The next year, 1668, the bishop of Ferns, Nicholas French, in exile and with little prospect of returning to Ireland, named Wadding his vicar-general. Wadding returned to Ireland and settled in New Ross. Bishop French's hopes of returning steadily declined, and Wadding was appointed coadjutor bishop on 6 May 1671. He accepted the nomination, but French agreed that the consecration might be deferred until after his own death. Shortly afterwards Wadding moved to Wexford. 
The town still bore scars of the sack of 1649. It was controlled by an exclusively protestant corporation, but many of the former Roman Catholic merchants had returned. Their presence had to be at least connived at if economic life was to be carried on, and it appears that in some respects relations were quite good. Certainly Wadding was on good terms with many protestants as he set about rebuilding his own Catholic community. He began a series of parish registers that are the oldest extant in the Roman Catholic church in Ireland, and he recorded many details in a personal notebook, which survives. Pride of place in this was given to listing his library of about 700 works, ranging from the standard theology and spirituality of the Counter-Reformation to the English metaphysical poets. 
In 1684 Wadding published in Ghent 'A Small Garland of Pious and Godly Songs for the Solace of his Friends in their Afflictions'; a popular work, it was to be reprinted a number of times during the eighteenth century. It included a collection of Christmas carols, reflecting a local tradition ranging from before the Reformation to the present day. His notebook also details his efforts to furnish the chapel that the protestant corporation allowed him to build in 1684 and the house that he acquired in the same year. 
When the Popish Plot had erupted in September 1678 it was inevitable that Wadding should have been indicted. He escaped conviction, however, because he had good friends among the protestant community and because he could plead in all honesty that he was neither a bishop nor a vicar-general, this office having lapsed on Bishop French's death in Ghent on 13 August 1678. Wadding was soon under pressure not to defer his consecration any longer, but it was only prudent to be cautious for a time. No record of episcopal consecration survives but it took place some time in 1683 or 1684. After the accession of James II he attended the first of the provincial synods held by Archbishop Russell of Dublin in July 1685. Like the other bishops, he received a pension from the king, in his case $150 a year, but he did not live long to enjoy it. That his health began to fail is clear from a number of entries in his notebook dated 1687 detailing the disposition of his possessions after his death. He died in Wexford in December 1687 and was buried in the chapel of the Franciscan friary there. 


@@@@@


doc= 68237


Elston, Henry (fl. 1517-1559), Observant Franciscan friar, is of obscure origins. The name Elstow, by which he is sometimes referred to, is without contemporary justification. He first appears at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he was elected fellow in April 1517. But by 1520 he had joined the Observants at Richmond, Surrey, and in early 1532 he was warden of the friary attached to the palace at Greenwich. 
On Easter Sunday 1532 the provincial minister, William Peto, gave a powerful sermon before the king in the Greenwich friary chapel to dissuade him from putting away Katherine of Aragon and marrying Anne Boleyn. Elston achieved notoriety when, on the following Sunday, he heckled, from the rood-loft, a sermon by the king's chaplain, Dr Richard Curwen, who had been put up to contradict Peto. Subsequently Peto refused the king's command to deprive Elston of office, and both men were imprisoned at Lambeth Palace, and examined before the bishops and the Canterbury convocation. Later, to isolate them from other partisans of Katherine, they were moved to the house of the Conventual Franciscans at Bedford, where they were still detained in September. 
By June 1533 Peto and Elston were living, with other English friars, in the friary at Antwerp. Here Elston was engaged in posting books and letters across the channel. In October 1533 he forwarded letters from Rome to Peto's replacement as provincial minister in England, and in April 1534 was alleged to be predicting a Spanish invasion of England. In 1538 Peto joined Cardinal Reginald Pole at Rome, but Elston stayed in Antwerp, where he was known as Pole's factotum, and remained active in forwarding letters to and from England, Scotland, Padua, and Rome. He was warden of the Antwerp Franciscans in 1545, twice visitor of the Observant province of Lower Germany, and provincial minister in 1549. 
Elston returned to England as warden when the Greenwich friary (suppressed in 1534) was refounded by Queen Mary in 1555. But in July 1559 the friary was again suppressed, following Elizabeth's accession, and Elston died in exile at an unknown date. 


@@@@@


doc= 68238


Weston, William (1654/5-1729), Franciscan friar, joined the English Recollect Franciscans in 1672, and was ordained a priest in 1679. He was a zealous missionary in England for many years and was appointed guardian of the Douai friary on two occasions. He participated in the consecration of the St Amand Chapel for the Eyston family at East Hendred, Berkshire, on 24 September 1687. The chapel was open to all comers until 11 December 1688, when it was raided by 'some loose fellows', but Weston, who happened to be in the district, said mass there again on Monday, 24 June 1689, and the chapel continued in use. He is described as a man who liked solitude and was a strict advocate of a well regulated religious mode of life, given to afflicting his body, and was called an example of true Franciscan humility to everyone. Father Thaddeus praised his description of evangelical poverty, stating that it was scarcely possible to describe it more clearly or accurately. 
Weston's book, 'An abstract of the doctrine of Jesus-Christ, or, The rule of the frier-minors: literally, morally, and spiritually expounded', was published in 1718. In some copies it is followed by 'A supplement to the abstract, being examples of holy men, drawn from the monuments of the order, and apply'd to each text of the rule', which dates to 1726. In the preface he declared that his one intention was to promote the observance of the rule 'ad litteram, sine glossa', forgetting that his work was a very long gloss indeed and included the glosses of other writers. He used four earlier expositions of the rule by Antonio of Cordoba (1621), Bonaventure Dernoye (1657), Pierre Marchant (1669), and Gaudentius vanden Kerchove (1700). The dissection of the rule into so-called precepts and counsels was then well under way. He quoted abundantly from the Old and New Testaments, and used the 'opuscula' and 'legenda' of St Francis, together with the chronicle and the annals of the order. The book was popular, to judge from the number of extant copies in friaries. 
In the 'facultas' (permission) he is named as 'custos custodum'. A Franciscan province, such as England, was made up of many guardianates, divided into a few custodies for administrative purposes, with a 'custos' in charge of each; one was chosen to represent and to co-ordinate the work of the others, this post being the one held by Weston. He also wrote a commentary, perhaps unpublished, on the Barcelona general statutes of the order, presumably meaning those promulgated in 1621 by the minister general, Benignus of Genoa, rather than those promulgated by the general chapter in Barcelona in 1461. According to his obituary notice Weston died rather suddenly, if not unexpectedly, aged seventy-four, on 11 April 1729 at Douai, in the friary of the Friars Minor Recollects of England, and was buried in the north end of the cloister there. 


@@@@@


doc= 68239


Joseph, Robert (1500-1569), Benedictine monk and letter writer, was probably born at Evesham, where he attended the grammar school before entering the Benedictine abbey in 1517 or 1518, when he changed his name from Becham to Joseph. In 1523 he was sent to Gloucester College, Oxford, and was recalled to Evesham in early 1529 after graduating BA. He became the abbot's chaplain, but was demoted in 1530 by the new prior to teacher of the novices. He spent his spare time manoeuvring for a return to Oxford and writing letters to monastic friends in the regions of the Severn and Avon and at his old university. In December 1532 he was permitted to return to Oxford where, in January 1533, he wrote his last two epistles. On 23 April 1535 he was granted his BTh. He was mentioned as prior of Gloucester College in December 1537 and replaced in early 1538 when he returned to Evesham, where he remained until the dissolution, when he changed his name to Wyllys, possibly the name of his mother's family. For nineteen years he was a secular priest at All Saints' Church in the former monastic precincts. In 1559 he was presented to the vicarage of Cropthorne, 3 miles west of Evesham, where he remained until his death, and where he was probably buried, in July 1569. He bequeathed his Latin books, and probably his collection of 170 letters and some Latin verses, to two priests with whom he had corresponded forty years earlier. 
Joseph's letter-book (NL Wales, Peniarth MS 119; published in 1967, edited by Dom Hugh Aveling and W. A. Pantin), which has survived by chance, illuminates university and monastic life just before the Reformation -- the entire collection dates from between 1530 and 1533. Joseph's attempts to point out when he was being ironic and playful, and his request to recipients that they return letters for copying, suggest that he was compiling a guide to letter writing for the novices under his charge, displaying his skills in rhetoric and in the composition of elegant and idiomatic Latin in the style of Erasmus. He required his correspondents to reply in Latin, and his references were from Cicero, Augustine, Virgil, Terence, Plautus, and contemporary humanists such as Erasmus and Baptista Manteanus. Little interest was shown in the scholastic theology of the middle ages -- Scotus was the butt of frequent jokes -- and little attention was paid to the more strident reforming aspects of even Erasmus's thought, such as church reform and the application of learning to a life of inner commitment to Christ. The writings of antiquity were read and imitated as models of persuasion; Joseph lectured to novice monks, displaying rhetoric and teaching appreciation of the comedies of Terence and Plautus. However, his letters also chart the erosion of the regency system within the university, as temporary public lecturers were being superseded by a more formal system of tutorials and lectures within the colleges. Joseph wrote letters on behalf of his younger relatives to the tutors whom he felt could supply them with a suitable humanist education. 
The core of this humanist, literary life was friendships sustained by letter writing. To his closest friend, John Feckenham of Evesham, who was also at Gloucester College, Joseph wrote: 'If I could not exchange letters with you my heart would break' (letter 111). Friendship and communication through letters attained for Joseph a religious significance. He remembered his friends in his daily prayers; mass was an opportunity to meditate on absent friends; and letters from a friend could be read many times, like the scriptures. Little interest was shown in this collection in rationalizing the monastic life and none in asceticism. Joseph enthusiastically endorsed Erasmus's secular ethic and frequently expressed irritation with the rituals and duties of the Evesham community when they distracted him from the joys of letter writing. By instinct conservative in religious matters, he reacted with horror to heresy while showing scant interest in doctrinal debate and merely expressed a desire to follow the custom and footsteps of 'our fathers' (letter 104). He was able to adapt to the dissolution of his house in 1540 by becoming a secular priest near his monastery (a vocation for which he always expressed the highest regard) because it allowed him to maintain his friendships. There was nothing of the martyr in his temperament. 
Joseph's letters are also of literary interest. He expressed the joys of creative writing. To John Dorell at Oxford he wrote: 'See how many words your little letter has given rise to. Keep writing: send whatever comes into your head' (letter 15). For Joseph this could include memories of his Oxford youth, and humorous references also abound: for instance to the quality of Westminster sausages, likened to candles. The letters attest the spread of Erasmian humanism into possibly unexpected places, and also bear witness, in the frequency with which he asks his friends to reply to his messages, and the anxiety with which he seeks reassurance that he has not offended anyone, to the sensitive temperament of their author. 


@@@@@


doc= 68241


Newdigate, Sebastian (1500-1535), Carthusian monk and Roman Catholic martyr, was born on 7 September 1500 at Harefield, Middlesex, the seventh of seventeen children of John Newdigate (died 1528), serjeant-at-law, and his wife, Amphyllis (died 1544), daughter and heir of John Neville of Rolleston, Nottinghamshire, a kinsman of the earls of Westmorland. The family was influential politically, and Newdigate was brought up at court. He may have spent time at Cambridge University, and later became a favoured member of Henry VIII's privy chamber. Newdigate married Katherine, daughter of Sir John Hampden of Great Hampden and widow of Henry Ferrers. They had two daughters, Amphyllis and Elizabeth. 
Following Katherine's death, Newdigate entered the London Charterhouse. His elder sister Jane Dormer (1496-1571), wife of Sir Robert Dormer of Wing, Buckinghamshire, visited the prior to question Sebastian's suitability for so strict an order, after life at court. Nevertheless Newdigate was admitted, was ordained deacon on 3 June 1531, and had become a priest before he died. His family was exceptionally devout: two brothers were knights of St John, two sisters became nuns, at Syon and at Holywell, and Jane Dormer was renowned for her piety. In the later 1520s Newdigate was himself involved in the confiscation of protestant books in London, where he brought to light the activities of the radical heretics known as the Christian Brethren. The London Charterhouse was at the forefront of the propaganda war against protestantism in England. In May 1535, after the community refused to accept Henry VIII's supremacy over the English church, Prior Houghton and two other Carthusian priors were martyred. A few days later Newdigate and two fellow monks were arrested. They were imprisoned for a fortnight, chained to pillars by their necks and legs, standing in their own excrement to encourage them to capitulate. The king allegedly visited Newdigate, trying to persuade him to recant with alternate entreaties and threats. All three monks stood firm and were condemned for treason. On 19 June they were dragged on hurdles to Tyburn, where they were hanged and quartered, and their remains displayed around the city. 
Newdigate is said to have been quite tall, well-proportioned, and attractive. He was lively and pleasant, and behaved with directness and honesty. His courageous death, as one of eighteen Carthusians martyred under Henry VIII, inspired others to adhere to Roman Catholicism, notably members of his own family. He was beatified in 1886 by Pope Leo XIII. 


