@@@@@


doc= 68242


Paslew, John (d. 1537), abbot of Whalley, was probably from the Paslew family of Wiswell in Whalley, Lancashire. He became a Cistercian monk, but nothing is known of him until he was elected abbot in 1507, when he was apparently in his late thirties. Surprisingly, he was not ordained priest until 1518. Whalley was in the second rank of Cistercian houses: not one of the greatest, but large, fairly well endowed, and successful. Paslew was ambitious for himself and for the abbey. He rebuilt the abbot's lodgings, added a lady chapel to the church, and probably built the north-east gateway. He travelled widely across the north and to London; he assumed a mitre, was summoned to the Canterbury convocation in 1529, and acted as a collector of clerical taxation in 1532. But Paslew's achievements had a price, and in 1530 he began to sell abbey plate, and to pursue tithes and fees more aggressively in the appropriated parishes, that is, those where the monastery appointed the vicar and received the most valuable tithes. 
Paslew's pride was to be followed by a dramatic fall. With a gross annual revenue of $541 and twenty-seven monks, the abbey was outside the terms of the 1536 'Act of Suppression', which was directed against the smaller monasteries, and seemed safe: paradoxically, it was brought down by the Pilgrimage of Grace, the movement which aimed to save the monasteries. In the autumn of 1536 Paslew and his monks were caught between the northern insurgents and a force raised for the king by the earl of Derby. The earl planned a muster at Whalley on 30 October, but rebels from Yorkshire had got there first. On 23 October, after a brief and perhaps token resistance, the abbey opened its gates to the rebels and Paslew and eight of his monks took the rebel oath to protect the church and the commons. Paslew was summoned by the rebel leadership to conferences at York and Pontefract, but did not attend and seems to have taken no further part in the rebellion. Nevertheless, and despite a general pardon, after the failure of the rising he was tried for treason by royal commissioners at Lancaster. Old, ill, and apparently in despair, Paslew seems to have expected fulfilment of a dream that he would die in 1536-7: he pleaded guilty to five counts, and was executed at Lancaster on 10 March 1537. The precise grounds for his conviction are not known, but the crown used it as a pretext for closing the abbey. A month after Paslew's execution his monks were ejected and his house was no more. 


@@@@@


doc= 68243


Sedbergh, Adam (c.1502-1537), abbot of Jervaulx, was, as a Cistercian monk, ordained subdeacon at York on 22 September 1526, deacon on 6 April 1527, and priest on 15 June. These dates suggest that he was born about 1502. When still a young man, in or about 1533, he succeeded Robert Thornton as abbot, and almost immediately found himself involved in high politics. On the visit of Sir Francis Bigod and Dr Thomas Garret to the abbey, on 11 July 1535, George Lasynby interrupted Garret's sermon in justification of the royal supremacy to assert that the headship of the church belonged to the pope alone. Sedbergh joined with Bigod in denouncing Lasynby to Cromwell, and the monk was subsequently tried for treason at the York assizes in August and executed. 
Sedbergh emerged unscathed from this encounter, only to succumb the following year. On 11 October 1536, soon after the outbreak of the Pilgrimage of Grace in the East Riding, insurgents arrived at Jervaulx demanding to see him. With his own father and a boy, Sedbergh fled to Witton Fell and remained there for four days. In his absence the rebels tried to persuade the convent to elect a new abbot, and in this extremity the monks prevailed upon him to return. Threatened with death by the rebels, Sedbergh took their oath and went with them to the great muster at Darlington where he spoke in favour of the rising. While the royal pardon might have extended to the abbot's behaviour in the first half of the pilgrimage, it could not save him from his actions early in the new year, when in February local agitators tried again to raise the commons and came to Jervaulx for a second time. On this occasion, before seeking refuge in Bolton Castle he gave them money for drink, and passed them on for a further reward to the quondam abbot of Fountains, then resident in the abbey. Once he had defeated the rebels Norfolk dispatched Sedbergh and the quondam of Fountains to London, where they were tried on a charge of treason, condemned, and put to death on 26 May 1537. On account of the abbot's attainder, Jervaulx Abbey and all its possessions reverted to the crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 68244


Wood, William (c.1490-1537), prior of Bridlington, was, as an Augustinian canon, ordained subdeacon at York on 5 April 1511 and deacon on 19 February 1513. He became prior of his house on the resignation of William Brownefleet in June 1531, and for a brief time occupied the place in East Riding society traditionally assigned to the head of this wealthy monastery, in 1532 serving with the abbot of Meaux, Sir John Constable, and other gentlemen on a commission for fishgarths and weirs. In the same year he received a bequest from a Scarborough chaplain for forgotten tithes. 
All too soon, however, events at Westminster intruded upon Wood's customary activities. In October 1535 he refused to accede to Cromwell's suggestion that the crown had founded the priory, maintaining that their founder had been 'Lord Water Gauntt' (Walter de Gant), whose body lay in the priory choir. At their visitation in the autumn of 1535 Cromwell's commissioners uncovered three cases of immorality among the canons, but made no allegations against the prior. Afterwards Wood sent the priory's charters to Cromwell, as instructed, together with an annuity, begging him to favour the house. 
During the Pilgrimage of Grace, Bridlington had the ill fortune to be situated near Beverley, its starting point in Yorkshire, and the prior sent under duress, as he subsequently claimed, eleven men to help in the rising, providing each man with 20's'. in his purse. Wood also gave Robert Aske 20 marks and the rebels in Holderness $4. He later dispatched four horsemen to the siege of Scarborough. He further compounded his offences by offering hospitality in the priory to the York Dominican friar, Dr John Pickering, who wrote there to encourage the commons his verses beginning 'O faithful people of the boreal region'. In the aftermath of the rising Wood was charged with being a principal procurer of the first insurrection and a great mover in the second. Found guilty of treason he was executed at Tyburn on 26 May 1537, together with the abbot of Jervaulx and the quondam abbot of Fountains. As a consequence of the prior's attainder Bridlington Priory, with all its possessions, was forfeited to the crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 68245


Coote, William Alexander (1842-1919), moral reform campaigner, was born at 10 Norfolk Street, Strand, London, on 24 December 1842, son of William Coote (died 1845/6), painter (originally of Queen's county, Ireland), and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Forbes. His father died when he was three years old: the loss of status and material comfort that resulted, he was to recall, 'was indelibly carved on my mind', though he also noted that, 'with the ease of childhood I forgot my troubles, and soon adopted the ways and some of the habits of the boys of the neighbourhood' (Coote, 'Romance', 21). He 'was never fond of school' and left formal education at the age of twelve to train as a compositor in the firm of a relative who was a master printer. 
Life as a wage-earner led to an immediate increase in Coote's self-esteem but also exposed him, as teenage 'leader of about forty lads of my own age', to the temptations of central London. His 'chief amusement' was boxing, a fact he later deplored while admitting that the training was 'of immense value to me in life'. At the age of sixteen, after a late-night encounter with 'three young men who offered me a religious tract', he had a conversion experience. This led him to break with his teenage companions and to commit himself to a programme of self-education in compensation for 'the many neglected educational opportunities of which my conversion had made me conscious' (Coote, 'Romance', 22-3). 
On 25 June 1864 Coote married Eliza Palmer, daughter of Joseph William Palmer, deceased, a sailor, with whom he had, by 1881, two sons and four daughters. Over the same period his career as a compositor prospered, the opportunities having expanded rapidly in an era which saw the development of popular literacy and of the commercial press. It was in this period that Coote began to demonstrate his capacity for organization and leadership once again, first by playing a role in the printing trades' campaign for shorter working hours, thereafter by securing election in 1880 to represent his craft association, the London Society of Compositors, at the Trades Union Congress. His interest in campaigns for shorter hours was thereafter to lead him, about 1889, to support the formation of a union for local government workers, the National Municipal and Incorporated Vestry Employees Union (of which he claimed to be the founding organizer). 
By the early 1880s Coote was clearly ambitious to move directly into public life. From his local government base as a Camberwell vestryman he tried unsuccessfully to gain endorsement as a Liberal parliamentary candidate. His subsequent attempt to combine public service with making a living succeeded. In 1885, with the patronage of the crusading journalist W. T. Stead, he accepted nomination as foundation co-secretary of Stead's National Vigilance Association. The association, set up to campaign for the enforcement of the 1885 'Criminal Law Amendment Act', which raised the age of consent for girls, was to be Coote's base for the rest of his career. As secretary (or equivalent) between 1886 and his death he was to exhibit the twin characteristics that had first recommended him to Stead -- excellent organizational skills and unswerving commitment to the cause of 'social purity'. As secretary he emerged as a leading player in late-century campaigns to enforce 'decency' both in public behaviour and in literature. His admirers by the 1890s included Isabella Burton, widow of the anthropologist Sir Richard Burton, who made him her literary executor. His critics included Bernard Shaw who described him as 'a person of real importance... thoroughly respectable', yet 'in artistic matters a most intensely stupid man, and on sexual questions something of a monomaniac' (Shaw, 443). 
By the turn of the new century Coote had managed to extend his public reputation even further through his role as key organizer of an international campaign against the white slave trade. This was work that had begun in 1898 when, after an episode of 'reverie' resolving itself into a 'Divine Vision', he began a series of visits to 'every capital in Europe' in the hope of mobilizing an international policing network (Coote, 'Vision', 21). Though hampered by his inability to speak any foreign language, he became the acknowledged leader of the International Bureau for the Suppression of the White Slave Traffic, the sponsoring organization for a series of European congresses between 1899 and the outbreak of war in 1914. 
On the home front over the same period Coote's pursuit of indecency continued unrelentingly. In 1901 he joined Bishop Creighton of London in founding the local government pressure group the London Council for the Promotion of Public Morality. In 1906, after successfully lobbying the Metropolitan Police for a crack-down on street prostitution, he felt able to declare London 'an open-air cathedral' ('Parl. papers', 1908, 50, Cd 4260, question 6958). From his post at the National Vigilance Association he helped to co-ordinate pressure on government to sponsor the 1912 'Criminal Law Amendment Act', which was aimed at the white slave traffic. By the coming of war in 1914, however, Coote's vision of moral reform as a state-assisted campaign against individual sin was coming to seem increasingly outdated to those who sought to revalue human sexual drives as impulses to be harnessed to 'race improvement'. By the war's end, indeed, Coote was to make an open break with the war-assisted 'social hygiene' movement, unable to reconcile its open discussion of sexual behaviour with his own priority of repressing obscenity (Mort, 204). 
Coote died of 'malignant disease of the bladder' at his home, 161 Grove Lane, Camberwell, London, on 26 October 1919, having been appointed OBE the previous year. After a funeral at St Matthew's Church, Denmark Hill, he was buried at Forest Hill cemetery on 31 October. 
Public appreciation of Coote's work had always been mixed. Bernard Shaw, while deploring his single-minded philistinism, simultaneously acknowledged 'achievements which we must all admit honourable to him'; Josephine Butler, his one-time co-worker in the rescue of the innocent from sexual exploitation, came to deplore him as 'most unsound' and one who 'loves coercion'. All were able to agree that (in the words of the 'Vigilance Record', Nov 1919, 85) he was 'practically adroit' and displayed 'extraordinary perseverance'. In his tenacity and puritanism he can be recognized as, in many ways, an embodiment of the respectable and upwardly mobile working-class male of the later Victorian and Edwardian era. 


@@@@@


doc= 68247


Aston, Herbert (bap. 1614, d. 1688/9), poet, was baptized in Chelsea on 16 January 1614, the third son in the family of ten children of Sir Walter Aston, later Baron Aston of Forfar (1583-1639), of Tixall, Staffordshire, and his wife, Gertrude, daughter of Sir Thomas Sadleir of Standon Lordship, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Gertrude. He accompanied his father on his second embassy to Madrid between 1635 and 1638, as letters addressed to him in the private correspondence of the Aston family indicate (BL, Add. MS 36452). Eight of those letters are from his youngest sister, 
Aston compiled a miscellany of popular poetry from 1634 onwards (Beinecke MS Osborn b.4) and continued to write his own poems, fifty of which are recorded or alluded to in 'Tixall Poetry' and BL, Add. MS 36452. He took up arms for the king during the civil war. In his account of Katherine's death at the age of forty on 9 July 1658, Aston writes that they had ten children (BL, Add. MS 36452, fols. 53-58'v'); two daughters were educated at the Augustinian priory headed by their aunt Winefrid Thimelby. After his wife's death Aston retired to Bellamore in Colton, Staffordshire, the house he built for her by 1656, where he died intestate; he was buried at Colton on 9 January 1689. 
Constance was married about 1634 to Walter Fowler ('bap'. 1620, died 1684) of St Thomas Priory, Staffordshire; they had twelve children. She also compiled a manuscript miscellany (Huntington MS HM 904), which preserves poetry written largely to and by her circle of predominantly Roman Catholic family and friends, who included Lady Dorothy Shirley and Sir Richard Fanshawe. It contains eight poems by her brother. Constance Fowler was buried at Baswich, Staffordshire, on 29 March 1664. 


@@@@@


doc= 68248


Austen, Katherine (b. 1629, d. in or before 1683), diarist and poet, was born in the parish of St Mary Colechurch, London, one of at least seven children of Robert Wilson (died 1639), draper, and his wife, Katherine (died 1648), daughter of Richard Rudd of London, and his wife, Anne. Katherine married Thomas Austen (1622-1658), barrister, on 10 July 1645, but when Thomas died at the premature age of thirty-six in 1658, Katherine was left a widow with three young children, Thomas, Robert, and Anne. Austen's 'Book M' (BL, Add. MS 4454) dates between 1664 and 1668, and is a series of autograph meditations on the trials of her widowhood, primarily her extended legal battle to retain her husband's manor of Highbury or Newington Barrow, Middlesex, for her under-age son Thomas. She is fascinated by the significance of dreams, interpreting her own and collating anecdotes about dreams experienced by contemporary divines and court figures (including John Donne, Henry Hammond, and William Laud). 'Book M' also contains thirty-four verse meditations in rhyming couplets. Austen determined not to remarry, out of 'perticular esteeme to my Dear Friend' ('Book M', fol. 68'v') and fear of compromising her children's financial interests. She resided in Hoxton, Middlesex, for the duration of her widowhood. The precise date of her death is unknown, but her will was proved in 1683. 


@@@@@


doc= 68249


Bargrave, Robert (1628-1661), merchant and diarist, was born in Kent, possibly at the family home, Eastry Court, Eastry, near Sandwich, on 25 March 1628, the second surviving son of Isaac Bargrave (bap. 1586, d. 1643), dean of Canterbury, and his wife, Elizabeth (1593-1667), daughter of John Dering and his wife, Elizabeth Wotton. Bargrave was admitted pensioner of Clare College, Cambridge, on 23 March 1642 and then matriculated from Corpus Christi, Oxford, on 10 May 1643. Both 'Alumni Cantabrigienses' and 'Alumni Oxonienses' accept without question that he was the Robert Bargrave who had been admitted to Gray's Inn on 14 August 1640, at the unusually young age of twelve, along with his elder brother, Thomas. If this was so, then Tilmouth speculates that it may primarily have been to take part in the inn's dramatic entertainments (Tilmouth, 158). 
Bargrave compiled a diary of four voyages undertaken between April 1647 and March 1656 as a merchant trading in the Levant and other Mediterranean locations (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C 799). The first account (April 1647 to September 1652) describes his journey by sea from England to Constantinople with the entourage of the new ambassador, Sir Thomas Bendish, and his experiences as a merchant in Turkey. The second account (September 1652 to March 1653) recounts his arduous travels home overland from Turkey to England. About 1653 Bargrave married Elizabeth Turner ('b'. 1632) of Canterbury. They had four children: Robert (1654-1659), Hester ('b'. 1658), Elizabeth ('b'. 1659?), and Isaac (1660-1663). Their two sons were commemorated in a pavement tablet at Canterbury Cathedral (removed in 1993 but reproduced in Cowper, 41). Bargrave's third voyage (November 1654 to February 1656) took him to Spain and then on to Venice; and his rapid progress home overland from Venice to England (February to March 1656) is described in the fourth account. Bargrave's diary records his extensive experiences of commercial and diplomatic affairs, as well as his encounters with emigre royalists, and his relatives John Bargrave and John Raymond, who together compiled the invaluable guidebook published under the latter's name as 'An Itinerary... Made through Italy' (1648). Interspersed with these travel records are examples of Bargrave's own poetry, including a masque with musical settings and dance steps, and his general observations as a tourist. Another, now lost, manuscript of these travels was at Bargrave's childhood home, Eastry Court, until at least the mid-1830s. 
After March 1656 Bargrave was employed as personal secretary to Heneage Finch, earl of Winchilsea. Through Winchilsea's influence, Robert was nominated as clerk of the castle court at Dover. He was then appointed by the Levant Company as secretary at Constantinople, following Winchilsea's appointment as ambassador there. This latter position was one of considerable influence, requiring Bargrave to serve as chancellor of the company's factory and also to deputize for Winchilsea if he was unable to perform his ambassadorial duties through absence, illness, or death. On 20 October 1660 Winchilsea sailed from the Downs on the 'Plymouth', under the command of Thomas Allin, with Bargrave and his new private secretary, Paul Rycaut. On route to Turkey, Winchilsea's party stopped at Lisbon and Algiers and several official documents concerning these visits (now in the National Archives) were penned by Bargrave. The 'Plymouth' arrived at Smyrna on 14 December and departed for Constantinople on 7 January 1661, leaving behind Bargrave who had been laid low by a severe fever. His death was reported on 9 February 1661 to Winchilsea by the English consul at Smyrna, Richard Baker: 'Yo'u'r serv'ant' mr Bargrave is dead & buried at Santa Venaranda whither wee all accompanied him; his wife most disconsolate & to be admired for her love & care of him' (Leics. RO, DG.7 Box 4982). His widow, Elizabeth, set out from Smyrna on 29 March for the return journey to England, accompanied by the retiring ambassador, Sir Thomas Bendish, with whom Bargrave had first travelled out to the Levant in 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 68250


Boothby, Frances (fl. 1669-1670), playwright, was the first woman to have an original play professionally staged in London: her tragicomedy, 'Marcelia, or, The Treacherous Friend', was performed by the King's Company early in 1669 and published in 1670. The imminent performance of 'Marcelia' was noticed in a letter from Elizabeth Cottington to Walter Aston, written in January 1669. 'I shall tremble for the poor woman exposed among the critticks' (Clifford, 'Letters', 2.60), she continued, with well justified fears: Boothby's only other known work, a poem lamenting the play's failure, is also preserved in the papers of the Aston family. 'Marcelia' is a conservative work, showing the defeat of upstarts and the triumph of aristocratic values. In portraying the fall of an ambitious favourite, it perhaps alludes to the recent fall of Clarendon, and in depicting a king who is (temporarily) false in love, it contributes to the widespread, but as yet tactful, theatrical criticism of the king's morals. 
Boothby's identity is a mystery: even her forename is known only because it is preserved by Gerard Langbaine (Langbaine, 26-7), and almost the only certainty is that she was not (as has been suggested in Bell, Parfitt, and Shepherd, 31), the Frances Boothby, 'nee' Milward, who married Sir William Boothby in 1653, for this Frances died the following year. The only clues are the two relatives to whom she addresses her works: 'Marcelia' is dedicated to Lady Yate, the most prominent recusant of Worcestershire, and the poem is addressed to her 'Cosen' Anne Somerset, a daughter of Walter Aston (Clifford, 'Poetry', 228-9). The Yates and Astons were linked by marriages with the Gage family of Firle Place, Sussex. 
Although Sir William Boothby's first wife cannot be the author, his family is the only one of that name likely to have the exalted connections which Frances mentions. Lady Yate and Sir William's uncle Richard Boothby of Potters Marston did, indeed, have a common ancestor in Ralph Sacheverell of Morley, Derbyshire. Another relative of Sir William, the prosperous merchant Walter Boothby of Tottenham, had a daughter named Frances, born in the mid-1630s and still alive in 1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 68251


Boothby, Sir William, first baronet (bap. 1637, d. 1707), book collector, was baptized on 9 November 1637 at Broadlow Ashe, the son of the landowner and royalist Henry Boothby (died 1648), of Clater Close, Oxfordshire, who was nominated first baronet during the civil war in 1644 but whose patent never passed the great seal, and his wife, Mary Hayes. Boothby inherited his father's estate in 1648, but little else is known of his early years. He was created baronet by Charles II, by letters patent dated 13 July 1660, and led an active life as a notable figure among the Derbyshire landed gentry, serving as county sheriff in 1661-2 and on the grand jury in the assizes of 1682. In 1671 he bought Ashbourne Hall, Derbyshire, and the manor of Ashbourne from the poet Sir Aston Cokayne (1608-1684). Boothby married twice, his first wife, Frances Milward, whom he married in 1653, dying a year later after presenting him with a son, Francis 
(Frank; died 1684)
. In 1657 he married Hill Brooke (1640-1704), the second daughter and eventually sole heir of Sir William Brooke, the nephew and heir of Henry Brooke, eleventh Lord Cobham. She was the object of his great affection, as is clear from his later diary comments on what a 'Jewell' and 'Treasure' she was, whose 'sweet and good society' he enjoyed for so long. They had nine children over the next thirteen years. 
Boothby would be remembered no more than any other midland landowner, gentleman farmer, and local dignitary of his time but for a series of his diaries and letter-books, written between 1676 and 1689, which came fully to light in the 1990s among the muniments of Fonmon Castle, Glamorgan, whither later generations of the Boothby family migrated through marriage into the Jones family. Besides documenting something of his relationship with his neighbour (8 miles away), the poet and translator Charles Cotton (1630-1687), and providing a glimpse of the provincial literary community to which they belonged, these four manuscript volumes (acquired in 1995 by the British Library) reveal in vivid and extensive detail, possibly unique of its kind, the predominant intellectual and recreational passion of Boothby's life, which was book collecting. 'My Books are the great joy of my life', he declared in a letter to Cotton on 21 July 1685. The result was years of book buying from a series of dealers, both in London and the midlands -- his regular suppliers including Michael Johnson (1656-1731) in Lichfield and Richard Chiswell (1639-1711) in London -- whom he frequently harangued for more information about current publications and whose attentions to his demands he often found woefully inadequate. He was a religious man and his tastes inclined especially to theology and ecclesiastical debate, but incorporated a wide spectrum of other categories, including literature, politics, science, medicine, history, travel, law, and rhetoric, as well as bibliography itself, books on miscellaneous social topics (such as marriage), and a variety of prints, maps, atlases, and dictionaries. He gave specific instructions for the binding he wanted on his books, and his frequent dissatisfaction with the results adds to the impression that dealers found him at times a difficult and perhaps cantankerous client. Boothby died at Ashbourne Hall on 24 March 1707, and was buried three days later at St Oswald's Church, Ashbourne. He was succeeded by his grandson Sir Henry Boothby (1682-1710). 
The ultimate result of Boothby's bibliomania was a library which, according to his memorial, numbered at his death 'near six Thousand Books'. This library, which occupied at least 122 shelves, is, in fact, extensively listed by subject in 'A catalogue of all the books in the inner library at Ashburne-Hall, collected by Sr Willm.: Boothby Kt: and baronet... 1715', a 57-leaf folio manuscript still preserved at Fonmon Castle. Apart from compiling this catalogue, his son Brooke Boothby (1670-1727), who erected a grand monument to him in St Oswald's Church, Ashbourne, is not known to have inherited his father's passion, but it seems that his grandson, another Brooke Boothby, the fifth baronet (1710-1789), did so, ordering (according to Samuel Pegge) ''every' book that was published to be sent to him' (J. Nichols, 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Leicester', 4, 1807, 179). A tribute to this later, expanded library appears in Ellis Farneworth's preface to 'The Life of Pope Sixtus the Fifth... Translated from... Gregorio Leti' (1754). Nevertheless, it seems that the Boothby library was sold before the year 1776 and was subsequently dispersed. Several dozen books bearing Boothby's signature ('Will: Boothby'), with occasional pressmarks or notes on prices paid for binding, sometimes in his original characteristic bindings of calf with lion's paw crest in gilt, have come to light (in the British Library, the Folger Shakespeare Library, the Huntington Library, the Beinecke Library, Yale University, the Humanities Research Center, University of Texas at Austin, the University Library, Durham, and elsewhere), and no doubt more will do so in the future. 


@@@@@


doc= 68252


Darby, Charles (bap. 1635, d. 1709), poet and clergyman, probably born at Bramford, Suffolk, was baptized there on 1 March 1635, the son of Charles Darby. He was admitted as a pensioner of Jesus College, Cambridge, on 21 April 1652 under the tutorship of Thomas Woodcock, who said that Darby enjoyed 'the best naturall parts of any pupill he ever had, yet extream idle' ('Extracts from the papers of Thomas Woodcock', 84). He was elected a scholar of the college in the following year and took his BA in 1655-6, his MA in 1659. Darby delivered the prevaricator's speech at the commencement of 1660 to great acclaim, but thought that he had 'only shewed that I can play the fool to please Boys', hoping instead that 'God would keep him from such company' (ibid., 84). He was also the author of a number of neo-Latin university poems. To 'Musarum Cantabrigiensium' (1658) he contributed two meditations occasioned by the death of Oliver Cromwell (of which the second was in English) which look to the succession of Cromwell's son Richard as lord protector, but a year after the Restoration his verses on the death of Mary, princess of Orange, eldest sister of Charles II, were published in 'Threni Cantabrigienses' (1661), and in 'Epithalamia Cantabrigiensia' (1662) he celebrated the king's marriage to Catherine of Braganza. He remained a fellow of Jesus College from 1657 to 1666. 
Darby was ordained a deacon at Lincoln on 27 September 1662 and a priest at Ely on 19 September 1663. In 1664 Woodcock prevailed on Sir Thomas Barnardiston to present Darby in the rectorship of Kedington, Suffolk. There he remained for the rest of his life. Darby thanked his former tutor for his help and asked for his further assistance in finding a wife, 'with whome he desired not durty mony, but pure vertue, yet in regard vertue was not infallibly certain, he desired 1,000 pounds caution-mony, for vertue should fail' ('Extracts from the papers of Thomas Woodcock', 84). On 8 November 1666 he married Mary Haiward at Sproughton, Suffolk. They had over ten children. Although at least three died in infancy, two daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, lived to marry in Kedington and three sons, Charles (their first child, baptized on 12 October 1667), Edward, and Henry (their last, baptized on 5 November 1683), followed their father to Jesus College. Darby continued to write and to publish during his incumbency, including 'Bacchanalia, or, A Description of a Drunken Club' (1680), a popular Pindaric which had enjoyed four editions by 1698, 'An Elegy on the Death of the Queen' (1695), in memory of Queen Mary, and 'The Book of Psalms in English Metre' (1704), a hymnal prefaced by fourteen pages of familiar melodies to which his renderings are set. 'The tacker[s]: by a Church of England minister', composed about April 1705, a verse satire on those who sought to attach the 'Bill against Occasional Conformity' (1704) to a money bill, has been attributed to Darby (British Library MS Add. 71446, fols. 1'v'-3'v', citing fol. 1'v'; the manuscript is a copy, not the poet's autograph). 'Union: a Poem Humbly Dedicated to the Queen' (1707) celebrates the 'Act of Union' in figures which tell of his many years of settled rural ministry; 'Thus have I often seen' he comments on the failure to unite the Anglican establishment and the Kirk, 'Two Churches friendly stand in one Church-Yard' (p. 6). 
Darby died in Kedington and was buried there, at the church of Sts Peter and Paul, on 19 September 1709. 


@@@@@


doc= 68253


Egerton, Elizabeth, countess of Bridgewater (1626-1663), writer, second daughter of William Cavendish, first duke of Newcastle upon Tyne (bap. 1593, d. 1676), and his first wife, Elizabeth Bassett (1599-1643), spent her childhood in the shelter of her father's immense wealth. From her earliest years, she was, like her siblings (and later, her prolific stepmother, Margaret Cavendish), encouraged to write by William Cavendish, himself the author of plays, poems, advice to his pupil (the future Charles II), and manuals on horsemanship. He was also patron to such seventeenth-century writers as Ben Jonson, James Shirley, and William Davenant. The earliest of Egerton's manuscript compilations (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. poet. 16; Yale University, Beinecke Library, Osborn MS b. 233), consonant with the works of the literary coterie that surrounded her cultivated father, is an anthology of poems and dramas co-authored with her sister Jane (later Lady Jane Cheyne). The best-known section, 'The Concealed Fansyes', is a drama (present only in the Bodleian exemplar) that has, since the twentieth century, been accorded scholarly attention. 
After her marriage in 1641 to John Egerton, later second earl of Bridgewater (1623-1686), she remained, with her sisters Jane and Frances (later countess of Bolingbroke), at Welbeck, her father's Nottinghamshire seat, despite her mother's death, and even after Cavendish, an important military figure in Charles I's camp, left England for the continent with her brothers. In 1645 she and her sisters twice entertained Charles at Welbeck, where they also experienced its possession by parliamentary forces. By late 1645 she moved to Ashridge, the Egerton family seat, and was thereafter largely sheltered from the ravages of the civil war, from which the Egertons succeeded, for the most part, to distance themselves. Her very successful marriage was ended on 14 June 1663 by her sudden and dramatic death at thirty-seven while being delivered of her tenth child during a visit to her husband, who had been placed in the custody of John Ayton, gentleman usher of the black rod after being challenged to a duel by Lionel Cranfield, third earl of Middlesex. She was buried at Ashridge, Hertfordshire. Although he survived her for over twenty years, Bridgewater never remarried; ironically, his extraordinary epitaph for her (recorded most prominently by Ballard), and particularly its mention of her private writings, has brought her belated notice. 
Shrouded from public view by her family during her lifetime, Egerton nevertheless claims attention today for a number of manuscripts described in family accounts though long kept in private hands. In various forms, some of these have found their way to public depositories: letters exchanged with family members (Nottingham University Library, Portland collection); the literary anthology co-written with her sister Jane in the early 1640s (Bodleian and Beinecke libraries); the deeply pious manuscripts written later in her life, her 'Loose Papers' (British and Huntington libraries); and her 'Meditations' (Hunt. L.). 
Fair copies of Egerton's posthumously bound 'Loose Papers' were apparently made for each of her children. The exemplar that descended to Samuel Egerton Brydges was sold to the British Library in 1836 (Egerton MS 607). Two other fair copies remain in the possession of the family, although facsimiles of these copies are housed at the Huntington Library (EL 8376; EL 8377). The title-page of each of these three copies bears the statement in John Egerton's hand that the manuscript was 'Examined by JBridgewater', and the extent of this examination is suggested by the inclusion, in each, of four entries by him (which are attributed to him, however, in only one copy). The originally 'Loose Papers' that constitute this manuscript contain original, unobjectionable prayers and meditations, many on domestic subjects; moving meditations, or essays, composed during the illness or after the death of three of Egerton's children; and essays on marriage and widowhood that open a highly unusual window on the thinking of a seventeenth-century woman. 
A partial fair copy of 'Meditations' (RB 297343), as well as a facsimile of the author's holograph of this compilation (EL 8374), is also held at the Huntington Library. Emendations, in the holograph, in John Egerton's distinctive hand, are carried over to the fair copy, providing clear evidence of his interference in his wife's work. A number of leaves in the folder containing the holograph seem to provide John Egerton's directions for copying the manuscript. That such interference was not limited to husband and wife can be shown by interpolations by the second earl in manuscripts by his oldest son, later the third earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 68254


Evelyn, Mary (c.1635-1709), correspondent, was the only child of Sir Richard Browne (1605-1683) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Pretyman (1610-1652). Mary spent most of her childhood and adolescence in France, where her father represented Charles I. She married John Evelyn (1620-1706) on 27 June 1647 in Paris; she was twelve or thirteen, he was twenty-six. She returned to England in June 1652, residing with her husband first at Sayes Court, in Deptford, and later at Wotton, in Surrey. She gave birth to five sons (Richard, John Stansfield, John Evelyn, George, and Richard), and three daughters (Mary ['see below'], Elizabeth, and Susanna). The recipient of a careful humanist education, she played an important role in educating her children, only the youngest of whom survived her. She was fluent in French, knew Italian, and studied mathematics and drawing. Though her marriage and family duties in many ways limited her intellectual pursuits her marriage was both a friendship and a partnership. Her husband's plan for an otherwise all-male mathematical college included her, and she designed the frontispiece for his 1656 translation of Lucretius. After his death she said of him that 'His care of my Education was such as might become a Father a Lover a Friend and Husband' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 1.37). She died on 9 February 1709 at her home in Dover Street, London, and was buried on the 14th at Wotton. 
After the publication of the diary of her husband, John Evelyn, in 1818 Mary Evelyn became with him a model of Anglican piety and domestic virtue. Though her husband credits her with authorship of 'The picture of the Princess Henrietta', published as a broadsheet in 1660, the attribution has been questioned (see Hiscock, 45), and it is in her correspondence that her wit, perceptiveness, and strength of character are most evident. Her letters to her son's tutor at Oxford, Ralph Bohun, were circulated by him among his university acquaintance for several years, providing Mary with an opportunity to engage Oxford dons on topics that included theatre and literature (see Harris, 'Living in the neighbourhood of science', 208; Harris, 'Letterbooks', 210-14). 

Mary Evelyn (1665-1685), the sixth of eight children born to John and Mary Evelyn, is credited with authorship of 'Mundus muliebris', a brief satire in tetrameter couplets on fashionable women's clothing, accoutrements, and behaviour, first published in 1690. Sole attribution of the piece to her is questionable: de Beer points out that the one reference to the work in her father's diary may suggest that she contributed to rather than wrote it (see Evelyn, 'Diary', 4.423; Nevinson, 5-12; Greer and others, 324). Other writings in Mary Evelyn's hand survive; these are primarily religious meditations and rules for her own conduct. She was dutiful and devout, playful and pious, and her death at the age of nineteen grieved her family deeply. She spent most of her short life at the family home at Sayes Court, Deptford. She studied French and Italian, history and literature, music and dancing. After her death her father eulogized her in his diary: 'The justnesse of her stature, person, comelinesse of her Countenance and gracefullnesse of motion, naturall, & unaffected (though more than ordinaryly beautifull), was... of the least, compar'd with the Ornaments of her mind' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 4.421). Her mother described her to a correspondent: 'The papers which are found in her cabinet discover she profited by her readying -- such reflections, collections out of Scripture, confessions, meditations, and pious notions, evidence her time was not spent in the trifling way of most young women' (H. Evelyn, 107). Another important role model was Margaret Godolphin (1652-1678), a family friend with whom Mary's father signed a pact of friendship using a symbol that Mary was to adapt in her own journal (Evelyn papers, MS ME 13). During an extended visit to Rebecca, Viscountess Falkland, in late 1684 and early 1685 Mary was exposed to smallpox. She returned to Sayes Court, where she fell ill, and died on 14 March 1685. She was buried on 17 March in St Nicholas's Church, Deptford. 


@@@@@


doc= 68255


Herbert, Percy, second Baron Powis (1598-1667), politician and writer, was the son of William Herbert, first Baron Powis (1573?-1655), and Lucy Eleanor (died 1650), daughter of Henry Percy, the 'wizard earl' of Northumberland. Percy was named in honour of his mother's illustrious family. He belonged to a recusant branch of the Herbert family that lived at Powis Castle, a medieval fortress in the Welsh marches, which was built of striking red sandstone and consequently known as the 'red castle'. On 19 November 1622 Herbert married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1600, died 1662), first surviving daughter of Sir William Craven (c.1545-1618), an extremely wealthy alderman of the City of London. Writing to his wife, Herbert counted among his blessings 'that your fortune made upp my estate & my conversation resolv'd you a Catholick' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/53/7, no. 33). Herbert was knighted on 7 November 1622, and created baronet on 16 November 1622. 
Herbert began public life as MP for Shaftesbury in 1620 and for Wilton in 1624-5. However, he owed what notoriety he achieved in national affairs to his entanglement in the 'Welsh army plot' scare. He was alleged in the Long Parliament to have made use of his powers as deputy lieutenant of Montgomeryshire to transfer arms from the county magazine to Powis Castle at the instigation of the marquess of Worcester, who was widely believed to have a commission from the king to receive into Wales an army raised in Ireland for the suppression of parliament ('Commons Journal', 2.463; 'Journal', ed. Notestein, 349). After a vote in the Commons, Herbert was summoned to London, where he was held under restraint for about eighteen months, before being released on bail. He is said by his wife to have fortified Powis Castle at his own charge, and raised and trained soldiers for the king's army in Wales. However, Lord Powis, Herbert's father, usurped his command, alleging that he had forfeited his commission. The king summoned Herbert to Oxford, where articles were preferred against him. He was then commanded to follow the king on his march to besiege Gloucester, and he took advantage of the distraction caused by the arrival of Essex's army at Gloucester to slip away from the king's camp. There is no evidence that Herbert was a traitor (parliament continued to treat him as a papist and a malignant) but he certainly had reservations about the involvement of Catholics in the civil war, 'not that I can doubt the cause (though I doe not like this cause of fighting for the True protestant religion)' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/53/7, no. 33). 
In September 1644 Herbert crossed the sea to the Low Countries, taking his son William Herbert (c.1626-1696) with him. He continued abroad until 1649, travelling in Italy, France, and the Netherlands. He was in Italy in 1645. Herbert and young William spent the summer of 1646 in Rome, occasionally dining at the English College. In September, 'as soon as the heats began to decline', they travelled to Naples in the company of Thomas Whetenhall, Maurice and Charles Berkeley, and their tutor Hugh Cressy (Chaney, 74-5, 368-9). From 1647 to 1648 Herbert was in Paris, where William attended an academy, and his uncle Lord Craven trained him 'in manly exercises'. 
The county committee for Montgomeryshire resumed the case against Herbert as a delinquent, and the Commons voted to summon him from the continent. He returned to England before the end of May 1649, the deadline stipulated by parliament. Herbert vigorously defended his case, but he was unsuccessful, and his estates were forfeited and sold in 1652-3. These included Hendon manor in Middlesex and several manors in Montgomeryshire. His wife kept Pipewell manor and abbey, Northamptonshire, but the estate was partially sequestered. In 1656 he became second Baron Powis in succession to his father, but nothing is known about his whereabouts in the 1650s, except for two licences issued in the summer of 1658 that gave Powis and his family permission to leave London for their country house ('CSP dom.', '1658-9', 576-7). 
His first publication was 'Certaine Conceptions' (1650), a book of pietistic and moralistic essays written for his son. He apparently paid for the paper and printing of the first edition (Stationers' Company court book D, fol. 62), but the book proved popular, and there were several subsequent editions. Powis is important in early modern prose fiction as the author of 'Cloria and Narcissus', a massive political 'roman a clef' published in five instalments from 1653 to 1661, which encompasses the Bourbon-Habsburg wars, the English civil wars, the war of the covenant in Scotland, the confederate war in Ireland, and the Fronde in France. The fourth instalment was completed by summer 1656 (Stationers' register, 5 June 1656). Powis died on 19 January 1667. He was succeeded by his son William. 


@@@@@


doc= 68256


Haward, Sir William (c.1617-1704), courtier and antiquary, was the third son of John Haward ('c'.1571-1631) of Tandridge Hall, Surrey, and his first with his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Angell, gentleman pensioner to James I. In November 1635 Haward -- his own preferred spelling of the name -- was granted special admission to the Inner Temple as the son of a bencher. Soon afterwards he purchased Tandridge Hall and two Surrey manors worth $600 per annum from his older half-brother John. From 1641 to 1646 he served as gentleman of the privy chamber to Charles I, who knighted him on 9 September 1643 at Sudeley Castle. Five days earlier, in the garrison at Oxford, he had married Martha (died 1689), youngest daughter of John Acton, a London goldsmith. She brought with her a dowry of $1250, and in due course they had six daughters and four sons. In the autumn of 1645 Haward retired to Tandridge, claiming in his petition to compound of the following April that he had never borne arms. His fine, fixed in January 1647 at the rate of one sixth of his estate, totalled $437. 
Although Evelyn dismissed Haward as 'a greate pretender to English antiquities &c' ('Diary', 6 Dec 1671), Aubrey pronounced him 'a learned Gentleman and great 'Antiquary'' (Aubrey, 3.36). Dugdale too thought him 'well accomplisht with learning especially in points of Honour and Armes' ('Life... of Sir William Dugdale', 32). By 1663, when he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, he had already begun to collect or make copies of monastic and genealogical records. His transcripts are executed in a bold and regular script well suited to the large folio format in which he preferred to work. Examples range from a volume of genealogical, heraldic, and historical material that includes a copy of a Glastonbury chartulary (BL, Add. MS 58216), by way of Becher's account of the amours of Henri IV of France (BL, Sloane MS 841), to an important 700-page miscellany that mingles Restoration verse, scandal, and politics with history, commerce, and much else (Bodl. Oxf., MS Don. b. 8). Peter Le Neve, who in 1695 bought an even larger antiquarian compilation (BL, Harleian MS 3875), along with two original chartularies (BL, Harleian MSS 391, 4809), drew up a list of twenty-seven Haward manuscripts purchased by Lord Chancellor Somers in 1697 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D. 888, fol. 41'v'). Several of these later found their way to the earls of Oxford and are now BL, Harleian MSS 4785, 4786, 6016, 6025, 6166, 6193, 6266, and 6829. A catalogue of Haward's library belonged to Richard Rawlinson (sale catalogue, Barnard, 4 March 1733/4, lot 387). 
At the Restoration Haward resumed his post in the household, retaining it under each successive sovereign until 1702. From 1661 to 1678 he sat in the Cavalier Parliament for his father's old seat of Bletchingley and was moderately active for the court party, serving on some seventy committees. In 1672 he gave money towards rebuilding the College of Heralds, though he failed five years later in his bid to become Garter. Three years after the dissolution of parliament he sold his Surrey estate and bought an interest in the Broken Wharf waterworks, while continuing to occupy his official lodging in old Scotland Yard. In the following decade he was constrained to sell his collection of manuscripts. His wife was buried in Westminster Abbey cloisters on 24 March 1689. In May 1704, when aged almost ninety, he petitioned Queen Anne for relief but did not long enjoy it, being buried on 28 July in St James's, Piccadilly. 


@@@@@


doc= 68257


More, Mary (d. c.1713), writer and artist, is of unknown origin. Information about her adult life can be derived from the lives of her two children from her first marriage, Elizabeth and Richard Waller, and from the preface to her manuscript essay, 'The woman's right'. On 17 April 1680 Elizabeth Waller married Alexander Pitfield in St Leonard, Shoreditch, giving her age as seventeen and listing 'Mary More, residing in the parish of Saint Andrew's Undershaft, Bishopsgate', as her mother. 
In the 1680s and 1690s, the More, Waller, and Pitfield households were residing close together. Richard Waller was the secretary of the Royal Society of London in nearby Gresham College from 1687 to 1709 and Alexander Pitfield its treasurer from 1700 to 1728. References in Waller's and Pitfield's correspondence reveal that Mary More was linked through them to other members of the Royal Society, including the scientist Robert Hooke (whose diary records discussing dreams with Mrs More), Sir Hans Sloane, and William Derham. 
More's initial claim to attention lay in her work as a portrait painter. Only one of her portraits is still known to exist, heavily retouched by restorers: a copy of a Holbein portrait of Thomas Cromwell, which she presented to the Bodleian Library in 1674 as being a portrait of Sir Thomas More. More's connection with Oxford was through Robert Whitehall, tutor of John Wilmot, earl of Rochester, who delivered the painting and also printed a heavy-handed commendatory verse to her. More (and another anonymous poet who wrote verses in reply) perceived the poem as insulting not only to More, but also to women in general. This exchange of verses may have laid the ground for their essays debating the equality of the sexes, 'The woman's right' and 'The woman's right proved false', preserved in a manuscript miscellany along with Whitehall's occasional verse (BL, Harley MS 3918). 
The full title of More's essay provides an accurate overview of its contents and position: 'The woman's right or her power in a greater equality to her husband proved than is allowed or practised in England from misunderstanding some scriptures, and false rendring others from ye originall, plainly shewing an equality in man & woman before ye fall, & not much difference after. The equality of their souls is also proved in that women have done whatever is of value that men have done, what hath been done may be done'. In the preface dedicated to her daughter, More observes that it may seem odd for her to embark on such a topic, 'having never had any Reason as to my self to complain of the least Ill Cariage of my Husbands to me'. Foreshadowing the arguments of early feminists such as Mary Astell, More asserts that in her society in general she has observed 'the sad consequences & events that have fallen on men and their Wives, through this mistake of mens pretending a Power over their Wives, that neither God nor nature doe allow'. More concludes that 'it is the want of learning, & the same education in women that men have, which makes them loose their right' and since men have always dominated parliament and made English law, women have been unjustly denied control of property and access to education. 
The date of More's death is unknown, but it was after Richard Waller drew up his will leaving his property in Gloucestershire to his wife Anna only after his mother's death (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/546/104) but before his own death in 1715, when his wife, not Mary More, proved the will. 


@@@@@


doc= 68258


Smith, Thomas (1624-1661), scholar and theological controversialist, was born in London, the son of Thomas Smith (mother's name unknown), and educated at St Paul's School. He was admitted as a sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1640, and took the degrees of BA in 1644, MA in 1647, and BD in 1654. He was ordained (presumably covertly) by Bishop Joseph Hall, and instituted as vicar of Caldecote, Cambridgeshire, in 1650. He held the post of praelector in rhetoric at Christ's, and was university librarian from 1659 to his death in 1661. 
Smith's particular scholarly interest was in Arabic: he was press corrector for Brian Walton's polyglot 'Bible', for which he obtained manuscripts from Cambridge. But his principal distinction is as a champion of the Church of England during the interregnum, continuing the work of the Tew circle. Introducing a translation of Jean Daille's work, entitled 'Treatise Concerning the Right Use of the Fathers' (1651), he recalls that the book had been a favourite of Viscount Falkland, to whose unpublished papers he had access. A second translation from Daille, 'An Apologie for the Reformed Churches' (1653), has a long preface by Smith defending the Church of England, and Chillingworth in particular. In 1660 he published 'Two Discourses Concerning Episcopacy' by Falkland and Chillingworth, and in the following year reprinted John Colet's 'Sermon of Conforming and Reforming' with additional material by Henry Hammond and Lancelot Andrewes. These works demonstrate Smith's adherence to and love for the Anglican church in dark times. 
Smith found his own place in church history through his disputes with the nonconformists George Whitehead and John Bunyan in 1659. In May Smith heard Bunyan preaching in a barn in Toft, outside Cambridge, and demanded to know who gave him authority to preach: 'The Church of Christ at 'Bedford'... consisting only of women and a few Lay-men is not indeed a Church of Christ; none of them hath power to preach or administer the sacraments, and therefore none of them can give the Tinker power to preach and administer the Sacraments.' Bunyan, thought Smith, subverted not only authority but also learning: 'Away (quoth he) to 'Oxford' with your hell bred Logick' (Smith, sig. C3'v' and C'v'). Smith's challenge to Bunyan was published in his pamphlet 'The Quaker Disarm'd' (1659), which was chiefly a record of his exchanges with the Quaker George Whitehead. Smith first encountered Whitehead in Westminster 'preaching against 'Universities', 'Learning', and 'Tithes', and the 'Clergy'', and argued against him to no effect (ibid., sig. A2'r'). 
In August 1659 Smith came across Whitehead again in Cambridge, preaching in the Quakers' meeting-house. Ever pugnacious rather than eirenic, Smith challenged him to a public debate, in which George Fox also participated. There he argued that Whitehead's preaching was heretical, focusing on his understanding of the Trinity, the Quakers' refusal to take oaths, and their lack of formal ordination. The debate provides a fascinating example of contrasting theological rhetoric, since Smith relies on syllogistic reasoning, with which the Quakers have some difficulty, while their more imaginative theological language is mockingly dismissed by Smith as nonsensical or papist. 
The verbal debate was continued in a pamphlet skirmish, in which Smith's 'The Quaker Disarm'd' and 'A Gagg for the Quakers' (1659) were answered by Whitehead's 'Truth Defending the Quakers' and his splendidly titled 'The Key of Knowledge not Found in the University Library of Cambridge' (1660), along with contributions from others. As Whitehead realized, he and Smith understood quite different things by knowledge, and by authority. Thomas Smith was maintaining Anglican scholarship, episcopal ordination, catholic doctrine, and liturgical prayer, at a time when they were scorned by those who professed the freedom and inspiration of the Spirit. In his will, Smith expressed his 'desire to dye in the ancient Catholic & Apostolic faith professed in the Church of England' and to be buried 'without pomp or sermon but with the Liturgy of the English Church'. By the time that will was signed, on All Saints' day 1660, Smith's beloved church had been restored, along with his king. He died the following year on 27 September 1661 'of the new Desease which spreads all over England but is least in the north' (as John Worthington recorded, Peile, 1.468), and was buried the same day at Kingston. 


@@@@@


doc= 68259


Swinhoe, Gilbert (fl. 1658-1671), playwright, was the son of Gilbert Swinhoe ('c'.1594-1644x51) of Chatton, co. Durham, high sheriff of Northumberland in 1642, and Dorothy Guevara, daughter of Robert Clavering and Mary Collingwood who, after her husband's death in 1600, married Sir Henry Guevara. Swinhoe's parents married about 1620. 
By the seventeenth century the Swinhoes had become a large family scattered throughout Northumberland and co. Durham; the several different branches, and several sons with the same forename, make confident identification difficult. What is known is that the surname derives from Swinhoe, a manor in the parish of Bamburgh. Swinhoe himself was a member of the Goswick branch (a cadet branch of the Rock side of the family), some of whom moved to Chatton. The manor of Chatton was part of the Percy estates; Swinhoe may have acted as bailiff to the earls of Northumberland in 1656. His immediate family was royalist. His younger brother, James, served as a lieutenant-colonel in 1643 and their father, charged with having raised the 'posse comitatus' against parliament, was excluded from employment by a resolution of the House of Commons passed on 3 October 1644; in September of the following year, moreover, Gilbert senior was taken prisoner, shipped to London, and committed to the Tower, where it is likely that he died (by July 1651 his wife is described as a widow). 
Much of what is known of Swinhoe's life has been adduced from the life -- and death -- of his brother James. That Gilbert Swinhoe of Chatton was the author of 'The Tragedy of the Unhappy Fair Irene' (1658) has been inferred from the three commendatory verses written by his kinsmen which accompany the text of the play; the first of them, 'To his Dear Brother the Author', is subscribed 'Ja. Swinhoe' (sig. A1'r'). Each in its way emphasizes the youth of the playwright. The play itself is the first extant English drama to treat of Mahomet the Great's violently passionate, fatal love for Irene, a Greek woman of incomparable beauty, a tale which had first appeared in print in Bandello's novella (1554), which was rendered into English by William Painter (1566). Swinhoe is likely to have read the tale, however, in Richard Knolles's 'The Generall Historie of the Turkes' (1603, 350-53). An uneven and haphazardly versified rendering, his play does not seem to have been performed publicly. His brother's intervention in a later incident helps to identify the protagonist as Gilbert Swinhoe the playwright. In February 1671 at Chillingham, a small village near Chatton, Swinhoe was provoked into striking Andrew Carr, who continued to exchange 'very hye and provoking words' with James Swinhoe for the rest of the evening (Raine, ed., 'Depositions', 188); the inference is that the company had been drinking for some time. After retiring, Carr sent Gilbert Swinhoe a note challenging him to a duel, but early the following morning Carr and James Swinhoe were found at swords drawn. They were parted. Later that afternoon they fought again, and James Swinhoe was wounded in the arm, from which injury he bled to death. Carr was tried for manslaughter. 
Raine states that Swinhoe married Susanna Rookebye ('bap'. 1637), the daughter of Francis Rookebye of Mortham, Yorkshire. In 1663 he settled at Crookhouse, a property high above Bowment Water which had been in the family for a century. It is not known when Swinhoe died. 


@@@@@


doc= 68260


Willan, Leonard (fl. 1648-1670), writer, may have been from Yorkshire; the surname is associated with the county. 'Alumni Cantabrigienses' states that a student of that forename and surname, who may have been from Kingston upon Hull, matriculated as a fellow-commoner of Christ's College, Cambridge, in June 1623. The college's own register, however, does not record this matriculation. 
Willan appears to have enjoyed a reputation in the middle years of the seventeenth century for his literary abilities; he was a friend of both James Howell, the historiographer royal, and the poet Robert Herrick, who in 'Hesperides' (1648) addressed commendatory verses 'To M. Leonard Willan his Peculiar Friend'. Willan's first volume to appear in print, 'The Phrygian fabulist, or, The fables of AEsop extracted from the Latine copie, and moraliz'd' (1650), contains some of his best work, including the tale of 'A Citie-mous and Field-mous', the longest of his fables, a slyly humorous account of achieved contentment. His idiom of contained ambition recalls Herrick or, given especially 'The troubles of the times in which it formed was', Richard Lovelace. With this allusion to the civil war (sig. A4'r'), Willan subscribes the dedication of the volume to Edward Sackville, fourth earl of Dorset. From this inscription something of the writer's life can be inferred. The nobleman appears to have interested himself in Willan's early career, 'the first fruits of my Pen' (sig. A3'v'): 'your careless eie by chance surpriz'd a Virgin scarcely drest, Poor 'Astraea', whose Tongue and Habit I had fashion'd to our use', the author recalls (sig. A3'r'- 'v'), but the uncertain political situation precluded Dorset's further encouragement. The peer was an active but moderate politician who tempered a strong respect for the royal prerogative with a keen sense of the worth of parliamentary liberties, but following the execution of Charles I he retired entirely from public life. Although a version of Willan's earliest work seems to have circulated in manuscript before he turned to the fables, 'Astraea, or, True Love's Myrrour: a Pastoral' (1651), a dramatized versification of D'Urfey's romance, was the second title published in his name. There then followed a period of silence, 'the obscurity of many years' as he put it in the dedication, to Lady Frances Wildegoss, of his next work, 'Orgula, or, The Fatall Error: a Tragedy' (1658) (sig. A2'r'). Willan develops the dedicatory address into a critical preface in which he defends poetry against the charges that it is fantastical and unsocial, before turning to its theatrical applications, and its political, social, and educational benefits. Both 'Astraea' and 'Orgula' are characterized by disguises, mislaid letters, overheard conversations, and lyrical interludes, and each publication contains lengthy, solemnly prescriptive stage directions which tell of the printing of texts never to be produced in the theatre. His last known work was a prose treatise, 'The Perfect States-Man' (1668), republished as 'The Exact Politician or Compleat Statesman' (1670). In it he reflects on the personal qualities desirable in a minister of state, his office and its perquisites, the nature, ends, and prosecution of the law, and the regulation of the law both to secure personal well-being and to defend private property. It is not known when Willan died. 


@@@@@


doc= 68261


Williams, Anna (bap. 1623, d. 1687/8), compiler of a manuscript miscellany, was baptized on 28 August 1623 at Upwood church, Huntingdonshire, the sole surviving child of Richard Cromwell (1603-1626), son of Henry Cromwell, uncle to the protector, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Hake, of Peterborough, who later married into the recusant Apreece family of Washingley, Huntingdonshire. The surname Cromwell had been adopted by the family about 1531 in honour of Sir Thomas Cromwell's advancement of his nephew Sir Richard Williams. Anna and her husband reverted to Williams in 1660. She inherited $1000 from her grandfather, who died in 1630. 
The contents of 'Mris Anna Cromewells Chamb[er]' are listed in an inventory of Upwood dated 1631-3 (BL, Add. MS 34397, fol. 31'v'), suggesting that she passed some portion of her childhood in the household of her second cousin and husband to be, Henry Cromwell (1625-1673), MP for Huntingdonshire in 1654, 1656, 1659, and from 1660 to 1673. He succeeded to the Ramsey estates in 1657; a record of court sessions held by him from 1657 to 1663 survives (BL, Add. MS 33454). Anna and her husband sold the manor, monastery, and rectory of Ramsey in 1664. This branch of the family was royalist: Anna Williams's father-in-law, his eldest son, father, and brothers fought for the king. Williams was fervently Church of England, as is evident in her sermon transcriptions, three of which were preached by local incumbents deprived of their livings during the civil wars (BL, Harleian MS 2311, fols. 74'v'-101'r', 101'r'-106'r', 149'r'-168'v'). 
It is reported that Anna Williams was 'called 'the poetess Cromwell'' ('VCH Huntingdonshire', 2.70) and that she was 'an authoress, publishing poetry and a book of prayers' (Wise and Noble, 159), but no evidence of publication exists. Her surviving works are collected in her miscellany held at the British Library (Harleian MS 2311); while specifically female-authored poetry is attributed here, no definitive attributions to Williams herself are made. Several occasional poems, however, are likely candidates. This manuscript contains royalist and religious poetry, prayers composed both by herself and her husband, and transcriptions of religious meditations, holy ejaculations, pious epistles, sermons, and catechisms. 
Henry's sisters and their heirs inherited the estates on her husband's death in 1673, and Anna Williams is reported as subsequently residing in a house near Ramsey, and in Church Street, Ramsey, in 1683, according to the 1684 visitation. Williams died childless and was buried at Ramsey church on 10 January 1688. 


@@@@@


doc= 68262


Brocklesby, Edward (1524/5-1573/4), Church of England clergyman, was the youngest of three surviving sons of Robert Brocklesby of Glentworth, Lincolnshire (died 1553) and his first wife ('nee' Cusforthe). He was educated at Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, matriculating on 13 August 1542 at the age of seventeen. A fellow from 1545, he graduated BA in 1547 and proceeded MA in 1550. 
Brocklesby clearly became a protestant, for he relinquished his fellowship in 1555 and on 9 June 1558 was granted citizenship of Emden, whose exile community during Mary I's reign included Nicholas Bullingham, former archdeacon and future bishop of Lincoln. In the interim he had married -- his daughter Sara was herself married by 1573 -- and had perhaps also become engaged in secret protestant activities in Marian England, like his exact contemporary Robert Cole, fellow of King's from 1545 to 1551. 
Nothing is known of Brocklesby's first wife, and he probably returned to England a widower. Although instituted vicar of Congresbury, Somerset, on 1 June 1560 he quickly gravitated to London, and in late 1561, as minister of the vacant parish of St Nicholas Olave, was described in a report to Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, as unmarried, learned, but non-resident, and living in the household of Edmund Guest, bishop of Rochester. Since Guest had been vice-provost of King's during his residence, Brocklesby perhaps went to London as one of Guest's private chaplains. In October 1562 he received letters of sequestration as curate of St Nicholas Olave. 
Brocklesby's brother Richard was among those who stood surety for Bullingham's first fruits as bishop of Lincoln (1560), and in 1563 he was himself nominated by Bullingham to the vicarage of Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire. He was soon embroiled in the campaign waged by the Oxford heads Thomas Sampson, dean of Christ Church, and Laurence Humphrey, president of Magdalen, against Archbishop Parker's drive for clerical conformity. Since this was originally confined to Oxford, Cambridge, and London, Brocklesby would hardly have attracted attention had he simply withdrawn to rural Hertfordshire. He was thus perhaps one of the 'four other' London clergy examined by Parker on 3 March 1565 along with Sampson and Humphrey, since on 8 May he was arraigned before the ecclesiastical commissioners at Lambeth. The case was heard by Parker, bishops Guest and Edmund Grindal of London, Sir Ambrose Cave, and William Drury. When the use of the surplice was demanded Brocklesby resolutely refused. He was thereupon deprived of Hemel Hempstead, thus becoming the first official casualty of the vestiarian controversy -- 'the first put out of his living for the surplice' (Peel, 1.52). Sampson was deprived of Christ Church at about this time, but his successor, Thomas Godwin, was not appointed until 26 May. 
In March 1566 Parker suspended thirty-seven London ministers who repudiated the surplice and square cap. Those refusing to conform within three months faced deprivation, but by royal warrant of 1 July 1566 were granted the right to sue for the cancellation of any remaining instalments of first fruits where these had not already fallen due. Brocklesby managed to take advantage of this warrant, appearing before the barons of the exchequer at Easter 1568 with letters testimonial from Parker rehearsing the circumstances of his deprivation three years earlier, and drawn up at that time. He and his sureties were duly discharged of their obligations for Hemel Hempstead's first fruits. 
In 1568 or 1569 Brocklesby was instituted rector of Branston, Lincolnshire, on the presentation of Christopher Wray, the future lord chief justice, who had married the widow of Brocklesby's eldest brother, Robert (died 1557). In 1571 he was collated by Bullingham to the prebend of Sexaginta Solidorum in Lincoln Cathedral. He died in possession of both preferments. 
In his will, dated 9 December 1573, Brocklesby left detailed bequests to his son Nathaniel, his unmarried daughters Rebecca and Elizabeth, and a married daughter, Sara Standeburne. Nathaniel, a minor, and Brocklesby's (unnamed) second wife were appointed executors. He died, at Branston or Lincoln, within weeks. Probate was granted to his (still unnamed) wife on 2 April 1574, power being reserved to Nathaniel until his majority. 


@@@@@


doc= 68264


Wilson, Thomas (fl. 1800-1839), dancing-master and writer, was active in London during the early nineteenth century. His career probably began at the King's Theatre Opera House; from the early 1800s he taught at his own dancing academy, variously based at Bedford Row, Ludgate Hill, and Hatton Garden, where he was assisted by Mrs Wilson and sufficient staff to form sets for any of the social dances then popular. 
The first work definitely attributed to Wilson is 'An Analysis of Country Dancing', first published in 1808, followed by the 'Treasures of Terpsichore, or, A Companion for the Ballroom' (1809; not to be confused with Carlo Blassis' 'The Code of Terpsichore' of 1818). Second and third editions of the 'Analysis' followed in 1811. In 1815 Wilson published another version of the 'Analysis', retitled 'The Complete System of English Country Dancing' (reprinted, 1816, 1817, 1820, 1821, and 1828), and a new work, 'The Quadrille Instructor'. The following year brought two new works: 'A Companion to the Ballroom' and 'A Description of the Correct Method of French and German Waltzing'. This last probably followed the appearance of the shocking new dance at the prince regent's ball on 13 July 1816, and its introduction to Almack's assembly rooms by one of its patronesses, Princess Lieven, a leading London society hostess. Further editions of the 'Companion', the 'Correct Method', and a brief volume describing 'The Celebrated and Fashionable Dance 'La Batteuse'' were published in 1817. 
In 1818 Wilson published 'The Ecossoise Instructor', one of few manuals devoted to this dance, which he termed 'a new species of dancing', citing the dance's popularity at the Russian court. Wilson's 'Quadrille and Cotillion Panorama' (1818; repr. 1839) reflected the growing popularity of the quadrille, which gradually replaced the cotillion after the French Revolution. A second edition, prefaced by 'The address, or, An essay in deportment' was published in 1822 and a third in 1839 with additions and illustrations. In 1821 Wilson published 'Plot Against Plot', a comedy performed at his private theatricals. 
In 1822 Wilson held his eighty-ninth public ball, which began with a dramatic prelude attacking the current standards of dance teaching, intended 'to caution the public against some impostors, those self-named 'Professors' yclept Dancing Masters'. In this Wilson denounced those he considered charlatans, and threatened to name those he felt should be exposed if they continued teaching. The sketch was later published in 1824 as 'The Danciad, or, Dancer's Monitor'. 
In 1825 Wilson published his 'Analysis of the London Ball-Room' which included quadrilles, waltzes and a selection of music, prefaced by a history of dancing from ancient times, through Tudor and Restoration, to later performers such as Grimaldi Nicolini. This appears to have been his last new work. 
Wilson's work at the theatre -- where he would have helped to train many of the opera dancers -- together with his teaching and writing activities, had a direct impact on the style and performance of social dancing. He was very much a traditionalist, preferring the allemande or German style of waltz, in which the dancers had intertwining arms, to the close hold which so scandalized sections of society, and which became beloved of the aristocracy. 
Wilson's manuals explain the figures in text and illustration, and several are accompanied by music suitable for each dance, and all fully describe the correct style and manner of performance, together with the correct ballroom etiquette expected of both ladies and gentlemen. This was an issue on which Wilson was at great pains to instruct his readers, as he feared standards of dancing would be 'perverted into a chaos of riot and confusion' (Wilson, 'Treasures of Terpsichore') if left to decline any further. 
Despite his assertion of his own professional good standing, Wilson's works were not always received with approval from his colleagues. W. M. S. Chivers in 'The Modern Dancing Master' (1822) quotes James Cassidy's 1810 manual 'A Treatise of the Theory and Practice of Dancing', which urges that the 'Treasures of Terpsichore' 'should be universally exploded as unintelligible and useless, though nothing more than an elementary indication of the art, or an explanation... of some of the technical terms of it'. 
Some modern writers have commented that Wilson's figure descriptions can be difficult to follow, and that the more complicated, balletic steps that Wilson included were in fact the province of only a few extremely accomplished dancers. Despite Wilson's traditional and conservative stance, later generations are indebted to him for a comprehensive description of the most popular social dances of this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 68265


Lyle, Agnes (fl. 1825), ballad singer, was the daughter of a 'customary' weaver from Locherlip who was born 'c'.1731 and died 'c'.1811, and from whom she learned her songs. She was residing in Kilbarchan, 51/2 miles east of Paisley, Renfrewshire, in 1825. 
Firsthand knowledge of Agnes Lyle comes from manuscript sources made by William Motherwell (1797-1835), poet, journalist, writer, and ballad collector and editor. In the early 1820s he entered into a collaborative project, which soon became his alone, to produce a book titled 'Minstrelsy: Ancient and Modern' (published in fascicles whose parts were gathered together in 1827). He read books, corresponded with experts, and engaged in field collecting. And he seems to have had particular success collecting materials from women and even identified in a manuscript notebook (Harvard U., Houghton L., MS 25242.16) a group designated 'old singing women'. Agnes Lyle, or Lile, as he sometimes wrote her name, was one of these women. She was probably then in her fifties, he in his twenties, so she seemed old to him, as did her Kilbarchan neighbours whose songs he also recorded: Mrs King, Mrs Thomson, Nancy Holmes, and Agnes Laird. 
Motherwell's collecting notebook (Harvard U., Houghton L., MS 25242.16, copy made for Francis James Child), where he wrote reminders and notes to himself, and the manuscript which offers fair copies of materials gathered by collecting and correspondence (University of Glasgow, Murray MS 501) suggest that he made three visits to Agnes Lyle, probably in the late summer and autumn of 1825. In total, he may have collected as many as thirty-two items of which twenty-one are full texts; he paid her for her help. He mentioned her in a letter to C. K. Sharpe (Harvard U., Houghton L., MS 25241.56F), commenting that she wept in the process of singing 'Sheath and Knife', a tale of incest and death. In addition to locating the source of her repertoire -- her father -- Motherwell also includes comments made by Lyle: 'I was informed by A. Lile that she has heard a longer set of the ballad ['Lord Jamie Douglas'] in which while Lady Douglas is continuing her lament she observes a troop of gentlemen coming to her father's and she expresses a wish that these should be sent by her lord to bring her home. They happen to be sent for that purpose and she accompanies them. On her meeting however with her lord... her heart breaks and she drops down dead-at-his feet.' Francis James Child, the great nineteenth-century American editor of balladry, recovered Motherwell's manuscripts and printed texts in his five-volume work ('English and Scottish Popular Ballads', 1882-98); most of Lyle's full texts are given there and attributed to her. That publication brought Agnes Lyle's name to public view and set the stage for an analysis of her repertory (McCarthy). 
In the introduction to his 'Minstrelsy', Motherwell had described a method of generating texts built on commonplaces which suggests something like oral formulaic composition (Lord). It may be that this was a technique he observed in the singing and song production of Agnes Lyle, a technique analysed from internal textual evidence alone by McCarthy who also suggests that her repertoire represents her radical political leanings resulting from the depressed situation for the weaving community in the early part of the nineteenth century. Yet her songs also present an array of strong, active women, who love despite all the obstacles. This may well reflect her own hopes. 


@@@@@


doc= 68266


Allen, Robert (fl. 1582-1612), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was probably the Robert Alen who matriculated as a sizar at Pembroke College, Cambridge, at Easter 1582 and graduated BA in 1585-6 and MA in 1589. In the epistle dedicatory to 'The Doctrine of the Gospel' (1606) he says that he has been catechizing during a ministry of twenty years, which accords with a graduation date of 1585-6. During his career he ministered to churches in small villages, including Culford, Suffolk, north of Bury St Edmunds, of which he had been deprived for nonconformity by 7 August 1605, when his successor was installed. 
Allen was one of at least fifteen Suffolk ministers who were authors in the years round 1600. His first book, 'An Alphabet of the Holy Proverbs of King Salomon' (1596), which was intended for household use, provides brief expositions of the more difficult proverbs, compares translations of selected ones, and includes an epistle dedicatory to Thomas, fourth Lord Wentworth, and Robert Rich, the future second earl of Warwick. Allen published two works in 1600, one of which, 'A Treatise of Beneficence', was completed at Culford in May and dedicated to Sir John Popham, lord chief justice and privy councillor. In it Allen praises the 'Vagrancy Act' of 1598, castigates vagabonds as dangerous and unworthy of relief, urges charity for deserving poor, and buttresses his argument with mostly classical quotations, especially from Seneca. This book was reprinted in 1603 as 'The Oderifferous Garden of Charitie'. In 1600 Allen also published 'A Treasurie of Catechisme, or, Christian Instruction', with an epistle dedicatory to his patron, Sir Nicholas Bacon, and his wife, Lady Anne. A substantial book of 308 pages, 'A Treasurie' was intended for catechists and mature Christians rather than children and uneducated believers. Its coverage includes social themes ranging from marriage and sexual matters to landlord-tenant relations and appropriate conduct for lawyers. 
Bacon was still Allen's patron when the latter completed 'The Doctrine of the Gospel', a work of 998 pages in three parts, which explicates 'what those things are which the faithfull Ministers of Jesus Christ doe beate their wittes about' (sig. *4'v'). Dedicated to the Bacons (Sir Nicholas, Lady Anne, Sir Nathaniel, Sir Francis, Sir Edmund, and Edward JP) this book too was written for mature believers, and also for fellow ministers, many of whom Allen had heard preach -- he likens himself to a bee that has extracted honey from their works. One of those ministers, Richard Blackerby, contributed verses to conclude Allen's mammoth undertaking. By this time Allen was suffering from ill health, but he continued to write. In 1608 he saw a work by a deceased fellow minister, Robert Pricke, through the press; entitled 'A Verie Godlie and Learned Sermon', it had been preached at the funeral of Sir Edward and Lady Susan Lewkenor. Allen contributed an epistle to Pricke's son Timothy, a fellow pastor. The following year Allen shepherded another of Robert Pricke's works, 'The Doctrine of Superioritie, and of Subjection', through to publication. In an epistle to Sir Edward Lewkenor the younger, Sir Robert Lewkenor, Sir Robert Quarles, and four other gentlemen, Allen describes himself as a friend of Pricke's former congregation at Denham, Suffolk. Allen completed his final work, 'Concordances of the Holy Proverbs of King Salomon: and of his Like Sentences in Ecclesiastes', on 20 July 1612; it groups verses according to a wide variety of themes. There is no further reference to him, and it is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 68267


Kennedy, James (fl. 1662-1686), Latin poet, was the son of James Kennedy, town clerk of Aberdeen and sheriff clerk from 1661 to 1672, who was dismissed from his post when writs were issued against him for debts he had incurred. Both father and son possessed the title of sheriff clerk when they were admitted burgesses of Aberdeen on 9 June 1668. The son may be identical with the James Kennedy who became conservator of Scottish privileges and Scottish resident in the Low Countries about 1684, and who was knighted in that or the following year. After the departure of Bevil Skelton, Kennedy was also appointed English resident and belatedly received his commission as consul from the states general of the United Provinces at Rotterdam on 16 August 1686, but his time in the town was marred by the antagonism of the English community there. His office brought him great personal expense and he wrote letters to Skelton and Lord Middleton describing the straitened circumstances of his large family, which included his five children (see BL, Add. MS 41820, fols. 28, 35). 
Kennedy's first publication, a pastoral with echoes of Virgil's 'Eclogues', emerged in Aberdeen in 1662 entitled ''Diadema kai mitra', seu, Daphnidis et Druydum reditus' ('The Diadem and the Mitre, or, The Return of Daphnis and the Druids'). The poem, which comprises eighty Latin hexameters, takes the form of a conversation between two shepherds, describing the celebrations in Scotland now that Daphnis and the druids have returned from exile. It is a simple allegory on the return of the episcopacy to Scotland: Daphnis represents James Sharp, archbishop of St Andrews, and the druids are the bishops. In the same year Kennedy found in the marriage of Charles II and Catherine of Braganza another reason to rejoice, and published ''Gamelion doron'' ('Wedding present'), a jubilant epithalamium in Latin hexameters. The little volume is rounded off with a prayer in Latin sapphics for the safety of the royal couple and their kingdom. 
Kennedy's only other published work was 'Aeneas Britannicus' (1663), a poem largely composed of passages culled from the 'Aeneid' and pieced together to celebrate Charles II as the 'British Aeneas'. The unique copy of this book, of which only the first few pages (containing 211 hexameters) survive, is in Aberdeen University Library. A couple of lines from the poem, which mimic the beginning of the 'Aeneid', will indicate the style: '
Arma virumque cano, Britannis primus ab oris 

Gallica qui fato profugus Germanaque venit 

Littora. 
(Arms I sing and the man, who first left British shores, exiled by fate, and came to the coasts of France and Germany. Ll. 5-7)' What remains of the poem covers only the battle of Worcester, but the 'argument' attests that it went on to describe Charles's exile, restoration, and marriage, hinting that this was a sizeable production. Although he has been described as a straggler behind the great tradition of Scottish Latin verse (Bradner, 198), James Kennedy was a competent Latin poet, and his letters show him to have been conscientious in his duties as a consul. 


@@@@@


doc= 68268


Andrewes, Bartimaeus (1550/51-1616), Church of England clergyman, was born in Bocking, Essex, of unknown parentage, and seems to have matriculated sizar from Jesus College, Cambridge, at Michaelmas 1570. Ordained deacon by Edwin Sandys, bishop of London, on 6 July 1574, he stated that he was 'of Braintree', had been born in Bocking, was aged twenty-three, and had lately been a scholar of St John's College, Cambridge. On 24 July of that year he was listed in an episcopal visitation as curate of Rochford, Essex, which suggests a connection with Robert, second Lord Rich, whose secondary seat of Rochford Hall stood opposite the church. On 13 July 1576 Lord Keeper Bacon presented him to the vicarage of Braintree, at Rich's petition. Why the benefice was deemed to have lapsed to the crown, so that its true patron had to petition for his own protege is mysterious; as is Andrewes's resignation of the living within six months. But he was ordained priest, at Ely, only in December 1576 and had perhaps not yet graduated from Cambridge. Following Bishop John Aylmer's primary visitation of London in 1577, he was granted a preaching licence as BA, 'especially' in Fordham, Essex, presumably under the auspices of the rector, Thomas Upcher. Andrewes is not heard of again in Essex. By October 1582 he was vicar of Wenham, Suffolk, and a founder member of the clerical conference which met in the Stour valley and is known to history as the Dedham classis. The eleventh meeting of the conference was held in his house. 
Andrewes was a popular preacher. A course of sermons on the 'Song of Songs' (1583; reprinted 1595), preached on three successive days (though where is unknown), was redolent with the rhetoric of godly fellowship. Those that 'truly love Christ' were to 'be ever inquiring after him, comforting one another, conferring, meditating, praying, stirring up one another'. Although disregarded as 'monsters among men' ('now these 'Puritans' flock together') they were to invite both their families and their neighbours to the sermon, 'and I will go with you also' (Andrewes, 'Sermons', 185). One of his colleagues in the conference considered that Andrewes's gift lay 'rather in exhortation then in doctryne' (Usher, 45). 
By 1585 Andrewes was looking for something better than Wenham. 'He had no comfort in that place, his heart was dead in it' (Usher, 43). And his living of $25 was not enough. While the parish complained of his absence, he was preaching with a view to a ministry in Great Yarmouth. What followed is remarkable evidence of the operation of reformed (presbyterian or congregational) procedures in the Elizabethan church. A majority of the conference opposed the move to Yarmouth, and believed that they had the authority to prevent it. It would be the 'ruin' of the poor church at Wenham. Moreover it could not be right to go from a pastoral charge to the lesser function of 'doctor'. One of the bailiffs of Yarmouth, accepting the jurisdiction of the conference, waited upon it at an extraordinary meeting. One member told him: 'If I were one of that church, I had as lief they shouldest pluck out mine eye as take from me my pastor'. Mr Mayham replied: 'But sir, if you cast out your eye you will give me leave to take it up' (Usher, 45-6). By the next regular meeting, Andrewes was off to Yarmouth, where in 1585 the corporation agreed to pay him $50 a year and to build him a house. 
Yarmouth had been searching for some time for an acceptable preacher not under threat of episcopal suspension. In 1591 Andrewes was reappointed on $50 'if he be not put to silence', but was to receive only $25 if he were, and two more preachers were appointed whom Andrewes had approved. In 1600 Andrewes was paid $32 10's'. His arrival in the town was evidently a historical moment, equivalent to the adoption of a thoroughly reformed regime. In dedicating a catechism to the magistrates, and 'all the whole congregation', Andrewes referred to a solemn promise 'at my first entry amongst you' to promote God's glory, 'agreeable to his word', and acknowledged that they had kept their promise by electing faithful ministers, and the earl of Leicester as 'so wise and godly a Steward'. It was the function of the public preacher to exhort the magistrates to public godliness, and Andrewes proceeded to do so: 'You must know that the burden of this people lieth upon your shoulders, and that their eyes look at you, as those by whose example the people either perish and fall, or are preserved and stayed up, for the fall and uprising of many dependeth upon public persons.... So shall you be famous in the Church of God and Common Weal. (Andrewes, 'Catechisme', dedicatory epistle)' A new pulpit, 10 feet high, was erected in St Nicholas's Church, which, as one of the largest parish churches in England, was capable of accommodating six thousand communicants. Andrewes's catechism was a preparation for the Lord's supper, and the accounts of the church wardens suggest that the sacrament was administered with increasing frequency in his time. 
Historians of Yarmouth have surprisingly little to say about Andrewes's later years in the pulpit, but he was still 'of Great Yarmouth' when he made his will in September 1615, and presumably when he died, in May 1616. He was probably married by the early 1580s, but nothing seems to be known of his wife, Joan, who survived him. Andrewes's son and grandson were both baptized Bartimaeus. There were other sons, John and Samuel. Two daughters, Abigail and Sara, with their husbands, were left shares of his large house in Yarmouth. Andrewes died a person of modest substance, with lands in two Suffolk parishes, including East Bergholt, hard by Dedham. 


@@@@@


doc= 68270


Philp, James, of Almerieclose (1654/5-1714x25), Jacobite poet, was born at Arbroath, Forfarshire, the son of James Philp of Almerieclose (died 1695/6), 'a small property... composed of several crofts and bits of lands... gathered round the old Almonry premises of the ruined Abbey' of Arbroath (Philp, 'Introduction'), and Margaret Grahame ('fl'. 1635-1675), the daughter of Walter Grahame of Duntrune and a second cousin of John Grahame of Claverhouse, Viscount Dundee. 
Philp, a member of a strongly royalist and episcopalian family, was educated at Arbroath grammar school and at the University of St Andrews (1672-5); he may subsequently have studied law at Edinburgh, where he was certainly staying in the late 1670s. In 1684 or 1685 Philp married Jean Corbit ('fl'. 1660-1700), daughter of John Corbit of Tollcrosse, Glasgow. They had two sons, James (died 1734) and John (died 1752), who became governor of St Martin's in America. Both sons succeeded Philp as laird. On 16 April 1689 Philp joined Viscount Dundee at the raising of the standard of King James on Dundee law: only fifty were present. Philp acted as the standard-bearer to the Jacobite army in the ensuing campaign, but more importantly he also gathered material for what was to be the last major attempt at a Latin epic written in the British Isles, the 'Grameid', probably composed in the years either side of 1700. It is influenced both by Virgil, whose 'Aeneid' was a major source of Jacobite code until 1750, and by Lucan, possibly in tribute to the fact that the 'Pharsalia' had been a favourite book of the marquess of Montrose, to whom Philp was related on his mother's side. 
The 'Grameid' is not only a useful source for details of the rising of 1689, but also an important piece of literature in its own right. Emphasizing 'Lucanian darkness and violence as a counterbalance to its Virgilian promise of hope and restoration' (Pittock, 40), Philp thematizes both Scottish and British foundation myths, and he is also perhaps the first Jacobite writer to use the image of the highlander as a synecdoche for true Scottish patriotism. The idea of the selling of nationality for 'Dutch gold' (ibid., 42), that was so prominent in later accounts of the Union also makes an early appearance in this poem. The 'Grameid' is a significant achievement in Scottish literature which would be far better recognized were it not written in Latin. 
Philp did not apparently suffer directly for his Jacobitism, although he was accused at the burgh court of Arbroath of abusing the town's Williamite magistrates in 1692. In 1695 or 1696 he succeeded his father as laird of Almerieclose; he died, probably in Arbroath, some time between 1714 and 1725. The manuscript of his poem was deposited in the Advocates' Library either at his death or shortly thereafter. In 1888 it was published by the Revd Alexander Murdoch for the Scottish History Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 68271


NicDhomhnaill, Sileas (c.1660-c.1729), Scottish Gaelic poet, was daughter of Gilleasbaig (died 1682), chief of the MacDonalds of Keppoch in Lochaber (Mac Mhic Raghnaill), and his wife, who has been identified as Mary MacMartin of the Letterfinlay family. Sileas was thus a sister of Colla nam Bo, the next Mac Mhic Raghnaill (died 'c'.1723). She was married in 1685 to Alexander Gordon of Camdell (died 1720), near Tomintoul in Banffshire, who was factor for the Lochaber lands of the Gordons of Huntly. She doubtless went to live in Gordon country then and in 1700 they acquired Beldorney Castle, near Dufftown. It seems clear that by her marriage Sileas was able to maintain a social standing consistent with her aristocratic highland origin. There were at least five sons and three daughters of the marriage. Sileas is perhaps best known as the Gaelic poet of the Jacobite rising of 1715, and from her extant corpus of twenty-three songs (they are not mere poems) six are primarily concerned with that event, but she has probably attracted some spurious ascriptions, since all of her extant works have depended, to various extents, on the oral tradition for survival. Some of the six (and of the twenty-three) may therefore not be her work at all, so that she cannot really be called a political poet. Instead it is likely that her high social standing and her eastern location, together with the passage of time, all helped her to develop as a new kind of songmaker in Gaelic, one not thematically limited to 'Clan and politics', D. S. Thomson's classic markers for the work of the seventeenth-century Gaelic poets (Thomson, 'Clan and politics', 116). Her songs, as far as is known, all date from after 1700 and her range of themes is notably wider than that of her predecessors. While she does not expand into nature poetry or love poetry (these were to flourish famously in Gaelic after her death), she does bring much that is new to the song tradition, including religious song, very much in the Roman Catholic dogmatic mould, and related comment on sexual mores. Her political songs on the 'Fifteen do reflect the simple Jacobite view one expects from MacDonald poets, and the presence of old conventions is clear to see. But a new extension of the idea of song as 'brosnachadh', incitement to battle, arises among Gaelic poets as the 1715 campaign gets under way. That is when the type of song sometimes called 'Oran nam fineachan Gaidhealach' ('the song of the highland clans') is first found, which some scholars see as a development of the age-old practice of listing a heroic subject's potential allies (Thomson, 'Political poetry', 192; MacInnes, 465). Songs of this new type are essentially lists of the main clans who might be expected to fight for the Stewarts, and as popular songs they could doubtless put heavy pressure on hesitant chiefs to lead their men out for James VIII (James Stuart). Both Sileas and another MacDonald poet, Iain Dubh, composed rousing songs of this type for the 'Fifteen, so neither poet can really be credited with inventing the genre. 
Sileas makes a major contribution to the vast body of Gaelic encomium with her famous and popular song lamenting the death of Alasdair Dubh, the Glengarry chief, late in 1721. Even here, in this heroic lament where the hero is likened to the noblest of animals, the most valuable of stones, and the trees that were traditionally respected by Gaels, there are personal touches that show that Sileas knew the man and loved him. Personal touches feature in other songs, as where she delights in her children or laments the deaths in 1720 of both her husband and daughter and, a little later, of a harper who had visited her house regularly, bringing music and news of her family in the west. It is probably in these more personal poems, for which she had few identifiable models in the heroic public poetry of her predecessors, that the modern reader will find her most approachable. Almost nothing is known of Sileas's life after her husband's death, and that shortage of information may partly explain a number of traditions which have persisted about her religious life, including vaguely sinister trances and conversions. All that can really be said is that, while her death has been placed about 1729 on very little evidence, it is quite likely that she was buried at the ancient church of Mortlach, near Dufftown, where one of her songs relates that her husband was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 68272


Carew, Thomas (d. 1616), Church of England clergyman, is of uncertain origins, although he claimed connections with more famous and armigerous Carews, including George Carew, successively Lord Carew and earl of Totnes, with the Norfolk family of Gawdy, and with the lord of the manor at Bildeston, John Rivett, whose grandmother was a Carew. Still less is known of his education, but there is no evidence that he was a graduate, and in the Norwich consistory court he was described as 'unskillful and unlearned in the tongues, as Latin, Greek and Hebrew'. He seems to have been ordained by Bishop Edmund Freake, either at Norwich or perhaps in Freake's original diocese of Rochester, which may tend to confirm naval connections, of which there are other stray hints. 
Carew's career was that of a clerical stormy petrel in Essex and Suffolk. He is first encountered in the mid-1580s at Hatfield Peverel in Essex, this being a donative served by a curate, and as such at the disposal of the owner of the former priory, Edmund Allen. It is highly probable, though incapable of final proof, that the Essex curate was identical with the man who was later curate of St Margaret and St Nicholas, Ipswich, and rector of Bildeston, Suffolk. As a notorious nonconformist who never wore the surplice or used the sign of the cross in baptism, the circumstances of his appointment enabled Bishop John Aylmer (who was later said to have consented to it) to allege that Carew had been 'elected by the people' and practised 'a presbytery' although Carew's principal offence may have been the hard pastoral line he took with crypto-papists in the parish, 'adversaries', 'monstrous enemies', whom Aylmer was anxious to win (Peel, 2.28-35). Carew's verbal onslaught on Aylmer was extreme, and he suffered periods of imprisonment, interspersed with irregular preaching. After two years of ignoring the prayer book and promulgating presbyterian doctrine in two more donatives in Ipswich, his past caught up with him and he was again on the run. But Carew had powerful friends, including Sir Martin Frobisher, and also the third Lord Rich and Sir Robert Jermyn, who in 1591 secured the right of presentation to the relatively well-endowed Suffolk rectory of Bildeston from the earl of Essex. 
At Bildeston, Carew either conformed or, more probably, found himself immune from prosecution for irregularities of that kind. His published sermons were, with one exception, typical and unremarkable Calvinist effusions, which freely plagiarized more celebrated preachers such as Richard Greenham and George Gifford. The exception was a sermon (part of a collection of 'Certaine Godly and Necessarie Sermons', 1603) to which he gave the title 'A caveat for craftesmen and clothiers'. This was an outspoken attack on clothiers, remarkable less for its rhetoric, vivid though this was, than for Carew's deployment of apparently accurate facts and figures about hours of work and levels of pay in an industry in which the distinction between entrepreneurs and employees was already emergent. Clothiers were the most unconscionable of employers, 'considering the greatness, variety and continuance of their oppressions' (Carew, 'Certaine Godly and Necessarie Sermons', sig. T6'v'-7'r'). 'It is a thing monstrous and strange that any should be so void of religion and humanity as to defraud the poor of their wages' (ibid., sig. T3'v'). Carew believed that the profits of rich clothiers were made from low and exploitative wages, 'the enriching of two or three in a town', 'the impoverishing of many' (ibid., sig. V6). Having been told that the rich remembered the poor in their wills, Carew remarked: 'Therefore it might be wished that such rich men would die quickly, that there might be some good done at their deaths, for they do hurt while they live' (ibid., sig. O5'v'). 
Although the economy of Bildeston depended on cloth, it is not certain that Carew's diatribe was delivered in his own parish or that he had his own people in his sights. The so-called 'new draperies' predominated in Bildeston, and Carew alleged that things were more tolerable in that branch of the industry, reserving his harsher criticism for the 'blue men', the manufacturers of broadcloth. Certainly he continued to live, apparently peaceably, in his comfortable rectory until his death in 1616, when his will had nothing to say about the poor but expressed a concern that his widow should not be deprived of her interest in the tithe corn which was even then being harvested. Carew and his wife, Margaret (who had little to dispose of when she herself died in 1629), had no fewer than nine children, including a son George (perhaps named for Lord Carew), who entered Merton College, Oxford, in 1604 and became a London clergyman. 


@@@@@


doc= 68273


Chapman, Edmund (1537/8-1602), Church of England clergyman, probably hailed from the family named Chapman or Barker long established in Sibton, Suffolk. He matriculated as a sizar from Gonville Hall, Cambridge, in November 1554, graduating BA from Trinity in 1559; appointed a fellow in 1560, he proceeded MA in 1562. Thus Garrett's identification of him with the Marian exile from Hastings who was living in Aarau with a wife and child in 1558 must be discounted; it was perhaps that man who was rector of Marsham, Norfolk, from 1559 to 1576. 
Chapman was ordained deacon at Norwich on 8 June 1566. Appointed university preacher the following year, he was granted the degree of BD in 1569. On 16 March 1570, at the petition of the master of Trinity and future archbishop of Canterbury, John Whitgift, Chapman received letters patent from the lord keeper, Nicholas Bacon, as canon of the first prebend in Norwich Cathedral. He then emerged as an active supporter of Thomas Cartwright, who that year launched the presbyterian campaign for further reform of the Church of England in his lectures as Lady Margaret professor at Cambridge. Chapman preached against pluralism, and with other members of the chapter broke into Norwich Cathedral and destroyed the organ. At about this time he married Susan, sister of William Cardinal of Great Bromley, Essex, a wealthy lawyer and former MP. 
As town preacher at Bedford in 1572 Chapman was suspended by Thomas Cooper, bishop of Lincoln, for contentious sermons. An oblique reference to this matter by Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, has led to the assumption, unsupported by the Norwich chapter acts, that he was also deprived of his prebend for nonconformity. It seems more likely that he eventually resigned because it did not provide an adequate income. On 12 April 1574 George Gardiner, dean of Norwich, urged Bishop John Parkhurst to 'travail' with him 'that he may stay upon his prebend and [have] some other help in Norwich' (Houlbrooke, 239). Chapman was still in residence on 3 January 1575, when Parkhurst noted with displeasure that he and others had inveighed against singing in the cathedral during the Christmas season. 
Perhaps Chapman finally quitted Norwich after the arrival of Edmund Freake as bishop in November 1575. In 1577 John Aylmer, bishop of London, told Lord Burghley that, like John Field and others, he was preaching 'God knows what' in private houses (Strype, 36-7). Later that year he gravitated to Dedham, Essex, where William Cardinal endowed a lectureship for him. Although no preacher was listed there during Aylmer's primary visitation of London diocese in July, Chapman was licensed to preach throughout Essex on 2 November. The foundation of the lectureship may thus be dated to the autumn of 1577. 
Chapman was incorporated BD and DD at Oxford on 7 and 10 July 1578. In October 1582 he was chief organizer of the Dedham classis, the only clerical conference active during the 1580s whose records survive, and remained its presiding intellect until it ceased to meet in June 1589. Throughout these years he remained on close terms with Cartwright and with Field, the co-ordinator of the conference movement. Letters to the former and from the latter survive among the Dedham papers. 
On 4 February 1583 Chapman asked the conference's advice about publishing a short catechism, the brethren having 'perused and allowed' its doctrine (Usher, 28). His only known work, it appeared anonymously the same year as 'A Catechisme with a Prayer Annexed, Meete for All Christian Families', the prayer being followed by the initials 'E. C.'. It enshrines the proposition that true faith in God is implanted 'by no other means but by the preaching of his holy word' (sig. A6'v'). 
Despite his earlier iconoclasm, Chapman's level-headed superintendency at Dedham belies the claim of its contemporary opponents that the movement was led only by irresponsible hot-heads. He frequently urged restraint and moderation on less temperate colleagues, and perhaps for that reason seldom clashed with Bishop Aylmer. He nevertheless suffered a period of suspension after the episcopal visitation of 1586, and again in 1588, because during a visit to Fulham in March he refused to assist Aylmer in conducting an ordination in the chapel. Even so, he was not one of those leaders of the movement examined or prosecuted between 1589 and 1592 for their clandestine activities. 
By the terms of William Cardinal's will in January 1596 Chapman received substantial property in Great Bromley as long as he retained the lectureship. By his own, dated 12 May 1601, he bequeathed half his goods and all his property in Dedham and nearby Ardleigh to his wife. Their son Paul, still a minor, was to inherit after her death. Bequests to their second son, John, included a property in Bread Street, London. Their daughter Susan received $200 at marriage or majority. Another daughter, Chrispian, is mentioned only in the codicil. There were bequests to his brother Nicholas, to Nicholas's sons Thomas and Edmund, and to a nephew named Dannocke. No member of the former Dedham conference was remembered. 
Chapman died on 7 November 1602, aged sixty-four, and was buried at Dedham church on 8 or 9 November. Two of the three executors he nominated renounced executorship. Letters of administration were therefore issued to the third, Simon Fenn, clothier of Dedham, on 10 February 1603. Both Chapman's gravestone and funeral monument survive, and were described in print by Canon Rendall, the last independent lecturer of Dedham. Two letters to John Reynolds, dated 1601, are preserved at Corpus Christi College, Oxford (MS 303, fol. 200). The Dedham lectureship still exists, but by an order in council of 1908 was officially vested in the incumbent vicar of Dedham, following the death of Canon Rendall in 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 68274


Crane, Elizabeth (d. in or before 1606), religious activist, was the eldest daughter of Sir Robert Hussey of Linwood, in Lincolnshire, who died in 1546, and his second wife, Dame Jane. Born towards the end of the reign of Henry VIII, she seems to have married Anthony Crane, a clerk controller in the royal household and resident of the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury, London, soon after Elizabeth's accession. On 8 April 1560 Anthony and Elizabeth Crane received a grant of the manor of Ockham, in Surrey, which Anthony gained permission to alienate six years later, before in 1571 obtaining a reversionary lease of the manor of East Molesey, also in Surrey, where since 1564 he had been a justice of the peace and member of the quorum. Anthony Crane was buried in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 18 August 1583, in his nuncupative will leaving all his goods to his wife and their daughter, Mary. About 1588 Mary Crane married an Aldermanbury merchant, Gerard Gore. 
As early as 1572 Anthony Crane appears to have been associating with those forward protestants who, according to the hostile testimony of Richard Bancroft, erected a presbytery at Wandsworth, and his widow continued her connection with the reformers after her husband's death. On the destruction of his press in May 1588 for having printed Udall's treatise 'The State of the Church of England Laid Open in a Conference', usually known as 'Diotrephes', Robert Waldegrave and his wife brought the salvaged type to Elizabeth Crane's house in Aldermanbury. Robert Penry then procured a new press, and with her permission transferred the type to her country house at East Molesey. There that autumn Waldegrave printed John Udall's 'Demonstration of Discipline', together with 'The Epistle to the Terrible Priests', the first of the Martin Marprelate tracts, but his protector, who feared retaliation, dared not house the press any longer, and Penry had removed it to Northamptonshire by the end of October. 
Late in 1588 or early in 1589 Elizabeth Crane married George Carleton (1529-1590), the stepfather of Anthony Cope and friend of Sir Richard Knightley, to whose house at Fawsley Penry had taken the press. Suspected of complicity in the Marprelate tracts, in April 1589 Carleton was required to attend daily upon the privy council, while the following October his wife was imprisoned in the Fleet with the other harbourers of the press, Sir Richard Knightley, John Hales, and Roger Wigston and his wife. George Carleton died in January 1590, some months before his widow appeared in the Star Chamber on 17 May, when, having affirmed her loyalty to the queen and denied being a papist, Anabaptist, Brownist, or member of the Family of Love, she prayed 'that she mighte not be forced to be her owne Accuser, or els that shee mighte have her Articles and tyme for Counsell wherby shee mighte not hurte herself or Gode's people' (McCorkle, 279). She was fined 1000 marks for refusing the 'ex officio' oath and a further $500 for sheltering the press, and was confined during the queen's pleasure, though the records do not reveal how long she remained in prison. She seems to have died before her daughter, who was buried in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury on 1 March 1606. 


@@@@@


doc= 68275


Tomkys, John (d. 1592), Church of England clergyman, was a native of Bilston, near Wolverhampton, the son of Richard Tomkys, who seems to have been a person of some substance, since his 'ancestors' were buried in Wolverhampton church. Although he was credited with an MA by his employers at Shrewsbury, no record of a university education has survived. However, a dedicatory epistle acknowledges that he was maintained in his studies by a Staffordshire neighbour, Sir Richard Pipe, lord mayor of London, whose sons Humfrey and Samuel, Tomkys remembered in his will with gifts of religious books. This education may conceivably have taken Tomkys to Switzerland, whether or not as a Marian exile, since he published translations from French and Latin of works by the Zurich reformer Heinrich Bullinger and dedicated the first of these to his diocesan, Thomas Bentham, who had ministered in the English congregation at Geneva. In a dedication to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, Tomkys recalls serving 'at his spiritual table' 'in the county of Stafford where I was born' (Tomkys, 'A Sermon Preached the 26 Day of May 1584', 1586). 
Nothing more is known of Tomkys's career until in 1582 he left Bilston for Shrewsbury, where he succeeded Edward Bulkeley as 'public preacher'. His appointment was backed by Sir George Bromley, elder brother of Sir Thomas Bromley, lord chancellor, who was Shrewsbury's recorder. Bulkeley had been paid the large salary of $72, raised partly from voluntary contributions, partly from the revenues of Shrewsbury School, to which the tithes of the two principal parish churches were appropriated. With the arrival of Tomkys, the town assembly attempted to place this burden on the entire rateable community. Tomkys was also incumbent of the royal peculiar of St Mary's, Shrewsbury, and as such styled himself 'Her Majesties Stipendiary Minister'. In reality he was employed by the town. The peculiar conveyed the right to hold a consistory court, an asset which was leased from Shrewsbury School. Here Tomkys announced seventy-nine visitation articles, which may be called, 'a la' Geneva, the ecclesiastical ordinances of Shrewsbury, enforcing stringent requirements in respect of church attendance and sabbath observance, and forbidding various 'notorious sins'. Evidently the arrival on the scene of Tomkys represented a tightening of the ratchet of reformation in what was already a protestant town with some aspirations towards godliness. Tomkys published his own catechism dedicated to 'Christian parents and godly householders', and attempted to purge St Mary's Church of its stone altar and other superstitious images. That these, and especially the altar, had survived until this late date is remarkable, raising questions about the thoroughness of Reformation processes in pre-Tomkys Shrewsbury. A fortnight after these acts of iconoclasm, the earl of Leicester paid a notable civic visit and Tomkys published the sermon he preached on the occasion, the only sermon preached before the earl to have been printed. 
The tight discipline enforced by Tomkys, with the backing of a magistracy dominated by the company of the drapers (and Tomkys lived in the guildhall of the drapers), met with spirited resistance. This clustered around the symbol of the shearmen's tree, a kind of maypole erected in celebration of their annual midsummer feast by the members of a trade and company, many of whose members were effectively dependent on the drapers for employment. Tomkys in his sermons began the campaign against the tree, and in 1591, when the younger drapers defied an order forbidding the setting up of the tree 'in superstitious order' (Somerset, 252) and were involved in a legal 'cause celebre', he was subjected to the shaming ritual of a charivari. Three years later, further trouble over the tree led to a murder and the execution of two young apprentices, in circumstances which included Anglo-Welsh tension and something of a craft, if not class, war, as well as the religious and moral issues at stake. 
But Tomkys had died before this, on 23 June 1592, in Shrewsbury, where a day later he was buried, his death, according to a local chronicler, much lamented 'of the perfect protestants' of the town (Leighton, 324). He had buried his wife (her name is unknown) in 1584 and now asked to be buried beside her, but not for any 'superstitious' reason, and he forbade ringing, alms giving, and 'entertaining of friends' at his funeral (Mander, 69-83). His son Thomas Tomkis, who was a scholar at Trinity College, Cambridge, wrote the comedy 'Albumazar', which was performed before James I and appeared in nine editions between 1615 and 1634. It is unlikely that so perfect a protestant, not to say puritan, as his father would have approved of such a thing. Tomkys himself published his catechism, 'A Briefe Exposition of the Lordes Prayer' (1585), his sermon preached on 26 May 1584 (1586), and, translated from Bullinger, 'A most Excellent Sermon of the Lordes Supper' ('c'.1577) and 'A most Godly and Learned Discourse of the Woorthynesse... of the Holy Scripture' (1579). 


@@@@@


doc= 68277


Heton, George (b. c.1515, d. in or after 1598), merchant and religious activist, was described in the memorial inscription of his son Martin Heton, bishop of Ely, as 'armiger' (esquire), and as descended from the family of Heton of Lancashire. If so he was evidently a younger son. However, an alternative parentage may be suggested by the will of one William Heton, merchant tailor of London. Dated 28 October and proved on 22 December 1523, Heton's will refers to 'George, Anne, and Thomas, mine own natural children', all of whom were then underage. As George later did, William Heton also owned property at Stratford Bow, Middlesex. Apprenticed to and made free of the Merchant Taylors' Company by the end of 1538, he settled in the London parish of St Dionis Backchurch, where on 20 January 1539 he married Elizabeth Paget. Only one child of the marriage is recorded in the register -- Ann, baptized on 24 April 1540 -- and Elizabeth was buried on 12 September 1546. 
Heton appears to have prospered early. In the London subsidy assessment of 1541 he was rated on the basis of an income of $60, and was thus reckoned one of the half-dozen wealthiest parishioners of St Dionis. His suitability as a son-in-law was not lost on London's merchant elite and on 24 January 1547 he married Joan Roocke, widowed daughter of Sir Martin Bowes, lord mayor of London in 1545. Five children quickly followed -- William (1547), Elizabeth (1548), Grace (1550), Thomas (1551), and finally Martin (1554), the future bishop. Joan Heton was buried ten days after Martin's baptism. 
In 1551 Heton bought a substantial estate in Bromley St Leonard and Stratford Bow, Middlesex, from another former lord mayor, Sir Henry Hoblethorne. Like his father-in-law, he was by this time deeply committed to protestantism. He and his brother Thomas Heton were among the principal 'sustainers' of London protestants under Mary. Two letters from the martyr John Bradford to George, his 'dear friend and brother in the lord', were afterwards published (Bickersteth, 342-6). 
Heton contrived to combine this clandestine activity with the mastership of the Merchant Taylors in 1556-7. Henry Machyn describes the company feast which ended Heton's mastership on 30 June 1557. Continuing to prosper under Elizabeth, Heton was rated in the higher assessment of London of 1559 on the basis of a taxable sum of $80 and was thus reckoned among its 700 wealthiest citizens. Yet he had evidently overstrained his resources in the protestant cause. He sold his Middlesex estate to Nicholas Culverwell in 1561 and disaster struck soon afterwards. On 17 May 1563 he made 'humble request' to his company for an annuity for his relief and that of his 'poor children, being in great need and necessity... by reason of the great losses that he hath of late... had and sustained as well by sea as by land' (Clode, 1.192). He was granted an annual pension of 20 marks. 
This reversal, coupled with his godly reputation, perhaps prompted the corporation to offer Heton the post of chamberlain of London, the city's principal financial officer, which he took up on 1 August 1563. In August 1565 he witnessed his father-in-law's will, which released him from a debt of $300, and in 1569 he was granted the gaugership of wine and oils for thirty years at $40 per annum. 
In 1572 Heton relinquished his pension from the Merchant Taylors on the grounds that 'God hath otherwise well provided for him' (Clode, 1.192). It was, however, restored between April 1576 and June 1577, for disaster had struck again. On 13 December 1577 Heton was dismissed from the chamberlainship for undisclosed reasons. It may be significant that Elizabeth had recently complained that loan money dispatched for repayment to certain city officials had failed to reach them. Heton was, moreover, once again heavily in debt to private creditors and to the city itself, owing the latter no less than $1463. Attempts to settle the debt and audit his accounts dragged on through numerous committees until, on 26 April 1598, a final one was appointed to examine and close them. 
Since no more is heard of the matter, nor of Heton himself, this may be evidence that he had recently died. Unless the description of him on Bishop Heton's tomb was merely an attempt to obliterate the memory of his financial disasters, it perhaps suggests that he had in the interim retired to a small estate in decent obscurity among his Lancashire relatives. Heton's second son, Thomas (died 1606), MP for Southampton in 1593, was in 1600 appointed bailiff of the Isle of Ely by his brother Martin. 


@@@@@


doc= 68279


Hinchliffe, William (1691-1742), poet and bookseller, was born on 12 May 1691 and baptized on 24 May at St Olave, Southwark, the son of Edward Hinchliffe, a tradesman, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Hurt. He was educated at a private grammar school in Reigate, Surrey, alongside his friend Henry Needler. He then served an apprenticeship to Arthur Bettesworth, a bookseller on London Bridge, 'and afterwards followed that business himself near thirty years' (Cibber, 5.24). In 1718 he married Jane Leigh, daughter of a prominent London citizen. 
Hinchliffe's first poems were complimentary addresses to Harley on the peace (1713) and to George I on his arrival at Greenwich (1714): the latter is also the earliest traced work of which he was the publisher. He also wrote and published a 'History' (1716) of the 1715 rising, dedicated to the duke of Argyll. Most occurrences of his name in later imprints are as one of a 'conger' (an alliance of booksellers) for joint publication of substantial (often scholarly) works, such as Joseph Trapp's 'Virgil' (1731-5) or the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions Abridged' (1734). His last traced publication is 'The Turkish Spy', eleventh edition, eight volumes (1741), in a conger of twenty-two booksellers. His business address was at Dryden's Head, under the Royal Exchange. 
In 1718 Hinchliffe published his own 'Poems, Amorous, Moral, and Divine', a collection of imitations and translations from Latin, pastorals, complimentary poems, and so on, dedicated to his friend Henry Needler. Some modern scholars think that 'The Seasons' in this volume gave hints to James Thomson. Hinchliffe later mastered French and published in 1734 his translation of 'La vie de Mahomet' (1730) by the freethinker Henri de Boulainviller. The translation was dedicated to his 'old Companion' William Duncombe, and carried a preface in which Hinchliffe expresses admiration for Muhammad and denounces popish corruption. At his death he left in manuscript a translation of the first nine books of Fenelon's 'Telemaque'. Hinchliffe died on 29 September 1742 and was buried in the parish church of St Margaret Lothbury. His wife, three daughters, and a son were already dead; he was survived only by his son William. 


@@@@@


doc= 68280


Needler, Henry (bap. 1690, d. 1718), poet and essayist, was baptized on 3 October 1690 at Horley, Surrey, the son of Henry Needler and Rose Watson. Needler was educated at a 'private school' in Reigate. In 1708 he entered the Navy Office, where he became a friend of William Duncombe; in his leisure hours he applied himself to reading the classics and the intensive study of logic, metaphysics, and mathematics. As early as 1711 Needler complained of severe pain in his head, and this gradually became more violent; eventually he became insane. He died of a 'fever' on 21 December 1718, and was buried in All Saints' Church, Frindsbury, near Rochester, Kent. 
Needler's miscellaneous writings were published by Duncombe in 1724, second and third editions appearing in 1728 and 1735 ('Works... Consisting of Original Poems, Translations, Essays, and Letters'). The poems are unremarkable, including a number of competent translations from the Latin and several pieces of biblical paraphrase. 'To Sir Richard Blackmore, on his poem, entitled 'Creation'' is of some interest as a response to Sir Richard Blackmore's laboriously 'physicotheological' didactic poem. More notable are the essays, which are partly modelled on those of 'The Spectator' and other contemporary periodicals: obvious examples are 'On the excellency of divine contemplation' and 'On the beauty of the universe', the second on a characteristic theme. The essay-like 'familiar letters', mostly dating from 1709-11, touch on a variety of moral and philosophical themes, and are of particular interest on account of the intellectual influences they reflect. In a letter (November 1711) to his friend John Hughes Needler warmly praises John Norris's Neoplatonic 'Theory of the Ideal World'; and in a letter (3 December 1711) to Duncombe he expresses admiration for the ''Philosophical Meditation'' in 'The Moralists' by Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of Shaftesbury, going on to attempt an imitation of Shaftesbury's rhapsodic prose in a passage on the manifestations of the deity in the physical universe. An important additional letter to Duncombe was later published by John Duncombe. Needler emerges as highly sensitive, introspective, and intellectually curious. In his preface to the 'Works' Duncombe pays tribute to Needler's personal qualities. 


@@@@@


doc= 68281


Paterson, William (fl. 1716-1760), colonial official and playwright, was born in Scotland. In February 1716 he matriculated at the College of Edinburgh. After college he succeeded his brother James Paterson as master at Edinburgh grammar school before following his friend James Thomson to London. He became a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Learning in 1735, and a freemason in 1737. 
Paterson's tragedy 'Arminius', whose hero and villain were thinly disguised portraits of, respectively, the prince of Wales and Walpole, was refused production by the lord chamberlain in 1740, but was printed in trade and subscription editions in that year. Patrick Murdoch, Thomson's biographer, claimed that Paterson was sometimes Thomson's amanuensis and that 'Arminius' was banned unread because the submitted text was in the same hand as Thomson's already banned 'Edward and Eleonora'. Thomson affectionately portrayed Paterson as a pensive, imaginative nature-lover in 'The Castle of Indolence' (1748, I.lvii-lix). 
By 1742 Paterson was in the service of Lord Tweeddale, secretary of state for Scotland. When the secretaryship was abolished Paterson became surveyor-general of customs for Barbados and the Leeward Islands, salary $400 p.a.; his warrant to start duty in Bridgetown, Barbados, is dated 29 May 1746. A letter by George Grenville, 3 September 1748, says that Paterson was appointed 'for Thomson's sake' (TNA: PRO Chatham MSS, 34). Murdoch claimed that Thomson was nominal holder of this post, procured for him by Lord Lyttelton. 
Paterson's letters from Barbados to the board of customs advocate imperial expansion in the West Indies and, 'inter alia', offer shrewd economic analyses of the sugar and slave trades. He believed that prohibitions and high duties were 'the smugglers' harvest' (Bodl. Oxf., MS North A.6: 5 July 1751, 18 Dec 1758). His last reported visit to London was in April 1760. It is not known when he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 68282


Pennyman, Margaret (bap. 1685, d. 1733), poet, was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 3 May 1685, the daughter of Barnet Angier of the City of Westminster, sometime carpenter to Charles II, and Jane Salter (or Slater). She is said to have been well educated and extraordinarily beautiful. In 1703 she eloped with Thomas Pennyman ('b'. 'c'.1669), of a good Yorkshire family, and was married on 18 June at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. Around this time, Thomas Pennyman came into an inheritance on the death of an elder brother. His wife brought him a fortune of $2000, but the marriage was disastrous and the couple obtained a legal separation after only three months. She lost much of her fortune in the Mississippi scheme, having travelled to Paris to dispose of her stock in 1720. Her journey to Paris, undertaken with another young woman and two male relatives, is recorded in her journal, printed in the 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse, by the Honourable Lady Margaret Pennyman', published posthumously in September 1739 (dated 1740 on title-page). The journal, which makes no direct mention of any financial transactions, is a pedestrian account of the logistics of travel and Parisian tourist sites. Pennyman does mention seeing Louis XV at mass, and shows an interest in Catholic rites and ceremonies. The preface to this volume, probably by her publisher, the scandalmonger Edmund Curll, states that after returning from France, Pennyman lived reclusively until her death. 
The 'Miscellanies', a small octavo volume priced at a modest 3's'., gives some indication of Pennyman's life and ideas, as well as revealing an unconventional poetic talent. The most arresting poem, 'A Paradox Against Life' (dated 1713) provides a series of bitter philosophical reflections on the pointlessness of desire and hope, in fluent yet robust couplets: '
Life, the great Hinge, on which uneasy Man 

Does turn in Pain, and never quiet hang; 

Life, which from worldly Cares contracts each Day 

A Rust which eats our polish'd Joys away, 

Life is a strange and fatal Energy. 

' Among the more public poems, 'A Ballad on the Duke of Marlborough's Funeral' (dated 1722) adopts a similarly tough, sardonic tone in attacking the cruelty and greed of the man; it also implies that Pennyman may have been tory or Jacobite in her political opinions. A group of amorous lyrics, to 'Celia' and 'Chloe', are written in the persona of man, but hint at passionate friendships between the women. The pseudonym Celia is used again in the short series of Pennyman's private letters appended to the volume, where she appears as the younger friend of the principal correspondent 'Mrs. D. F.' (possibly the 'Mary Knight' of the acrostic poem in one of the letters). Pennyman's letters profess extravagant devotion to both 'Celia' and Mrs D. F. The friendship between Pennyman and Mrs D. F. cooled after the latter married in 1732 and thereafter Pennyman's letters become increasingly lonely and desperate: 'What can I say? What can I do? My Brain is strangely disordered'. Pennyman died soon after this great disappointment, on 16 June 1733, and was buried by her brother Burridge Angier in St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 68283


Roberts, John (fl. 1722-1748), actor, is of unknown parents or upbringing. By 1724 he was married to an actress, known only as Mrs John Roberts, who predeceased him. No image survives but accounts emphasize Roberts's serious demeanour. In 1733 Aaron Hill advised that while 'nobody speaks with more weight and significance', Roberts might 'quicken and inspirit the solemnity' ('Works', 1.169). Although Roberts played a variety of roles, including comic ones, as early as 1728, he was cast as Gloucester in 'King Lear' and often portrayed sombre characters. 
Roberts's earliest recorded performance was on 19 February 1722 at Drury Lane, where he remained through the season of 1723-4. He and his wife were removed from that theatre's payroll on 9 September 1726, and both disappeared from the records until John returned to Drury Lane two years later in more significant roles. Roberts and his wife appeared at Richmond in the summer of 1724, and regularly performed at Southwark and Bartholomew fairs. 
In 1729 Roberts published 'An Answer to Mr Pope's Preface to Shakespear' refuting Pope's attacks on actors as the source of errors in the bard's texts. His arguments reveal an extensive knowledge of theatrical history, and precede similar points made by Lewis Theobald in the preface to his edition of Shakespeare (1733). He also drew two sketches of a performance in 1738 of 'Richard II' that record the essential conservatism of eighteenth-century staging. 
Although Roberts was in the Fleet in late January 1732, his career recovered and he played leading roles in provincial performances in Canterbury (Macbeth and Lear, 1733) and Norwich (Balance in Farquhar's 'Recruiting Officer' and Othello, 1735). He shifted his London activities to Covent Garden, where he closed with a benefit performance on 14 May 1742. He appeared as Claudius in 'Hamlet' at Goodmans' Fields Theatre in 1745, and may have been active in York 'c'.1748, but was referred to as 'the late Mr. 'John Roberts'' in 1755, when Charlotte Charke praised his depiction of Husband opposite her Wife in Lillo's 'Fatal Curiosity' (Charke, 64-5). 


@@@@@


doc= 68284


Simpson, Thomas (d. 1584), Church of England clergyman, is first recorded by John Foxe as one of the lay deacons of the secret protestant congregation of London during the reign of Mary I. On one occasion spies were waiting for the congregation near Aldgate, 'and had not Thomas Simpson the deacon espied them, and bid themselves disperse themselves away, they had been taken' ('Acts and Monuments', 8.558). Foxe also states that Augustine Bernher and Simpson visited the deacon Cuthbert Symson on the night before his martyrdom in March 1558. That Thomas and Cuthbert were brothers, or at least closely related, thus seems highly probable. 
What Foxe does not disclose is that, probably in November 1557, Thomas Simpson had been ordained priest in the redundant church of St Mary Axe by the congregation's 'superintendent and 'presbyterium''. The four 'witnesses' were three ordained clergy -- William Lyving, Augustine Bernher, and Robert Cole -- and Avery Brierton, a merchant tailor of the parish of St Martin Vintry. When Simpson subscribed the oath of supremacy in August 1559 he did so as 'minister in Honey Lane' (Carte antique et miscellanee, XIII/2/57, fol. 2). He was presumably serving as curate in the parish of All Hallows. 
Simpson's clandestine ordination was accepted as valid by Edmund Grindal who, in one of his earliest acts as bishop of London, collated him to the vicarage of Brightlingsea, near Colchester, on the Essex coast, on 4 January 1560. Avery Brierton stood surety at the exchequer for Simpson's first fruits along with another member of the former London congregation, Thomas Gee, whose widow later married John Sterne, suffragan bishop of Colchester. 
On 12 November 1562 Grindal issued Simpson with letters testimonial rehearsing the circumstances of his ordination 'five years since', and retrospectively ratifying and confirming it. It is implied, though not definitely stated, that it was justified by 'a time of persecution'. It is the only known example of English orders at this time which did not involve the laying on of consecrated hands. 
On 2 July 1569 Grindal further collated Simpson to the city rectory of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. He held both his livings until his death, without ever apparently becoming involved in nonconformist activities in the city or in Colchester. The preamble to his will nevertheless trusts that he will 'inherit the kingdom of Glory among the Saints' (will, fol. 324'v'). 
Simpson made his will as a widower, probably in January 1584. Nothing is known of his wife. After monetary bequests to the poor of both his parishes, he left a private house to his son, William, a minor, and his sixth share in a boat. The rest of his goods and possessions were divided between his other sons, Thomas, John, and Josias, who were all apparently of age. His daughters, Martha, Hester, Anne, and Mary, were left monetary bequests totalling $120 and were to inherit at nineteen or marriage. He probably died in May 1584. Thomas and John, named joint executors, were granted probate on 3 June, the day on which Thomas was collated to Brightlingsea as his father's successor in the vicarage. 


@@@@@


doc= 68285


Johnson, Robert (d. 1574), Church of England clergyman, is not always easy to distinguish from Robert Johnson (1540/41-1625), founder of Oakham and Uppingham schools, who in spite of an impressive portfolio of livings held in plurality shared the puritan credentials of this Robert Johnson. The latter is not known to have had any university career, and at his trial in February 1574 he was described as 'unlearned'. All the little that is known of Johnson relates to the last two years of his life. In 1572 he was one of those who visited in prison the authors of the 'Admonition to the Parliament', John Field and Thomas Wilcox, when he was identified as 'Mr Johnson dwelling in Middlesex near to Mr Gresham' (Petyt MS 538/47, fol. 481). He seems to have been a preacher at St Clement Danes when in 1573 he was put on trial at Middlesex assizes for baptizing without using the sign of the cross and marrying without the ring. On 21 December 1573 Wilcox reported to Anthony Gilby that Johnson was 'laid in the Gatehouse at Westminster' and 'others with him' (CUL, MS Mm.1.43, p. 441). 
Several documents relating to what followed were printed in 1593 in 'A Parte of a Register'. These may (or may not) compound the problem of identity, since they are given the running headline: 'The articles, letters, and examina. of Mai. Ro. Jonson, of late Preacher at Northampton'. Moreover, the first of these documents consists of Johnson's answer to articles objected against him by the bishop of Lincoln, containing references to 'us in Saint Martines' ('A Parte of a Register', 95) and to an alleged threat of the bishop to come to Leicester to preach against him. This may concern the other Robert Johnson, although Northampton is not in the diocese of Lincoln, and neither Johnson is known to have been beneficed at St Martin's Leicester. 

'A Parte of a Register' prints Johnson's own account of his trial in Westminster Hall, which he says took place seven weeks after his imprisonment, on 20 February 1574. Here may be more confusion, since the trial is said to have been conducted before the ecclesiastical commissioners, yet a jury is also mentioned as being empanelled and charged. Johnson was again indicted for neglect of the sign of the cross in baptism and the ring in marriage, but most time was spent on a third, almost technical, offence: failure to repeat the words of consecration when fresh supplies of wine were called for at communion. Johnson was a dextrous barrack-room lawyer, and both Bishop Edwin Sandys of London -- whom Johnson accused of being 'the chief of my trouble' ('A Parte of a Register', 118) -- and the lord chief justice remarked on his stubborn and arrogant nature. Johnson was sentenced to a year's imprisonment, but died in the Westminster Gatehouse no later than April 1574. 
Johnson wrote prison letters to Sandys -- 'superintendent of popish corruptions in the diocese of London' ('A Parte of a Register', 101) -- and Gabriel Goodman, dean of Westminster, in which he exercised a sharply satirical tongue. Commenting on Goodman's Lenten and Easter sermons as essentially popish, he asked 'as for Schism, who is a greater schismatic than you?... And as for Puritanism, who is a greater Puritan than you?' (ibid., 115). Johnson's pointed wit may support the unprovable theory that he was the father of 'Ben Jonson of Westminster' ['see 'Jonson, Benjamin (1572-1637)], who is known to have been the son of a minister, born posthumously and quite possibly in 1574. 


@@@@@


doc= 68286


Wood, Thomas (d. 1577), soldier and religious activist, may have been of either Leicestershire or Yorkshire origin. Until 1960 he was known only as one of the four Englishmen who founded the protestant exile community in Frankfurt am Main on 27 June 1554 and as an elder of the later English congregation at Geneva. He has also been identified tentatively (though undoubtedly incorrectly) by Christina Garrett as the mercer of that name who had some association with John Knox in 1553. The publication by Patrick Collinson in 1960 of the copies Wood's son Ambrose made of 'my father Captaine Thomas Wood his lettres to certaine noble personages and other his good freinds' ('Letters of Thomas Wood' in 'Godly People', 83) not only brought him out of the shadows, but also transformed our understanding of Elizabethan history. 
Collinson discovered most of the biographical details now available, but it is possible to supply further information about Wood's military career. Although he may have attended Cambridge University, Wood is first publicly encountered as a man-at-arms of the garrison of Boulogne, jousting to celebrate the accession of Edward VI on 24 February 1547. In 1548 he was serving as a junior officer with the Boulogne horse in Scotland. On 17 July he was taken prisoner in an ambush at Linton Bridge, Haddingtonshire, and not released until the end of 1549. In 1551 he went to Ireland to negotiate a lease of former monastic property granted him for his arrears of pay. At Cork in April he met an old acquaintance from Boulogne, the new lord deputy, Sir James Croft, who employed him as a confidential messenger with the privy council until December 1552. On 19 July 1552 (styled 'the king's servant') Wood was granted a lease in reversion of Tintern Abbey, co. Wexford. 
Nothing is known about Wood's earlier association with the other three founders of the Frankfurt community, except that one, William Williams, the assay-master of the Dublin mint, was married to his sister Jane by June 1554. Nor are Wood's precise motives for going into exile known, but he was accompanied by his wife, Anne, and possibly some of his children. He ultimately left two sons (Thomas and Ambrose) and five daughters, one of whom, Debora, was born in Frankfurt. Wood was one of the signatories of the congregation's invitation to John Knox to become its pastor, which raises the question of whether he had made Knox's acquaintance while serving on the borders. He was also a member of the faction that, under the leadership of William Whittingham, followed Knox to Geneva, where he and his family arrived in October 1555. In December 1557 he was elected an elder of the English congregation. 
By 9 March 1560 Wood was back in England. He then wrote to Lord Robert Dudley, later earl of Leicester, about an inspection carried out at Portsmouth, evidence both of his resumption of military service and of his association with the Dudleys, which had certainly begun earlier. He reached the high point of his military career two years later when he served under Dudley's brother Ambrose, earl of Warwick, as clerk of the council and captain of a company in the garrison of Newhaven (as the English called Le Havre) between October 1562 and July 1563. In August 1563 Sir William Cecil nominated Wood as clerk of the council in a proposed appointment of Warwick as lord deputy of Ireland, but this was never implemented. In 1568 Wood was styled of 'Tottenham, Midd. Esq.' and two years later as 'the queen's servant'. Since the manor of Tottenham was an established perquisite of servants of the household, Wood may have held a minor post in the latter. In 1570 he leased the manor of Groby, Leicestershire, from the crown, where he resided until his death. He served as a Leicestershire JP and was closely associated, both socially and financially, with the third earl of Huntingdon, Leicester and Warwick's brother-in-law. By mid-1576 he was seriously ill and he died at Groby at some point during the spring of 1577. Wood made his will on 16 July 1576 and it was proved on 3 May 1577. He was survived by a widow named Agnes, who was still alive in 1598, but whether she was a second wife, or Agnes a variant of Anne, is unclear. 
The letters copied by Ambrose Wood are both the central source for his father's life after 1563 and, as Collinson appreciated, among the most important records of Elizabethan lay puritanism. The most significant are an exchange with Cecil over the suppression of a puritan exercise in London in 1566, one to Whittingham of 15 February 1574, and -- the most dramatic -- an exchange with Leicester and Warwick in the late summer of 1576. They reveal much about Wood's religious allegiances and his responses to the major issues of the day, but -- as always -- they raise possibly more questions than they answer. 
The letter to Whittingham includes the important recollection concerning the 'Book of Common Prayer' that 'yow were the first that made me and many others mislike with the said boke' ('Letters of Thomas Wood' in 'Godly People', 89). It is not clear whether this took place at Frankfurt or Geneva, but it could imply that Wood returned to England in 1559 a committed presbyterian. He certainly kept the records of the English congregation at Geneva (at least until he left). The combination of his strong anti-episcopal views in the 1570s and his firsthand knowledge of the events of the exile has led Collinson to suggest that he rather than Whittingham was the author or compiler of the famous and controversial account of the Frankfurt community, 'A Brieff Discours off the Troubles Begonne at Franckford' [1575]. On the other hand, if read in sequence his letters reveal his increasing hostility to the episcopate following the 'persecution' of ministers who refused to wear the surplice, then those who refused to subscribe to the prayer book in 1571, and finally the suppression of exercises. This might imply an initial willingness to accept the Elizabethan church settlement that diminished over time in response to the church's treatment of nonconformity. 
The correspondence with Warwick and Leicester was a consequence of Wood's illness in the summer of 1576. Wood had attended the great festivities at Kenilworth in 1575 and had spoken briefly to Leicester then. Had he been fit to travel in 1576, he would (he admitted) have preferred to see Leicester personally rather than to write. The surviving letters are eight in number: an initial letter to Leicester and a covering note to Warwick, both dated 4 August; an answer from Warwick on the 16th; one from Leicester on the 19th; a further letter from Wood to Warwick on the 20th; Wood's answers to Warwick's and Leicester's letters (both dated 7 September); and a final undated letter from Wood to both earls in early 1577. The subject of this exchange was an admonition from Wood that Leicester was being blamed for the dissolution of the exercise at Southam in eastern Warwickshire earlier in the summer. Wood also wanted to warn Leicester of 'verie common brutes verie dishonorable and ungodly' about him ('Letters of Thomas Wood' in 'Godly People', 92), but only by word of mouth (he had tried to do so at Kenilworth but could not find the opportunity). It has been assumed that these were related to Leicester's private life. 
Leicester denied any responsibility for the Southam dissolution and claimed he had learned of it only when Elizabeth, who had her own sources, complained to him of 'disorders' there. But as important as the content of the exchange is its style. What has struck most commentators is the combination of both Wood's boldness in criticizing Leicester and Leicester's willingness to defend both his conduct and his commitment to religion at length in his answer of 19 August. Wood appreciated that his initial admonition to Leicester was 'plaine, and peradventure may be thought to plaine' ('Letters of Thomas Wood' in 'Godly People', 92), and sent it to Warwick unsealed for him to read and then deliver to his brother personally. 
Yet the real significance of this exchange is that it was not unique. Wood's correspondence with Cecil in 1566 had been a similar 'friendly admonition' (as Cecil termed it) that Cecil was being blamed for the suppression of the St Antholin's exercise. Nor is the exchange between Wood and Leicester the only example of puritan criticism sent directly to Leicester and long defences by Leicester of his conduct. Leicester's willingness to tolerate and respond to the apparently constant carping and admonishing, however irritating it may have been -- 'I stand on the topp of the hill, where I knowe the smallest slipp semeth a fall', as he wrote to Wood on 19 August ('Letters of Thomas Wood' in 'Godly People', 96) -- was a key aspect to his role as 'patron-general' of Elizabethan puritans. It also accounts for the political influence of Elizabethan lay puritanism. Wood's Genevan loyalties were strong, but they should not obscure the fact that his public career in the crown's service placed him at the heart of the Elizabethan protestant establishment. What characterized that establishment was the very openness of the dialogue between men of Wood's rank and independence of mind and his nominal superiors, Cecil, Leicester, and Warwick. 


@@@@@


doc= 68287


Galliardello, Mark Anthony (d. 1585), musician, was born in or near Venice into a Jewish musical dynasty whose Italian surname was probably Alberti. When at the end of the 1530s Henry VIII authorized Thomas Cromwell to effect an improvement in his musical establishment at court, Cromwell recruited a branch of the Lanier family from France and many musicians from the Venetian families of Lupo, Ferrabosco, Bassano, and (as they came to be known in England) Galliardello. 
The Galliardellos specialized in playing, and probably also making, viols and violins. Mark Anthony 'Gagiardell' entered the royal service on 1 May 1545 and was in 1549 living in a large alien colony in East Smithfield. By the beginning of Elizabeth's reign he had moved to the liberty of Holy Trinity Minories, next to the city parish of St Botolph Aldgate, having apparently just married his wife, Margery. A daughter, Lucretia, was baptized at Holy Trinity on 8 April 1563, followed by Mark Anthony in 1565 (died 1566), Frances in 1566, and Caesar Galliardello in 1568. One month before Caesar's birth Mark Anthony was granted letters of denization as queen's servant, born a subject of the duke of Venice. 
By this time Galliardello had abandoned his Jewish faith and espoused protestantism -- with a vengeance, it may be said. He became churchwarden of Holy Trinity Minories in December 1568, keeping scrupulous accounts and carefully compiling a list of visiting preachers and the sums paid to them. His conscientious drudgery provides historians with vital clues to the development of nonconformist activity in London in the aftermath of the vestiarian controversy which divided the capital after March 1566. It is plain that he was prominent in encouraging the activities of such radical clergymen as John Field, William Bonham, and Nicholas Crane. 
Although Galliardello's successors after 1570 did not continue the tradition of listing their visiting preachers, one of them noted in 1575 that he and others were to be thanked for their 'liberality towards the preachers... or else it would cost us more money' (Tomlinson, 398). Galliardello served again as churchwarden for two years from December 1576 and was associated with Crane and Thomas Wilcox in the regulation of poor relief. 
Galliardello's daughter Lucretia married another royal musician, Henry Troches, in 1580 and gave birth to three children before dying aged twenty-one in September 1584. Mark Anthony did not long survive her, dying on 15 June 1585 in Holy Trinity Minories. He was buried at the church two days later, in 'most good name and fame and godly report of all his neighbours' (ibid.), a comment unique in the Minories' records. He was survived by Margery, by Caesar, and by Frances, who on 12 October 1585 married the musician John Lanier (died 1616). Their son, Nicholas Lanier, first master of the king's music, was baptized in the parish on 10 November 1588. Margery Galliardello long survived her husband, dying in 1611. 


@@@@@


doc= 68288


Galliardello, Caesar (bap. 1568, d. 1627), musician, was baptized in the London liberty of Holy Trinity Minories on 1 July 1568, second but only surviving son of Mark Anthony Galliardello (d. 1585) and his wife, Margery (died 1611). In 1585 Caesar inherited his father's place among the royal viols and violins, remaining in place until his death. He also inherited his father's trenchant protestant convictions, and was at once accepted into the ruling vestry of Holy Trinity. Though only seventeen, he was a signatory to the confirmation of new churchwardens in January 1586. In 1590 he was chosen one of the two collectors for the poor, but by January 1592 had left the parish, probably on his marriage to Elizabeth Cosyn ('b'. 'c'.1570), sister of the composer Benjamin Cosyn. Three children, Mark Anthony, Mary, and Judith, had been born by 1599, when Caesar and Elizabeth settled in Camberwell, Surrey. Here four more children were baptized: Susan, Martha, Edmund, and lastly Benjamin, on 23 October 1608. 
Caesar Galliardello was one of the seven violinists who played at the funeral of Elizabeth I in 1603. Thereafter he climbed steadily through the ranks of the royal violins. With the death of Joseph Lupo in 1616 he may have become their leader. 
By 21 May 1611, when a daughter was baptized there, the Galliardellos had returned to the Minories. Although Caesar was at once accepted back into the ruling vestry, serving as churchwarden in 1612, the ensuing years proved tragic. By 1627, when he made his will, Caesar had only two children living, Mary and Benjamin. Elizabeth, too, had died and Caesar had remarried. 
Galliardello maintained links with Camberwell, however, in the process becoming a friend of the actor Edmund Alleyn, who founded Dulwich College within the parish in 1619. Alleyn's diary twice records the Galliardello family dining at Dulwich. It was presumably this friendship which led to Benjamin Cosyn's appointment as organist of Dulwich College in 1622. 
Galliardello played at the funeral of James I in 1625, was again elected churchwarden of Holy Trinity, on 11 October 1626, and died in office in 1627. His will, drawn up on 14 September, begins with a trenchant protestant preamble. Like Shakespeare, he describes himself only as 'gentleman', making no reference to his profession, to musical instruments, or to manuscripts. His estate was divided between his second wife, Alice (died 1641), and his son Benjamin. The will's principal witness was the veteran preacher Josias Nicholls, who thereafter lived on in the parish until 1635. Caesar Galliardello was buried in the churchyard of Holy Trinity on 15 November 1627. His will was proved on 10 December following. 


@@@@@


doc= 68289


Withers, George (bap. 1540, d. 1605), Church of England clergyman, was baptized at All Hallows, Bread Street, London, on 15 August 1540, the second son of Laurence Withers or Wither (died 1573), salter and alderman of London, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Standish), kinswoman of the earl of Derby. His father hailed from an extensive London family which early embraced protestantism, four of its members going into exile after Mary's accession. Laurence's own abrupt departure from the court of aldermen in 1556 suggests involvement with London's secret protestant congregation, which George later described in terms that have the stamp of personal reminiscence. In 1559 Laurence was a member of the syndicate that loaned Elizabeth I $30,000 to launch her reign. Perhaps for that reason he became MP for London in 1563. 
George Withers matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1556. Having graduated early in 1559 he became fellow of Queens' College, from where he proceeded MA in 1562. On resigning his fellowship he was collated vicar of nearby Swaffham Bulbeck on 1 May 1563 and appointed university preacher the same year. In early 1565 he delivered a sermon calling for the destruction of the stained glass in the colleges' windows. Summoned to Lambeth to account for himself before the archbishop of Canterbury, according to Matthew Parker he arrived brimming with confidence, evidently regarding himself as the representative of a party rather than as an individual transgressor. On refusing the prescribed clerical habits he was suspended from preaching and threatened with deprivation. On 24 May 1565, however (as Wither, the signature he habitually adopted), he wrote a submissive letter from Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, where he apparently served as town preacher, explaining that his congregation had urged him not to desert them for such a trifle as the wearing of the square cap. Incorporated MA at Oxford in 1566 he resigned Swaffham shortly afterwards. 
When on 26 March 1566 Parker suspended thirty-seven London clergy for refusing the surplice and square cap, his opponents quickly reminded him that he was not only the successor of Augustine but also chief pastor of a reformed church. They attempted to mobilize continental opinion on their behalf, sending Percival Wiburn to invoke the support of Theodore Beza in Geneva and Heinrich Bullinger and Rudolf Gualter in Zurich. Wiburn met with mixed success and in mid-1567 Withers and John Bartlett crossed the channel to try again. Like Wiburn they elicited Beza's sympathy but antagonized Bullinger and Gualter, wearied by constant harangues from both sides in the vestiarian dispute. They then appealed to the elector palatine, Frederick III, asking him to intercede with Elizabeth. Frederick prudently ignored the invitation but had no objection to their continued presence in Heidelberg. Gualter later lamented that they were 'the chief authors of those changes' which had 'inflicted such a blow' upon the palatinate's ecclesiastical affairs (Robinson, 1. 364). 
Bartlett disappears from the record but Withers matriculated at Heidelberg University on 22 March 1568 with three compatriots, including Laurence Tomson, one of the 'eminences grises' of early nonconformity. He conducted himself like a man in exile, settling down to the preparation of a doctoral thesis. Dissuaded from a full-scale attack on Parker's activities lest he offend the English government, he turned his attention to ecclesiastical discipline in general, denying the right even of godly magistrates to exercise it, and claiming that ministers and elders alone had the power to excommunicate. 
This was the full presbyterian programme, as propounded by Thomas Cartwright in 1570, 'avant la lettre'. Withers duly received his doctorate at a ceremony attended by the elector on 21 June 1568 and in July 1570 Frederick established a presbyterian system on Genevan lines. Yet there were to be repercussions. In his 'Explicatio', published posthumously in 1589, Thomas Erastus, Heidelberg's professor of medicine, comprehensively attacked Withers, arguing that since excommunication was not a divine ordinance moral offences were punishable by the magistrate. From that proposition were developed all later notions of Erastianism. 
After returning to England, Withers succeeded William Cole as town preacher of Colchester, Essex. Made free of the borough on 14 February 1569, two weeks later at nearby Fordham he married Priscilla Shilbery, whose mother was Dutch. Their eldest child, Thomas, was baptized in Colchester on 30 July 1570. On 11 October Edwin Sandys, the new bishop of London, collated Withers archdeacon of Colchester. He probably continued as town preacher until instituted rector of Danbury, Essex, on 17 November 1572, on the presentation of Sir Walter Mildmay. 
Twenty-one act books bear witness to Withers's twenty-five years as archdeacon. A radical put in charge of a radical jurisdiction, he put aside the presbyterianism of his Heidelberg heyday but contrived to combine the obligations of office with unwavering sympathy for the evangelical cause: Arthur Dent, for example, was for three years his curate at Danbury. He began his tenure as archdeacon in a flurry of activity, presiding over sessions of his archidiaconal court in Colchester, Kelvedon, and Saffron Walden. Having appointed a new official he thereafter limited his direct involvement in local affairs to his twice yearly visitations. 
In 1579 Withers published 'Certaine godly instructions, verie necessarie to be learned of the younger sorte before they be admitted to be partakers of the holie communion'. These consisted of eleven questions and answers, presumably stemming from his own pastoral experiences. They were published jointly with 'An Invective Againste Vices' by Richard Rice, minister of Southwark in the 1550s, and a preface by Robert Crowley, another survivor of the protestant congregation of Marian London. 
During the divisive 1580s Withers acted as a buffer between his clergy and his new bishop, John Aylmer. On 19 November 1582 he thanked Lord Burghley for his 'good friendship and favour' following the indictment of certain Essex ministers at Chelmsford assizes ('Salisbury MSS', 2.532). When in early 1584 Aylmer introduced Archbishop Whitgift's three articles into London diocese as the official yardstick of conformity, Withers, overtly referring to his continental mission of 1567, reminded Burghley that although he had long been concerned to inculcate obedience to the queen's laws 'the urging of this subscription, I fear, will make our division greater' (BL, Lansdowne MS 40, fol. 44). 
There can be no doubt that Withers tacitly condoned the clandestine activities of the conference of ministers known as the Dedham classis. Late in 1584 Edmund Chapman, its leader, devised a scheme signed by a dozen local clergy whereby Withers would exercise his functions as permanent moderator of a synod 'where we may use our freedom in conference and determining of ecclesiastical matters with [you] as fellow labourers and brethren' (R. G. Usher, 89). 
In 1585 Withers published 'An ABC for Laymen, otherwise called the Laymans Letters', laying out alphabetically the spiritual lessons to be drawn from 'thinges sensible'. Beginning with 'abundance' he analysed the significance of several hundred common words and concepts, dedicating it jointly to Burghley and Mildmay, 'whom my estate hath compelled to trouble and use most, for your constant goodwill and continual favour shewed and benefits bestowed' (sig. 2'v'). 
In October 1586 Withers and his official were suspended by Aylmer for exceeding their privileges in granting licences. The sequel is unknown but he was back in harness by Michaelmas 1587 and during winter 1587-8 compiled 'A view of the marginal notes of the popish testament, translated into English by the English fugitive papists at Rhemes in France', publishing it with a remarkably deferential dedication to Archbishop John Whitgift, dated 12 April 1588. Contrasting his own 'mean place' with God's decision 'so highly to advance' the primate, Withers spoke of 'the love, wherewith you have embraced me these thirty years and upwards' (sig. A2). Whitgift had apparently been instrumental in having Withers's Heidelberg DD incorporated at Cambridge but there is no other evidence of friendship between the two men. 
In late 1595 Withers resigned the archdeaconry in favour of his son, Thomas (1570-1617), who was collated on 8 January 1596. He remained a respected preacher as rector of Danbury until his death there on 25 November 1605. He had made his will on 1 May, requesting a simple funeral, and was buried at Danbury. Having already disposed of his Danbury property (presumably to Thomas and his second son, Laurence, unmentioned in the will) his remaining assets went to his third son from his first marriage, George, appointed his sole executor. He provided for his second wife, Mary ('nee' Scott), whom he had married about 1590, to the tune of $200 and household goods. Of their children Mary, wife of Andrew Cooke, had already received her marriage portion. Abel received a bond of unspecified value. Micah should have benefited from a lease of another Danbury property but defective drafting 'casteth it upon George'. Withers declared himself content with the arrangement since George had proved dutiful and Micah 'disobedient, unthrifty, stubborn and wilful' (Will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/106, sig. 79). 


@@@@@


doc= 68290


Rolli, Paolo Antonio (1687-1765), translator and librettist, was born on 13 June 1687 in Rome, son of the architect Filippo Rolli, of Burgundy, and Marta Arnaldi, of Torre Ceccona. He resided in London from 1715 or 1716 to 1744, and was a leading figure in the Italian circle and a cultural mediator between England and Italy. He was a member of several Italian academies and a fellow of the Royal Society (1729). He received a patent of nobility from Todi in Italy (1735) and styled himself 'patrizio tudertino'. Generally ranked second to Pietro Metastasio among early eighteenth-century Italian poets, his literary reputation rests primarily on his translation of Milton and a handful of lyrics and epigrams. 
Rolli's early education was from the church, and later at the Collegio Romano, and occasional references to 'l'abate Rolli' suggest he may have taken minor orders. His studies were completed under the jurist and dramatist Gian Vincenzo Gravina, one of the founders of the reformist Arcadian Academy, from whom Rolli (and his fellow student Metastasio) absorbed the ideals of neo-classicism. His first publication, 'Componimenti poetici' (1711), is an edition of Arcadian poetry. 
In 1715 Rolli was invited to England by the earl of Pembroke or the earl of Stair, or perhaps both. Through his various literary activities Rolli worked to foster English appreciation of the language and classic literature of Italy. He taught Italian and Italian literature to the royal family and other noble families. The many peers to whom he dedicated his works and who subscribed to his 1725 London edition of Boccaccio's 'Decameron' indicate the range of his British contacts and patrons. 
In London Rolli published original poetry and Italian translations and editions of classics not otherwise available, including works of Anacreon, Virgil, Boccaccio, Ariosto, a group of Italian satirists, and Marchetti's famous Italian translation of Lucretius (1717). His Italian translations and editions served both scholarly and pedagogic aims by giving English students easily understandable classic Italian texts. 'Solitario bosco ombroso' in 'Di canzonette e di cantate' (1727) was long considered a model of classical perfection in Italian lyric poetry. 
Rolli's most important contribution to Italian letters, his translation of Milton's 'Paradise Lost', is its first complete Italian translation; Rolli's preface and life of Milton are pioneering pieces of Italian Milton criticism. Despite omissions to avoid offending Roman Catholic sensibilities, the translation landed on the Index. Rolli's translation is literal and smooth, although literalness often overrides the poetic. The first six books, in folio, appeared in London in 1729; the revised, complete poem appeared in 1735 adorned with three portraits, and was dedicated to Frederick, prince of Wales, who supported the publication with $100. The translation quickly acquired a European reputation and was frequently reprinted. 
When the Royal Academy of Music (a company for producing Italian opera) was organized in 1719, Rolli became its secretary, charged primarily with providing librettos for the house composers; he was dismissed in 1722 following a dispute with the directors. He also prepared librettos for the Opera of the Nobility, established in 1733 as a rival to George Frideric Handel, and for the subsequent company headed by Lord Middlesex. Because of uncertain attributions and the vague line between original works and adaptations, the number of his librettos is uncertain; but Rolli at least produced more than twenty-four librettos and five adaptations for the London stage. 
Rolli's correspondence with his circle of friends (including Giuseppe Riva, Senesino, Antonio Cocchi, and Gio. Giacomo Zamboni) is a wealth of observations and opinions. Rolli delights in entertaining his distant friends with the intrigues, jealousies, manoeuvres, and gossip of the musical and literary life of London. Rolli returned to Italy in 1744 and published further verse and translations. He died at Todi on 20 March 1765, and was buried there. A posthumous collection of epigrams, 'Marziale in Albion' (1776), satirizes many literary and musical figures of Rolli's London days. 


@@@@@


doc= 68292


Baillie, John (d. 1743), physician and writer, was employed as a doctor at St George's Hospital in London and in the English army. He accompanied the army to Flanders in the War of the Austrian Succession and died at Ghent of 'spotted fever' in December 1743. His only known works are a comedy, 'The Married Coquet', published after his death 'by subscription for the benefit of the widow' in 1746 (Baker, 1.15), and 'An Essay on the Sublime', published in 1747. The brief treatise on the sublime is probably the first systematic development of the topic in a psychological framework relying on the Lockean doctrine of the association of ideas. Baillie analyses the sublime in the arts as an imitation of the sublime in nature, which he regards as being grounded in the vastness of natural objects. Although following in many ways the earlier approaches by Addison and Shaftesbury, he surpasses them in discussing a wider range and variety of manifestations of the sublime in literature and the arts. Alexander Gerard sympathetically mentions Baillie's work in 1759 as a treatment very close to his own views on sublimity (Gerard, 'An Essay on Taste', 2nd edn, 1764, 11n.). 


@@@@@


doc= 68344


Anna Maria Woodforde (1757-1830) was born on 8 March 1757 at Alhampton, Ditcheat, Somerset, the eldest child of the diarist's elder brother, Heighes Woodforde (1726-1789), and his wife, Anne Dorville (1734-1799). From 1780 she lived with her uncle and kept house for him. In general they got along very well together. He appreciated her gift for laughter, and even the tones of her voice must have sounded refreshingly different from the Norfolk accent. In the earlier years of her stay her letters home were lyrical about the kindness and generosity of her uncle, and his rescue of her from a poverty-stricken life. But years passed; the suitor she must have dreamed of never appeared, and she drifted into middle age; the relationship soured and her uncle took to calling her 'Miss Woodforde' in the diary. She also was a diarist. In 1792 she acquired a large manuscript volume, and in that year produced a full diary, to demand comparison with that of her uncle. She lived on until her death on 6 January 1830 at her home in High Street, Castle Cary, and was buried on 13 January at Ansford. 


@@@@@


doc= 68537


Gelasius O'Cullenan (c.1554-1580), Cistercian monk. Born at Mullaghnashee, he became a Cistercian monk, probably at nearby Abbey Assaroe, a daughter-house of Boyle Abbey, co. Roscommon, Latinizing his name to Gelasius, and was ordained priest. He studied at Louvain and Paris, becoming DTh of the Sorbonne. While in Paris he was appointed titular abbot of Boyle (still functioning although suppressed), and went there about 1579, apparently by way of Rome. Setting vigorously about restoring monastic life and ministering to the neighbouring population, he received practical help from a local personage, possibly MacDermot of Moylurg. He went to Dublin and secured from the privy council sanction for permission, previously given, for a limited monastic revival at Boyle. But John Garvey, dean of Christ Church, Dublin, fearful of the damage done to the Reformation cause in Connaught and Ulster by the zeal of Gelasius, persuaded his fellow councillors to have him and his companion Eoin O'Mulkern, the Premonstratensian abbot of Loch Ce monastery, near Boyle, arrested. Offers of high office in the established church were made in vain to both. They were then cruelly tortured and afterwards tried, probably by martial law, for treason, in that they rejected the queen's ecclesiastical authority as expressed in the 1560 'Acts of Supremacy and Uniformity'. Found guilty, they were hanged and, it seems, then beheaded at the public place of execution outside Dublin city, on 21 November 1580. The Cistercian historians Henriquez and Hartry claim that their steadfast demeanour brought 500 bystanders back to the practice of Catholicism. Gelasius's place of burial is unknown. The reputation as martyrs ('fama martyrii') of the two was constant from the beginning. 


@@@@@


doc= 68576


Alice Eliza Loane (1863-1922), author, was born on 23 October 1863 at 2 Exbury Place, Green Road, Southsea, Hampshire. The youngest child of Jabez Loane and his second wife, she received her elementary education at the Royal Naval School for Females (1874-81). She published one book under her own name, 'Shipmates' (1912), in addition to her work published under the name M. Loane. From late 1912 she was an active member of the Bristol Civic League, an organization which dealt with the problems of poverty. She died at 22 Elmdale Road, Clifton, Bristol, on 23 February 1922. Her sister, Beatrice Mary Loane, was her sole beneficiary, but the will was unsigned, and remained unproven until 18 January 1939, four years after Beatrice's death. Probate was then granted to Lloyds Bank; the value of the estate amounted to $2363 5's'. 8died 


@@@@@


doc= 68679


Nabob (fl. 1780), imported in 1780 by the lawyer William Hickey (1749-1830). Some Asian slaves, like Nabob, converted to Christianity, which granted them manumission according to popular belief (although not yet British law); Nabob did not remain free after his return to India. 
Middle-class Indians also visited England. 


@@@@@


doc= 68680


Naorozji Rastamji (fl. 1724-1725), son of a Parsi broker to the company, ventured to London in April 1724, pursuing his family's commercial dispute with the company's Bombay government. During his year-long stay in England he won in arbitration, receiving over $50,000 in compensation and a dress of honour from the company's directors. Similarly, 


@@@@@


doc= 68681


Gregore Cojamaul (fl. 1768-1770) and 


@@@@@


doc= 68682


Hanumant Rao (fl. 1781-1782), a Brahman, and his assistant 


@@@@@


doc= 68683


Maniar (fl. 1781-1782), a Parsi, visited England in 1781-2 as emissaries to the English court, representing the Maratha peshwa Raghunath Rao (died 1783). Edmund Burke arranged for this Brahman diplomat to live for a time in his greenhouse at Beaconsfield; living in a separate building, he could prepare his food and dine in isolation without being polluted by Europeans. 
Among Indian travellers 


@@@@@


doc= 68684


Halime Banu (1770-1853), mistress or wife (by Islamic rite) of Benoit de Boigne (1751-1830), visited England in 1797 with him and their two children, Ali Bakhsh (otherwise Charles Alexander (1792-1853)) and Banu, or Anna (1789-1804). 
A significant proportion of these visiting sailors, servants, wives, mistresses, and children were born in India of European, especially Portuguese, ancestry or were of mixed Indian and European descent. The East India Company classed such people as 'natives of India', although it officially distinguished those of them having patrilineal European ancestry as legally distinct from 'non-European natives of India'. 


@@@@@


doc= 68778


Johanes Padre Rafael (fl. 1768-1770), Armenian Christians long domiciled in India, arrived in London in 1769 with a petition for the company's directors against its officials in India. When this petition failed, they turned to the House of Commons, testifying before its select committee on Indian affairs about abuses by company officials against Indians. 
Several Indian diplomatic missions visited England. 


@@@@@


doc= 68779


Sir Walter Gray (1848-1918), property speculator and local politician, was born in Weston, Hertfordshire, and educated at Stevenage grammar school. He joined the Great Northern Railway Company and became stationmaster at Waddington, Lincolnshire, where John Shaw-Stewart, a member of Keble College's council, was a regular passenger. On Shaw-Stewart's recommendation, Gray was brought to Oxford in 1870 as steward to the newly established college. He stayed in the post for thirteen years, and began a series of property speculations in north Oxford and elsewhere that made his fortune. He was elected a Conservative councillor for the city's north ward in 1881 and, following the collapse of the Liberal-dominated Oxford Building and Investment Company in 1883, he achieved a political coup by becoming the company's official liquidator. He was elected alderman on the new county borough council in 1889 and was for many years the recognized leader of the Conservatives on the council. He was mayor of Oxford four times between 1888 and 1901 and was knighted in 1902. In 1917 Gray was passed over as the Conservative parliamentary candidate for the Oxford city constituency in favour of the historian J. A. R. Marriott. This snub is sometimes said to have converted his son to the Liberal cause, but Frank had already become an enemy of class privilege by that time. Walter Gray died at Rothbury, Northumberland, on 17 March 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 68899


Rhisiart Phylip (d. 1641), Welsh-language poet, was a younger brother of Sion Phylip. He was born in Mochras, near Harlech, but at some stage moved to Llanuwchllyn, near Bala in Merioneth. It was there that he died, in a place called Y Prys. He was buried in Llanuwchllyn. In an elegy to him William Phylip calls him his 'uncle and good teacher' (NL Wales, Wynnstay MS 6, 46). He also refers to him as 'bardd Nannau', because he was more closely associated with that house and family than with any other: he composed at least seven poems to that family. It is likely that he also had a close relationship with the Lloyd family of Rhiwedog in Merioneth: at least he was involved in a light-hearted bardic controversy ('pur gellwair') (NL Wales, Cwrtmawr MS 11, 181) about the family with Richard Cynwal. Just over a hundred of his strict-metre poems survive, and many 'englynion'. Most were composed to north Wales families, although one poem is an elegy to Dafydd Llwyd ab Ifan from Aber-mad in Cardiganshire, who died in 1631. Among his most remarkable poems are his elegies to Catrin of Berain and Queen Elizabeth, and his love poem to a girl from Tywyn in Merioneth. He was one of several poets who composed an elegy to the eminent scholar Dr John Davies of Mallwyd. He also composed an elegy to Edmwnd Prys. 


@@@@@


doc= 68900


Gruffydd Phylip (d. 1666), Welsh-language poet, was the son of Sion Phylip. He composed over sixty strict-metre poems, 'englynion', and a handful of free-metre poems. He composed mainly to families in Merioneth and Caernarvonshire, and was most closely associated with the Vaughan family of Corsygedol, to whom he composed at least seventeen poems. It is noteworthy that he composed 'englynion' that were prefixed to Rowland Vaughan's translation of Lewis Bayly's 'The Practice of Piety' ('Yr ymarfer o dduwioldeb', 1630) and Elis Lewis's translation of an English version of Drexelius's meditations on eternity ('Ystyriaethau Drexelius ar dragwyddoldeb', 1661). These 'englynion' suggest a very different character from the one portrayed in a poem William Phylip addressed to him. There he is presented as a loudmouth, 'dwndrio bawb dan daro'r bwrdd' ('railing against all and banging the table'; NL Wales, Swansea MS 3, 94), and as a belligerent wencher -- though he was, at sixty, so William Phylip suggests, past it. Such a poem is typical of the mock-satirical banter of the poets among themselves. Among his more interesting poems are his elegy to his father, 'englynion' on the overthrow of Harlech Castle by the parliamentarians, two poems addressed to Dr John Davies of Mallwyd, a 'cywydd' addressed to Humphrey Davies of Llandyfrydog in Anglesey on behalf of Richard Vaughan of Corsygedol asking for copies of a hundred poems by Dafydd ap Gwilym, and a free-metre poem on the poet's longing for Ystumllyn. In an 'englyn' he describes himself as the last of the Welsh professional poets, and he was also so regarded by some of his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 68901


Phylip Sion Phylip (d. 1676x8), Welsh-language poet, was the son of Sion Phylip. His will, dated 9 September 1676 and proved 5 July 1678 (NL Wales), shows that he lived in the parish of Llandanwg, Merioneth. He was probably a farmer, who composed occasional poems in the traditional manner. Not many of his poems survive -- though more have come to light than when W. Ll. Davies was writing about him in the 'Dictionary of Welsh Biography' (1953). Most are poems addressed to Merioneth and Caernarvonshire families. His two most interesting poems are his elegy to William Phylip and his 'cywydd' to Gruffydd Vaughan of Corsygedol to welcome him home -- 'from school' according to a manuscript title (NL Wales, Peniarth MS 239, 154), though the poem itself suggests that Vaughan was a student at Oxford University ('ystuwdent... o Rydychen wych'). The fact that Phylip John Phylip composed fewer poems than any other member of his family and that he died later than any of them indicates that it was becoming more and more difficult for any poet to live by his art by composing poems to Welsh gentry and being paid for his services. 


@@@@@


doc= 69039


Henry Vaux (c.1559-1587) was most likely born at Harrowden, the oldest son of William, third Baron Vaux, and Elizabeth Beaumont. He was an especially talented child, and by the age of thirteen was writing poetry in English and Latin. In 1571 Lord Vaux entrusted the care of the children of his marriage with Elizabeth Beaumont to her mother (also named Elizabeth) for ten years. He paid $20 annually for Henry and $10 annually for each of his sisters. Presumably the children received most of their education at Grace Dieu. In 1580 Henry Vaux was a member of an association of Catholic laymen, organized by George Gilbert to meet and support recently arrived priests and to conduct them to Catholic households. By 1583 he refused to marry because of his desire to become a priest. Consequently he and Lord Vaux drafted an agreement whereby the title and inheritance was settled on his half-brother George after an annuity had been set aside for Henry. Henry postponed his departure for the continent to study for orders until he constructed a safe network for clergy in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 69044


Louise Ingram Rayner (1832-1924), watercolour painter, was born in Museum Parade, Matlock Bath, on 21 June 1832. From 1852 to 1860 she exhibited oils at the Royal Academy, the first of which was entitled 'The Interior of Haddon Chapel, Derbyshire'. In 1860, however, she began to exhibit with the Society of Women Artists and her subsequent work was in watercolour. Most of her drawings are street scenes which, although invariably populated, show considerable truth to nature. From 1870 she lived at Chester; she moved to Tunbridge Wells around 1910 and finally to 60 Southwater Road, St Leonards, where she died on 8 October 1924. She was a prolific artist; the Russell-Cotes Art Gallery, Bournemouth, and the Grosvenor Museum, Chester, hold examples of her work. 


@@@@@


doc= 69045


Ann Ingram Rayner (1825/6-1855), watercolour painter, was born at 11 Blandford Street, London. Her drawing was influenced by Octavius Oakley who worked at the Cornmarket Gallery in Derby. In 1850 she was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours; she exhibited thirteen pictures there, and showed three times at the Royal Academy. Her drawings were mostly interiors, including two of Knole in 1852, and rustic figures, and were sold for between 15 and 20 guineas. Nancy Rayner died from consumption at 15 Berners Street, London, on 14 August 1855, at the age of twenty-nine. The society voted $20 for the relief of her surviving sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 69081


Sarah Fell (1642-1714), Quaker preacher, was born at Swarthmoor Hall in 1642, the fourth daughter of Margaret and Thomas Fell. She accompanied her mother on her missionary visit to Devon and Cornwall in May-August 1663. As the eldest daughter then resident at Swarthmoor during her mother's imprisonment between 1664 and 1668, it fell to Sarah to become the chief overseer of affairs on the estate, particularly the running of the home farm. She continued with this task during her mother's frequent absences from Swarthmoor. She kept a careful record of the income and expenses from raising livestock and produce on the farm and continued to do this following Margaret's release. The record for 1673-8 is extant in 'The Household Account Book of Sarah Fell' (1920), which details the household economy and living patterns of the Fells. The account book gives evidence that although the Fells held on to their gentry status, their conversion to Quakerism caused a reshuffling of their social network, replacing their former county-wide gentry network with a Quaker network. It also demonstrates Sarah's role in the management of the family's iron forges, and as a local banker. 


@@@@@


doc= 69083


Mary Gadbury (b. c.1619), the wife of James Gadbury, by a woman living with Gadbury. Mary Gadbury may have been the Mary Pakeman who, aged about eighteen, married James Gadbury by licence in the parish of St Gregory by St Paul's, London, in September 1637. In 1643 or thereabouts, James Gadbury had deserted his wife and gone to the Netherlands with a servant; Mary had pursued her husband across the sea but to no avail. On her return she lived with a daughter in London, mainly in Watling Street, finding employment as a seller of 'Laces, pins, Bandstrings, and other trifles for Gentlewomen'. A 'frequent hearer of the Word', Mary Gadbury gadded 'chiefly' to the sermons of John Goodwin and Henry Jessey (Ellis, 'Pseudochristus', 8). After their meeting with Franklin, Gadbury and her introductor began to sing joyously. Gadbury, moreover, confessed that she was possessed by 'certain Fits' which would 'set her whole body in a trembling' (ibid., 9, 10). She also acknowledged that a voice within began to speak to her in 'Parables', saying that 'the Lord would send his Son to raign in the person of a man'. Soon after Franklin arrived at Gadbury's house and convinced her that he was the Son of God come to earth in 'a new body' (ibid., 11). Franklin later stayed the night with Gadbury, perhaps lying in 'the same bed' as her, for which she was accused by her neighbours of keeping a 'naughty house' (ibid., 13). It was probably about this time that Gadbury heard 'the Voyce' of the Lord 'bid her sell what she had, and follow him'. She obeyed and departed with Franklin to Hampshire -- 'the Land of 'Ham'' of 'Psalm' 105: 23 (ibid., 13, 14). 


@@@@@


doc= 69086


Elizabeth Leavens (d. 1665) who was to become his wife and fellow Quaker missionary. In March 1654 he noted that before he was arrested the officer sent to apprehend him fainted, which was taken by Friends as a sign that Holme had received God's favour. To assist his missionary work in northern England and on the Welsh borders the Society supplied him with a pair of shoes and breeches worth 10's'. 6died from a fund for travelling Quaker preachers, while Thomas Storey, another early Quaker, bequeathed $5. During his confinement at Chester Holme was often moved by the Lord to sing loudly at any hour of the day or night; as he wrote to Margaret Fell on 5 April 1654: 'And the power was so great it made all my fellow-prisoners amazed, and some were shaken, for the power was exceeding great, and I scarcely know whether I was in the body, yea or no, and there appeared light in the prison and astonished me, and I was afraid, and trembled at the appearance of the light, my legs shook under me: and my fellow-prisoners beheld the light and wondered, and the light was so glorious it dazzled my eyes. (Braithwaite, 'Beginnings', 125)' Apart from his preaching and singing, in August 1655 Holme walked the streets of Chester 'naked as a sign' which led to a further period of imprisonment in the city gaol. It seems that his preaching was successful and occasioned 'a remarkable revival in Cheshire and South Lancashire, where his excitable nature had awakened a condition in his hearers' (Brailsford, 149). 


@@@@@


doc= 69112


John Carteret Pilkington (1730-1763), tried to follow in his mother's footsteps with his own boyhood memoirs -- a less skilful, less high-spirited, and factually less reliable work, originally advertised as 'The Adventures of Jack Luckless' (printed proposals, 1758). Padded out with his mother's correspondence with Lord Kingsborough, her last patron in Dublin, this appeared two years later in London as 'The Real Story of John Carteret Pilkington', complete with an impressive list of subscribers and dedication to a daughter of Jack's namesake John Carteret, Earl Granville, who had been lord lieutenant in Dublin in the year of his birth. 


@@@@@


doc= 69124


Dunnett, Sir (Ludovic) James (1914-1997), civil servant, was born in India on 12 February 1914, the second son and second of the four children of Sir James Macdonald Dunnett (1877-1953) of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Annie (died 1951), youngest daughter of William Sangster. His father had a distinguished career in India, and was reforms commissioner of the government of India from 1930 to 1936. Ned Dunnett, as he was known, spent much of his youth with two aunts in Edinburgh. He attended Edinburgh Academy from 1920 to 1932. He proved a distinguished pupil both academically and athletically. He was dux of the school in his last year and excelled at rugby. From the academy he went to University College, Oxford, where he gained a second class in classical moderations in 1934 and a second in Greats in 1936. 
In 1936 Dunnett passed well up the list into the administrative class of the home civil service and joined the Air Ministry. A year later he became private secretary to Sir Arthur Street, permanent under-secretary of state throughout the Second World War. Dunnett spent seven years as private secretary. Street had a tremendous capacity for hard work and was a demanding master as well as an exemplar, from whom Dunnett learned much. On 27 August 1943 Dunnett married Olga Adair (1909/10-1980), daughter of Samuel Adair, civil servant. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1945 Dunnett moved to the Ministry of Civil Aviation -- a new department. He was promoted to under-secretary at thirty-four, and at thirty-nine became a deputy secretary in the Ministry of Supply. In the first ministry he was deeply involved in the rapid expansion of international civil aviation. When he moved on, his primary responsibility was for the research, development, and the procurement of weapons for the separate service ministries. This was a period of steeply rising costs, and the service ministries were generally hostile to the separate Ministry of Supply. He was appointed CMG in 1948 and CB in 1957. 
In 1959 Dunnett became permanent secretary of the Ministry of Transport, with the extrovert Ernest Marples as his minister, trying to solve Britain's increasing traffic problems and deal with the diminishing British merchant fleet. He was promoted KCB in 1960. In 1962 he moved to the Ministry of Labour. Incomes policy and the need to improve industrial relations were major national issues. Earlier in his career Dunnett had established good relations with many industrial and trade union leaders. He was a breath of fresh air in the Ministry of Labour, which too often in the past had contented itself by accepting solutions agreed upon by unions and employers. Dunnett took a more interventionist view. During his term some major changes were enacted covering contracts of employment, the training board system, and redundancy payments. He retained a lifelong interest in industrial relations. 
Dunnett was a natural choice to become permanent under-secretary of state for defence in 1966. The three service departments had by then become constitutionally one, under one secretary of state. Nevertheless, the change remained more theoretical than practical. Dunnett wished to produce an organization that would work effectively on defence as a whole rather than on individual services. To bring this about he set up the headquarters organization committee. Old attitudes and loyalties change slowly and die hard, and his success was limited. Moreover, Britain was lurching from one economic crisis to another and defence reviews and cuts were the order of the day. Inter-service rivalry was intense and there were difficult relations with some allies, not least when economic factors forced a decision to withdraw from east of Suez. To this was added Dunnett's appointment to the Fulton committee, set up in February 1966 to review the civil service. Reporting in June 1968, the committee made his workload virtually impossible. Moreover, he did not enjoy a happy home life and his consumption of alcohol was high. Dunnett had privately hoped to become permanent secretary of the newly created civil service department and head of the home civil service. It was not to be. Nevertheless, he did produce a more coherent Ministry of Defence before he retired in 1974, and from 1972 the procurement executive brought together the research, development, and procurement functions for all three services. He was promoted GCB in 1969. 
Dunnett was a permanent secretary for fifteen years in three different departments. Although he was a shy man, on occasion appearing awkward and ill at ease, many who worked for him stood in considerable awe of him. He had a formidable presence, and was good at asking penetrating questions and at synthesizing the ideas of others. His instincts and actions consistently favoured reorganization and change. He did not suffer fools gladly and saw himself as a manager. He enjoyed watching both rugby and football and was a very good golfer. He knew many people outside the civil service, not least trade union and business leaders. 
Dunnett was a visiting fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, from 1964 to 1972. He was an active member of the Social Science Research Council from 1977 to 1982; chairman of the International Maritime Industries Forum from 1976 to 1979; and president of the Institute of Manpower Studies from 1977 to 1988. He was a trustee of the Charities Aid Foundation from 1974 to 1988. In his later years his eyesight began to fail him, which he found frustrating. His first wife having died in 1980, on 24 March 1984 he married Clarisse, Lady Grover, widow of Sir Anthony Charles Grover, chairman of Lloyd's register of shipping (1963-73), and daughter of Bela Feher, banker. His second marriage was happy, and thanks to his wife he moved in more artistic circles. He died in London of heart failure at St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, on 30 December 1997, and his remains were cremated on 9 January 1998. He was survived by his wife, Clarisse. 


@@@@@


doc= 69125


Story, John (d. 1681), Quaker schismatic, was 'descended of Christian parents' of Preston Patrick, Westmorland, where they 'lived honestly, (having land, goods and trade) in good repute'. He received a good education and 'was never seen inclinable to any evil vice, but against all such things from his youth'. At the age of twelve he began to wonder 'where to find a place and people that sought the Lord', finding the answer when he met and joined with Gervase Benson, Francis Howgill, Edward Burough, and John Audland (Wilkinson, 4). At the age of fourteen he preached in the 'public assemblies' in Westmorland and the surrounding area. George Fox recorded in his journal entry for 1652 that he had met Story at Crosslands near Preston Patrick and 'looked upon him to be a forward bold lad' who had 'a flashy empty notion of religion' ('Journal of George Fox', 1.44). Upon his conversion to Quakerism, Story was apparently 'struck silent for the space of a whole year', feeling himself unfit to preach (Wilkinson, 5). 
About 1654 Story joined John Wilkinson to spread the Quaker message and the two became travelling companions for a period of three years. In 1654 they wrote to George Fox from Cinderhill Green about their meetings in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, and a further letter reveals they had 'drawings' towards Cumberland and Durham. In 1655 they were in Wiltshire which became the centre of their early work and where many Baptists received the Quaker message. The same year saw them imprisoned in Gloucester gaol. Other letters reveal they spent time in Bristol, while in 1660 Story suffered in Salisbury gaol for a year under the sentence of 'praemunire', but was released at the king's coronation. 
Story appears to have initially been highly thought of among Quakers for he was described as 'being well read in holy scriptuer, and had a large undrstanding & Memory and a grave Carriage, by which he was more Qualified for the service'. In these early years he was viewed as 'very servisable, Espechally in the defence of truth against opposers thereof, in sevrall disputes' (Penney, 256). Indeed Wilkinson noted that Story's efforts contributed to his weak health for he suffered from 'great colds, after much heat in meetings impaired his health, besides his concern with many opposers in the breaking forth of truth' (Wilkinson, 6). Story wrote two defences of Quakerism: the first 'Babylon's Defence Broken Down' (1660), an answer to William Brownsford's 'The Quaker Jesuit', defended the movement against the charge of popery; the second, 'A Short Discovery of Certain Truths of God' (1664), was a response to John Batchiler's anti-Quaker tract, 'Christian Queries to Quaking Christians', and upheld Quaker beliefs about the inner light, the role of scripture, oaths, and social deference. Story's early importance can also be seen from his invitation to a special meeting of Quaker ministers in London in May 1666 called to deal with the problems caused by John Perrot and followers regarding the issue of authority within the movement. 
In the early 1670s Story began to be critical of mainstream Quakerism and gradually led a group of dissatisfied Westmorland Quakers centred around Preston Patrick into a separation, first in their business meetings and then in worship. According to the mainstream Quaker movement, Story had '[grown] proud of his gifts, and exalted in his spirit' with the result that 'he Grew to be Contentious, Espechally against good ordr and govrmt in the Church' (Penney, 256). Initially the Preston Patrick Quakers had, in response to the second 'Conventicle Act' of 1670, met in woods and other places rather than openly in Friends' houses, a decision which had incurred the disapproval of their Quaker meeting. Their activities developed into a general attack on authority, organization, and leadership within the movement, particularly George Fox's setting up of separate women's meetings (except for those in large towns and cities, where it was thought more appropriate) and the consequent submission of marriages before the women's meetings as well as those of the men. Further issues concerned the practice of recording papers of condemnation against errant Quakers, and the insistence that tithe testimonies be upheld even if Friends did not feel moved to do so. Some insight into Story's own beliefs is given by the Quaker Elizabeth Stirredge who described how he had upset two Wiltshire women Friends by 'bidding them go home about their business, and wash their dishes, and not go about to preach... and sent them crying home' (Stirredge, 73). She also related how he advised Friends to meet together privately for worship to avoid disturbance, and if necessary to alter the time and place of their worship. No doubt referring to these very issues, Wilkinson, who had joined his former companion at the end of 1672, wrote that 'because he [Story] could not receive some prescriptions of men's, with all its formalities, therefore was he proceeded against... as one of a wrong spirit, and out of the unity' (Wilkinson, 6). He noted however that Story 'rendered not evil for evil, by opposing his opposers in meetings for public worship' (ibid., 7). 
In January 1675, supported by Thomas and Ann Curtis of Reading, Story and Wilkinson met George Fox at Worcester Castle. Thomas Lower who accompanied Fox at the meeting, wrote that the two men were well-apparelled, Story wearing 'his extraordinary broad-brimmed beaver hat and his periwig and broad belt with silver buckles and great hose'. Lower also noted Story's popularity, adding that he 'hath great obeisance rendered to him in the country where he comes by those that know him not' (Braithwaite, 'Second Period', 297). 
However, no agreement could be reached and shortly afterwards Wilkinson and Story set up a separate business meeting, confirming an open separation from the rest of the movement. The 1675 yearly meeting issued a condemnation against Story and Wilkinson, and they were asked by Westmorland Friends to attend two further meetings, both of which they refused -- the first because the charges had not been put in writing, and the second because they did not feel adequately represented. While in Bristol with William Rogers, who later wrote 'The Christian Quaker' (1680) in their defence, Story and Wilkinson were asked to attend a meeting at Draw-well in April 1676 with leading Quakers such as George Whitehead in order to try and heal the breach. During this encounter the two maintained their reasons for separation, although they admitted some fault in opposing Friends 'in the practice of those things that they testify are commendable in the Church of God' (ibid., 306). The two then visited George Fox at Swarthmoor but a lasting reconciliation failed to emerge because of their resentment at mainstream Friends' version of events at Draw-well and the portrayal of the pair's admissions as tantamount to a condemnation against themselves. Following this, Story travelled south to garner more support. After the 1677 yearly meeting a paper was issued which strongly condemned the so-called Wilkinson-Story separation and had the effect of galvanizing the Westmorland quarterly meeting into removing meetings for worship from the homes of separatist Friends: the breach was now complete. 
In 1678 Story was present at a meeting attended by Fox in Bristol, concerning separatists in that city (chiefly William Rogers) and others from Wiltshire. He appears to have kept travelling in the west and south towards the end of his life for Wilkinson noted that in the years after 1676 that 'God gave him strength, and carried him hundreds of miles in his service; afterwards he was very weak' (Wilkinson, 8). In 1679 he went to London where the second-day morning meeting acquired confirmation from him of the paper of regret drawn up at Draw-well, an act that was interpreted as a move on Story's part towards reconciliation. Story's final meeting was at Kendal on 16 October 1681 and was attended by Thomas Camm, who later criticized Story's testimony and behaviour at the meeting. 
According to 'Antichristian Treachery Discovered' (1683), Story died some weeks after the Kendal meeting (his death having been prophesied by the Quaker Solomon Eccles a few years earlier, much to the embarrassment of Friends). He fell ill about a week after the meeting, and he died about 24 November 1681 apparently from distemper; he was said to have been aged between forty and fifty. While his critics inevitably viewed him as 'a man that caused strife, division and discord in his later years' (Camm, 2), Wilkinson in his personal testimony to him in 'The Memory of that Servant of God, John Story, Revived' believed that 'he fulfilled a great time, if wisdom be grey-hair, and undefiled life, old age' (Wilkinson, 8). 


@@@@@


doc= 69127


Stranger, Hannah (fl. 1656-1671), Quaker missionary, was the wife of John Stranger, combmaker of London. Hannah was one of the women who, with Martha Simmonds, challenged Francis Howgill and Edward Hubberthorne at London Friends' meetings in the summer of 1656, interrupting the meetings by singing. She and her husband were among the group who travelled to Exeter in October 1656 to secure Nayler's release from gaol. With Nayler, Martha and Thomas Simmonds, Dorcas Erbury, and three others they journeyed through Wells and Glastonbury, arriving in Bristol on 24 October. Hannah and Martha Simmonds walked on either side of Nayler's horse, holding the bridle, singing with their companions 'Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Israel'. They were arrested, imprisoned, and questioned by Bristol magistrates before being sent to London in November for Nayler's trial. 
Letters from Hannah, found on Nayler at the time of his arrest, were given as evidence of his blasphemy. Writing to Nayler from London (16 September 1656) Hannah had described him as 'Thou everlasting son of righteousnesse and Prince of Peace' (Deacon, 6). Another letter addressed him as 'Oh thou fairest of ten thousand, thou only begotten son of God', and its references to his 'Spouse' were taken to imply an improper relationship with Martha Simmonds (Farmer, 7). Particularly damaging was a postscript by John Stranger: 'Thy name is no more to be called James but Jesus.' On examination Hannah said that she had acted at the Lord's command. Like her husband, she avoided compounding the misunderstanding of their actions by refusing to answer questions about Nayler's being called Jesus. Thomas Cole, keeper of Newgate prison in Bristol, testified to the idolatrous behaviour of the women towards Nayler during their confinement, describing their kneeling before him. When Nayler was punished on 27 December the women sat at the foot of the pillory. Hannah wrote a section of Martha Simmonds's 'O England, thy Time is Come' (1656/7?) beginning 'Consider I beseech you how clearly the Scripture is fulfilled in our dayes', speaking elliptically of Nayler's sufferings and proclaiming the coming of the Lord (Simmonds, 6). 
Ostracized by Friends, some of the group persisted in their protests while others, including Hannah, sought reconciliation. In 1666, after her second marriage, to Henry Salter, with whom she had two sons in 1667 and 1668, she was received by Bristol Friends and at a meeting on 2 November 1669 submitted a written testimony of contrition for her former actions. In 1671 she and Martha Fisher went at Fox's request to the king to ask for Margaret Fell's liberty. That her reputation was still sensitive is indicated by Ellwood's deletion of her name in his edition of Fox's journal, replacing it with 'another Woman-Friend' (Penney, 2.169). Her later life is undocumented, though she has been identified as a property-owning widow in Tokaney, Delaware, in 1678-9. 


@@@@@


doc= 69130


Gower, Laurence Cecil Bartlett (1913-1997), jurist, was born on 29 December 1913 at 22 Disraeli Road, Forest Gate, Essex, the elder child and only son of Henry Laurence Gower, businessman, and his wife, Daisy Ethel, 'nee' Lee. Jim Gower (as he was known throughout his life) was educated at Lindisfarne College and University College, London, from where he graduated with first-class honours in law in 1933. After taking the LLM in 1934, and serving articles with the five-partner Bedford Row firm of Smiles & Co., he was admitted a solicitor in 1937. On 7 September 1939 he married Helen Margaret Shepperson (Peggy) Birch (1910/11-1999), secondary school teacher, the daughter of George Francis Birch, corn merchant. They had three children, Jenny, James, and Richard. Gower served in the army throughout the Second World War (latterly in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps), and played a significant part in the planning of the allied landings in France in June 1944. He ended the war as a lieutenant-colonel (having joined the army as a private). 
In 1948 Gower was invited to accept the Sir Ernest Cassel chair of commercial law at the London School of Economics. His fourteen-year tenure of this prestigious post was exceptionally distinguished. In particular, the publication of his 'Principles of Modern Company Law' in 1954 demonstrated that subjects at the time often regarded as so dominated by the concerns of legal practice as to be unsuitable for academic study could in reality be properly understood only if put into historical and economic context. Gower's own experience and continued involvement in both legal practice and academic life made him well aware of the deficiencies in English legal education; and the reform proposals he made in his inaugural lecture set the terms for debate over the next quarter of a century. In 1962 he saw the possibility of putting his ideas into practice. He resigned the Cassel chair, was appointed adviser on legal education to the Nigerian government and dean of the faculty of law in Lagos, and threw himself energetically into the task of providing Nigeria and other Anglophone African territories with their own systems of legal education putting appropriate emphasis on the skills needed for routine legal practice. But in 1965, as Nigeria moved towards civil war, Gower took a stand on an issue of principle in the university and, in an atmosphere of inter-tribal tension, was summarily sacked from his office as dean. 
At this time, the 'Law Commissions Act' of 1965, giving effect to the Labour Party's pledge to establish a body charged with the systematic development and reform of English law, was going through the United Kingdom parliament; and Gower's experience as a practising solicitor and teacher of law, coupled with his radical (but realistic) approach to the legal system, made him exceptionally well qualified for appointment as one of the five founding law commissioners, who took up office in June 1965. 
Gower had had experience (not only in his solicitor's practice but also in the poor man's lawyer clinic, which he and his lifelong friend Arnold Goodman organized in deprived areas of London) of the hardship to which English divorce law gave rise. In 1952 he had given outspoken evidence about the reality of bogus hotel adultery and simulated desertion divorces to the royal commission on marriage and divorce, which had not endeared him to the conservatively minded. But as a law commissioner he was able to suppress his naturally somewhat rebellious and irreverent personality, and his diplomatic skills enabled him to take the lead in successfully negotiating the compromise which became the basis of the 'Divorce Reform Act' of 1969: the sole ground for divorce was to be that the marriage had irretrievably broken down, although such breakdown was to be inferred from facts akin to the traditional matrimonial offences or from the fact that the parties had lived apart for five years (or two years if they agreed to the divorce). Gower also took the lead in formulating many other proposals made by the Law Commission and in due course enacted, ranging from reform of the law of nullity of marriage to abolition of outdated forms of action, such as breach of promise of marriage, restitution of conjugal rights, and the husband's right to claim damages against the person with whom the wife had committed adultery. 
From the many opportunities available to him at the end of his term as a law commissioner, in 1971 Gower accepted the offer of appointment as vice-chancellor of Southampton University. He and his wife, Peggy -- who for nearly sixty years shared and unfailingly supported him in all his activities -- threw themselves vigorously into the life of the university. Gower was a skilled fund-raiser, and a highly effective administrator (not least in promoting the interests of the university's newly opened medical school); but perhaps the Gowers' greatest achievement was in building up an atmosphere of trust and shared enthusiasm with the student body and academic and administrative staff. 
Gower retired from the vice-chancellorship in 1979, but his intellectual (and physical) energy remained undiminished. He had been appointed a trustee of the British Museum in 1968 and continued to give the museum not only sagacious advice about financial and legal issues but also enthusiastic support to extending its wider educational role. He remained a much sought-after lecturer. 
By 1981 a number of scandals in the futures, investment, and banking industries had demonstrated the inadequacy of the legislative framework intended to protect investors from fraud; and in that year Gower was appointed by Margaret Thatcher's administration to consider the statutory protection required by private and business investors, and the need for statutory control of dealers and investment consultants and managers. Gower carried out an intensive programme of consultation and research. This not only helped to establish a larger measure of agreement than would previously have been thought possible, but also created a powerful momentum for legislation. If he had had the power to decide policy he would no doubt have recommended the creation of a securities and exchange commission on the United States model (of which he had over the years acquired a profound knowledge). But he recognized that personal conviction had to yield to practical politics, and he drew back from making such a recommendation. The 'Financial Services Act' of 1986 owed much to his report. His work on investor protection was a fitting climax to a distinguished career as teacher, scholar, and law reformer. His standing is evidenced by the award of eight honorary degrees from universities both in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in the Commonwealth, his election as a fellow of the British Academy in 1965, and his appointment as one of the first queen's counsel 'honoris causa' in 1991. 
A man of tall, spare, and angular build, Gower had enormous physical as well as intellectual energy, and his capacities remained undimmed until the last year of his life. He died on Christmas day 1997 in a nursing home at 31 Eton Avenue, Camden, London. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 69131


Stubbs, John (c.1618-1675), Quaker minister, was probably born in Durham, though details of his parentage are unknown. He married Elizabeth Stubbs, and both became Quakers at the same time. According to George Fox's description, Stubbs was 'a poore man haveing a wife & four Chrildren ['sic']' ('Journal of George Fox', 2.49). Only two of these children can be identified: they are named in the Swarthmore manuscripts as Sarah and Lydia. Stubbs worked in a variety of jobs: if all the contemporary records are to be believed he was a soldier, a schoolmaster, and a husbandman. 
Stubbs was a Baptist serving in the army at the time when the Quaker leader, George Fox, secured his conversion in 1653. Fox, who was then imprisoned at Carlisle, remembers Stubbs's conversion in his 'Journal', and the two were clearly good friends. Stubbs's travels and sufferings after he became a Friend were extensive, even by early Quaker terms. He joined a movement whose charismatic ministers felt the 'call' to publish their ideas both in England and abroad; Stubbs, however, went further than most. 
Stubbs's ministry began on home soil before encompassing Europe and the New World. From his northern base Stubbs moved southwards; he was travelling with William Caton in Kent when the couple were charged with vagrancy, placed in the stocks, and whipped. From being one of the first Quakers in Kent in 1655, Stubbs went on to contribute to the expansion of Quakerism in London, Colchester (1655), Scotland (1655), and Ireland (1656 and 1669): he was attacked in Coldbeck and imprisoned at Cork, but elsewhere appears to have escaped any serious injury. George Fox's recollection of Stubbs's journeys in 'Holland, Ireland, Scotland, Legarne, Rome, Aegypt, America' shows that these foreign travels left a strong impression on the minds of others ('Journal of George Fox', 1.141). 
Stubbs made a brief journey to the continent with William Caton in 1655 (he had returned by August 1656). This international ministry was at first focused on establishing a Quaker community in the Netherlands, and Stubbs's residence in 1657 continued this work. In 1658, with Samuel Fisher, Stubbs's continental evangelism reached Italy, where pamphlets were distributed. Stubbs then became part of one of the Quakers' most ambitious ministries: beginning in the Netherlands he and two other Friends tried to travel to China via Alexandria. However, they were banished from Egypt and so Stubbs travelled on through Europe. During the 1660s Stubbs's ministry was mostly based in England -- he was in Lancaster prison until November 1664, which led to his petitioning Charles II for clemency. His final overseas ministry occurred in 1671, when a group including George Fox travelled throughout the North American colonies. 
Stubbs died in London of consumption on 31 July 1675, and was buried at Chequer Alley, London. Fox commemorated the 'wise' Stubbs's 'many sufferings', remarking that he was 'a notable Minister of the Gospel of Christ' (Lodge, 52). 


@@@@@


doc= 69132


Haggart, Alastair Iain Macdonald (1915-1998), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Edinburgh, was born at 30 Nairn Street, Glasgow, on 10 October 1915, the son of Alexander Macdonald Haggart, a timekeeper, and Janet Mackay. The family had moved from Fort William to Glasgow, where the young Haggart was brought up and educated at Hyndland primary and secondary schools. On leaving school he worked for some years at Burroughs Accounting Machines. Although his Christian life had begun as a member of the Free Church of Scotland, he made a conscious decision as a young man to become an Episcopalian. At the age of twenty-three he began training for the ministry at Coates Hall, the Episcopal theological college in Edinburgh. From there he gained an open exhibition to Hatfield College, Durham, where he graduated BA in 1941 and proceeded MA four years later. The University of Dundee made him an honorary LLD in 1970. 
Haggart's clerical ministry initially was very much along traditional lines. He was ordained deacon in 1941 and priest in the following year. A three-year curacy at St Mary's Cathedral in Glasgow was followed by a similar period at St Mary's, Hendon, in London. At St Mary's, Glasgow, he married Margaret Agnes (Peggy) Trundle (1911/12-1979), a shorthand typist, on 14 May 1945. They had two daughters. In 1948 he returned to Scotland to become precentor of St Ninian's Cathedral in Perth, where he remained until he went to his first incumbency, King's Park, Glasgow, in 1951. Eight years later he was appointed provost of St Paul's Cathedral in Dundee, where he exercised an effective and efficient pastoral ministry. His wide gifts were recognized in 1970, when he received a unanimous call from the college of bishops to accept appointment as principal of Edinburgh Theological College. Although he laid no claim to scholarship, he was an avid reader and regarded theological reading as an essential part of the priestly life. He kept very much in touch with the latest developments in theology. Under his leadership, the whole pattern of teaching at the college was reshaped. Formal links were established with New College, the theological faculty in the University of Edinburgh, as a consequence of which Episcopal church ordinands trained alongside candidates for the ministry of the Church of Scotland. He went on to establish a concordat with the advisory council for ministry in the Church of England, under which courses were integrated and became acceptable to all three parties. 
Haggart was elected bishop of Edinburgh in 1975 at the age of sixty, when he described himself as 'an old man in a hurry' ('The Times'). Two years later he became primus. In that capacity he clearly recognized and responded to the need for radical reform of many of the structures of the church. He presided over the creation of a general synod which amalgamated the two bodies previously responsible for the governance of the church. The representative church council had been concerned with finance, while a provincial synod had dealt with doctrine. His eight years as primus saw a number of other significant changes. Among these were new patterns of ministry, a fresh approach to pastoral discipline in the matter of the marriage of divorced persons, and the development and introduction of new liturgies. 
A committed ecumenist, Haggart soon made his mark in the British Council of Churches. As chairman of the division of ecumenical affairs he was one of those responsible for the change to new ecumenical structures in Britain in which the Roman Catholic church could be full participants. He drafted the introduction to the Swanwick declaration when the churches agreed to ratify the 'Not Strangers but Pilgrims' process. It was later a source of disappointment to him that church life in Britain had failed to sustain that early commitment. He made his presence and influence felt unmistakably in the Anglican consultative council, where he served for a time as vice-chairman. During the pope's visit to Canterbury in 1982 Haggart initiated a dialogue for the discussion of inter-faith marriages. 
In 1983 Haggart travelled to Johannesburg as one of the Anglican observers at the trial of Archbishop Desmond Tutu and others. His first wife having died in 1979, on 3 April 1983 he married chief nursing officer Mary Elizabeth Scholes ('b'. 1924). He retired as primus in 1985, but returned to the Anglican stage to act as chaplain to the 1988 Lambeth conference. A lifelong pacifist, he was a member of the Peace Pledge Union and a conscientious objector during the Second World War. More controversially, perhaps, he became an office-bearer in the Voluntary Euthanasia Society of Scotland. Perhaps the most striking impressions made by Haggart on first acquaintance were the admonitory forefinger, which was frequently raised in conversation, and his very distinctive Scottish accent, neither highland nor Lallans. Both combined made for a memorable and effective means of communication. Haggart died on 11 January 1998 in Astley Ainslie Hospital, Edinburgh. His funeral was held on 17 January at St Mary's Cathedral, Edinburgh. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 69134


Tillam, Thomas (d. in or before 1674), Seventh Day Baptist minister, was by his own testimony born a Roman Catholic, and in his youth travelled on the continent. Like many other Englishmen during the political and economic hardships of the 1620s and 1630s, Tillam had looked towards the New World and arrived in America on 29 June 1638. He commemorated his freedom with a poem, 'Uppon the First Sight of New-England', which still appears in anthologies of early American verse. Tillam returned to England during the revolutionary 1640s, spent some time in Wales, where he was ordained in an Independent church in Wrexham about 1648 or 1649, became a Baptist preacher at Hill Cliffe, Cheshire, where he may have met his wife, Jane, and eventually became a member of the Baptist church in London led by Hanserd Knollys. Tillam practised for some time as an apothecary, but seems to have distinguished himself in the Baptist community, for by the end of 1651 he was selected to be their 'messenger' to the town of Hexham, about 20 miles up the River Tyne from Newcastle. He was also appointed to one of the puritan lectureships in the gift of the parliamentary commission for propagation of the gospel in the northern counties. Despite this promising start, by March 1653 Tillam was already under attack from the slightly older and neighbouring Baptist congregation at Newcastle, whose leaders prevailed upon the parent assembly in Coleman Street, London, to deny him the status of full pastor. 
It was the scandal of the so-called False Jew of Hexham, however, that brought Tillam down and propelled him on his extravagant adventures. A man calling himself Joseph ben Israel had arrived in Hexham from Newcastle on 4 June 1653, claiming to be a Jew of the tribe of Judah, born in Mantua, conversant in eight languages, and educated in philosophy as well as the religion of his ancestors. Curiously, he also spoke English with a local accent, but Tillam did not think this linguistic talent significant at the time. Joseph told of his conversion to Christ and his wanderings through Europe, until he arrived one day in Hamburg and heard of the English Baptists. He made his way to Newcastle, he said, and lived for about a month at the home of Paul Hobson, the deputy governor of the town and one of the founders of the new Baptist congregation there. Hobson told Joseph that if he really wanted to become a Baptist, he might like to try the brethren at nearby Hexham. Tillam baptized Joseph only a few days after his arrival, in the wake of declarations and public confessions by this 'Jew' who had 'seen the light'. However, Joseph had arrived in Hexham with a letter of introduction from Hobson himself which also warned Tillam not to believe everything he was told by his latest spiritual conquest, and as soon as the report of Tillam's hasty baptism reached Newcastle it was announced that this supposed Italian Jew might actually be a certain Thomas Ramsay (alias Horsley), who had just recently passed through the city. Tillam and Joseph were called to Newcastle to answer charges there at meetings held from 21 June 1653. Joseph's story soon began to unravel, its falsehood clinched by a misdirected letter from his mother, the wife of a Dr Alexander Ramsay of Scotland. Joseph-Horsley-Ramsay broke down and confessed to being a former student at various Scottish and continental universities, sent to England by the Jesuits to stir up trouble. Ramsay was imprisoned without trial in London for about six years, and two months before the Restoration was allowed to leave the country. 
It was quite apparent that Tillam's mission to the north, while not quite a failure, had succeeded in bringing shame and disgrace to the Baptist movement as a whole. Yet he was allowed to remain in his post for another two and a half years, until doctrinal differences with the central congregation at Coleman Street led the Baptists in the first fortnight of November 1655 to replace Tillam with George Ritschel, the Bohemian divine then serving as chief master at the free school in Newcastle. Tillam's movements that winter are unknown, but the revelation in December 1655 of a genuine secret Jewish community in London must have brought back bitter memories. Notwithstanding, by May 1656 Tillam was baptizing dozens of converts in Colchester, where his community met in a ruined parish church, and a number of local aldermen successfully petitioned Cromwell himself that something more permanent be found for him in the town. Some time before the following January, however, Tillam underwent his final metamorphosis, and began proclaiming in the pulpit and in print that Saturday was the sabbath, and that at least on that score the Jews were correct. It was also at about this time that Tillam met Christopher Pooley, the Cambridge-educated Baptist and Fifth Monarchist, whose millenarian views Tillam enthusiastically shared. The two men travelled together in the last few years before the king's return, as Tillam preached the Saturday sabbath -- whose merits he argued in a debate at the Stone Chapel by St Paul's, London, in 1659 -- and flirted with Quakerism. Between 1651 and 1660, Tillam published seven works, the most notable being his account of the 'False Jew' episode which was printed in Newcastle in 1653. 
Tillam was arrested along with many other old radicals at the Restoration, but he and Pooley managed to escape to the Netherlands. They returned to England in August 1661 in the company of a mysterious Dr Love. This was none other than Paul Hobson, the original magnet for the False Jew of Hexham, freshly ejected from his post as chaplain at Eton College and driven now to forget old quarrels and plot more dramatic action. The plan was to establish an emigre sabbatarian colony in the Palatinate, and whereas Hobson was soon occupied with his own seditious affairs, Tillam and Pooley led an underground life in 1662 and 1663 and may have returned to the continent to promote their settlement. They were certainly back in England by the end of 1664 before they fled abroad again, and Pooley at least spent the second half of 1666 travelling in the north, trying to convince believers to join the continental colony and to subscribe to its sabbatarian covenant. A vessel with eight or nine passengers set sail in March 1668, bound for Tillam's little colony. According to English intelligence reports it had actually been established, at a monastery granted by Frederick William, the tolerant 'great elector' of Brandenburg, and was thriving. The subsequent fate of his band of Saturday sabbatarians remains unknown; Tillam had died by 5 August 1674, when his death in Germany was reported by a London Seventh Day Baptist, Joseph Davis, to a Seventh Day Baptist congregation in Rhode Island. 


@@@@@


doc= 69135


Townsend, Theophila (d. 1692), Quaker activist and writer, of unknown parentage, was married to Richard Townsend (1629-1715), a bodice-maker and Quaker of Cirencester, Gloucestershire. Richard, who was the son of Roger and Elizabeth Townsend of Cirencester, had a brother named Roger. His public association with Quakerism is dated first to his arrest in November 1660, and lasted well into the first decade of the eighteenth century; his name appears frequently in the literature of Quaker suffering. The couple were apparently childless. 
Theophila Townsend became involved in public professions of faith when, having absented herself for some years from her local parish church, her name became linked to the Quakers. From early in the 1670s through to her death in 1692 she tirelessly protested against anti-Quaker laws: during the 1680s, particularly, she seemed rarely out of prison. The first significant period of incarceration, lasting eleven weeks, was occasioned by an act of public preaching in May 1682. Between that time and April 1686, when she was released, Townsend was frequently castigated by the authorities. By arresting her for minor offences, then committing her for the refusal either to provide sureties for good behaviour or to swear the oath of allegiance, the authorities succeeded in restraining her liberty for much of this four-year period. She was released alongside fifty-six other Quakers freed from Gloucester Castle, after James II issued a declaration of indulgence that brought a level of religious tolerance to nonconformists nationwide. 
Townsend's life as a Quaker was therefore shaped by her experiences of 'suffering'; however, only one of her published texts refers extensively to imprisonment -- the rest being concerned with more general aspects of Quaker policy. When writing to the 'persecuting magistrates' in 'A Word in Councel' (1687), Townsend openly expresses a common antinomian idea that it is better to 'obey God then ['sic'] Man' (p. 4). Indeed, her usage of 'Old Testament' topoi here and elsewhere is indicative of a prophetic impulse in her writing. In 'A Testimony Concerning the Life and Death of Jane Whitehead', for example, Townsend draws on 'Revelation' to predict the second coming of Christ. She also wrote in praise of other deceased Quakers -- Joan Vokins, Amariah Drewet, and Anne Whitehead. Her tribute to Anne Whitehead ('An Epistle of Love'), who was a central member of the London women's meetings, was combined with a more general explanation of women's public work in the separate meetings. 
Perhaps the most enduring testimony to Theophila Townsend came from the Quaker martyrologist Joseph Besse who, writing of her many sufferings, pithily described her as 'a virtuous Woman, and of great Understanding' (Besse, 1.225). Townsend's death in Cirencester, through unknown causes, was recorded in the Quaker registers, and she was buried there on 15 June 1692. 


@@@@@


doc= 69136


Barnes, Joseph (1549/50-1618), bookseller and printer, was the son of Thomas Barnes, a husbandman of Long Wittenham, Berkshire. In 1562 he was apprenticed for ten years to Garbrand Harkes, a Dutch-born bookseller, vintner, and mercer in Oxford; Harkes was both a privileged member of the University of Oxford and (unusually for a member of the book trade) a freeman of the city. Barnes's apprenticeship was enrolled in the city's records rather than the university's, but he never took up city freedom, and was admitted as a bookseller by the university on 8 September 1573. Two years later he was granted a university licence to sell wine, and maintained both occupations throughout his career. 
There had been a few short-lived attempts to establish printing at Oxford but, by the time that Barnes became a bookseller, no book had been printed in the city for over fifty years. Moreover, since 1557, printing in England had been restricted to members of the London Stationers' Company and those who held patents for printing from the crown. The University of Cambridge had received a grant in 1534 but Oxford could claim no such right. However, in 1584 -- a year after Cambridge appointed a new university printer -- a draft petition was submitted to Oxford's chancellor, the earl of Leicester, in a bid to secure a privilege from the crown. It named Barnes as 'a substantial bookseller' who was willing to print on behalf of the university if he were granted some specific privileges in his own right and the opportunity to sell his publications abroad (Carter, 20). No privilege was forthcoming. None the less, the university believed it should proceed: in August Barnes was loaned $100 to establish a press; in December a supervisory delegacy of scholars was appointed; and in January 1585 a single leaf, 'In aduentum illustrissimi Lecestrensis comitis ad Collegium Lincolniense', was printed by Barnes. The university's right to print was tacitly endorsed by a Star Chamber decree of 1586, which listed it and Cambridge as the only places where printing was allowed outside London; it was also reflected in a privy council action about the same time against London printers who had pirated an Oxford publication. 
Barnes's printing house was not a 'university press' in a modern sense. He styled himself 'printer to the university' but the epithet appears on relatively few of his more than 260 imprints. The university offered no direct support, despite the fact that the $100 loan was clearly inadequate for his needs. None the less, Barnes was 'an excellent printer': 'Oxford could not again until very recent times boast such a beautiful equipment of type' (Carter, 21). The absence of black letter and the inclusion of Greek type evidently reflected Barnes's humanist aspirations, and he published works by John Case and Alberico Gentili, both of whom had an international readership; Case's 'Speculum quaestionum moralium' (1585) was advertised at the Frankfurt book fair. However, the economics of printing and Barnes's international inexperience limited such ambitions and, although there were classical publications, there were far more university verses and sermons. Barnes published the first printed catalogue of the Bodleian Library in 1605, but the experience was not a happy one; the Hebrew was inaccurate and poor, and the catalogue appeared with an errata list compiled by the professor of Hebrew at Leiden. 
Barnes apprenticed his son, John, to a London bookseller in 1594 and, after John's freedom in 1601, he took advantage of his son's membership of the Stationers' Company to secure his rights over certain works. On 7 June 1602 John entered twelve items into the Stationers' register; one of them was Thomas Rider's 'Bibliotheca scholastica', an English-Latin dictionary that Barnes had published in 1589. In December this work was re-entered on condition that it was only printed in London, and the following month John assigned it over to Cuthbert Burby. Another edition was published in Oxford in 1612, and in 1616 a chancery suit was brought to clarify that assignment of 1603. In November 1618, barely weeks before Barnes's death, father and son relinquished all claim to the work in return for $60. 
Barnes was married at least twice: Anne or Anna was buried in All Saints' Church in 1603; Barbara executed his will. He had at least three children: Robert, born in either 1576 or 1577, who became an Oxfordshire rector; John; and Anne, who married a physician and was buried in the same grave as her father in 1657. His brother Roger was a notable Oxford bookbinder. 
Barnes held leases for a number of properties on Oxford's High Street. In 1601 he leased a tenement next to Brasenose College that would remain in the family until 1652. An inventory made at his death records two rooms for printing, one for storing paper, and a fourth for wine. It appears, though, that he had a separate bookshop and warehouse. In the late seventeenth century John Aubrey reported that college fellows used to go 'every satterday night... to Joseph Barnes shop the bookseller (opposite the west end of St Marys) where the Newes was brought from London' (Bennett, 51). 
Barnes retired in January 1617, and was succeeded by William Wrench and John Lichfield. He died in Oxford on 6 December 1618, and was buried on 17 December in St Mary's Church, where Wood records a memorial. Barnes's age was there given as seventy-two, but university depositions from the 1570s onwards suggest he was born in 1549 or 1550. Barnes's will was proved in January 1619, and left money to the Bodleian Library and to Brasenose and Magdalen colleges. An inventory indicates a substantial estate of $1128 2's'. 9died, including $300 in bound and unbound books. However, Barnes's debts were even greater: between February 1619 and February 1621 his son John sold over a dozen of his father's 'copies' to various members of the Stationers' Company, and in 1624 his widow and daughter were granted a university licence to sell wine. 


@@@@@


doc= 69138


Dockwray, Thomas (d. 1559), master of the Stationers' Company and ecclesiastical lawyer, about whose origins and parentage nothing is known, does not seem to have been related to his namesake and near contemporary Sir Thomas Docwra (d. 1527), prior of the knights of St John of Jerusalem at Clerkenwell. Although a member of the Stationers' Company from at least 1519, Dockwray's name appears in no surviving book imprints. However, he was associated with both the printer and bookseller Henry Pepwell and the bookseller John Reynes. In 1533 Dockwray was in Antwerp on behalf of the bishop of London, John Stokesley, on unknown business, to the nature of which Pepwell was said to be privy. Dockwray's early relationship with the Stationers' Company is difficult to assess as no company records survive before 1554; however, he served as master from 1554 to 1558 -- a crucial period that saw the company incorporated by Queen Mary in 1557. 
Dockwray had a lifelong association with the London parish of St Faith which included the main bookselling areas of St Paul's Churchyard and Paternoster Row, both as a resident -- he occupied premises on the north side of the churchyard -- and as a property developer. He seems, at least for a time, to have been a wealthy man, and in 1536 he and Pepwell, another St Faith's resident, were described as substantial inhabitants of the parish in their appointment as petty collectors of the king's subsidy. However, in 1539 Dockwray was listed as one of many churchyard tenants in arrears. In 1552 he built tenements in Paternoster Row, and at his death he held property in both Paternoster Row and Warwick Lane. 
Dockwray also had a long legal career. From at least 1527 he was a proctor in the court of arches -- that is, one of a dozen or so lawyers in the highest ecclesiastical court in the Canterbury province based in St Mary-le-Bow Church, London. At some point between 1542 and 1550 he was suspended, as in the latter year he was reinstated by the archbishop; eight months later Dockwray was one of the defending lawyers at the trial of Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester. 
In 1532, despite having been successfully sued two months earlier for armed assault, Dockwray was appointed the city's proctor for 'speciall matters & Causes' (CLRO, repertory, 8, fol. 242'r'); he was still drawing a fee for this in 1536, and in 1541 he was consulted by the city recorder, Roger Cholmley, regarding a conflict of rights between the lord admiral and the Thames conservators. Earlier in 1541, he seems to have been a common councilman as he was among a list of 'Commoners' appointed by the court of aldermen to view the former London friaries. 
Dockwray died on 23 June 1559 and was buried in the church of St Faith's under St Paul's two days later, attended by 'mony morners' ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 201). An epitaph was recorded by William Dugdale. He was survived by a widow, Anne, and had held property in London, Middlesex, and Hertfordshire. 
Dockwray did not mention the Stationers' Company in his will, although a bequest of 20's'. and a gilt-silver spoon was made on his behalf by his widow; however, he left a tenement in Paternoster Row to the Jesus Guild, a religious fraternity re-established in St Faith's in 1556 but dissolved very early in Elizabeth's reign. 
Of Anne, nothing is known although she may have been the 'mistress Dockwra' buried in April 1561 ('Diary of Henry Machyn', 254). 


@@@@@


doc= 69139


Venn, Anne (bap. 1627, d. 1654), religious radical and diarist, was baptized in London on 1 January 1627 at All Hallows, Bread Street, the only daughter of John Venn (bap. 1586, d. 1650), a silk merchant trading from his shop on Bread Street but originally from Lydiard St Lawrence in Somerset, and his second wife, Margaret ('b'. 1594), daughter of Geoffrey Langley of Colchester, Essex, and widow of two Londoners, John Elliot and John Scarborough. 
The Venns were a godly and relatively prosperous London family. Although still an adolescent, at the end of the 1630s Anne Venn was allowed to accompany her parents regularly to secret puritan religious meetings. At the meetings, the Venns made the close acquaintance of the zealous divine Christopher Love who, as chaplain to her father's regiment during the civil war, lived with the family at Windsor Castle, where they had moved in October 1642, and for a time became Anne's spiritual confidant. John Venn, her father, had become a leading parliamentarian activist and later became a regicide. Unknown to her parents, from the age of nine Anne began to be tortured by the fear that she might be damned and subsequently kept a careful written record, very much in the genre of the puritan diarist or autobiographer, of her excruciating mental turmoil over an eighteen-year period until she at last gained some comforting assurance of salvation. The handwritten work, which she kept a close secret, was discovered in her closet along with several other godly devotional writings after her death and was published in 1658, organized into three books by her stepfather Thomas Weld, an Independent divine, under the title 'A Wise Virgin's Lamp Burning'. 
The work reveals a clearly well-educated and intelligent woman who sought spiritual reassurance by reading puritan works and attending godly sermons. Personally austere, she would not wear jewellery or vain clothes. She was intensely introspective, probably lonely and depressive, and may not have enjoyed robust health. Yet she could also be self-assertive, if not stubborn, at times when pursuing her spiritual goals. Although remaining on good terms with most of the godly whose acquaintance she made, she and her parents eventually became dissatisfied with Christopher Love and the newly imposed presbyterian settlement. About 1645 the family returned to London, living in Whitecross Street. Anne submitted herself to the required vetting for the sacrament of communion by elders in Love's parish of St Anne, Aldersgate, London, but the experience was blighted by a lack of inner conviction that she was fit to partake of it. The Venns moved out of London to Kensington about 1647, but found the local preaching unsatisfactory and later attended the ministry elsewhere. The sudden and unexpected death of John Venn during the night of 27-8 June 1650 was a great blow to Anne and her mother. By 1651 Anne had become totally disillusioned with presbyterianism and had fallen under the influence of the Independent divine and former chaplain to Sir Thomas Fairfax, Isaac Knight, the curate at Hammersmith in the chapelry of Fulham and later rector of Fulham. When Knight gathered an Independent church at Fulham in 1652, Anne and her mother joined the church and became active and enthusiastic members of it. At long last Anne was able to experience some spiritual peace. 
Left a dowry of $1000 in her father's will, Anne never married. She died in Kensington in late December 1654 after a severe cold, but characteristically she maintained her diary until on the verge of death. In her will, made on 19 November 1653 and proved on 26 January 1655, she left bequests totalling $867. Among the beneficiaries were eight leading Independent divines, including Isaac Knight, and the poor of the gathered church at Fulham. She bequeathed her remaining goods, plate, jewels, household furnishing, and books to her mother, whom she appointed her executor. 


@@@@@


doc= 69140


Waugh, Dorothy (c.1636-1666?), Quaker preacher, was probably born in Hutton, Westmorland; though further details of her parentage are unknown, her sister, Jane Waugh (later Whitehead), was also a Friend. 
Dorothy Waugh converted to Quakerism in the early 1650s, and she was one of the 'valiant sixty' whose efforts ensured that the movement quickly achieved a national and international profile. For Waugh, whose exposure to the Quaker message probably came when she was a maid at the house of another Friend, John Camm, the call to service involved ministering campaigns both at home and abroad, and not infrequently resulted in spells of imprisonment. A term in Kendal prison in 1653 was followed later by another four months' detention in Norwich in 1654 -- but neither sentence deterred Waugh. She subsequently published the Quaker message in Buckinghamshire (1655), Cornwall (1655), Carlisle (1655), Reading (1656), and, on two separate occasions, on ministering journeys to New England (1656, 1657). In Carlisle during Michaelmas 1655 Waugh preached against the citizenry's 'deceit & ungodly practices' to the consternation of the town's mayor who, believing that Waugh's incendiary presence might 'spoile a whole Cittie', imprisoned Waugh and, furthermore, placed her head in a scold's bridle (Waugh, 29-30). 
The penalties for preaching in New England were equally harsh: Waugh first suffered imprisonment and expulsion from the colony, sharing the common fate of seven other Quakers who had ventured into Boston in July 1656. Several of the party, among them Waugh, defied the rules of transportation, returning once more to the colony in the summer of 1657; this time, the courageous Quaker travelled from Boston to Salem with another woman, Sarah Gibbons, defying the harsh New England weather as much as the authorities. She and her female companion were commended in contemporary accounts for enduring 'storms and tempests... frost and snow' in order to 'accomplish the will and work of God' (Norton, 69). On returning once more to Boston in February 1659, however, the two women were imprisoned and later whipped for preaching. According to accounts, the women praised God even while the lashes were laid on. 
Waugh's marriage to the Quaker William Lotherington (died 1674?) of Whitby probably occurred around the time of her return from New England, where she had become a vocal advocate of marital celibacy. She probably rescinded her public testimony in favour of the domestic life from this point onwards; at least, she appears no longer to figure in the compendium of Quaker sufferings compiled by the eighteenth-century martyrologist William Besse. If she and William settled in Whitby, Yorkshire, to become members of the Pickering meeting, as seems likely, then it was two of their children, Hannah and Benjamin, who died there in 1664. Dorothy herself probably died on 9 December 1666, in Whitby, though both the cause of death and her place of burial are unknown. Her husband probably died in their home town on 1 March 1674. 
Dorothy Waugh's place in Quaker history is as a preacher and a writer, whose courage spreading the Quaker message secured her significance as one of the first 'publishers of truth'. Though she was a literate woman, Waugh's only published account of her travels relates to her treatment in Carlisle, while her testimony is one of the few records surviving from the seventeenth century describing firsthand the constraints of a scold's bridle. 


@@@@@


doc= 69143


Wight, Sarah (b. 1631), mystic, was born in September 1631, the daughter of Thomas Wight (died before 1643), an official in the auditor's and exchequer's office, and Mary, 'nee' Purcel. Her mother's first husband, Edward Vaughan, was the king's receiver and surveyor for Northamptonshire and Rutlandshire, with whom she had had a son, Jonathan. 
Sarah Wight's account of her own severe illnesses, visions, and miraculous healing are found in the lengthy 'Exceeding riches of grace advanced by the spirit of grace, in an empty nothing creature, viz. Mris Sarah Wight' (1647), first published when she was approaching sixteen years of age. The text also contains eyewitness testimonials, including that of her Independent, and later Particular Baptist, pastor, Henry Jessey, in whose name the book was published, corroborating the events which transpired chiefly between the years 1643 and 1647. The narrative gives little information about Sarah's early life except that for seven years her mother suffered from depression and terror of spirit, while living near Londonstone in London with her Irish maid. Unable to care for Sarah, Mary left her rearing to her mother-in-law, with whom Sarah grew up and was 'well trained up in the Scriptures' (Jessey, 5). Sarah was reunited with her mother at the age of nine. 
In 1643, while living with her now widowed mother at Lawrence Pountney Lane, London, Sarah began to suffer from deep despair and spiritual angst, a condition which worsened over time. Jessey visited their home almost daily and, during the next four years, witnessed more than sixty ministers try to alleviate Sarah's illness. In February 1647 Sarah's spiritual agitation intensified, spawning a rash of dramatic suicide attempts. She ceased eating and drinking on 27 March 1647 and was apparently struck blind and deaf the following month. At this time she began to have trances during which she quoted texts from scripture and expounded upon them as if from memory; visiting ministers recorded these expositions verbatim. She appeared to be dying, and by 19 April, with the restoration of her sight and hearing, she seemed at peace, assuring her mother that she would no longer do herself harm. On 27 April the first account of her experiences was published, and over the next few months friends gathered to celebrate the spiritual and emotional 'healing' that Sarah had experienced and to hear her quote passages of text, praise God for his mercies, and counsel others in similar circumstances. Theologians quizzed her upon doctrinal points, for explanations of difficult passages, and about the details of her trances. For sixty-five days Sarah fasted and remained in bed; on 11 June, following a dream that she would eat, arise, and walk again, according to the story in 'Mark' 5, she ate her first meal and was able to leave her bed. A fortnight later she was able to walk again, and during the next weeks she celebrated her recovery with friends and family, attended church, and recuperated in a country house at Highgate. By the end of September she was restored to health, with a revised second edition of 'The Exceeding Riches of Grace' appearing on 27 September. 
Nothing further is known about Sarah Wight and her later life. Her ecstatic experiences as a young woman demonstrate how, during the seventeenth century, pious Englishwomen, particularly among the protestant laity, sought outlets for religious expression other than monastic life. Women prophets, mystics, and theologians published personal accounts of deeply spiritual encounters, and it is within this context that Sarah's own narrative should be read. Her story proved particularly popular: several editions of 'The Exceeding Riches of Grace' were issued between 1647 and 1666, and the work was republished at least three times during the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 69144


Wilkinson, John (fl. 1652-1683), Quaker schismatic, was from Millholme, New Hutton, Westmorland. Little else is known of his background, except that he was a husbandman and was convinced by George Fox in 1652 near Sedbergh. As one of the early Quakers, he travelled with John Story of Preston Patrick from about 1654 to spread the Quaker message in the south and west of England, and the two were 'Instrumentall to Convince many in sevrall parts' and were 'greatly beloved of the Brethren', while in 'unity with the ffriends' (Penney, 267). In July 1654 he and Story wrote to George Fox from Cinderhill Green on the Yorkshire-Derbyshire border, relating details of their meetings in Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. They may have passed into Cumberland and Durham as an undated letter expresses their wish to visit these areas. In 1655 both were in Wiltshire, the centre of their early work, where they convinced several Baptists. Wilkinson wrote to fellow Quakers Edward Burrough and Francis Howgill, reporting that, 'Many falls from them; they have no courage left' (Braithwaite, 'Beginnings', 387). In the same year both Wilkinson and Story were imprisoned in Gloucester gaol and at some point in the 1650s they spent time in Bristol. A letter of 1655 suggests that Wilkinson was married, evidence reinforced by the Quaker digest registers which record the birth of Sarah Wilkinson on 30 January 1661 whose father was named as John Wilkinson of Millhome and member of Kendal monthly meeting. In 1662 Wilkinson and a fellow Quaker, John Audland, were arrested in Westmorland for refusing the oath of allegiance. During his imprisonment, Wilkinson wrote a short piece on persecution entitled 'Some queries to any that profess themselves Christians' which was included in Audland's 'The Suffering Condition of the Servants of the Lord' (1662). It is likely that he was the John Wilkinson who visited Ireland in 1669 along with William Penn, Solomon Eccles, and John Banks. 
About the end of 1672, Wilkinson rejoined Story, who was leading a group of dissatisfied Preston Patrick Friends in opposition to the movement's stance of meeting openly in defiance of the second 'Conventicles Act' of 1670. The breakaway group was also opposed to Fox's establishment of women's meetings and other Quaker practices such as the recording of papers of condemnation against errant Quakers, and the insistence that the tithe testimony should be upheld even if individual Friends did not feel moved to do so. It would appear that Wilkinson was initially reluctant to break with mainstream Friends as in October 1671 he had approved of the establishment of a women's meeting at Kendal 'for unity's-sake' (Wilkinson, 38), and the following year he had specifically criticized Preston Patrick Friends for neglecting meetings. Quaker records state that he 'at first seemed tendrly to accord with ffaithfull ffriends in Incorageing faithfull womens Meetings' and 'allso in ffriends Care and Inspection' and 'that all their Xtian [Christian] testemonys might be ffaithfully kept up' but eventually 'quickly Joyned' with Story after the latter returned from a visit in the south (Penney, 267). Even so, Wilkinson has been judged as playing a smaller role than Story in the events that followed and what was to become known as the Wilkinson-Story separation. 
In January 1675 Wilkinson and Story met George Fox at Worcester Castle to discuss the divisions, but soon after they openly separated from the movement. A paper condemning them was issued by the 1675 yearly meeting, and they refused to attend two further meetings which had invited them to Westmorland Friends. While in Bristol with William Rogers, who later wrote 'The Christian Quaker' (1680) in their defence, Wilkinson and Story were asked to attend a meeting at Draw-well in April 1676 with leading Quakers at which Wilkinson and Story maintained their reasons for separation but did admit to wrongdoing in opposing Friends 'in the practice of those things that they testify are commendable in the Church of God' (Braithwaite, 'Second Period', 306). The two then visited Fox at Swarthmoor but their resentment at the way in which mainstream Quakers had misrepresented their actions at Draw-well prevented a lasting reconciliation. After the 1677 yearly meeting issued another strong condemnation of the Wilkinson-Story separation, the Westmorland quarterly meeting removed meetings for worship from the homes of dissident Friends. A number of Quaker meetings thus became wholly separated and at Hutton, Wilkinson himself was apparently able to carry with him the entire meeting of about six families. 
Little has been recorded of Wilkinson in his later years except that he remained loyal to his friend John Story, who died in 1681. He wrote 'A brief relation concerning the life and death of John Story' in 'The Memory of that Servant of God, John Story, Revived' (1683), which also contained the testimonies of other sympathetic Friends. In his remaining years Wilkinson appears to have carried on travelling and holding meetings, visiting Reading in 1678 and Bristol about the same time. He seems never to have been reconciled with the rest of the movement: 'he was... laboured with and visited by sevrall Brethern, & sometimes seemed somewt softer, yet did not Joyne againe in unity' (Penney, 268). He is believed to have died and been buried at Kendal a few years after Story's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 69145


Yeamans, Isabel (1637x42-1704), Quaker preacher, was born at Swarthmoor Hall, near Ulverston, Lancashire, the third of eight children (seven sisters and one brother) of Thomas Fell (bap. 1599, d. 1658), judge and recruiter MP for Lancaster, and his wife, Margaret Fell (1614-1702), daughter of the Lancashire gentleman John Askew of Marsh Grange near Dalton in Furness. She became deeply committed to Quakerism in 1652, when George Fox first visited Swarthmoor Hall and converted Margaret Fell and her daughters to the new sect. By 1660 Isabel became an intermittently travelling Quaker. She was known to preach throughout her adult life at the meetings she visited across England. Her signature appeared on Quaker women's meeting records from Yorkshire to Somerset between the 1670s and the 1690s, and she corresponded with other Quaker ministers such as William Penn. 
In the summer of 1664 Isabel Fell married William Yeamans (1639-1674), a Quaker and merchant of Bristol. They had at least four children, three of whom died in childhood. When her mother married George Fox in Bristol in 1669 Isabel was present and signed the marriage certificate. During her married years in Bristol she helped set up the Bristol women's monthly meeting in 1671 in response to George Fox's circular letter sent out to encourage women to form separate women's meetings for business, which pronounced that men and women were 'helpmeets' for one another, and also in the wake of her mother's earlier call for women's rights in Quaker meetings in 'Women's Speaking Justified' (1666). The efforts of Isabel Yeamans and the Bristol women challenged the Bristol leadership and they did meet resistance. The (all-male) Bristol two-week meeting admonished the women for exceeding the boundaries of authority in forming their own meeting without their approval. The Bristol women acquiesced. 
William Yeamans died in 1674, after which Isabel returned to Swarthmoor and lived there for some time with her two surviving children, William and Rachel (an earlier William had died in 1666 and Margaret in 1674). While there she attended the women's monthly meetings. In June 1676 Rachel died at Swarthmoor, aged ten. A small note in the household account book of Isabel's sister Sarah Fell ['see under 'Fell, Margaret] of Swarthmoor, marks her passing, for 5's'. was paid to a friend for 'her paines about Rachel Yeamans when she died' (Fell, 'Household Account Book', 285). 
In the summer of 1677 Isabel Yeamans accompanied George Fox, William Penn, George Keith, and Robert Barclay to the Netherlands and then to northern Germany to visit small groups of Quakers living in the region, and in the hope of converting protestant sectaries to the Quaker 'Truth', as early Quakers termed it. The party visited Princess Elizabeth of the Palatinate, a learned woman who had shown some interest in Quaker thought in her earlier correspondence with Penn. Accompanied by Penn and Barclay, Isabel did speak during the visit with Princess Elizabeth, who was somewhat taken by her free manner of personal delivery. Fox did not attend the meeting, but rather wrote a letter which was personally delivered by Isabel to Princess Elizabeth. Fox was then fifty-three years old, and it is probable that his wife, Margaret, was concerned for his position in the Quaker leadership. Isabel Yeamans was chosen to accompany her stepfather in part for her reputation as an effective preacher, but she also acted as a support and representative for him in relation to the other influential Quaker travellers of higher social status. By the late 1670s Fox was yielding his 'primus inter pares' leadership role to younger men, some of whom were of higher social rank. 
Over her adult years Yeamans kept close contact with her mother and sisters. The Fell women exchanged continuous correspondence, purchased needed articles for one another when in London, and exchanged gifts and advice. The family correspondence between 1652 and 1704 resonates with affection, generosity, mutual concern, and an insatiable desire for news of one another. In 1689 Yeamans married Abraham Morrice of Lincoln, a well-to-do merchant who was an active Quaker in his monthly meeting in the south-west area of Lincolnshire. Both died in 1704, presumably at their home in Lincoln. The value of the Morrice estate is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 69146


Jones, Rice (fl. 1650-1663), Quaker schismatic, was a Baptist soldier from Nottingham prior to joining the Society of Friends. According to George Fox, Jones and John Trentam of Mansfield in Nottinghamshire left the Quakers in 1650 and 'drew a great company after them & opposed the truth' ('Journal of George Fox', 'Journal', 2.314). They held their meetings in the castle yard at Nottingham. When Jones was on his way to participate in the battle of Worcester the following year he visited Fox, who was then a prisoner at Derby. Having taken Fox's views about the primacy of the indwelling of Christ literally, he reputedly castigated Fox for having placed his faith in 'a man that dyed att Jerusalem & there was never any such thinge'. When Fox retorted that Christ had been persecuted by Pilate, the chief priests, and 'professinge Jewes', Jones labelled Fox a chief priest and insisted that prophets, apostles, and holy men suffered inwardly, never externally ('Journal of George Fox', 'Journal', 1.10-11). Fox blamed Jones and his followers for the erroneous accusation that Quakers denied the historical Christ. 
In 1654 James Nayler visited Jones, finding that in 'the things of god he is exceeding darke... many Confused words came forth, as swearing marry'. Although he apologized for offending Nayler, Jones saw no sin in swearing, nor did he repudiate oaths, without which, he argued, the 'heathen' would not believe Quakers (Swarthmore MS 3, fol. 75). About the same time he and his colleagues prophesied that Fox was at his zenith and would soon fall as rapidly as he had risen, and they distributed papers accusing the Quakers of improperly proclaiming their message in churches and markets. In an epistle to London Friends in 1654, Fox denounced Jones for having castigated the monthly meetings to assist the poor as 'moon-light Meetings'. Because Jones repudiated the Quakers' judgements and admonitions, which Fox claimed had been rendered in the spirit of God, he was denounced by the Quaker leader as a son of the devil and an opponent of gospel order (Penington MS 4, fol. 80). At Fox's invitation, approximately eighty of Jones's followers met with him at Nottingham in 1658. Similar efforts to convince the Proud Quakers, as Jones's people were known, were made by George Whitehead and Richard Hubberthorne, and in time some of them embraced mainstream Quaker tenets. 
There is no evidence to determine the number of Proud Quakers, who were probably so-called because they refused to humble themselves and follow Fox. All of the information about Jones and his adherents comes from hostile sources and should be assessed with caution. They reputedly embraced worldly customs and fashion, claiming they had the freedom to do so as long as they were inwardly committed to God. Some of them were known for their skill as wrestlers and football players, and Fox accused them of playing shovel-board on Sundays. Jones had no objection to taking oaths tendered by civil authorities, and Fox accused him of profanity. The opposition of the Proud Quakers to Fox's efforts to persuade Friends of means to assist their less fortunate fellow believers suggests that they were relatively prosperous. Fox sent a letter warning the Proud Quakers of their erroneous ways in 1660. Three years later Lodowick Muggleton referred to a society at Nottingham that comprised Quakers and followers of the mystic Jakob Boehme, by which he apparently meant Jones's group. When Jones's economic fortunes declined, he opened an alehouse, and his colleague Trentam, having turned from the Spirit to spirits, became an alcoholic. The Proud Quakers probably disintegrated in the 1660s, for Fox later observed that 'most of all there people came to nought but what turned againe to ffrendes & truth' ('Journal of George Fox', 'Journal', 2.314). 


@@@@@


doc= 69148


Henry Gosson (fl. 1601-1630), succeeded to the business and was admitted to the Stationers' Company on 3 August 1601. Henry's earliest publication entered on the Stationers' register was 'A Recantacon of a Browniste' (1 July 1606). During the early seventeenth century he had a shop on London Bridge and was busy producing broadsides until 1630. 


@@@@@


doc= 69150


Redman, Robert (d. 1540), printer, first comes to notice in a record of a fine paid for selling foreign books in 1521 when his freedom is described, as in his will: 'Stacioner and Freman of London' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/28, fol. 117'r'). He was assessed in the Middlesex lay subsidy of 1523/4 for $10 in the parish of St Clement Danes. The London stationer John Redman, who printed editions for him in 1534 and 1539, may have been a relation. Robert Redman operated his business from a number of carefully chosen premises. He began printing as well as selling books in 1525 at the sign of the George in St Clement's, outside Temple Bar. He was in the main a printer of law books, and adopted the same sign as his main competitor in this trade, Richard Pynson, the king's printer at the sign of the George in nearby Fleet Street. In 1527 Redman moved his own shop to Fleet Street, under the same sign, only 100 yards from Pynson. When Pynson died in 1530, Redman moved his business to Pynson's old shop. 
Redman was a prolific printer: 203 editions were printed for or by him between 1523 and 1540. He printed vernacular devotional manuals and other popular texts, such as herbals and saints' lives. Legal texts, however, comprised more than 60 per cent of his output. His use of Pynson's signs, and later devices, and printing material, were one way that he secured access to the legal book market, which was monopolized by the king's printers. In the 1520s Redman had issued editions of the 'Magna Carta', Thomas Littleton's 'Tenures', and yearbooks in direct competition with Pynson. This, and his encroachment upon his competitor's sign and shop, led Pynson to call him 'Rob. Redman, sed verius Rudeman' in his own 1520s editions of the 'Tenures'. In the 1530s Redman continued to compete with Pynson's successor as king's printer, Thomas Berthelet, by issuing further editions of the 'Tenures', as well as Christopher St German's 'Division betwene the Spirytualtie and Temporaltie', the 'Natura brevium', and law books by Anthony Fitzherbert, for which Berthelet apparently held privileges. It was perhaps at Berthelet's instigation that Redman was brought before the privy council on 15 May 1533 and bound over for 500 marks not to sell St German's work, or any other books privileged by the king. 
Redman was perhaps sympathetic to religious reform. He may have used a Wycliffite translation for parts of his 'Prayers of the Byble' (1535, 'STC' 20200.3), one of the earliest books of English scripture. He certainly printed William Hardy's Lollard 'Lanterne of Lyght' in 1535, and reformist material by John Frith in 1534. Redman's name appears in relation to an English primer in correspondence between Thomas Cromwell and Thomas Cranmer in 1537; a year earlier he printed a translation of a text by Erasmus that the reformist author Richard Taverner dedicated to Cromwell. In the latter year he was also commissioned to print a translation by another reformer, Tristram Revel, for presentation to Anne Boleyn, but the author was brought before the council and the edition cancelled. In 1541 the printer Robert Bankes was brought before the council accused of producing ballads by Thomas Smyth attacking Cromwell, and responses by William Gray accusing Smyth of popery. Bankes claimed that the broadsides had false imprints and had in fact been printed by Richard Grafton and Redman, who was by then dead; Grafton admitted the charge and was imprisoned. 
Redman died at some point between 21 October 1540, when he drew up his will, and 4 November 1540, when it was proved. Among his beneficiaries was Henry Smith, his son-in-law and a fellow printer of law books. He left the main part of his business to his widow. His first wife, whose name is unknown, died in 1537. His second became the first English woman to print books under her maiden name, Elisabeth Pickering (c.1510-1562), although by the time of her marriage to Redman she had already been married to a man named Jackson, with whom she had two daughters, Lucy and Elizabeth. In the nine months or so after Redman's death, Elisabeth printed at least thirteen editions that survive, eleven bearing her name. All her editions were from earlier Redman prints, mostly medical tracts and law books. She married again in 1541, about which time she sold her business to William Middleton. Elisabeth's new husband was William Cholmeley (died in or before 1546), a gentleman of Lincoln's Inn. Like Redman, Cholmeley mentions Henry Smith in his will, which was proved in April 1546. Alice Redman, later Alice Hilton, a daughter of Elisabeth and Redman, as well as Lucy and Elizabeth Jackson, are mentioned. Another daughter of Elisabeth and Redman, Mildred Hanbury, in disgrace after marrying under age, is not mentioned. William Cholmeley was freed as a member of the Stationers shortly before he and Elisabeth married. He may, at her instigation, have assisted with the unsuccessful 1542 charter of incorporation of that company. Following Cholmeley's death, Elisabeth married William's relative, Ranulph Cholmeley (died 1563), who, from 1554, was the recorder of London, and sometime counsel to the Stationers'. Ranulph was probably the author of the Stationers' successful charter of incorporation of 1556. It is likely that Elisabeth's own interest in the book trade is linked to the important role her last two husbands played in the Stationers' incorporation. Elisabeth died in October 1562, when the administration of her previous husbands' goods was granted to Ranulph Cholmeley. She was buried in St Dunstan-in-the-West Church; Ranulph was buried next to her when he died in late April 1563. His will, proved in May, gives some indication of Elisabeth's circle about the time of her death: among those named are William Roper, the printer Richard Tottell, and no fewer than three former lord mayors of London: Thomas Leigh, Thomas Offley, and William Chester. Her funeral service was held at St Margaret Lothbury and her body then carried for burial in St Dunstan-in-the-West, where her last husband was buried six months later. 


@@@@@


doc= 69151


Ann Mudd (b. 1612/13, d. in or after 1693) was married to Thomas Mudd of Rickmansworth. Both became followers of John Pennyman and were either disowned by, or left, the Friends. Isaac Penington wrote to Ann and Thomas in 1672 with regard to forsaking meetings and criticism of ministers. In 1673 instances of Quaker violence in meetings were described in 'Tyranny and Hypocrisy', thought to be by William Mucklow, which also noted that the Friends 'would not spare that grave ancient gentlewoman Anne Mudd, who being moved to speak a few words among them, before their speakers began, Thomas Matthews, who guarded the stairs, pulled her away by violence' (Mucklow, 15). In 1678 Mudd wrote 'A cry, a cry: a sensible cry for many months together hath been in my heart for the Quakers return out of that Egyptian darkness', in which she accused the leading Friends in London of 'unworthy dealings' with John Pennyman, and criticized Quaker central organization, urging them to 'ponder well what your meetings are for: are they not to exalt yourselves, and to make you seem more holy than you are?' (A. Mudd, 'A Cry', 1678, 4). The exact date of Ann's death is uncertain; however, she did write to the Pennymans on 10 April 1693 from Wilscomb, describing herself as eighty years of age and advising them that her health had dwindled, and that she believed she was close to death. 


@@@@@


doc= 69152


Mary Pennyman (1630-1701), was the sister of his first wife. She was born on 1 May 1630, the daughter of Edmund Heron, 'a gentleman of a good estate' and of 'great repute' who had incurred considerable losses following the execution of Charles I, and his wife, the daughter of Justice Wood of Woodborough (Pennyman, 'Letters and Papers', sig. A2'v'). She first married the Quaker Henry Boreman (died 1662), who had been imprisoned in London at Newgate 'for selling religious books' and who died there on 17 October 1662 (Besse, 389) leaving her with three children and pregnant with a fourth. Mary had kept an oil shop in Leadenhall Street, but decided to give this up in 1670, after which she went to live with two other widows in Tottenham. It is possible that one of these was Jane Ward Lead or Leade (1623-1704), the central figure of the Philadelphians, a mystical sect who followed Jakob Boehme's theosophy. It is thought that Mary dissociated herself from the Friends for some time after Boreman's death and may have held views similar to the Philadelphians. 


@@@@@


doc= 69153


Pope, Mary (d. 1653?), royalist writer, of unknown parentage, was married to John Pope (died 1646), a member of the London Salters' Company who served as its master for 1642. They were living in Friday Street, in the parish of St Margaret Moses, London, from at least 1622. Before John's death on 18 November 1646 the couple had ten children, the first of whom was baptized in 1622; as the parish records indicate, many of them died in infancy. 
Mary Pope began publishing pro-monarchist tracts in the late 1640s against significant obstacles, personal and political. Most of the information relating to her has to be culled from her three tracts: 'A Treatise of Magistracy' (1647); 'Behold, Here is a Word' (1648); and the second part of 'Behold' entitled, 'Heare, Heare, Heare, Heare, a Word or Message from Heaven' (1648). Pope began writing 'A Treatise', her first pamphlet, when she felt impelled by God to share her ideas with the nation. From auspicious beginnings in December 1645, however, she began to falter -- and the reasons she presents offer significant insight into her personal circumstances. In the first instance her health appears to have been very fragile, and indeed 'A Treatise' was reputedly dictated to another. Further difficulties related to the 'extraordinary change' she had in her own family -- possibly a coded reference to the death of her husband John ('Treatise', sig. C3'r'). The considerable problems encountered in the writing of this tract did not end there though: when the manuscript was delivered finally to parliament, on 6 January 1647, almost three years after Pope had begun to write, the Commons arrested the deliverer. According to one account, a comment in the newsbook 'A Perfect Diurnall' (number 232), Pope's manuscript had given parliament 'much discontent' (1870). 
Mary Pope's second and third ventures into print a year later in 1648 were therefore written despite the earlier opposition of parliament. Referring explicitly to her previous troubles, she observes, in 'Heare', that since 1647 she has 'laine among the pots, under disgrace, because of my book of 'Magistracy'' (p. 32). Her body of writing, though likely to be disliked by parliament because of its broadly pro-monarchical sentiments, is however anything but clear cut in its allegiances. She did reserve particular criticism for the Commonswealthmen, writing in condemnation of parliament's arrogance in waging war against God's divinely appointed monarch, for instance, and of the army's seeming contempt for authority. Throughout, she attempts to speak on behalf of the middle-ranking taxpayers -- people like herself -- who suffered during the troubles. But her support of the monarchy was far from absolute, acknowledging that the king had been manipulated by evil counsellors, and even blaming the monarchy for declining moral standards, as she perceived them. Overall, her position is more finely graded than the parliament gave her credit for. Furthermore, though the Popes' regular attendance at St Margaret Moses Church suggests religious conformity, Mary was critical of some aspects of church government. In the last quarter of the twentieth century Pope received more critical appraisal and her historical significance could not be better described than in the words of the critic Dorothy Ludlow, who suggests that Pope's work provides a window to a 'conservative, non-separating Puritanism' representative of 'thousands of men and women whose religiosity was of a non-militant nature' (Ludlow, 198). 
Mary Pope possibly died in Shinfield, Essex, in 1653, as on 26 September 1653 the administration of the estate of a Mary Pope was granted to Nathaniel, a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 69159


Lukis, Frederick Corbin (1788-1871), antiquary and natural historian, was born on 24 February 1788 at La Grange, St Peter Port, Guernsey, the last of the four children of John Lukis (1753-1832), captain in the Royal Guernsey militia, and Sarah Collings (1749-1816). His father having made a substantial income from privateering and from the lucrative wine trade, the family had a fine house built in the elegant Grange Road, leading out of St Peter Port. As a young man Lukis became interested in a wide variety of disciplines, including natural history, botany, geology, conchology, and science. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 28 April 1853 but never published in their journal, 'Archaeologia', although he wrote many letters to the secretary and other members. He served in the local Guernsey militia, which later became the Royal Guernsey militia; he became a colonel and served as aide-de-camp to the governor of Guernsey in 1820. In 17 February 1813 he married his first cousin Elizabeth Collings (1791-1865), with whom he had six sons and three daughters. In the same year he became a constable of St Peter Port. 
In 1811, while still a young man, Lukis was taken by Joshua Gosselin (1739-1813), an elderly cousin and a noted local botanist, to examine a chambered tomb on L'Ancresse Common. The tomb had been uncovered by soldiers working on the common to make a redoubt; they thought they had discovered an artificial cavern, and were digging through pottery and bones when Gosselin and Lukis arrived. It is said that the young Lukis went away with a human skull under his arm. This brush with the past at the age of twenty-three was the start of Lukis's lifelong fascination with archaeology and the natural sciences. Self-taught, he went on to discover, record, and protect as best he could the remains of Guernsey's heritage. Although to present-day archaeologists his methods may seem crude, he made meticulous notes and etchings, and left superb watercolour sketches, many of which were painted by his youngest daughter, Mary-Anne (1822-1906), who lived with her father and devoted much of her time to this exercise. Lukis also collected artefacts from these investigations, and in addition to the papers he published nationally on Guernsey his greatest endeavour was an archive called the Collectanea Antiqua, in which he recorded his excavations and fieldwork. This unpublished opus, in six volumes, is housed at Guernsey Museum together with a number of his letters, notebooks, and diaries; this body of work, amassed without the scientific basis of modern studies, still forms the basis for any serious study of Guernsey's prehistoric past. 
Lukis was also intensely involved in the study of local natural history and was the local secretary of the Botanical Society of the British Isles. From his studies in geology he left a collection of over 900 entries; the material collected by him, and later by his family, forms the nucleus of the collections of the Guernsey Museum and Galleries. He died on 15 November 1871 at his home, La Grange, St Peter Port. A local obituarist recorded: 'Like all true sons of science he combined the humility and simplicity of a child with the depth and wisdom of a philosopher. Never was he so happy as when unfolding to the youngest the interesting marvels of natural history, and many who are besides his own more favoured children, have received their earliest impulses and most abiding inspirations from him. ('Gazette de Guernesey', 18 Nov 1871)' Several of Lukis's children did indeed follow in his footsteps. His second son, John Walter Lukis (1816-1894), who moved to northern France, was a mining engineer and collected many geological samples; he also carried out a number of excavations in Brittany. His eldest daughter, Louisa (1818-1887), married her cousin William Collings, who was seigneur of Sark. She collected lichens, and over 1000 of her specimens are in the Guernsey museum collections. William Collings Lukis (1817-1894), the third son, was born and educated in Guernsey and is best remembered in England for his work on the megaliths of Great Britain and France; with his university friend Sir Henry Dryden he surveyed the megalithic monuments of Brittany. He was ordained in Salisbury in 1845, and after holding several livings in Wiltshire he moved to Wath in Yorkshire, where he carried out a number of excavations. He published a treatise on ancient church plate in 1845 and was a regular contributor to the journals of the British Archaeological Association and other learned societies. His collection of artefacts was bought by the British Museum after his death. Lukis's fifth son, Francois du Bois Lukis (1826-1907), a lieutenant in the 64th regiment and an archaeologist, was also born and educated in Guernsey. On his retirement from the army in 1870 he dedicated his time to archaeology, mainly excavating in Alderney. He inherited his father's collections and archive, and in accordance with his wishes bequeathed them to the states of Guernsey. The Lukis collection formed part of the nucleus of the present Guernsey Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 69160


Williamson, Laurence (1855-1936), crofter and antiquary, was born on 11 March 1855 at Linkshouse, Mid Yell, Shetland, the only son and the elder of the two children of James Williamson (1800-1872), postmaster and general merchant, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Gardner (1819-1906), a native of the island of Fetlar. He was a precocious pupil of Andrew D. Mathewson, an eccentric schoolteacher at East Yell. His family on both sides was full of lore and genealogies from Fetlar and Yell, and he revelled in them. His father, a reserved man, had an important influence on him. 'I was under a Medo-Persian law', Williamson wrote later, 'not [to] stir anywhere without leave nor meddle with anybody or anything but my own affairs.... Any deviation from this rule was strictly reprimanded.... In my sister it developed a spirit of resistance, self-reliance and independence.... Entirely unlike him... but bound hand, foot and tongue, I feared to ask the least freedom, otherwise I was kindly dealt with. Naturally I turned to this open pleasant field [of scholarship], away from the hedged and thorny; the result was I remained weak, handless, unmanly, while the understanding developed and knowledge was acquired. (Johnson, 18)' After his father's death Williamson left school and succeeded him as sub-postmaster. He became skilled in the use of the telegraph: Mid Yell was a busy herring port in the late 1870s and early 1880s. In 1884, however, he abruptly resigned his post and devoted the rest of his life to what might be called crofting. He frequently neglected his croft to make some mathematical observation, or collect and record some piece of local lore: in a letter of 1900, sprinkled (as was his habit) with local dialect, he told his sister how he: 'wrought hard at the lay [uncultivated] heads of rigs [small fields] 2 and 4 (counting from east), some 25 pace each, 6 days should have done me: but many interruptions, and yesterday mostly taken up winduing Scots-ets [winnowing Scotch oats] (9 bushel) and taking in ait-skroo [oat-stack] which mice had spoilt -- killed 29. Also last piece very bad sooriks [sorrel] so not finisht. (Laurence Williamson to May Williamson, 24 April 1900, Shetland Archives, D.7/9/9)' The scholars Karl Blind and Jakob Jakobsen, interested in Shetland lore and language respectively, were impressed by Williamson's scholarship. He happily shared his collections with them: Jakobsen's 'Etymological Dictionary of the Norn Language in Shetland' (2 vols., 1928-32), for instance, is full of his contributions. He himself found it difficult to record and arrange his work effectively. He transcribed words, definitions, stories, and conversations, using a phonetic system of his own, but he wrote in microscopic script on minute scraps of paper (one of his manuscripts, an A4 page, contains 20,000 words). He published little or none of his material, except for a few pieces of journalism and a short note here and there. 
Like many contemporaries, Williamson espoused views about 'race-type' and celebrated the Scandinavian ancestry of Shetlanders. 'After all', he wrote to his cousin in 1916, 'my mind turns with most liking to the Norse type, in spite of their want of philosophic thinking and their terrible persistence. Their simplicity, frankness, sincerity, and their depth and persistence of affections, their firmness and bravery when need is all are most precious, and their independence and love of freedom. (Johnson, 175)' At the same time he had reservations about British, and especially Scottish, influences in the islands; he and others saw these as ruinous. In 1897 he refused to attend bonfires in Yell commemorating Queen Victoria's jubilee because, as he said, it was 'an Established Church thing': 'I object to the jubilee and kingly craze as unpatriotic, seeing the destruction they have worked on Shetland and its institutions and its opposition to the Norse spirit' (Laurence Williamson to May Williamson, 22 June 1897, Shetland Archives, D.7/6/12). 
Just as most of Williamson's contemporaries looked on him as a curiosity, there is evidence that he himself felt out of place, in Yell and everywhere else. Writing to his cousin in 1901 he said: 'In bygone Yule-times... I have often wished you were here beside us. It is true there were rants [dances] almost every Yule-time, but I never went to them. I seldom felt more isolated than at Yule' (Johnson, 173). His main contacts with people were with a few select companions; during the last thirty years of his life he lived in poverty with his sister May. He died, unmarried, in Mid Yell on 25 April 1936, but had elected to be buried in the churchyard at Fetlar, the home of his ancestors. 
One of Williamson's companions, Laurence G. Johnson, became his fast friend, and, after his death, his literary executor. Johnson sifted through and preserved Williamson's manifold scraps of paper, which are now in the Shetland Archives in Lerwick. In 1971, following years of devoted work, Johnson produced a biography, 'Laurence Williamson of Mid Yell', which gives a vivid account of its subject's life and work. Johnson edited selections from Williamson's papers, and thus made them available to a wide readership for the first time; they reveal Williamson's philosophical and scholarly tone of mind and his sometimes beautiful use of the English language. 


@@@@@


doc= 69161


Williamson, John (c.1730-c.1796), smallpox inoculator, was the son of Andrew Williamson; otherwise his parentage and place of birth are obscure. From the late 1740s at least, Williamson lived at Hamnavoe, Esha Ness, in the north-west of the Shetland mainland. A tenant of the most prosperous merchant-landlord in the islands, Williamson had a reasonably sized farm by Shetland standards (10 arable acres), and was well placed geographically for deep-sea fishing, a condition of tenure in Shetland at that time. He married Christian Nicolson, and they had at least five children. 
Since 1700 the Shetlands had been afflicted by devastating visitations of smallpox, which (because of the islands' remoteness, and the inability of the inhabitants to acquire immunity) killed children and adults alike. These epidemics arrived every twenty years, and Williamson may have caught the disease himself, as most children did, in a particularly severe outbreak in 1740. There was no inoculation in the islands until 1758, and even then it was available only for the well-off. It was not until the late 1760s that popular inoculators began to practise in the islands. 
By that time Williamson was turning away from the sea to new interests. He seems to have succeeded in a series of occupations: he was, said an observer, 'a tailor, a joiner, a clock and watch-mender, a blacksmith, and a physician' (Dishington, 543). Williamson now turned his attention to inoculation. He used the not too invasive method perfected by his contemporary Daniel Sutton in Essex, with interesting local elaborations. To lessen the virulence of his smallpox matter he dried it in peat smoke and then buried it with camphor. He seems to have collected large amounts of matter, because there is evidence that he sometimes buried it for seven or eight years. 'This self-taught practitioner', wrote a local clergyman, 'finds from experience, that it always proves milder to the patient, when it has lost a considerable degree of its strength' (ibid.). Williamson rejected a lancet in favour of a home-made knife. With it he made the smallest possible incision in the outer skin of his patient's arm, without releasing blood, and inserted a tiny amount of matter. He immediately replaced the skin, and, said the clergyman, 'the only plaister he uses, for healing the wound, is a bit of cabbage leaf' (ibid.). 
Williamson was an extremely successful inoculator. There are reports that he inoculated several thousand subjects without losing a single patient. According to Arthur Edmondston, the son of Shetland's pioneer inoculator, Williamson 'met with such unexampled success in his practice, that were I not able to bear testimony to its truth, I should myself be disposed to be sceptical on the subject' (Edmondston, 2.87). For Edmondston: 'The most extraordinary part of the proceeding is, the purification of the matter, which, under his management, seems to resist the influence of powers which destroy the very contagion itself. Had every practitioner been as uniformly successful in the disease as he was, the small-pox might have been banished from the face of the earth. (ibid.)' The efforts of Williamson, and other plebeian inoculators in the Shetlands, had an important effect on the islands' demography and economy, which had been restricted by regular smallpox epidemics earlier in the century. 
In his later years Williamson was in business at Hamnavoe as a joiner-carpenter and tailor, but he also entered into contracts with landowners to inoculate their tenantry. He seems to have died on Shetland about 1796, and was buried in an unmarked grave in the churchyard at Esha Ness. The semi-derisive nickname bestowed on him during his life, and still used today -- Johnny Notions -- suggests that, notwithstanding his ability, his contemporaries were a little wary of the remarkable man who saved so many lives on the islands. 


@@@@@


doc= 69162


Churchill, Awnsham (1658-1728), bookseller and politician, was born on 2 May 1658 in the parish of St Peter's, Dorchester, Dorset, the son of William Churchill (1628-1706), of Dorchester, who was also a bookseller, and Elizabeth Awnsham (died 1714). He was apprenticed in 1676 to George Sawbridge, one of the principal booksellers in London, published his first book in 1681, and in 1690 entered into partnership with his brother John ['see below'] as booksellers and stationers at the sign of the Black Swan in Paternoster Row. Awnsham and John 'were of an universal trade', according to John Dunton who added that he 'was never concerned with any persons more exact in their accompts and more just in their payments' ('Life and Errors', 204). Two other brothers, Joshua (died 1721) and William ('c'.1657-1737), both became MPs. The Churchills were distantly related to John Churchill, duke of Marlborough, though Awnsham appears to have made little political capital out of the connection and indeed held strongly whiggish opinions. In January 1680 he signed, alongside a number of radical printers and publishers, a mass petition calling on Charles II to allow parliament to sit. He also seems to have held strong views on religious toleration. Two of the first pamphlets he published in 1682 pleaded, controversially, for moderation towards and concessions for nonconformists. 
Awnsham's political and religious views may have brought him to the attention of John Locke, whose publisher, book dealer, and financial agent he became; but they also embroiled him in controversy. In 1685 he and his brother William (with whom he was in partnership until 1690) were in contact with rebels who had fought for the duke of Monmouth. Awnsham subsequently visited the United Provinces where, according to a spy, he visited and had 'a great conference' with one of the most ardent supporters of revolution principles, John Trenchard. Returning to England, Churchill was arrested in 1687 for printing and selling 'Fagel's Letter', which outlined William of Orange's views on toleration. That tract had also been printed in the Netherlands by John Starkey, with whom Awnsham worked in partnership at the time of the revolution. In January 1689 he lent $50 to the prince, and soon thereafter began publishing Locke's works. His business was lucrative, and by 1694 he was able to invest $500 of stock in the newly created Bank of England. Churchill's standing with the 'true whigs' was sufficiently strong for him to have been approached in 1695 by Slingsby Bethel to publish the republican Edmund Ludlow's memoirs. Churchill found them an editor (almost certainly John Toland) only to find that Bethel both disliked the alterations to Ludlow's text and sought to regain possession of the manuscript through the courts. Churchill won and Bethel's death in 1697 allowed for the publication of the memoirs, albeit in a form shaped to the taste of later Stuart whiggery. Bethel was not the only one to have questioned Churchill's methods, for his friend John Locke also expressed reservations about the care with which Awnsham published his work but nevertheless thought highly enough of him to recommend that he should be consulted in October 1693 about the 'Licensing Act'. The philosopher encouraged and gave advice about the project which became Churchill's most famous publication, 'A Collection of Voyages' (1704). That year Locke summoned Awnsham to speak to him before he died and left $10 in his will, which also made Churchill a trustee. It also saw Churchill's publication of the first volume of Thomas Rymer's 'Foedera', which ran to sixteen volumes. Other important publications include an edition of Camden's 'Britannia', Bayle's 'Dictionary', Burnet's sermons, Sir William Temple's 'Miscellanea', and John Strype's 'Survey of London'. Although he was a devout whig, Churchill's publishing interests were diverse, and in October 1701 he joked with Locke that when he published Edmund Gibson's 'The Right of the Archbishop to Continue or Prorogue the Whole Convocation' he had become 'printer for the Church'. He was elected to the court of the Stationers' Company in April 1700. 
By 1704 Churchill was wealthy enough to buy the manor of Henbury in Dorset and to consider entering parliament under the patronage of Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of Shaftesbury. Although claiming that his decision to contest Dorchester was 'against my own judgment and inclination', perhaps because he suffered a 'lameness' in his leg (BL, Stowe MS 748, fol. 27), he could not 'but tremble at the thought of a Tory House of Commons' and decided that if honest gentlemen did not act 'the honest commonalty must be trampled on... I shall not think it very comfortable living in Dorsetshire when the T[ories] have got the possession of the country' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/24/20/208/214). Churchill became a freeman of Dorchester and was successful at the polls, though one disgruntled tory believed he was chosen 'only for want of a better' (MS Ballard 21, fol. 222). Classified as a low-church whig on lists drawn up by political observers, he was probably on the country wing of the party -- given that he was evidently an ally of Shaftesbury, and was not listed as one of those who supported the court over the 'place clause' of the 'Regency Bill' which aimed to limit the number of courtiers in the house. He was re-elected in 1708, but does not seem to have taken a very active role, failing even to participate in the passage of the 'Copyright Act' of 1710, though in 1708 he was an active supporter of the whiggish Bishop Nicolson in his attempts to legalize his control over his diocese. He continued to represent Dorcester until 1710; in that year his vote in favour of impeaching Dr Sacheverell prompted an address from the borough which condemned 'republican principles and anti-monarchical notions', and took another 'kick' at Churchill by declaring an intention to be represented 'by such as shall after their own heart be eminently loyal and perspicuously zealous' (Oldmixon, pt 2, 227). Defeated again in 1713, he made no further attempt to enter parliament. Churchill died, unmarried, on 24 April 1728, leaving $100 to his brother William and his property and extensive library to his nephews. His will referred to $4000 of stock in the Bank of England. One of his apprentices, Charles Rivington, was to follow his master in eminence in the trade. John Churchill (c.1663-c.1714) was very much the junior partner to his brother. His name does not even appear in the Stationers' Company apprenticeship books. Like Awnsham, John was on friendly terms with John Locke, and helped invest his money. The brothers' first joint publication was Locke's 'Second Letter Concerning Toleration'. Churchill's name last appears on an imprint in 1714, but his will (dated 10 September 1714) was not proved until 1716. He left Barkham Farm in Dorset to his eldest son, William, and provided for his other five children, two of whom followed him into publishing. His wife, Mary, was left an annuity of $160 p.a. and his brother Awnsham was made an executor. 


@@@@@


doc= 69164


Manson, (Thomas) Mortimer Yule (1904-1996), journalist and musician, was born on 9 February 1904 at Lerwick, Shetland, the third son and fourth and youngest child of Thomas Manson (1859-1941), a journalist, printer, and musician, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Cruttwell (1865-1954), a piano teacher and choral singer. Both parents were important influences on Manson, the Benjamin of the family, as he once referred to himself. Their house often swarmed with musical people and other local celebrities. Manson was educated at a small private school in Lerwick and then at the Anderson Educational Institute there. He shone in most subjects, and was devoted to art in particular. He eventually studied English and history at Edinburgh University, and prepared to become a teacher. But his return to Shetland in winter 1929-30 coincided with his eldest brother's departure for South Africa, and Manson took his place in the family printing works in Mounthooly Street, Lerwick. He succeeded his father as editor of the 'Shetland News' in 1941, and ran the paper until its demise twenty-three years later. He was conscientious as editor, as in everything else. However, there was an old-fashioned air about the 'News', and its political stance -- it had come into existence as Shetland's Conservative organ -- did not always commend it to Shetland's largely Liberal population. The Liberal 'Shetland Times' gradually ousted it. Manson's subsequent career, as a jobbing printer, was not prosperous either. When he retired, in 1977, he relaxed for the first time for years. 
During the 1980s Manson took up an entirely new career. For a few years after his retirement he had reported council meetings for Radio Shetland. In May 1982 he stood for election in the Clickimin ward of Lerwick, knocking personally on each door. He was duly elected. An independent councillor, in every sense, he took the work seriously, especially his position as chairman of the leisure and recreation committee. He liked to be busy: shortly after he left the council, in his eighties, he visited the employment exchange in search of a job. 
Manson was also a scholar. In the 1930s he was the founder of 'Manson's Guide to Shetland', a pocket-sized book for discerning tourists. He read up on current archaeological and historical work, and expounded it in his earnest way. An exacting critic, Bruce Dickins, described the 'Guide' as an 'excellent piece of work by a good scholar' ('Old-Lore Miscellany', 10, 1935-46, 290). Manson was also a staunch contributor of historical and political articles to the 'New Shetlander' and 'Shetland Life' magazines. His essay on Shetland's Spanish Armada shipwreck, written for a Festschrift for his friend Ronald Cant in 1974, was a characteristic piece of work. Ten years later another friend, Barbara Crawford, edited Manson's own Festschrift -- this time called a 'heidursrit', the equivalent Faroese word -- entitled 'Essays in Shetland History' (1984). 
Dear to Manson's heart was the fostering of contact between Shetland and the Scandinavian countries. In 1933 he accompanied a group of Shetland footballers to Torshavn in the Faroes, re-creating a link that had long been in abeyance. For the rest of his life he did his best to foster relationships between the two groups of islands. He played a key part in organizing the first Viking Congress, a meeting of Scandinavianists in Lerwick. A measure of his conscientiousness in everything he did is the fact that at one point he sent a telegram concerning an aspect of the congress at four o'clock in the morning. The congress, held in 1950, was a great success, the first of many. A year later Aberdeen University awarded Manson an honorary degree of doctor of laws for his achievement. 
Manson's chief love, however, was music. When he was thirteen he joined the Boy Scouts flute band and became besotted with that instrument. Almost self-taught, he was in demand to play it in the local orchestra, since Lerwick lacked flautists at that time. Eventually he taught local scholars and trained and led the Boys' Brigade flute band. When young flautists began to take their place in the orchestra, in the 1970s, Manson took up the violin. He was conductor of the brass band from 1959 to 1964, treasurer of the Lerwick Orchestral Society from 1937, and secretary from 1947 to 1989. 
Manson was active in numerous other ways. His campaigns to preserve the old flagstones on Lerwick's Commercial Street, and to restrain industrial depletion of sand at St Ninian's Isle, conducted stubbornly, became legendary. He was a devoted scouter. A tory for most of his life, he left the fold when the party began to look towards Europe, in 1962, and defiantly printed 'A Commonwealth newspaper' on the masthead of the 'Shetland News'. 
Mortimer Manson was shy, and sometimes a little gruff. Courteous and dutiful, he felt distressed if he thought that he had let someone down. His halting voice and sweet personality made a vivid and lasting impression on people both in Shetland and further afield. He died, unmarried, on 23 January 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 69166


Thomas, John Godfrey Parry (1884-1927), holder of land speed records, was born at 6 Grove Park, Wrexham, on 6 April 1884, the second son of John William Thomas, a curate, and his wife, Mary Parry. In January 1888 his father became vicar of Bwlchycibau, Montgomeryshire, and the family moved and remained there for the next sixteen years. He attended Oswestry School, and then in 1902 went to pursue a course in electrical engineering at the City and Guilds Engineering College in London, where he met Kenneth Thomson, his later collaborator. At the end of the course he spent some months doing research on induction motors under William Edward Ayrton (1847-1908), professor of electrical engineering, at Central Technical College, South Kensington, before becoming an apprentice in 1905 with Siemens Brothers & Co. Ltd, then with Clayton and Shuttleworth Ltd. 
In 1907 Thomas set up on his own, with financial help from his mother, and began experimenting on electrical transmission for motor vehicles. Kenneth Thomson's brother Hedley was persuaded to put up money to form two companies, Thomas Transmission Ltd and Thomas Foreign Patents Ltd, and over the next four years he developed the Thomas transmission, which was successfully fitted to various vehicles -- buses, trams, railcars -- and also began his long association with Leyland Motors Ltd, using their extensive workshop facilities as he outgrew his own. By 1914, however, it became apparent that the Thomas transmission, though efficient, was too expensive to be practical, given the improvement in diesel engines and the size and cost of the parts involved, and the companies were wound up. 
During the First World War Thomas advised the government on the design of aero engines. He was a member of a commission on tank design in 1917, the year in which he returned to Leyland, now with the title chief engineer. There he developed aero engines, but Leyland dropped the project after an unfortunate incident: the representatives from the Air Ministry arrived two weeks earlier than anticipated for a demonstration, and the engine seized. Back on auto engines, Thomas enjoyed the freedom of his new project: to design a luxury car without consideration of cost. His best-known model was the Leyland Eight, priced at well over $2500, of which only fourteen were produced (two went, with an engineer to explain them, to the maharaja of Patiala, and one to Michael Collins in Ireland, where it later took a bullet through the windshield). Some of its design features led to torsion springs, anti-roll bars, and vacuum-assisted brakes. One of the reasons, however, for his lack of commercial success was that as a designer he took on too much of the development work himself, rather than leaving it to draughtsmen and assistants, which slowed progress. 
In 1921 Thomas asked Leyland if he could race their cars, and after some dispute and on the understanding that it would serve to advertise their product, the directors agreed. His first race -- at Brooklands circuit on Easter Monday, 17 April 1922 -- was a disaster: clutch trouble meant that he stalled on the start line. His Leyland bosses were also less than impressed, as Thomas had stripped the car down from full regalia to racing essentials. By the end of this first season, however, he had gained three first places, eight seconds, and three thirds. The handicap style of motor racing at that time meant that many drivers were also attracted to record-breaking, and Thomas began working to that end; in November 1922 he broke his first record, for the 10 miles flying start, at 115 m.p.h. 
Thomas was spending more and more time at Brooklands circuit, and in early 1923, as a result of this and his commercial failings as a designer, Leyland issued an ultimatum, following which the two parted company. He moved into a bungalow inside Brooklands, where he could devote all his time to racing and record-breaking. He achieved some success with the modified Leyland Eight, but the turning point came when he purchased, for $125, a converted Higham special which had belonged to the late Count Zborowski. It consisted of a V12 Liberty aeroplane motor in a chain-driven chassis; Thomas added four Zenith carburettors and his own design of pistons, modified the body and tail, and christened it 'Babs', after a friend's daughter. 
When he was ready to attempt the land speed record, Thomas went to Pendine (Pen-tywyn) Sands on the Carmarthenshire coast, where Malcolm Campbell had set a record of nearly 151 m.p.h. in July 1925. Thomas's first record attempt at Pendine, in October 1925, was aborted owing to bad weather, and before he could make another attempt, Major Henry Segrave raised the record to 152 m.p.h. in March 1926. On returning to Pendine in April 1926, Thomas became the first man to break two world land speed records in two consecutive days (27 and 28 April), first to 169 m.p.h., then the next day to 171 m.p.h. Whereas Campbell had spent $9500 on his 'Bluebird', Thomas spent only an additional $800 improving 'Babs' to achieve similar success. During the next year he made modifications to 'Babs' and to the Leyland-Thomas, which was his rebuilt version of the Leyland Eight. He raced the Leyland-Thomas throughout the season, and won in his last race at Brooklands on 2 October 1926, and the same week broke records for the 500 km, 500 miles, and three-hour run in that car. 
On 1 March 1927 Thomas returned to Pendine with 'Babs', determined to beat Campbell's new record of 174 m.p.h., set in February that year, and possibly to reach 200 m.p.h. before Segrave had the chance at the end of March at Daytona. The weather was poor, and Thomas was recovering from flu, but on 3 March 1927, a cold wet day, he decided to go ahead. His first two runs were discounted because the timing device was inaccurate, but he reached almost 180 m.p.h. on his first legitimate run. The record depends on a two-way average, and he was on the second run when the offside driving chain broke, the rear wheel was torn off, and the car overturned, travelling over 300 yards upside down before coming to rest. Thomas was killed almost instantly, the first man to die in a land speed record attempt. 
Thomas was buried with his goggles at St Mary's Church, Byfleet, Surrey, on 7 March 1927 after a private service at the Hermitage, Brooklands. 'Babs' was buried under Pendine Sands, along with Thomas's leather coat, slit up to discourage souvenir hunters, and his driving helmet. In 1969 'Babs' was excavated and restored by Owen Wyn Owen, a lecturer in engineering at Bangor; it had been thought for many years that Thomas was partially decapitated by the driving chain, but Owen found that it was more likely that Thomas was killed by injuries caused when the car overturned. 
Throughout his career Thomas failed to get on with the press, and was considered misogynistic and sullen. He never married. He was a tall, stocky man with a heavy jaw, and had a sharp tongue, but was highly regarded by those who knew him well. At Leyland he was generous to employees and genuinely interested in their welfare. He loved children, organizing races and choosing prizes for them at the staff sports day, and after his death it was discovered that he had made regular donations to Great Ormond Street Hospital and Belgrave Hospital for children. 'Autocar' set up a memorial fund, and endowed a 'Babs' cot at Great Ormond Street. Although his name is not now the first remembered, he was commemorated on a Royal Mail stamp in 1998 as part of a series celebrating achievement in land speed records. 'Babs', meanwhile, is now on exhibition in winter at the National Museum and Gallery of Wales in Cardiff and returns to Pendine Museum for two months each summer. 


@@@@@


doc= 69167


Fleming, Alice, Lady Slane (b. c.1508, d. in or after 1540), conspirator, was the daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534), chief governor of Ireland, and his first wife, Elizabeth Zouche (died 1517). She was apparently the second of four daughters and a son -- Thomas Fitzgerald, known as Silken Thomas, the future tenth earl. She also had two half-brothers -- the elder of whom, Gerald Fitzgerald, later became eleventh earl of Kildare -- and three half-sisters, the children of her father's second marriage, to Elizabeth Grey, following her mother's death in 1517. She was raised in the earl's lavishly furnished castle of Maynooth. Successive earls of Kildare all had large families, and some of her kinswomen also proved adept politicians, notably her aunts Margaret, countess of Ormond, and Eleanor, wife of MacCarthy Reagh and then Manus O'Donnell, who harboured the future eleventh earl after the Kildare rebellion. Kildare practice was generally to marry their younger sons into the lordship's other leading families; but their daughters, including Alice's younger sisters, who married Brian O'Connor and Ferganainm O'Carroll ['see under 'O'Carroll, Mulroney] respectively, were frequently matched with Gaelic chiefs to strengthen the family's influence in Gaelic Ireland. 
Lady Alice Fitzgerald married her cousin James Fleming, ninth Baron Slane (1507/8-1573), son of Christopher Fleming, eighth Baron Slane, and her aunt Elizabeth Fitzgerald, probably in 1527 or 1528. James was nine when his father died in August 1517, and in January 1523 Kildare obtained his wardship from Henry VIII. Alice accompanied her father to court in December 1526, and they later stayed at the duke of Norfolk's house at Newington. Before his departure from Ireland, Kildare had arranged with his leading officials and advisers to use Alice as a 'prevy token' to indicate to them how well he was faring in the council's inquiries into his conduct as deputy. Accordingly, when Lady Slane, as she then was, arrived home without her father in August 1528, they knew the earl 'was not at his pleasour to come home' (TNA: PRO, SP 60/1, fol. 139). Allegedly, Kildare ordered her to procure his brothers and servants, O'Neill and O'Connor, to stir up war against the new deputy, the earl of Ossory; and 'upon hir arryvall, sche rod streth home to OConour is house, and had longe secrete comynycation' with her brother-in-law ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.147). Immediately thereafter O'Connor recommenced raids on the Englishry, and the earl's brother Sir Thomas Fitzgerald of Leixlip, captain in his absence, put up no resistance 'by reason of certain intelligence had with O'Conoghour, contrary to his allegiance' ('Calendar of Ormond Deeds', 1509-47, no. 144). In the inquiries which followed, Lady Slane, together with the earl's steward, Sir Walter Delahide, and his wife, was commonly reputed the chief instigator of 'O'Connor's wars'. The king pardoned her of all treasons and conspiracies with Irish rebels in June 1529, but when the earl was posthumously attainted of treason by the Irish parliament in May 1536 for his role in the 1534-5 rebellion, the attainder took effect from 8 July 1528 -- the date on which he had dispatched Alice back home. 
Neither Lady Slane nor her husband played a major role in the 1534-5 revolt, and so escaped attainder. Her date of death is not known, although she was still alive in May 1540, when granted the joint wardship of the future tenth Lord Slane. A Lady Slane was living in July 1561. 


@@@@@


doc= 69168


Butler, Margaret, countess of Ossory and Ormond (d. 1542), noblewoman, was the second daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare (1456?-1513), lord deputy of Ireland, and his first wife, Alison (died 1495), daughter and coheir to Roland Eustace, baron of Portlester. Margaret married Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond and first earl of Ossory (b. in or after 1467, d. 1539), about 1485. In March 1509 she and her husband were admitted to the confraternity of the convent of Osney, near Oxford. She exercised a personal role in aspects of the administration of the Ormond patrimony: in March 1515 and again in November 1516 she presided at hearings held in Christ Church, Dublin, regarding the earldom of Ormond being entailed to male heirs. In March 1517 she appeared in the presence of a notary and the bishop of Ferns at St Saviour's Church in New Ross, co. Wexford, with regard to a case concerning the disputed possession of a house in the town. 
Throughout her life, in her capacity as countess, Margaret Butler was party to successive indentures, bonds, and agreements concerning the transfer or ownership or custodianship of land, chiefly in counties Kilkenny, Tipperary, and Carlow. In 1526 letters patent were issued to Piers, earl of Ormond, and to his wife, granting them various castles, honours, and lands in counties Kilkenny and Tipperary to be held in tail male. Her preservation of Geraldine interests is evident in her interception of a letter written in 1525 by her brother Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare, to the earl of Desmond. In it, Kildare entreated Desmond to join forces with him, unaware, as he claimed, of the fact that Desmond was engaged in continental intrigue against Henry VIII at this time. In 1537 a grand jury of the commons of co. Kilkenny complained that Ossory, his wife, and their children indiscriminately imposed coign and livery exactions in their lordship. 
In his will, dated 28 May 1539, Piers Butler appointed Margaret his executor, along with two of their sons, Richard and James Butler, later ninth earl of Ormond and second earl of Ossory. In September 1539 she and her second son, Richard, were granted all profits arising from Piers's property since his death in the previous August. In April 1540 she was resident at Kilkenny and in May of that year she signed an indenture to secure one-third of the land which James Butler was to inherit. One gains some insight into the extent of her wealth from the terms of this agreement. She was to receive the castles, towns, and manors of Donmore, Donfert, Bennitsbridge, Ballykive, and Whitsbrownstown in co. Kilkenny, Tullow and Bynecorre in co. Carlow, and Killenaule in co. Tipperary. At that time she also presented James with Ir$100, twenty-four milk cows, and twenty-four stud mares. In July 1540 Margaret was in Waterford, from where she sent Henry VIII a gift of hawks. Up to her death she continued her personal participation in the administration of the Ormond estate. 
In the Jacobean era Margaret and her husband were celebrated for having brought civilization to Tipperary and Kilkenny and for having provided a good example to the inhabitants of both counties by bringing artificers from Flanders and other countries to make tapestries, cushions, and carpets. Margaret was patron of a school near the churchyard of St Canice's Cathedral, Kilkenny, and the reconstruction of Gowran Castle, co. Kilkenny, is attributed to her. Contemporaries acknowledge that the countess was the dominant party in the marriage. The ninth earl of Kildare referred to his sister as 'my lady, his [Piers's] wife, by whom he is only ruled' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', vol. 2, pt 3, 123). Richard Stanihurst's account is of a formidable woman whose husband governed well: 'through the singular wisdom of his Countess, a lady of such port, that all estates in the realm crouched unto her; so politique, that nothing was thought substantial debated without her advice. She was man like, and tall of stature, very liberal and bountiful.' He describes her as a sure friend and a bitter enemy, and praises her for having been 'the only means at those days whereby her husband's country was reclaimed from sluttish and unclean Irish custom to English habits, bedding, house-keeping, and civility' ('Holinshed's Chronicles', 6.280). Margaret and Piers had three sons, James (Piers's successor), Richard, and Thomas, and six daughters, Margaret, Catherine, Joan, Ellice, Eleanor, and Ellen. In her final years she is said to have lived in a manner 'most Godly, in contemplation and prayer, giving alms bountifully to poor and needy people' (BL, Add. MS 4792). The countess died in early August 1542, and was buried in St Canice's Cathedral, Kilkenny, along with her husband; their tomb is adorned by a mensa monument which portrays both as idealized in features. 


@@@@@


doc= 69169


Jacob Tonson the younger (1682-1735) began working for him. The younger Jacob was born in London, the son of Tonson's brother Richard, and over the ensuing fifteen years the younger Jacob increasingly came to run the daily affairs of the Tonson business, until the elder Jacob retired about 1718, with his trip to France in 1718-20 effectively easing him out of it. The younger Jacob had demonstrated energy and ability almost the equal of his uncle's: one of his most important achievements was the purchase of over 100 titles owned by Henry Herringman in 1707, a lot that included three plays by Shakespeare. The elder Jacob had also been actively trying to purchase Shakespeare copyrights, though the details of the sales -- and indeed whether some vendors actually owned the copyrights at all -- remain unclear. 


@@@@@


doc= 69171


Smith, Thomas (1547-1573), colonial adventurer, was born on 15 March 1547, probably at Cambridge, the illegitimate son of Sir Thomas Smith (1513-1577), the influential Tudor intellectual and courtier. Sir Thomas expected much of his only child and heir and dictated the course of his life. The awesome shadow cast by his indefatigable father obscures his early years. Thomas is known only to have accompanied him on his French embassies, and to have served as an officer in Ireland about 1568 before entering into the service of the earl of Leicester. His career began in earnest following his father's plan for a private colonial venture in the north of Ireland in the summer of 1571. 
In November 1571 Sir Thomas and his son received a substantial grant of land in the Ards, co. Down, and Upper Clandeboye, co. Antrim. Sir Thomas, then a privy councillor, secured this grant by offering independently to recruit colonists and privately fund the expedition. This was accomplished by the publication and distribution of a broadsheet and book appealing for subscriptions and volunteers. Sir Thomas was undoubtedly the ideological force behind both works, although they were attributed to his son. The intention of father and son was to expropriate the Gaelic clansmen in the area, thus liberating the allegedly tractable Gaelic churl who would remain to till the land. They supposed that the clansmen were the disruptive element in local society, whereas the peaceful, hard-working churl would acquiesce in English law and custom. These publications reached Ireland and provoked resentment from Sir Brian O'Neill of Clandeboye, the Anglophile chieftain whose lands had been granted to the Smiths. The administration at Dublin was less than enthusiastic about the plan and feared that outside intervention would cause a general rebellion in the north. The unexpected dispatch of Sir Thomas to France in December 1571 left the controversial and well-publicized enterprise in the untested hands of his son. 
Early in 1572 Smith began gathering volunteers at Liverpool, although his undisciplined handling of them soon caused the mayor to complain of their unruly behaviour. Smith further exacerbated the problems of the already troubled undertaking by tampering with the proposed structure of the colony. He attempted to sell to his friends thirty 'assistantships' allowing them wide powers in the colony. Sir Thomas disagreed with his son's changes and suspended the matter until his return. Smith had no recourse but to borrow money from both his father and London in order to keep the enterprise afloat. Sir Thomas rebuked his son for believing he had 'a bottomless purse or a mine to spend at his pleasure' (Dewar, 162). His return in July saved the enterprise from dissolution and his influence at court at last secured permission for the expedition to embark. The delays over the winter, however, had taken their toll and Thomas Smith set sail for Ireland on 30 August 1572 with but 100 of the 800 men he had gathered. 
Smith arrived in Ireland the following day to a cold reception. Fitzwilliam, the lord deputy, offered little assistance. He had not been consulted about the enterprise and did not favour the establishment of a virtually autonomous colony in Ireland. Penniless, Smith was forced to borrow wheat from Fitzwilliam and $100 from Lady Fitzwilliam. Two successive grants in late September, according the Smiths substantial powers, did not improve the situation. Smith sought a meeting with O'Neill, who had been most vocal in his opposition to the prospective colony. O'Neill declined and flatly refused to surrender any land to the brash outsider. Smith reluctantly travelled to Dublin to seek the advice of Fitzwilliam, who convinced Smith to allow the winter to pass before any further provocative movements were made. In October O'Neill, supported by rival Gaelic chieftains who also feared expropriation, ravaged the Ards. Irish hostility then ceased for the winter and O'Neill appeared receptive to negotiation. This, however, was a common tactic employed to frustrate and confuse the enemy. Smith, unlearned in Gaelic warfare, looked confidently toward the spring. Sir Thomas did not share his son's confidence and dispatched 250 soldiers in March. But the reinforcements never reached Ireland and Smith was left unaided. 
Smith enjoyed some success in early 1573, attacking O'Neill and negotiating the submission of the MacDonald chief. Fitzwilliam, fearing an Irish confederation, reluctantly granted him command of the Newry garrison to facilitate his offensive. His fears were confirmed when O'Neill burnt Carrickfergus in May. It was clear to all, including Smith, that the colony would not survive without reinforcements. He appealed for assistance but none was forthcoming. Following the mutiny of some of his soldiers, Smith wrote that 'envy hath hindered more than the enemy' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/40/75). His authority was further diminished by the dispatch of the earl of Essex to salvage Smith's enterprise and establish colonies in those lands where Smith had failed. Smith, however, could not be saved from the bitter enmity his expedition had caused. On 20 October 1573 an Irishman in his employ killed him with a gunshot at Comber in the Ards. What was to have been an exemplary venture ended in utter failure. The hapless Thomas Smith was at once the victim of his father's innovative but untested colonial ideas and his own ignorance of Irish affairs. His death shocked the Elizabethan court and moved a poet to compose 'The Tumulus of Thomas Smith Killed in Ireland'. 


@@@@@


doc= 69172


Campbell, Lady Agnes (d. in or after 1590), noblewoman, was the second daughter and fifth child of Colin Campbell, third earl of Argyll (d. 1529), landowner and administrator, and his wife, Janet Gordon. She was educated at the Scottish court, learning English and French. In 1545 she married James MacDonald of Dunyvaig and the Glens (d. 1565), chieftain, head of MacDonald south, and had sons Archibald, Angus, and Donnell Gorm, and daughters Katherine and Finola ['see below']. On 2 May 1565 Agnes's husband and his brother Sorley Boy were defeated by Shane O'Neill at Glenshesk and James died as a prisoner of Shane in August of that year. The position of Lady Agnes is well described by the historian J. M. Hill: 'Whether she possessed surpassing personal charm we know not but she could command the services of multitudinous redshanks... never was widow, therefore, more interesting in the eyes of Ulster lords than Lady Cantyre [Kintyre] and more than one Ulsterman sought her hand. (Hill, 'Fire and Sword', 148-9)' The killing of Shane O'Neill by the MacDonalds in June 1567 was followed by an apparent rapprochement between Sorley Boy and Shane's successor, Turlough Luineach O'Neill (c.1530-1595). Turlough Luineach looked to Archibald Campbell, fifth earl of Argyll, for aid and it came in February 1568 in the form of an offer of marriage with his aunt, Lady Agnes. 
Government military activity in Ulster and the dilatoriness of Argyll in supplying redshanks (highland Scottish mercenary infantry serving the Irish chieftains) for an Ulster incursion combined to delay the marriage until 1569. Before that, however, Argyll had come up with a new approach to his aunt's nuptials, suggesting to Sir Henry Sidney, lord deputy of Ireland, that Agnes would marry an Irish chief chosen by Elizabeth I if the queen would make a grant to her and her sons of the territory of the Glens of Antrim. This was unlikely to find favour with Sorley Boy who had sought a grant of the area for himself. In any event, before either Argyll or Sidney could further elaborate upon the scheme, Turlough Luineach and Lady Agnes married, with Captain William Piers reporting from Carrickfergus, co. Antrim, on 5 August that the lady had brought over 1000 redshanks with her into Ulster, while Sir William Fitzwilliam, vice-treasurer and lord justice, noted that they had spent fourteen days in celebration on Rathlin Island in Antrim. From this marriage Lady Agnes had one son, Art. 
Lady Agnes's actions suggest that she felt her interests and those of her sons were best advanced by Turlough Luineach's success. Although Sorley Boy encouraged him to invade the English pale in 1569, Turlough Luineach did little more than keep the English busy while forcing agreements upon several Ulster chiefs and accruing considerable plunder to himself. In December 1569 Sidney wrote that Turlough Luineach was about to 'sunder' from his wife. This may have been wishful thinking for although by April 1570 Agnes was in Scotland, it was to procure redshanks on Turlough Luineach's behalf. The following year she was in Scotland again, intent on the same task but this time followed by Sorley Boy, apparently to prevent her augmenting her husband's forces. On 20 January 1571 Turlough Luineach came to an agreement with the government which, if it conferred no special advantage upon himself, at least left Sorley Boy no better off. 
In December 1572, as an English colonization project threatened Ulster, Lady Agnes departed to Scotland with a large number of redshanks in her train. Again, the government placed its trust in 'discord' between husband and wife, but Lady Agnes seems simply to have exchanged some of her husband's forces for fresh men. Certainly, Turlough Luineach substantially increased his Scottish forces from early 1573, continuing to hold these at full strength as Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex, attempted to support the colonists. In May 1574 Sir Brian mac Phelim O'Neill, chief of the rival O'Neills of Clandeboye, surrendered Clandeboye to the queen's forces but Essex admitted in October that Turlough Luineach's strength remained intact. Following the attack on Rathlin in July 1575 and Essex's withdrawal from Ulster, Sorley Boy and Lord Deputy Sidney reached an agreement in October 1575 which included the revocation of a number of colonist grants and recognized Sorley's claim to the Glens. It remained to be seen to what degree Sorley Boy could enforce this provision against the counter-claims of Lady Agnes and her sons. Turlough Luineach had meanwhile succeeded in enhancing his position by skilfully measured shows of strength which ultimately cost him little and in this process the efforts of Lady Agnes in Argyll had been invaluable. 
Turlough Luineach regularly employed Lady Agnes as his delegate in meetings with government officials; from 1575 this was even more frequent. This ploy enabled him to distance himself from negotiations, rendering escape from agreements all the more easy should he deem it necessary. In June 1575 he sent his wife to treat with Essex, extracting considerable land grants and permission to refuse to meet any governor against his will. In November Turlough Luineach and Lady Agnes both met Sidney. He offered to submit to Sidney in return for an earldom and lands promised by Essex, while Lady Agnes requested recognition of the claims of her sons to the Glens. Her demeanour was noted by one of the officials: 'She is a very nobell wysse woman and as dutifully uses herself to further the Queenes service as if she weare a naturall borne subiecte' (TNA: PRO, SP 63/53/69). Despite Sidney's demands, Lady Agnes continued to organize the dispatch of Scottish mercenaries to Turlough Luineach and it is clear that the lord deputy considered her an important political figure in her own right, and no mere cipher of her husband. This view was shared in 1579 by his colleagues, Sir William Drury, lord justice, and Sir William Gerard, lord chancellor. In September 1579 Turlough Luineach refused to deal with the queen's representatives save in the presence of his wife. 
Lady Agnes's diplomatic skills and military connections continued to be indispensable to Turlough Luineach throughout the 1580s. Though no longer young, she still travelled regularly to Scotland to ensure that support there was continuously maintained. A letter by Arthur, fourteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, lord deputy, during his encampment at the River Blackwater in August 1580 described vividly the skill of husband and wife as joint negotiators. He got an agreement but could neither commend the 'surety of it nor honer', nor had he secured the rebel William Nugent who had fled to Turlough Luineach for protection (TNA: PRO, SP 63/85.5). As she pressed her husband's interests, Lady Agnes continued to support those of her sons. By 1575, she believed Sorley Boy to be a serious threat to them and in January 1577 induced Turlough Luineach to decline negotiation with Sidney until he should agree to 'repel the Scots' and assist her sons in their ambitions to become chiefs in Antrim. Articles were signed in the autumn of 1584 between Sir John Perrot, lord deputy, and the Irish privy council, and Lady Agnes's younger son Donell Gorm for a grant of the former Bisset lands in the Glens, followed by a similar agreement with her son Angus in August 1585. In 1586 Turlough Luineach employed Lady Agnes to represent him in talks with Perrot. In 1587 she travelled to Scotland to calm an outbreak of hostilities between her son Angus and MacLean of Duart. In March 1588 she went to Edinburgh to plead for Angus before James VI and at the end of that year was again to be found negotiating on behalf of Turlough Luineach. In Scotland once more in April 1590, she subsequently disappears from state records and died soon after. 




@@@@@


doc= 69173


Finola MacDonald (d. in or after 1610), noblewoman, was the second daughter of James MacDonald and Agnes Campbell. In 1569 she married Hugh Manus O'Donnell of Tyrconnell (died 1593), chieftain, sometimes known as the elder, son of Hugh O'Donnell. With him she had a son, Hugh, and a daughter, Nuala. As sister of MacDonald of Dunyvaig, she could bring Scottish mercenaries to the service of her husband and, like her mother, frequently negotiated on her husband's behalf. Michael O'Cleary, in his 'Life of Red Hugh', described Finola as 'much praised for her womanly qualities, with the heart of a hero and soul of a soldier' (p. 39). The historian C. Falls, however, observed that 'she exhibited a savagery of which no trace can be found in the record of her mother' (Falls, 82). She was credited with arranging the murder in 1588 of Hugh O'Gallagher, who had been implicated in the killing of her cousin, Alexander MacSorley. Later, considering that the O'Donnell castle at Donegal could act as a bridgehead for entry by English forces into O'Donnell country, Finola ordered the structure to be burnt. She showed a singular ruthlessness in advancing the causes of her son, Red Hugh O'Donnell, apparently ordering the death of Hugh, son of former chief Calvagh, to clear the way for her son to succeed to the chieftainship. In September 1590, while Red Hugh was a prisoner at Dublin Castle, Donnell, a son of Finola's husband by an earlier liaison, was killed at Derrylahan by Finola's forces. After Red Hugh's succession, as he was engaged in the Nine Years' War (1594-1603), he used his mother to speak for him in Scotland. During the war, Red Hugh's kinsman, Niall Garbh O'Donnell, deserted to the English side. After the flight of the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell from Ireland in September 1607, Finola contrived Niall Garbh's arrest for rebellion in 1609; he was incarcerated in the Tower of London where he died in 1626. Finola died some time after 1610. 


@@@@@


doc= 69174


Curwen, Thomas (c.1610-1680), Quaker missionary, was born in Baycliff in the parish of Aldingham, near Ulverston in Furness, Lancashire; his parents' names are not known. About 1641 he married 'a strict religious professor' (Backhouse and others, 200); the maiden name and parentage of his wife, Alice Curwen (c.1619-1679), Quaker missionary, remain unknown. The Curwens were converted to Quakerism about 1652 during George Fox's mission in Furness. In 1654-6 Curwen was numbered with twenty-six other Friends from Furness and elsewhere in Lancashire who were 'several times committed for speaking to priests and people in their public assemblies' (Nightingale, 35); in 1659 he was assessed for unpaid parish tithes at 12's'. -- though he had goods distrained to the value of $2 10's'. -- and was rounded up with co-religionists, 'Taken from their homes or from the market or their employment by a party of horsemen and sent to Lancaster Castle without any warrant' (Nightingale, 32). By 1663 Curwen was free but headed a presentment list of thirteen Quakers in Aldingham township. A further imprisonment in 1665 led to his involvement with other Friends within Lancaster Castle prison in a debate against the Baptist-Fifth Monarchist prisoner John Wiggan, and issuing in a published form (with an appendix by Margaret Fell) the Quaker riposte to a work widely distributed in north Wales and the north-west by Wiggan. 
From as early as 1660 Alice Curwen, who had by now emerged as a Quaker preacher, had felt a deep concern for Friends in the American colonies and the persecutions they underwent and, with their family grown, between 1676 and 1678 she and her husband undertook a mission to both Quakers and non-Quakers in Rhode Island, New England (in a critical period of Native American raids), and New Jersey. The Curwens were gaoled in Boston under Massachusetts law and publicly flogged, but went on to evangelize in Barbados among both the European and Afro-Caribbean populations. In one letter Alice reproved a plantation-owner for 'preventing thy Servants, whom thou callest thy Slaves' from attending a Quaker meeting: 'for I am perswaded, that if they whom thou call'st thy Slaves, be Upright-hearted to God, the Lord God Almighty will set them Free in a way that thou knowest not; for there is none set free but in Christ Jesus, for all other Freedom will prove but a Bondage. ('A Relation', 18)' Following their return to England the Curwens continued their preaching work in London, the south-east, and the east midlands, though retaining their links with Furness and especially with Swarthmoor. In the winter of 1677-8, when they were active in Huntingdonshire, Alice still gave their home as Baycliff and wrote a letter addressed to the Swarthmoor meeting. 
Though 'she seemed not very aged and but a few days before appeared a healthy strong woman' (R. T., 'A testimony concerning Alice Curwen', in 'A Relation', unpag.), Alice Curwen died in London 'on the 7th Day of the 6th Moneth' 1679, aged about sixty. Thomas Curwen contributed an entry in the obituary compilation in her memory, 'A relation of the labour, travail and suffering of that faithful servant of the Lord Alice Curwen', recalling her as 'a dread and a terror to the wicked where-ever she came... her children... were convinced by her wise walking before them' (Mack, 382). One of these children, Thomas, a Quaker London glover, maintained close business links with the Fells of Swarthmoor. Thomas Curwen died at Blackfriars, London, aged about seventy, on 1 August 1680, and was buried there. 'A Relation', which put together letters between the Curwens and colonial Friends, along with Thomas Curwen's 'Account of the suffgs. of Friends and breaking up a meeting in New England by warrant' and 'The sufferings of Thomas Curwen which he hath suffered for conscience sake towards God', as well as a record by the Quaker writer Rebecca Travers of Alice Curwen's peaceable demise, provided a retrospect over the heroic work of this early north Lancashire Quaker couple of modest farming folk, propelled into a transatlantic mission. 


