@@@@@


doc= 69178


French, Harold Arthur George (1900-1997), actor and director, was born on 23 April 1900 at 6 Herne Hill Road, Brixton, the son of Irish parents, William Joseph French, a journeyman optician, and his wife, Gertrude Lucy Brady. He was educated at Edge Hill College, Wimbledon. After answering an Italia Conti advertisement he was soon promoted from understudy to debut as Mamillius in 'The Winter's Tale' (1912) at London's Savoy Theatre, followed by a role in 'Twelfth Night' as a black page. He appeared with Noel Coward and Gertrude Lawrence at the Liverpool Playhouse and with Lewis Casson and Sybil Thorndike at the Gaiety, Manchester, before a Christmas revival of 'Where the Rainbow Ends' (1913) as Crispian Gray, which he reprised for the next two years. Numerous minor roles followed, including nine months with the Birmingham repertory, before he was called up in 1917, joining the Royal Flying Corps. 
After demobilization French was soon back on the stage, as both Athos and the Baron de Casterae in 'Cyrano de Bergerac' (1919) at the Garrick. Throughout the 1920s he was a familiar face, mostly in London but occasionally on tour, appearing chiefly in inconsequential light or musical comedy such as 'The Blue Lagoon' (1920) at the Prince of Wales, 'The Bird of Paradise' (1922) at the Garrick, and 'Good Gracious, Annabelle!' (1923) at the Duke of York's. He toured in 'By-the-Way' (1924) before appearing in it also at the Apollo and then in New York. And he appeared again with Gertrude Lawrence -- a favourite co-star in such fare -- as Jimmy Winter, in the Gershwins' 'Oh, Kay!' (1927) at His Majesty's. On 3 February 1927 he married Phyllis Marie Symondson (1901/2-1941), who acted under the name Phyl Arnold. They had a daughter, who was killed on her first flight as an air hostess. There were more light leading roles into the 1930s, including 'The Gay Princess' and 'Marriage a la mode' (both 1931), 'Whose Baby are You' and 'Night of the Garter' (both 1932), and finally 'Among Friends' (1933) for the Overture Players at the Piccadilly. Having made his film debut in 'Land of Mystery' (1920), by the 1930s he was appearing as an equally lightweight lead actor on screen, although perhaps only 'Night of the Garter' (1933), a reprise of his stage role, 'How's Chances?' (1934), directed by Anthony Kimmins, and 'The Girl in the Crowd' (1935), directed by Michael Powell, are really worth remembering. 
By now it was 'abundantly clear to him that neither his talents nor his inclinations fitted him for performing on the stage' ('The Times', 24 Oct 1997) and French switched to directing for the stage, commencing with 'Youth at the Helm' (1934). His first major success was 'French without Tears' (1936) at the Criterion. For some time its preparation and rehearsal seemed destined to fail but, coming together so well on opening night, it was a triumph, not least for its young author, Terence Rattigan. There was a greater certainty to French in front of the stage, and he directed another ten plays in the next five years, including 'Ladies and Gentlemen' (1937), Coward's 'Design for Living' (1939), and S. N. Behrman's 'No Time for Comedy' (1941). This latter title was sadly apt: his wife Phyllis was killed during the blitz in that year. 
French also gave up film acting, turning firstly to co-scriptwriting -- 'Accused' and 'Crime over London' (both 1936), 'Jump for Glory' (1937) -- and then to directing, making a good debut with 'The Cavalier of the Streets' (1937). His films were very English and, while making no masterpiece, he maintained a high standard of 'pleasing, unassuming, skilful entertainment' (Quinlan), partly thanks to his using the talents of such scriptwriters as Anatole de Grunwald, Terence Rattigan, and Roland Pertwee. Uncredited (as was David Lean), he co-directed 'Major Barbara' (1941) for its named director, Gabriel Pascal. Particular successes after this included the romantic comedy 'Jeannie' (1941), the excellent spy drama 'The Day will Dawn' (1942), 'Mr Emmanuel' (1944), and 'White Cradle Inn' (1947). The last was good but a box-office flop, but a big commercial success was the well-crafted 'My Brother Jonathan' (1947). Also successful were 'several warm and cosily amusing portraits of middle-class British family life' (ibid.): 'Dear Octopus' (1943), 'English without Tears' (1944), 'Quiet Weekend' (1947), and 'Isn't Life Wonderful!' (1952). He directed segments of three portmanteau films based on stories by Somerset Maugham, 'Quartet' (1949), 'Trio' (1950), and 'Encore' (1952), and was the unlikely director of 'Rob Roy, the Highland Rogue' (1953), a rather wooden version of the Scottish story for Disney. Although some television work followed into the 1960s, his last film was 'The Man who Loved Redheads' (1955), a final screen collaboration with Rattigan, who said of him, 'he had the kind of manners that are so good they are never noticed, intense liveliness of disposition, and as keen a sense of humour as I have ever encountered' ('The Times', 28 Jan 1998). 
French now returned to the stage, commencing with the melodrama 'Tabitha' (1956); at this time he directed Australian actress Mary Parker (died 1993) who later became his second wife. Among his later plays were 'Waltz of the Toreadors' (1958) from Anouilh's French original, 'When in Rome' (1959), 'The More the Merrier' (1960), and 'A Public Mischief' (1965). As late as 1971 French was touring in South Africa with 'The Winter's Tale' and 'The Merchant of Venice', himself playing Shylock in the latter. In later life he wrote two well-received volumes of autobiography, 'I Swore I Never Would' (1970) and 'I Thought I Never Could' (1973). As a younger man he had enjoyed golf, swimming, and punting. French died on 19 October 1997 at Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham. 


@@@@@


doc= 69184


Cummings, (Arthur Stuart) Michael (1919-1997), cartoonist, was born on 1 June 1919 at 99 Spencer Place, Leeds, the only son of Arthur John Cummings (1882-1957), political editor of the 'News Chronicle', and his wife, Nora Suddards, an artist. Following education at The Hall, Hampstead, London, and Gresham's School, Holt, Norfolk, he studied at Chelsea School of Art, London, where he was taught by Graham Sutherland and specialized in etching. It was there that in 1939 he drew his first cartoon for the left-wing journal 'The Tribune', edited by the future Labour leader Michael Foot. Cummings's studies were then interrupted by the Second World War. He was called up for service in the Royal Air Force and posted to the Air Ministry, where he put his artistic ability to good use as a draughtsman, drawing aeroplane parts for the duration. On discharge he resumed his arts studies at Chelsea and also his contributions to 'The Tribune', with Foot giving him regular work as an illustrator for the book-review page. 
In 1948 Cummings had just secured a post as art teacher at St Albans Grammar School for Girls, Hertfordshire, when his father suggested he apply for a cartooning position on the 'Daily Express', where he had learned that the regular cartoonist, Giles, was seeking relief from his demanding schedule. The proprietor, Lord Beaverbrook, a lover of cartoons, could see Cummings's potential, and he was taken on for a trial period by the paper's editor, Arthur Christiansen, who appointed him to alternate with Giles and as political cartoonist in place of the popular Strube, whom Christiansen had sacked the previous year after a disagreement. This could have served as an omen for Cummings, who was himself dismissed at the end of his three months' probation after finding it difficult to maintain a consistent level of originality. But Beaverbrook intervened and Cummings was reinstated. 
Apart from his responsibility as political cartoonist, the arrangement was that Cummings and Giles should share the regular production of editorial cartoons. They drew three cartoons a week each, with Cummings producing an additional one for the 'Sunday Express' from 1958. He also worked for 'Punch', originally signing himself A. S. M. Cummings but later simply Cummings; he took over its 'Essence of parliament' illustrations from A. W. Lloyd in 1953. That same year, while working in France, he met his future wife, Anne-Marie Monique Pittier, 'nee' Lethel ('b'. 1928/9), the daughter of Michel Henri Lethel, director of the French Red Cross. They were married at Kensington register office, London, on 23 March 1956, and made their home at 8 Falkland House, Marloes Road, west London. 
Cummings had at first adopted a delicate style in his work for 'The Tribune', but on the 'Express' progressed to a bolder technique, with an abundance of solid black areas. He roughed out his cartoons in pencil on A3 paper, producing usually six drawings from which the editor chose one, and used a dip pen and brush with Pelikan black ink on Daler board for the finished work. Like Stanley McMurtry ('Mac'), he often concealed an image of his wife in his cartoons. 
Cummings spared no one in his choice of political subjects, and though his Conservatism and patriotism led him to treat Winston Churchill and Margaret Thatcher with respect, others were less fortunate and were portrayed in a style that sometimes descended into crude caricature. Cummings was Churchill's favourite cartoonist, and claimed to be the only political cartoonist to have drawn every British prime minister from Churchill to Tony Blair. A distinctive feature of his drawings were the explanatory labels that he added, with hand-drawn speech and thought bubbles in the manner of Gillray and other eighteenth-century caricaturists. Some of his depictions were controversial. A 1960s cartoon showing a cargo-load of golliwogs arriving in Britain caused complaints, and print unions prevented publication of the Scottish edition of the 'Express' containing a drawing of President Brezhnev dressed as a Roman Catholic priest with a consignment of tanks marked 'IRA'. 
A long-standing member of the Garrick Club, Cummings was a founder member of the British Cartoonists' Association in 1966. He was appointed OBE in 1983. He died of cancer at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, on 9 October 1997. He was survived by his wife Anne-Marie, and a stepson, Jean-Marc. 


@@@@@


doc= 69185


Berni, Aldo (1909-1997), restaurateur, was born on 14 March 1909 in Bardi in northern Italy, the youngest of three sons of Louis Berni, the owner of the Louis Cafe in Ebbw Vale, Monmouthshire, which served meals consisting of soup, a joint, and two vegetables. Aldo's elder brother, 
Aldo Berni went to Britain when he was sixteen, as Louis had the boys educated in Italy before sending for them to join the family business (their mother stayed in Italy). When the Second World War came, his brothers Frank and Marco were interned. Aldo, who had a British passport, was called up but exempted to work at a nursery by day, while in the evenings he ran the business -- a chain of about six unlicensed restaurants in the west of England. In 1943 Aldo and Frank bought their first licensed restaurant, Horts, the best-known restaurant in Bristol, specializing in oyster soup and Dover sole. Two years earlier Frank had married Lina Allegri, the daughter of another Welsh Italian cafe-owner, from Llanelli; they had two daughters. On 15 January 1947 Aldo married Esme Neville de Clifford Clifton (1920/21-1995), daughter of Edward Hinton Clifton of Clifton, Bristol; they had one daughter. 
The brothers added more eating-houses to their chain, and when food rationing finally ended in 1954 and the British public went beef mad, the Berni boom began, and they instituted the famous 7's'. 6died set menu of steak, chips, peas, bread roll and butter, and pudding or cheese. This limited menu meant that no trained chef was needed, and most of the normal kitchen staff could be dispensed with. The cooking facilities needed were simply a central grill and a deep-fryer. The only important member of staff was the manager, who looked after the money and hired and fired the waiters. Quality was controlled by giving every establishment a 'bible', a large manual of instructions with every detail of the operation spelt out. The brothers replaced tablecloths with place mats and saved, it was said, $700,000 a year in laundry bills. They disliked written contracts and did business on a handshake; few suppliers ever let them down. Unusually for a British catering business, they encouraged their customers to complain if the standards of the food or service faltered, and were concerned that their clientele should perceive Berni Inns as giving good value for money. The inns were mobbed by beef-hungry customers, and the brothers converted as many pubs as they could get their hands on. 
The Berni Inns chain evolved and grew until it comprised 147 hotels and restaurants, including the New Inn at Gloucester, the Mitre at Oxford, and several in Japan. The biggest food chain outside the USA, it based its identity not just on the food and the brand name, Berni Inn, but on the furnishings and decor, which were intended to mimic the luxury of American steakhouses: red velvet, stout wooden chairs, and paper parasols for the puddings and the cocktails. Frank, the chairman of the company, was responsible for the strict cost controls that made the chain so profitable, while the more outgoing Aldo was the public face of the company. The Bernis were probably the first caterers to use management consultants in their business. Aldo was generous with his money and helpful to others entering business careers, and earned the gratitude of a large number of younger people. He and Frank took very little out of the business. Aldo continued to live in Bristol, in a four-bedroomed bungalow in Clifton (he spoke with a decided Welsh lilt, but was proud to call himself a Bristolian). He owned a Bentley, but drove it himself, and would do the washing-up if the machine broke down. A passionate golfer, he had a handicap of five, and was an avid reader, browsing in encyclopaedias in his leisure hours. He enjoyed good wine, good food (except for Indian), and dining out. The brothers became millionaires when they went public in 1962, but eight years later they sold out to Grand Metropolitan for $14.5 million. By then Frank Berni had already retired to the Channel Islands. Aldo Berni remained on close terms with Sir Maxwell Joseph of Grand Metropolitan, and continued in the business in a non-executive role until the late 1970s. Berni Inns were later sold to Whitbread, who amalgamated them into their own Beefeater chain in 1990. A contemporary and friend of Lord Forte, whose family had similar Italian roots, Berni said of the Fortes, 'They were talented; we were lucky' ('Daily Telegraph'). 
Aldo Berni was, above all, a family man. Sprightly, teasing banter was a feature of Aldo and Esme Berni's strong marriage, and he devotedly gave her part of his fortune. She died first, in 1995. When her will was published in May 1996, he was not surprised to learn that she left the bulk of her $4.8 million to a home for cats and dogs. About this time, he suffered a severe stroke, and moved into the Avon Gorge Nursing Home, North Road, Leigh Woods, Clevedon, Somerset, where he died on 12 October 1997. He was survived by his daughter and by both his brothers; Frank died at St Lawrence, Jersey, on 10 July 2000. 


@@@@@


doc= 69188


Bucker, George (d. 1543), religious radical, is first recorded in 1536 when he was in Padua with Reginald Pole and Alvise Priuli. He then tried to attach himself to Cosmo Gheri, bishop of Fano. He claimed to have been John Fisher's mass priest, and told Priuli many of Fisher's sayings. Bucker had begun by expressing 'certain depraved and heretical opinions especially against the unity of the church and the authority of the Roman pontiff' as well as condemning the reason Fisher had died, but when he saw that Pole and Priuli disapproved, he changed his opinion and gave them a 'discourse on both sides ['in utramque partem'] on papal authority' (Bodl. Oxf., Bodl. MS Ital. C. 25, fol. 147'r') that Pole thought he must have heard from Fisher. Gheri regarded Bucker's arrival in Fano as providential, since Pole had just asked Gheri to write Fisher's life. Bucker set down Fisher's opinions 'De oratione' ('On prayer'), 'De predestinatione et libero arbitrio' ('On predestination and free will'), and 'De potestate pontificis' ('On papal power'), the last only in a copy which Bucker had hidden in his house in England. Only the first of these is known, but many of Fisher's works were destroyed by his enemies. Along with discussions of the late bishop, Bucker spoke on the Pauline epistles. He told Gheri that after Fisher's imprisonment he adhered to Henry VIII but repented after the bishop's death, inspired by a vision of Fisher asking him about his desertion. He undertook a pilgrimage to Rome, where he attached himself to an Englishman, one of whose servants he killed. Gheri offered to secure absolution for him, and Bucker tried to enlist Ludevico Beccadelli's assistance. 
Bucker next appeared in Calais about the end of April 1538, looking for passage to England and calling himself Adam Damplip or perhaps just Adams. He was persuaded to stay and preach. Damplip alleged that he could have had a good living from Pole had he stayed in Rome -- Pole wished him to read there three times a week and sent money after him to get him back. This gift would become the fatal French crown that according to John Foxe led to Damplip's execution for treason. Foxe is one of the most important sources for the rest of Damplip's story, but his tale changed between the first edition of 1563 and that of 1570. Despite the alterations, Foxe's main story agrees well enough with Ellis Gruffudd's contemporary chronicle and other sources to make it possible to reconstruct Damplip's actions in Calais with fair confidence. 
Lord Lisle, the deputy of Calais, gave Damplip money and strong support, subsequently denying only that he had known that Damplip came from Pole. Lisle pronounced Damplip's sermon on the epistle to the 'Romans' the best he had heard, and he recommended Damplip to Archbishop Thomas Cranmer. The Carmelite prior John Dove by contrast attacked Damplip for saying that each Christian should understand the significance of the mass. On Whitsunday (9 June), Damplip preached at the destroyed site called Resurrection where a supposedly miraculous host had been exposed by royal commissioners. The council of Calais warned Cranmer's commissary John Butler on 19 June 1538 that Damplip should preach nothing on Corpus Christi (20 June) contrary to royal ordinances, and shortly thereafter he was summoned to England. He allegedly responded that he had a licence (from Butler) 'to tarry there as long as he would and to depart when he would' ('Lisle Letters', 5.186). A month later Thomas Cromwell ordered an investigation. 
No sooner had Damplip sent in a written opinion than he was taken to England by a member of Lisle's household, with a letter of recommendation from Butler to Cranmer. As soon as he arrived, Cranmer sent him first to Cromwell with a letter asking that he be allowed to return to Calais, and then to a committee of bishops. Warned by Cranmer that he was in danger of imprisonment, Damplip submitted a written statement of his opinions and escaped (according to Foxe), but nothing more happened until 1539. In the interval, Damplip may have taken service with Nicholas Shaxton, bishop of Salisbury, while Foxe asserts that he kept a school in the west country for one or two years. Then on 27 May 1539 Cromwell told the council of Calais that the allegations against Damplip did not amount to much. The council rejoined to Cranmer that Damplip 'preached here directly against the sacraments of the altar and baptism' ('Lisle Letters', 5.516), and a few days later Cromwell himself wrote that, if true, the articles against Damplip were 'very pestilent' and 'most detestable and cankered heresy' (ibid., 5.523). On 27 June Lisle and the council informed bishops Clerk, Sampson, and Rugg that Damplip had caused recent disturbances in Calais. They were especially concerned to discover whether anyone had heard him preach that 'the very body of God was not really and substantially contained in the sacrament... And the priest with his mumming cannot make a god' (ibid., 5.567). 
Almost another year passed, and then a royal commission was dispatched to Calais. It took sixty depositions and reported on 5 April 1540 that Damplip had engendered division. Lisle asked William, Lord Sandys, who was hearing depositions along with Sampson, to have Dove brought over to London to testify, and Sandys agreed. On 22 July Damplip was attainted of treason for his contacts with Pole. Most of the denouement comes from the 1570 edition of Foxe, drawing on the letters of John Marbeck who had been imprisoned in the Marshalsea with Damplip for about a month (Foxe says a year). Foxe's chronology is out by a year overall and by about a week in its essential details, but much of his narrative seems plausible. After Damplip had been in prison for about two years, at Easter (25 March) 1543 he decided Stephen Gardiner had forgotten him and wrote offering his submission. Gardiner replied by having him sent back to Calais. When the news arrived, Damplip discerned that it meant his death. Nevertheless he ate a hearty dinner, asking the keeper 'Do you think I have been God's prisoner so long in the Marshalsea and have not yet learned to die?' (Foxe, 'Actes and Monuments', 1583 edn, 1229). On 2 May he was taken to Calais, following orders from the privy council on 22 and 29 April about the manner of his execution. On 5 May he was hanged, drawn, and quartered. The parson of Notre Dame preached as directed, and Sir Ralph Ellerker prevented Damplip from speaking in his own defence. 
Volatile in his opinions in a way far from untypical of this period, Damplip illustrates the pervasiveness of Pauline Christianity in the early Reformation, as well as the degree to which it turned on questions of ecclesiology. His arguments in his interrogation of 1538 also had a significant impact on Cranmer's eucharistic theology. 


@@@@@


doc= 69189


Brook, Helen Grace, Lady Brook (1907-1997), advocate of birth control, was born on 12 October 1907 at the Chenil Gallery, 183a Kings Road, Chelsea, London. She was the eldest among the six children of John Knewstub, who ran the gallery, and Helen Harriett Hillier, an Irish artist's model. The gallery exhibited work by Knewstub's brothers-in-law Sir William Orpen and Sir William Rothenstein, as well as artists such as Augustus John and Helen Brook's grandfather Walter Knewstub, who had been a pupil of Dante Gabriel Rossetti. 
Helen's mother had converted to Roman Catholicism and sent her daughter to be educated at the Convent of the Holy Child Jesus in Mark Cross, Sussex. Helen loathed the Catholic church and once adult converted to the Church of England. After completing her education at seventeen, Helen had difficulty finding employment and briefly became her father's secretary at the Chenil Gallery. On 10 March 1928 she married (William) George Whitaker ('b'. 1902/3), violinist and leader of the Chenil Chamber Orchestra. In common with many young women of her generation she knew almost nothing about sexual behaviour, and found marriage a great shock. She had little time to adjust, as her first daughter Christine arrived in April 1929, following the failure of the couple's birth-control method, a device called the whirling spray; 'There was a rubber ball at the end, which you filled up with water', she recalled later. 'You put it inside you and squirted it and whirled it round' ('Daily Telegraph', 7 October 1997). The marriage was dissolved in 1930, as Helen discovered that, rather than being a round of glamorous concerts, life with a musician was 'exceedingly boring'. When Christine was two, Helen departed for Paris to paint, leaving the child for two years with John Knewstub, who was living in Hastings, having separated from Helen's mother. Helen spent about four years in France, keeping company with other English painters including Michael Salaman and Gwen John. Helen's second husband, Ralph Ellis (Robin) Brook (1908-1998), was a very conventional man and her life was very different following their marriage in 1937. Throughout the rest of her life Robin Brook provided his wife with emotional and financial support, and a place within the establishment. He had an illustrious career as a banker, and was appointed OBE in 1945, and a knight in 1974. The couple preferred to forget Helen's previous marriage and divorce, and Christine never felt welcomed by Brook. Helen had two further children, Sara ('b'. 1941) and Diana ('b'. 1943). As was usual for people of their social class, the two girls had nannies, and later went on to Roedean, an exclusive boarding school. 
Helen was an ambitious woman with a great deal of energy, which she channelled into voluntary work, joining the increasingly respectable Family Planning Association (FPA) in 1949. She began interviewing clients for the Islington branch in 1952, and became branch chairman eighteen months later. In 1959 the Marie Stopes Memorial Foundation board asked her to take over their nearly moribund clinic in Whitfield Street, London. This meant Helen was no longer bound by the FPA constitution, which forbade the provision of contraception for unmarried women, and a new evening session was quickly filled by female students from the nearby university. This was a radical step in the early 1960s, and the board was not told until eighteen months later, when they agreed that a young persons' advisory centre could be set up. In 1964 the first Brook Advisory Centre for Young People started work. In January 1966 the second centre opened in Walworth, followed by affiliated branches in Birmingham and Cambridge. 
The first clinic was a tiny operation, and saw only 564 cases in that first year when more than 63,000 illegitimate births occurred. The Brook clinics were important for helping to legitimize provision of contraception to unmarried women so that they could engage in sexual activity without fear of pregnancy. The double standard had always been dependent upon a proportion of sexually active women covertly engaging in sexual intercourse outside marriage. It was by openly treating this sexual activity as respectable, and deserving of society's support, that Helen Brook contributed to changing sexual mores. Part of her strength lay in the fact that, despite her unconventional past, and her young daughters, she argued that her goal was the prevention of unwanted babies. She believed in female equality, not in women's liberation, and she repeatedly insisted that the clinics did not encourage female promiscuity. The permissiveness that flowered in the late 1960s following the advent of the contraceptive pill shocked her. By the early 1970s the provision of contraception to girls under sixteen had emerged as a controversial issue on which the Brook clinics nevertheless took an uncompromisingly positive stand. 
Until losing her sight late in life Helen continued her activities, joining Family Planning Sales in 1972 and acting as chairman from 1974 to 1981. From 1980 she was vice-president of the National Association of Family Planning Nurses, and from 1987 she was vice-president of the national council of the FPA. Helen Brook was a magnetic companion, highly valued by those with whom she worked. Public recognition was slow to arrive and she appreciated her appointment as CBE in 1995. She died of a stroke on 3 October 1997, and was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 69194


Critchley, Macdonald (1900-1997), neurologist, was born on 2 February 1900 at 4 Lime Tree Villas, Ashley Down, Bristol, the son of Arthur Frank Critchley, gas collector, and his wife, Rosina Matilda, 'nee' White. Educated at the Christian Brothers' College, Bristol, he matriculated at fifteen at Bristol University. Too young to be admitted, he spent the following year studying German and Greek. In 1917 he enlisted as a private soldier and in 1918 became a cadet in the Royal Flying Corps. He returned to university after the war and graduated in 1922 with first-class honours, having found the time also to perform on stage in and around Bristol. 
After a brief period as a house physician in Bristol, Critchley moved to London, first to the Hospital for Sick Children at Great Ormond Street, then to the Maida Vale Hospital, and finally in 1923 to the National Hospital, Queen Square. He was trained there as a neurologist by physicians such as Sir Gordon Holmes, James Collier, Samuel Alexander Kinnier Wilson, and Risien Russell. In 1924, the year he proceeded MD, Critchley published seven papers, including three on disorders of movement and three on disorders of calcium metabolism. His interests then shifted to those which came to dominate his later work: in 1927 he published on defects in reading and writing in children, a prelude to one of his major books, 'The Dyslexic Child' (1970), for which he received the Sam T. Orton prize in 1974. It was Critchley who, in diagnosing dyslexia in Michael Heseltine's son Rupert, diagnosed it also in the father. 'You do realize that you are a classic dyslexic?' was his question, which confirmed what had been, with Michael Heseltine, a slowly growing suspicion (Heseltine, 14). He married on 16 April 1927 Edna Auldeth Morris (1899/1900-1974). They had two sons, the elder of whom was Sir Julian Michael Gordon Critchley (1930-2000), MP. Critchley's first book, 'On Mirror Writing' (1928), was published in the same year that he was appointed to the consultant staff at both the National Hospital, Queen Square and King's College Hospital. Elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians at the early age of thirty, he gave the Goulstonian lecture to the college in 1931 on the neurology of old age, a topic which sixty years later became a major concern of neurology. 
Increasingly in the 1930s Critchley's writings reflected a growing concern with higher cerebral function: the dementias, hallucinatory states, and aphasia. The Second World War radically, if temporarily, changed his direction. As surgeon captain he organized the neurological and psychiatric services for the Royal Navy. His observations in the Arctic and in the tropics provided the substance of his Croonian lecture to the Royal College of Physicians in 1945: 'Problems of naval warfare under climatic extremes'. After the war he returned to his clinical studies of higher cerebral function and in 1953 published 'The Parietal Lobes', a landmark in the field of cognitive neurology. 
Critchley was a brilliant teacher and was internationally renowned as a lecturer. His eminence in the profession was recognized by, among other things, his election as president of the World Federation of Neurology (1965-73). He was the first elected vice-president of the Royal College of Physicians (1964). He was appointed CBE in 1962 and retired from the National Health Service in 1965, but continued to see patients for another two decades. 
Critchley wrote extensively throughout his life. His essays were collected in three volumes: 'The Divine Banquet of the Brain' (1979), 'The Citadel of the Senses' (1986), and 'The Ventricle of Memory' (1990); they covered topics as diverse as self-portraiture, gesture, Indian mythology and dance, criminal trials, and human attitudes to the nose. Critchley wrote biographies of the two neurologists who had influenced him most: Sir William Gowers (1949) and John Hughlings Jackson (1998). The latter was written with his second wife, Eileen Audrey Hargreaves, 'nee' Bristow ('b'. 1926/7), whom he married on 23 April 1974, and was completed just before he died. 
Critchley's manner was that of the distinguished physician of the mid-twentieth century -- quiet, elegant, unhurried, and always civil. An apparent aloofness of manner reflected a natural reticence which concealed from most a concern for others prompted by shrewd insight into their personalities. He avoided any unnecessary movement and counselled against exercise. In later years in his office in Queen Court, he would sit surrounded by cushions in an armchair at his desk, in the side-shelves of which were memorabilia of Oscar Wilde, pieces from his collection of paste jars, and curious objects collected in the Far East. 
Critchley died suddenly on 15 October 1997 at his home, Hughlings House, Mill Lane, Nether Stowey, Bridgwater, Somerset, and was cremated. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 69196


Pelling, Henry Mathison (1920-1997), historian, was born on 27 August 1920 at 4 Curzon Road, Prenton, Wirral, Cheshire, one of the two sons of Douglas Langley Pelling, a stockbroker, and his wife, Maud Mary, 'nee' Mathison. He was educated at Birkenhead School (1926-39) and was elected to an open exhibition in classics at St John's College, Cambridge (1938). He matriculated in 1939 and was placed in the first class in part I of the classical tripos in 1941, whereupon his studies were interrupted by war service. The following year he was commissioned in the Royal Engineers. Having served in the Normandy campaign and the assault on Berlin (1944-5), he returned to Cambridge as an undergraduate (1946) and gained first-class honours with distinction (a 'starred' first) in part II of the historical tripos (1947). Under war conditions, he had qualified for the BA in 1942; he took his Cambridge MA in 1947 (incorporated as an Oxford MA in 1949), and was awarded the Cambridge PhD in 1950 and the LittD in 1975. 
In abandoning classics in favour of modern history, Pelling found his vocation. He now began research on the early history of the Labour Party, a field where triumphalist myth making yielded to his exact scholarship. 'The Origins of the Labour Party' (1954), reshaped from his PhD thesis, remains a classic pioneering study, built to last. From 1949 to 1965 he was fellow and praelector of the Queen's College, Oxford, living in college. His teaching covered both modern history and politics; a member of two faculties, he never agreed to become an examiner in either, preferring to put his research first. His move back to Cambridge in 1966, to the new post of director of research in the history faculty, acknowledged this priority. He had many graduate students and was a PhD examiner of formidable rigour, though he also showed real kindliness towards younger historians, many of whom became lifelong friends. While he was highly appreciative of female company, potentially uxorious, and fond of children, he remained unmarried. 
Pelling's books represent a scholarly achievement in at least two fields. Having made himself the unrivalled authority on the history of the labour movement, he branched out in the 1960s into the new field of electoral history. 'The Social Geography of British Elections' (1967) was the result -- still an indispensable handbook to further research. Curiously, Pelling saved his most exciting ideas not for his big books, but for a series of trenchant essays, often originating as after-dinner talks or seminar papers. This was the origin of his influential volume 'Popular Politics and Society in Late Victorian Britain' (1968). He became well known to generations of students through his 'Short History of the Labour Party' (1961), which went through eleven editions in his lifetime. 'The History of British Trade Unionism' (1963) was likewise updated many times; and Pelling published early books on American labour history which blazed a trail for later historians. His biography 'Winston Churchill' (1974), though commercially successful (not least to the author), saw his talents less well matched to the subject. Accuracy always out-trumped rhetoric for Pelling. He liked to bet on election results, culminating in the general election of 1997, on which he made his usual healthy profit; and his shrewdness in managing money gratified him. 
The pace slowed only with his serious stroke in 1971, which left him permanently scarred despite a resilient recovery; after this Pelling seemed older than his years. His achievement was recognized, perhaps belatedly, by his election as fellow of the British Academy in 1992. He had decided to retire early from his university post in 1980 (having been promoted to a readership at Cambridge in 1976) but he continued to live in St John's College, where he had held a fellowship since returning from Oxford, occupying a succession of book-lined, paper-strewn rooms. Pelling continued writing 'my last book' on 'Churchill's Peacetime Ministry, 1951-55' (1997) which -- tenaciously, triumphantly -- he saw to publication in his final months. He had been admitted to the Midfield Lodge Nursing Home, Cambridge Road, Oakington, near Cambridge, and died there on 14 October 1997; the causes were given as congestive heart failure, ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, and myocardial infarction. A well-attended funeral in the chapel of St John's College on 22 October was followed by cremation at the Cambridge crematorium. 
Pelling's career was his life, and his work won the kind of esteem that mattered to him: the respect of professional colleagues for his reputation as the foremost empirical labour historian of his generation. Many people were surprised at the value of his estate, over $1.8 million; but it was totally in character that it was divided equally between his college and the Save the Children Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 69219


Campbell, Agnes (1637-1716), printer and book merchant, was born in Edinburgh in August 1637 and baptized there on 1 September 1637, the third daughter of James Campbell, a merchant of Edinburgh, formerly from Cumnock in Ayrshire, and Issobell, daughter of John Orr, merchant of Edinburgh. Agnes Campbell's sisters Beatrix and Jean were married respectively to the Edinburgh bookseller Archibald Hislop and to the Edinburgh goldsmith William Law, whose son John was the financial innovator responsible for the French economic crisis known as the Mississippi Bubble. In 1676 on the death of her husband, Andrew Anderson, Agnes succeeded as king's printer and printer to the burgh and university of Edinburgh; she generally used the imprint 'Heirs of Andrew Anderson'. Latterly she adopted the name Lady Roseburn after acquiring the lands of Roseburn, Dalry, to the north-west of Edinburgh. 

Andrew Anderson (c.1635-1676) was a son of the printer George Anderson and Isobel Aitcheson. George, famous as printer to the revolutionary Glasgow general assembly of 1638, was burgh and college printer for Edinburgh (1637-8), and first printer to the burgh of Glasgow (1638-47). He had died by November 1647, but his widow continued the business, first in Glasgow (1648), and then in Edinburgh (1649-53), at which point Andrew Anderson began running the press, which now took his name for its imprint. On 26 June 1656 he married Agnes. After returning to Glasgow (where he lived 1657-61), Anderson finally settled his family and press in Edinburgh in May 1661, and he was in 1663 appointed burgh and university printer on the death of Gideon Lithgow ('fl'. 1645-1662), at which time he became a burgess of the burgh by right of his wife, Agnes. He took advantage of the withdrawal from Edinburgh by the London Society of Stationers to purchase his appointment as king's printer in 1671, and the forty-one year patent was ratified by parliament in September 1672. Andrew and his partners were given unprecedented and controversial supervisory powers over the Scottish press; this began a period of trade dispute and litigation. However, in spite of his monopoly privileges, Anderson was heavily in debt at his death in Edinburgh on 1 June 1676. 
Thereafter, in spite of a shaky start, Agnes Campbell developed her press until it was the largest in Scotland in the early modern period. Even in 1678 she had no fewer than sixteen apprentices. As royal printer she was exempt from import and export customs and excise dues. She traded widely in books and paper, taking advantage of these exemptions, and she acted as moneylender to numerous book traders in England, Ireland, and throughout Scotland. Competitors in Aberdeen, Glasgow, and Edinburgh protested repeatedly against her extensive monopoly rights, and in 1681 persuaded the privy council to reduce her privileges to those of her husband's predecessors. None the less, she was a dogged and generally successful litigant throughout her career and she was able to restrict the liberties of competitors and especially her major rival in Edinburgh, James Watson the younger ('fl'. 1695-1722). Unfortunately for Campbell, she lost the most complex book-patent dispute of the time, which began in 1711. With her patent due to expire in 1712 she was unable to defeat Watson in the court of session when a new gift granted to Watson, the Jacobite printer Robert Freebairn ('fl'. 1701-1747), and the English royal printer John Basket clashed with an alternative patent to Campbell, Freebairn, and Basket. George I did his best to confuse matters, but finally in 1718 the House of Lords confirmed Watson's rights and by 1726 the Anderson press had closed and the family were in financial difficulties. 
Agnes Campbell's political and religious inclinations were establishment orientated. Hers was, nevertheless, the largest Presbyterian press in Edinburgh for her city competitors, Watson and Freebairn, were inclined to Episcopalian and Jacobite sympathies. In 'A brief reply to the letter from Edinburgh relating to the case of Mrs. Anderson, her majesty's printer in Scotland' (1712) she smeared Watson as a 'papist' and Freebairn as an educated drunk, but her motives were entirely personal and commercial, not idealistic. In fact, she was briefly censured by the revolution government in 1690 for being slow to take the oath of allegiance to William and Mary, her priority being, for the benefit of her press, to ensure she backed the winning side. Thereafter her long campaign to become printer to the general assembly, which lasted over two decades, ensured she took every opportunity to support Presbyterianism, though in a moderate manner acceptable in a government appointee. At last in 1712 she was appointed printer to the Church of Scotland. 
Historians' assessments of Agnes Campbell's personality have been too dependent on the bitter reflections of James Watson. The 'wicked widow' caricature emanates from Watson's disgust that a printer of such poor quality possessed the royal patent and also from his view that her extensive monopoly, and ruthless exploitation of it, gave 'the Art of printing a dead Stroke' and 'damp'd all ingenious Attempts of advancing it' (Watson, 11-12). Certainly Campbell protected her rights, restricted competitors, used the courts, printed propaganda, and produced counterfeit editions to undermine other licence holders, although her behaviour was typical not unique. One unbiased contemporary, Sir John Lauder of Fountainhall, simply stated that Mrs Anderson printed 'poor books' and that her patent involved 'exorbitant clauses' ('Historical Notices', 2.866; 1.393). Yet Campbell is remarkable for her business success, if not for the quality of her printing. She was not merely a successful woman in the masculine world of commerce, but she became uniquely wealthy for a commercial woman in Scotland who had not inherited substantial means. The value of her inheritance lay in the potential of her position and monopolies, and her subsequent rise was testament to her business acumen. 
Campbell's marriage to Andrew Anderson brought them at least eight children. Unfortunately, James, the only son to survive into adulthood, died in 1693, just when he was beginning to engage in the family business. On 22 March 1681 she married Patrick Telfer, Edinburgh merchant and widower. There were no children -- in fact the couple were estranged by the 1690s and she rarely used her second married name. When Agnes died, her book and paper businesses, including a large papermill established in 1706 at Valleyfield on the Esk waters of Penicuik, fell to her daughters and her sons-in-law. She acquired various properties in and around Edinburgh, some of which were tenements rented to members of the city's legal profession. The lands of Roseburn were acquired in 1704 and her further properties at Coats in Edinburgh and Cowdenknowes, Berwickshire, were acquired in 1710 and 1711 respectively. Her will and testament survive and at her death her estate was valued at $78,000 Scots, a very large sum in Scottish terms. Agnes died in Edinburgh on 24 July 1716, and was buried at Greyfriars churchyard there three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 69220


Bentley, Richard (bap. 1645, d. 1697), bookseller, was baptized on 18 December 1645 at Barton on the Heath, Warwickshire, the son of Thomas Bentley. Nothing further is known of his childhood or his parents' circumstances, but when Bentley was apprenticed for the term of eight years to James Magnes in March 1659, his father was described as 'gent.'. Magnes, of Russell Street, Covent Garden, was a member of the Merchant Taylors of London, but worked in the book trade. After his apprenticeship Bentley seems to have stayed on in the business as a journeyman and after the death of Magnes in 1678 went into partnership with his master's widow. When she died in July 1682, her part of the stock was left to her daughter Susanna, whose name appeared with Bentley's in the imprint of publications until 1689. In 1684 Bentley was made free of the Stationers' Company, and only then was he able to register titles in the Stationers' register under his own name. Throughout his career, Bentley worked from the address that Magnes had used, the Post House (or Office) in Russell Street. In August 1689 Bentley acquired a lease on a house in King Street, Covent Garden, and married Katherine Davis (died 1699) on 13 February of the following year. The couple had at least three children, Dawbenny, Richard, and Thomas, all three baptized in the local church of St Paul's, Covent Garden. 
Bentley published mainly, but not exclusively, novels and plays, which led John Dunton, a fellow stationer, to call him 'novel Bentley' (Mandelbrote, 56). He had varying percentages of shares in the copyright of many literary works such as Milton's 'Paradise Lost' and 'Paradise Regained' and some of Shakespeare's plays. Bentley often made up collections of novels or plays, which were sometimes no more than a reissue with a new title-page of unsold publications from the time when he and Magnes worked together. He frequently published works in association with other members of the book trade, owning only a part share in the rights. In one instance Bentley fell foul of the authorities over Gabriel de Bremond's 'Hattige', a satire on the conduct of Charles II, but the work was published nevertheless with a false imprint in 1680 and incorporated into one of Bentley's collections, 'Modern Novels', in 1692. 
Bentley died at King Street very shortly after his will was drawn up on 15 June 1697 and was buried in St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, on the 23rd of the same month. Probate was granted on 16 July 1697 to Katherine, whom Bentley had named executor and guardian of Dawbenny and Thomas; Richard junior presumably died before his father. Katherine sold the copyrights that Bentley had held on his publications and part of the stock to Richard Wellington, but kept the shop going until she herself died; she was buried on 16 September 1699. The one surviving child of the marriage, Dawbenny, died in May the following year. Administration of Katherine's estate was granted to Anna Davis, her sister. The shop passed into the hands of Edmund Rumball, a former apprentice of Bentley, who went into partnership with Wellington, bringing Bentley's assets back together again. 


@@@@@


doc= 69222


Brome, Henry (d. 1681), bookseller, was born probably in the early 1620s in Evershot, Dorset, perhaps the second of at least seven children of John Brome, of whom the eldest was Alexander Brome, the poet. The father was styled as a gentleman when Alexander was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1648, although confirmation of this family status has not been found. Henry Brome probably went to the local school, but at some point during the next twenty years the family moved to nearby West Milton, Dorset, as that was the paternal address given when, on 2 October 1646, Henry Brome was apprenticed to John Allen of the London Haberdashers' Company for seven years. He was freed on 14 October 1653. He followed his brother Alexander's example in marrying a bookseller's widow: by 27 September 1658 he had 'lately married' Joanna (died 1684), widow of Francis Leach (Stationers' Company, court book D, fol. 36'r'). On 22 May 1664, the Bromes' first child was born, a son, Charles, and on 28 April 1668, they baptized their second, a daughter, Allet. 
Henry Brome's name first appears on an imprint in 1656, with his shop at the sign of the Hand in St Paul's Churchyard; in 1658 he moved just to the north, at the Gun in Ivy Lane, where he remained until 1665. He was one of only a few booksellers who had been apprenticed to members of the Haberdashers' Company, from whom he may have gained special experience in auctioneering and making inventories -- skills that Brome was later called upon to use. In marrying Leach's widow, Brome did not gain Leach's bookshop as that went to Leach's son Thomas, but he did secure from Leach an association with the royalist author Roger L'Estrange which was to prove long and productive. In 1659 he was already selling the work of L'Estrange's brother Hamon, and during the winter and spring of 1660 he was helping to publish, anonymously, the prolific Roger, who later recalled of his many royalist works on the eve of the Restoration that 'honest Harry Brome got them printed too, to his very great Hazzard' (L'Estrange, 31). Especially in 1659-62 and again after 1678, L'Estrange benefited greatly from Brome's support of his energetic pamphleteering as well as his later journal 'The Observator', which Brome published in the last months of his life in 1681. In 1680-81 L'Estrange accounted for almost half the titles the busy Brome had in print, and the two were very closely associated in satirical attacks at this date, such as 'A Dialogue betwixt H.B.'s. Ghost, and his Dear Author R.L.S.' (1681). 
Including L'Estrange's many publications and republications, Brome's list averaged about twenty new titles a year, with the highest number appearing in the year before his death, when the lapsing of the so-called 'Licensing Act' and the exclusion crisis had much increased pamphleteering. Controversial works aside, his list is marked by a preponderance of religious, scientific, and literary titles, reflecting the work and the tastes of his clientele, who seem to have included many of 'the most important figures in the political, social, religious and intellectual life of Restoration England' (Mandelbrote, 74). Having left Ivy Lane early in 1666 for premises in Little Britain (first at the Dial, and then at the Star), Brome returned in 1669 to an address closer to St Paul's, where his shop at the sign of the Gun in Ludgate Street flourished, with the family living upstairs. On 2 October 1678, Brome applied (along with the bookseller Richard Chiswell the elder) and was admitted gratis to the freedom of the Stationers' Company. He was formally freed on 4 November and the next year was chosen as one of the company's renter wardens. Brome's prosperous business seems to have served its customers as something of a library. Brome was said to have given considerable support to L'Estrange, and his estate, less debts and charges, was valued at his death at $2785. He died at Ludgate Street about 11 May 1681. 
After Brome's death his wife, Joanna, took over the business until her own death late in May 1684, just before their son Charles reached his majority. Subject to prosecution in October 1681 for publishing a too controversial issue of 'The Observator', she was able to get her case transferred to the king's bench; again in 1683, she was presented to the London sessions, this time for printing 'The Observator' without licence, but that publication continued uninterrupted nevertheless. She had been accused of improper relations with L'Estrange, but he was notorious for his ways with printers' wives. She was styled 'rich and proud' in the correspondence of a disgruntled client (Raine MSS, G. Hickes to T. Comber, 17 Jan 1684) and came to marry her daughter Allet to Alexander Davenant, brother of Charles, with a portion of $3000. Charles Brome, who was freed by patrimony on 10 June 1684, kept up the business at the Gun in Ludgate Street. His publishing list recalls that of his father but later displayed Jacobite tendencies. In 1705 Dunton described him as 'a Genteel Man in his Garb, a Prudent Man in his Actions, and thriving Man in his Shop' (Dunton, 300). His last imprints are dated 1711-12. 


@@@@@


doc= 69225


How, John (c.1657-1719), bookseller and printer, was the son of Mary How. Little is known of How's heritage but the printer Job How was probably a brother, possibly a twin. John was bound as an apprentice on 3 June 1672 to the London bookseller and printer Benjamin Harris; the indenture recorded his mother as a widow of London. Job was bound on the same day to a different London printer. It appears that How was not trained as a printer, although this is at odds with his later criticism of those who print without serving an apprenticeship. Where book imprints lack a forename, it is difficult to distinguish John from Job, but before 1699 How probably worked primarily as a bookseller rather than as a printer; John Dunton notes in 1705 that How 'was a Bookseller for many Years, and now follows the Trade of Printing' (Dunton, 297). John and Job may have had some sort of business relationship, as they produced at least three works together. 
How's first publications appeared in 1680, during which year he was based successively in Mutton Court, Maiden Lane, and at the Seven Stars in Sweetings, or Swithins, Alley to the east of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, London. By the following year he had moved the Seven Stars to the south-west corner of the Exchange itself. By 1683, however, his imprints place him to the north of Bishopsgate, and in 1684 his sign was given as the Coach and Horses. 
At some time before 1686 How married Katherine, with whom he had at least three children: Job, Rachel, and Susannah. How then disappears from the records for over a decade, a gap which may be attributable to his political sympathies as a whig; Dunton claims that How had been 'a great Sufferer in King 'James's' Reign, and has had the FATE of being a Traveller' (Dunton, 298). How's re-entry into the book trade in 1696 was inaugurated by work jointly printed with Job, John Seller's 'History of England', and from 1697 until at least 1702 he was based in Ram-Head-Inn-Yard in Fenchurch Street. In 1700 he became quite active, printing at least ten original or subsequent editions of works by Edward Ward. 
During his career How commissioned or printed several weekly and bi-weekly newspapers, usually satirical and pointedly anti-Catholic. His first two publications were such periodicals: 'Mercurius Publicus', printed for How from 28 February to 18 March 1680, and the 'Catholick Intelligence', which survived only a little longer, from 1 March to 29 March 1680. On his return to the trade How printed the 'Weekly Comedy' from 17 May 1699 to 12 July of the same year. His most contentious periodical was 'The Observator', a publication commissioned by the whig pamphleteer John Tutchin, printed by How, and sold by the bookseller Benjamin Bragg; it first appeared in April 1702 and was at times associated with Daniel Defoe. In 1703 How's connection with it resulted in a proclamation by Queen Anne for his apprehension along with that of Tutchin and Bragg. Although 'The Observator' ran until 1712, How is associated with it only until 1704, perhaps falling victim to Tutchin's tendency to quarrel with political allies as well as opponents. Dunton specifically cites How's involvement with 'The Observator' as evidence of his awareness of developing trends in the book trade: How, 'being a great Projector... is like to encrease a pace' (Dunton, 298). 
By 1707 How had moved to Talbot Court, Gracechurch Street, where in 1709 he produced one of his final printings, his own pamphlet entitled 'Some Thoughts on the Present State of Printing and Bookselling'. His text is an invective against wealthy printers who pirate texts and freely vend their wares 'because they are rich' (How, 4). He concludes with twelve proposals for securing and protecting copyright laws. The pamphlet is dated 28 November, four months prior to parliamentary approval of the 'Copyright Act' of 1710. How's pamphlet must have been an irritation, both for the printers to whom he alludes and for those directly named. The proposals were essentially conservative, however, and failed to address two of the most controversial issues connected to the emerging copyright laws: time limits on a printer or publisher's right to print a particular text, and the developing debate over who is entitled to literary property rights. 
How was buried at St Benet Gracechurch, London, on 16 September 1719. Dunton describes him as ''Generous' and 'Franck', and speaks what he thinks; which... has given him an 'Honest Character'' (Dunton, 297). His will, dated 6 September 1719, was proved on 20 September 1720. A year after his death financial pressures led his widow to put the printing house up for sale. 


@@@@@


doc= 69227


Sawbridge, George, the elder (b. in or before 1621, d. 1681), printer and bookseller, was born at Hilmorton near Rugby, the son of George Sawbridge, a Warwickshire husbandman. On 19 February 1638 he was apprenticed to the London bookseller Edward Brewster, and after seven years won his freedom on 14 April 1645; about 1646 he also won the hand of Brewster's daughter, Hannah ('c'.1625-1686). When Brewster died in 1647, Sawbridge succeeded him within the Stationers' Company as treasurer of the company's joint-stock venture, the English Stock, a post he held for thirty-two years; he also served as master of the Stationers' Company for 1675-6. From 1647 he operated a shop at the sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill and sometimes sold books from his house on Clerkenwell Green. He was a leading publisher of medical literature, particularly the posthumous works and translations of Nicholas Culpeper, including a 1679 edition of the London 'Pharmacopoeia'. He also held shares in the chief publications of his day. He partnered with other printers throughout his career, including Edward Brewster the younger in 1653, and after the Restoration, Sawbridge was a partner in the king's printing house with Samuel Mearne, Richard Roycroft, and others. Ten apprentices were bound to Sawbridge over the years, including two Thomas Sawbridges (the first, probably George's brother, freed in 1666; the second, probably his son, freed by patrimony in 1685). 
In 1668, as an executor of the estate of the Cambridge University printer John Field, Sawbridge camouflaged his purchase of Field's printing materials and the leasehold of the university printing house, which still had thirty-four years to run. He paid John Hayes, whose appointment as new university printer Sawbridge had secured, to pose as the owner of Field's business, though Hayes was really only Sawbridge's agent. By company ordinance Sawbridge could not have simultaneously held his post as treasurer of the English Stock and university printer, and should have reported the profits on his Cambridge business to the English Stock account. In January 1679 Sawbridge's secret connection to Hayes was exposed, and he did not stand for another term as treasurer two months later. The company, astounded by Sawbridge's deception, duly revised its rules so that subsequent treasurers had to give up their bookselling businesses entirely and furnish $1000 in securities through guarantors from outside the company. Inventories of Sawbridge's property, mostly investments in the book trade, show him to have been a very wealthy man when he died in London in July 1681; his estate was valued at $11,000, plus a further $15,000 owed to him. In 1683 Sawbridge's widow paid the company $158, a sum that a committee investigating his Cambridge swindle had decided was due to the company. 
Hannah Sawbridge maintained the shop at the Bible for five years after her husband's death; her imprint can be found on fifty-two works. She and her son Thomas both died in 1686. The fellow bookman John Dunton remarked on four Sawbridge daughters provided for by their parents, but there was concern about the absence of lands for inheritance. Some confusion persists over the relationship of the Sawbridges to the bookseller George Sawbridge the younger, probably a grandson or grandnephew, who succeeded Thomas Sawbridge at the Three Golden Fleur de Luces in Little Britain, London, in 1692. Despite his misappropriation of English Stock moneys, the elder George Sawbridge left a reputation in the trade that prompted Dunton to describe him as 'the greatest bookseller that has been in England for many years' ('Life and Errors', 291). 


@@@@@


doc= 69229


Scott, Robert (b. in or before 1632, d. 1709/10), bookseller, was the son of Arthur Scott, clerk of York. Nothing is known about his early childhood or his education, but on 10 January 1649 he was apprenticed to Daniel Frere, a London bookseller. After two years he was turned over to the bookseller William Wells, and freed of the Stationers' Company on 31 March 1656. His name appears in imprints rather infrequently from the year 1661 with the address 'ad insignia' 'Principis' 'in vico' 'Little Britain' 'dicto', or in English at the Prince's Armes in Little Britain, London, which was to remain his address throughout his career. He was made a liveryman of the Stationers' Company on 20 April 1664. At some point he married a daughter of William Wells; this may have been the Elizabeth (died 1697) who was noted as Scott's wife in the marriage tax assessment for the London parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate, in 1695. 
The 1670s and 1680s were the busiest years for Scott as a publisher, judging by the number of publications that carried his name, although his total output was never as large as that of some of his contemporaries. He frequently published works in association with other booksellers, in the early years often with William Wells, his former master. His publications range from solid theological or scientific volumes such as George Bull's 'Harmonia apostolica' (1670) or Marcello Malpighi's 'Opera omnia' (1686) to popular literature, such as 'The Famous History of the Seven Champions' (1687) and 'Don Quixote' (1675). He also published several works written by John Evelyn. After the death of William Wells in early 1673 Scott went into publishing partnership with his brother-in-law, George Wells, but Scott was first and foremost a bookseller, selling books to people such as Samuel Pepys and Robert Hooke. Scott was considered the major importer of scholarly books in Latin from the continent and made frequent trips abroad to supplement his stock and to fulfil commissions given him by cherished customers such as John Cosin, bishop of Durham. In 1674 he brought out his 'Catalogus librorum ex variis Europae partibus advectorum' of well over 200 pages with about 6500 items. A large part of his stock (25,000 items in 8800 lots) was sold in 1688 in an auction organized by his former apprentice Benjamin Walford, but Scott retained a bookshop, possibly on a smaller scale, until at least 1692, when Pepys mentions to his friend John Evelyn that he has been in Scott's shop. An unwise association with Adiel Mill of Amen Corner, whom many considered to be a speculator, led to a substantial loss for Scott, who tried with several other of Mill's creditors to recoup some assets by selling off Mill's stock of books in 1691. 
Scott was the London agent of the Oxford University Press, for whom he published William Beveridge's 'Pandects', and of the Bodleian Library, selling them the manuscripts that had belonged to Lord Christopher Hatton, which Scott had bought after Hatton's death in 1670. He was an active and leading member of the Stationers' Company. He was elected to its governing body in June 1681 and, over the remainder of his career, fined for all the offices, including that of master of the company in 1691, when reference was made to his considerable deafness. No publications carry his name after 1706 and his last attendance at a company meeting was in November 1708; he may have retired to the country. He was buried on 13 January 1710 in the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate. His will, made on 4 February 1708 and proved on 17 January 1710, appointed as executors his eldest sons, Charles and Robert, and his daughter, Ann, who were to benefit equally from his estate; he also requested only a modest funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 69230


Simmons, Matthew (b. in or before 1608, d. 1654), bookseller and printer, was the son of Thomas Simmons (died in or before 1624), a husbandman from Middleton, Warwickshire. Thomas Simmons, the Quaker bookseller and husband of Martha Calvert, was not the brother of Matthew, as has sometimes been supposed. Matthew Simmons was apprenticed to the London printer John Dawson senior on 20 November 1624 and was freed into the Stationers' Company, when he would have been at least twenty-four, on 14 January 1632. He was active as a bookseller at a shop near Moorgate in London in 1634, when he took the first of six apprentices, and had moved to the sign of the Golden Lion in Duck Lane by the following year. In November 1637 he was in the Netherlands meeting Dutch booksellers; in the same year imprints locate his house in the Barbican near the Red Cross, and in 1640 he was in Goldsmiths' Alley in Red Cross Street. Most of the items he published before that date had been produced with his former fellow apprentice Thomas Paine, and in 1640 he became a partner in Paine's printing shop in the same street. 
Simmons was married by 1639 as that year he baptized a son, Lazarus, in St Giles Cripplegate; his wife was 
Simmons was a favoured printer for independents and radicals during the civil war period. Most notably, in 1643 he printed Milton's 'Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce', beginning a professional association between the poet and the Simmons family that would last over thirty years. Simmons himself printed Milton's 'The Judgement of Martin Bucer' (1644), 'Articles of Peace' (1649), 'Eikonklastes' (1649), and 'The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates' (1649), and he may also have been involved in the production of 'Areopagitica' (1644), 'Of Education' (1644), 'Tetrachordon' (1645), and 'Colasterion' (1645). Curiously, he entered 'Eikon basilike' in the Stationers' register in March 1649, although this was crossed out two years later. The registers of St Botolph, Aldersgate, record the death of Simmons on 19 May 1654; the administration of his estate was granted to his wife, Mary, although the date given (6 May) must be erroneous. 
Mary Simmons succeeded to Simmons's printing business and proved an active printer, entering titles in the Stationers' register and binding apprentices. Samuel was sent to the Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1656 before formally joining his mother's business, with his freedom by patrimony into the Stationers' Company on 3 March 1662. The two seem to have operated in partnership until at least 1673, with Mary being evidently in charge for at least part of that time. The hearth tax of 1666 noted that her establishment had thirteen hearths, making her printing house the largest such recorded on the tax roll, and a census made two years later of London's printing houses listed her as operating two presses with five workmen and one apprentice. 
Although Samuel's name appears as a printer on imprints from 1662 onwards, he did not enter a work in his own name into the Stationers' register until 1667. The work in question was 'Paradise Lost', the first Milton work the Simmons family had printed for nearly two decades. The publication was also notable for one of the earliest survivals in England of a detailed contract between author and printer, in which Milton received $5 in advance with a further $5 (and 200 copies) payable at the end of the first three impressions. Samuel also printed Milton's 'Accedence Commenc't Grammar' (1669) and the second and third editions of 'Paradise Lost' (1674 and 1678). He became a liveryman in July 1669. Jacob Tonson, writing later in the century, described Simmons as someone who 'was lookt upon an able & substantial printer' (Dobranski, 194). Simmons was also responsible for the ambitious attempt to publish by subscription a complete edition of Joseph Caryl's 'Exposition with Practical Observations upon the Book of Job', a work that his parents had published in parts from 1650. Mary assigned all her interests in Caryl's work to her son in 1673 and Samuel announced the proposed publication that same year; however, although the work appeared in two volumes during 1676-7, by 1677 Simmons acknowledged that the project had been 'long a doing... to the great vexation and loss of the Proposer' (Lindenbaum, 184). By 1690 the work was being remaindered. 
Mary Simmons died at some point between 24 December 1686 when she collected her annual dividend from her husband's share in the Stationers' Company's joint-stock venture and 11 May 1687 when the share was transferred to a new stationer. In her will, drawn up on 27 May 1684 and proved on 7 July 1687, she described herself as living at a farm in Dagenham, Essex, suggesting that she had retired from the printing business, probably about 1675. She left her estate principally to her son Samuel, who was to act as executor; however, although he was alive on 11 May, he too had died by the time the will was proved. 


@@@@@


doc= 69231


Fitzgerald, Elizabeth, countess of Kildare (fl. 1514-1548), noblewoman, was a younger daughter of Thomas Grey, first marquess of Dorset (c.1455-1501), and his second wife, Cicely Bonville, 'suo jure' Baroness Harington and Bonville (died 1530). Little is known about her early life. She attended Mary, Henry VIII's sister and wife of Louis XII, in France in 1514. Thereafter, as Henry VIII's second cousin, she acquired considerable experience of the Tudor court. At a banquet for Mary, now the dowager queen of France and married to Charles Brandon, at Greenwich in July 1517 she had a place of honour, and ten days later she acted as deputy for the Princess Mary at the baptism of the Brandons' daughter. She also participated, as one of Queen Catherine's retinue, in the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520. 
About 1522 Elizabeth married as his second wife Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare (1487-1534). The marriage was a means whereby the earl rebuilt his credit at court after a period out of favour, and Lady Elizabeth's mother and four brothers had all put up bonds for Kildare's appearance before the king in 1521. Subsequently, through the mediation of Cardinal Wolsey, the dowager marchioness had reached agreement with her son Thomas, second marquess, for a marriage portion of $1000 for the Lady Elizabeth and her three sisters. The countess returned to Ireland with her husband early in 1523 and immediately exerted her influence at court to support Kildare's position in Ireland. Writing from Maynooth in May, she sent Wolsey a partial but shrewd analysis of recent developments in her husband's feud with the earl of Ormond, while urging Wolsey to favour Kildare's suits at her instance and thanking him for reminding her mother concerning her marriage money: 'for as yet my sayd lord and husband hat not had enny gret proffyt by me, yet I find hym as good and kynd unto me alwes, as eny man may be to hys wyf' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 2.101). On another occasion she asked the earl of Shrewsbury to ignore false reports that Kildare was oppressing his tenants and usurping his privileges in Shrewsbury's liberty of Wexford. Kildare also began to use his wife's brother, Lord Leonard Grey, as an intermediary with the king and Wolsey. In 1531 Kildare secured a private act of parliament assuring his countess an annual income of Ir$200 for life from his estates, with a clause allowing her possession of the manor of Portlester after his death if she chose to live in Ireland. 
By 1533, with her husband now seriously ill from a bullet wound, the countess was increasingly concerned to ensure provision for her young sons, Gerald Fitzgerald (1525-1585) and Edward. Pointing out that Kildare had already provided for his heir and other children by his first wife, she petitioned the king for a 61-year lease for herself and Gerald of five royal manors in Meath, and she also approached Cromwell, asking Lord Leonard to have Cromwell 'labor this as secretely as ye can' because the earl 'wold be mor gladder to get these manors unto his eldest son' (TNA: PRO, SP 60/2, fol. 3). None the less, when the king sent for Kildare, the earl entrusted his wife with the delicate mission of conveying his excuses on grounds of illness. She reached court in early October 1533, but the king insisted on Kildare's personal appearance. Following his arrival and subsequent imprisonment in July 1534, Lady Kildare was initially prevented from visiting him, but as he lay dying she was allowed to visit freely. Her absence in England cleared her of any suspicion of involvement in the Kildare rebellion, but when Lord Leonard was sent to Ireland as marshal of the army (July 1535) and, later, governor (January 1536) she was thought to have great influence with her brother. Rumours in late 1535 that she intended to return to Ireland drew a warning to Cromwell from an old adversary of the earl that this could do no good. 
After her husband's death the countess lived quietly at Beaumanor, Leicestershire. She was associated with Princess Mary's household and with the conservative faction plotting against Anne Boleyn. The king eventually honoured her dower, despite the earl's posthumous attainder in 1536, and she received quarterly payments of 50 marks sterling even though the Irish revenues were sometimes overassigned. Her sons evaded Lord Leonard's arrest of Kildare's brothers in February 1536, probably with his collusion, and in July, as she notified Cromwell, Edward, then aged eight, was mysteriously deposited at Beaumanor during her absence. She was allowed to raise him. The elder son, Gerald, initially took refuge in the Irishry, later fleeing to the continent; but Irish officials believed she could have assisted in his capture. Following Henry VIII's death, the regime of Protector Somerset was more favourable to the restoration of fallen magnates and, with the privy council's encouragement, the countess wrote to her son, then in Italy, in January 1548. Observing that she had 'taken such care of you as never mother tooke greater for her childe', she undertook to get him his pardon if he would repent and submit, which would be 'to me an ende of muche care and sorowe', and suggested that the king might grant him an honourable living, ('APC', '1547-50', 540-42). He returned to England during the spring, conducted home by Lady Kildare's chaplain. In 1554, he was at last created eleventh earl of Kildare, but whether his mother lived to witness this is unclear. 


@@@@@


doc= 69233


Muir, Frank Herbert (1920-1998), writer and broadcaster, was born on 5 February 1920 in the Derby Arms hotel, 72 Margate Road, Ramsgate, Kent, the younger son of Charles James Muir (1888-1934), a steam tug engineer from New Zealand, and his wife, Margaret Webber ('b'. 1891). He was educated at schools in Ramsgate, Broadstairs, and Leyton, east London, before leaving at fourteen to join a firm of carbon paper manufacturers after his father suddenly died of pneumonia. A few years later, after the outbreak of the Second World War, he joined the RAF -- because, as he recalled in characteristically droll vein, it seemed to him 'that in the RAF I would get to sit down more' (Muir, 62). In the event he had to sit, stand, and fall, learning parachuting and photography. He was stationed partly in Dorset and partly in allied-occupied Iceland, where he gained his first experience of radio broadcasting and performing comedy sketches to troops in Reykjavik. He said he had had a 'soft war', never firing a shot in anger. 
Muir was demobbed in 1945. Having set his heart on a life in comedy and begun to gravitate to the Windmill Theatre like so many other future stars, he sent material to Ted Kavanagh, the creator of the wartime radio hit 'ITMA' who had subsequently founded his own company, Ted Kavanagh Associates, which trained young talent. Kavanagh used him to write for the rising comedian Jimmy Edwards in a comedy series called 'Navy Mixture'. The writer for the show's other star, Dick Bentley, was Denis Norden, a Kavanagh employee. Thus the two men first came into contact. They went on to forge, over more than fifteen years, one of the most productive partnerships in British comedy history, considered as synonymous with scriptwriting as Morecambe and Wise were with television. 
The first fruit of Muir and Norden's collaboration was a show commissioned by the producer of 'Navy Mixture', Charles Maxwell, 'Take It From Here', which ran on the Light Programme from 1948 to 1960 and broke new ground in its use of sophisticated wordplay and topical jokes and the way in which it acknowledged the literacy of the listener. One example of its wit was the line 'Infamy! Infamy! They've all got it in for me!', often recalled as a line first spoken by Kenneth Williams in a 'Carry On' film but actually created by Muir and Norden and first uttered by Dick Bentley, as Caesar, on 'Take It From Here'. Similarly, it was Muir and Norden who wrote the parody 'Bal-ham, Gateway to the South', which Peter Sellers made famous. The most famous part of the show, however, was 'The Glums', a lowlife family saga in which Jimmy Edwards was the male chauvinist pig of a father, Dick Bentley his moronic son Ron, and June Whitfield the perpetually swooning fiancee, Eth. 
Muir and Norden had much in common: both were former members of the RAF, both were extremely tall, and both were possessed of extraordinarily fertile minds and an apparently inexhaustible verbal dexterity. Muir was the elder by two years. They worked together in a small top room in the Kavanagh offices in Bruton Street, Mayfair, and developed an effective way of getting a lot of work done. They had only two chairs in their office, 'so that anyone dropping in for idle chatter became tired of standing after a few minutes, and drifted off' (Plomley, 146). 

'Take It From Here' became a huge hit. It made Muir and Norden hot properties. They wrote several radio series for the Canadian funny man Bernard Braden and his wife, Barbara Kelly, and were much in demand on television as it exploded in popularity. They created (in 1956) and wrote 'Whack-o!', with Jimmy Edwards as the conniving, cane-swishing headmaster of Chiselbury School. It ran for four years. They adapted Henry Cecil's 'Brothers-in-Law' (1962), giving the young Richard Briers his first leading role. They appeared together as rival panellists in two exceptionally long-running radio panel games, 'My Word!' (1956-90), famous for its tortuous puns, and 'My Music' (1967-91). They wrote for summer seasons and rewrote for comedy films. 
The 1950s, the main period of his partnership with Norden, was a happy decade for Muir. He married on 16 July 1949 Edith Ann Mary (Polly) McIrvine ('b'. 1925), a half-British, half-French former WRNS girl. They had a son, Jamie, and then a daughter, Sally. In 1953 they bought a former farmhouse in 2 acres of rough meadow in Thorpe, near Egham in Surrey, which became the family home and the heart of Muir's emotional security. In 1960 he and Norden appeared together as joint castaways on 'Desert Island Discs'. In 1963 he and Polly bought a holiday home on Corsica. 
In 1964, when the scriptwriting partnership with Norden was dissolved (though not their friendship), Muir joined the BBC as assistant head of light entertainment. Two notable achievements were his purchase of 'All Gas and Gaiters' (1967-71), an affectionate ecclesiastical situation comedy starring William Mervyn, Derek Nimmo, and Robertson Hare, and 'The World of Wooster' (1965-7), with Ian Carmichael and Dennis Price (unsurpassable as Jeeves), of which he was executive producer. 
After three years at the BBC Muir left to join a new ITV contractor, London Weekend Television. But when in 1969 a boardroom coup ousted its first managing director, Michael Peacock, he and other executives resigned in protest and he 'reverted to being self-unemployed' ('WW'). This was an unnecessarily self-deprecating assessment. Freelancing was what he was best at. He was in demand everywhere. On radio he made more than 100 editions of an anthology show, 'Frank Muir Goes into...', which he co-wrote with Simon Brett and presented with an old RAF comrade, Alfred Marks. On television he became a household name through the BBC2 word game 'Call my Bluff', in which he was a polished team captain for more than twenty years opposite Robert Morley, then Patrick Campbell, and finally Arthur Marshall. Making lucrative television commercials, he donned an Edwardian swimming costume for Hovis and sang 'Everyone's a fruit and nut case...' to the strains of the 'Nutcracker' suite to advertise a Cadbury's chocolate bar. 
None of this taxed Muir particularly. Behind the dandified, languid manner, the pink bow tie, and the pipe, was a self-taught, formidably well-read man and gifted writer. His literary output included an anthology entitled 'The Frank Muir Book: an Irreverent Companion to Social History' (1976); sixteen 'What-a-Mess' books for children about his family's problematical Afghan hound; 'The Oxford Book of Humorous Prose' (1990), which ranged from Caxton to Wodehouse; a novel, 'The Walpole Orange' (1993); and finally his warm and gentle autobiography, 'A Kentish Lad' (1997). He was awarded two honorary degrees, an LLD from St Andrews University, where he was rector (1978), and a DLitt from the University of Kent (1982). Muir and Norden were both appointed CBE in 1980. Muir's scholarship was also recognized when he was invited to become president of the Johnson Society in Lichfield for 1975-6; he argued in his presidential address that Samuel Johnson had a more pronounced sense of humour than either eighteenth-century manners or Boswell's biography allowed him to display. Not for nothing did 'The Guardian' call him a 'philosopher of laughter'. 
Anners, the house Muir had bought with his wife in the 1950s, was where he spent most of his time in his closing years and where he wrote his funny, modest, bestselling memoirs. He died there of heart failure on the morning of 2 January 1998; his wife and children survived him. He was buried ten days later in the parish church where he worshipped, St Mary's, Thorpe, and with him in the coffin his family placed a copy of the 'Sunday Times' review of 'A Kentish Lad', in which the reviewer had paid tribute to Muir's 'enormous fund of curious learning'. 


@@@@@


doc= 69234


Mary Simmons (d. 1686/7). (An earlier baptism of Mary, the daughter of Matthew and Mary Symons at St Olave, Silver Street, in September 1634 probably does not refer to the same couple.) The parish registers record the burial of another son in 1640 and the baptism of two more children, including 


@@@@@


doc= 69236


Samuel Simmons (1640-1687) who, although he was apparently born on 8 April 1640, was not baptized until 15 October 1643. At some point the family moved to Aldersgate Street; a daughter of theirs was baptized in St Botolph, Aldersgate, in February 1646. Simmons was made a liveryman of the Stationers' Company on 12 April 1647. 


@@@@@


doc= 69238


Starkey, John (c.1630-1690), bookseller, the son of George Starkey of Isley Walton, Leicestershire, was apprenticed to the bookseller John Saywell on 9 November 1646 and freed on 6 November 1655. The first publications that can be ascribed to him were printed in 1657 and he appears to have rapidly established himself, working from a shop in Fleet Street. In 1660 Starkey published George Lawson's 'Politica sacra', a work which, among other influences, drew on Machiavelli's notions of the disadvantages of unmixed forms of government. This Machiavellianism, the most important strand running through Starkey's output, can be discerned in another publication in 1660, James Harrington's 'The Rota'; but it also helps explain Starkey's publication of numerous books and pamphlets about law and European constitutions. He was thus responsible for works on the states of Venice, other Italian principalities, and the United Provinces. Starkey developed a particularly strong interest in the history of the Turks, perhaps as a sustained parallel with the perceived arbitrary government of Charles II, and in 1668 published Paul Rycaut's history of the Ottoman empire. Concern with European statecraft evidently provoked or reflected expertise in publishing translations of prominent European writers. All these interests were reconciled in Starkey's most important publication, in 1675, of the first printed translation of Machiavelli's 'Works'. Starkey may have made the translation himself, since the 1689 edition refers to the 'publisher or translator'. He certainly wrote a preface in which he praised both Cosimo de' Medici, whom he had met and supplied with books, and Machiavelli for his 'principles of religion', which were sharply critical of the 'priestcraft' that Starkey saw in the Restoration Anglican clergy. Starkey ended by exhorting his readers to absorb Machiavelli's message and to 'serve God, thy King and thy country with the knowledge he will teach thee'. Though Starkey himself may have had a hand in editing the 'Works' the honour has usually been given to Henry Neville. It was Starkey who published Neville's 'Plato redivivus' in 1681, an ascription which can be determined from the list of works recommended to the reader at the start of the treatise, all of which were published by Starkey. 'Plato redivivus' was the most subtle of the political theories spawned by the succession crisis of 1679-81, a careful reconciliation of republican ideals to monarchical government. 
By 1681 Starkey was already a marked man. He had come into conflict in the late 1660s with Robert Clavell over the rights to a catalogue of books called 'Mercurius librarius', the forerunner of the term catalogues. In 1671 he published Milton's 'Paradise Regained' and the politically charged 'Samson Agonistes'. But it was increasingly in the political sphere that he created disquiet. His bookshop had evidently become a focal point for news-gathering by 1675, a political watershed and the publication year of Machiavelli's 'Works', for the earl of Danby noted that Starkey received daily reports of 'all resolutions of Parliament that are either voted or are preparing for vote in either House, perfect true or artificially corrupted or penned by halves on purpose as may make most for the Faction'. Danby observed that 'ill affected citizens of all sorts' flocked to the shop (Browning, 3.2-3). Fortunately a series of newsletters written by Starkey survives in the British Library for the period 1667-72 and confirms the extraordinarily detailed accounts of parliamentary affairs that he was able to compile. Since Starkey was close to Anchitell Grey, an MP whose notes on debates were later published and who is mentioned by name in the newsletters, it seems likely that Grey was supplying the information to Starkey or that Starkey's sources were used by Grey to reconstruct debates. He is thus probably the 'Mr Starky' who was taken into custody, apparently for selling 'certain votes of the last sessions of Parliament without licence or authority' ('CSP dom.', '1673-5', 46). It also seems probable that the evolution of the Green Ribbon Club owed much to him, and that the gatherings of the 'ill affected' at his shop paved the way for more formal meetings there which we know took place by 1679 ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 21). Starkey's activities during the crisis of 1679-81 are on occasion hard to disentangle from those of Henry Starkey, a servant of the earl of Shaftesbury and Samuel Starkey, his nephew who was clerk to the radical lawyer Aaron Smith ('CSP dom.', 'July-Sept 1683', 41). Nevertheless it is clear from his publications that he was vehemently anti-Catholic and that he considered the market ripe for another edition of Machiavelli. In 1682 he was elected as a common councillor for Farringdon Without, earning for his efforts the description of 'as bad as may be' from one commentator (TNA: PRO, SP 29/418/145). Perhaps assuming that office gave him some protection from prosecution, Starkey revived a long-cherished project. In 1677 he had been arrested for publishing John Selden's 'Historical Discourse' (edited by Nathaniel Bacon), 'the contents whereof are of a very seditious nature' according to the warrant ('CSP dom.', '1677-8', 402). Four to five hundred copies had been seized and burnt 'to ashes' (ibid., 495). Yet Starkey's attempt to publish the work again in 1682 provoked a similar response. The government described it as 'dedicated to the service of a rebellion' and extracted passages to prove its anti-monarchical intent ('CSP dom.', '1682', 608). Starkey was indicted in December and he later recorded that 'the prosecution went on so rigorously that the Publisher, tho beyond the seas, yet willing to try the Cause, appeared according to the constant practice of the Court of King's Bench, by his Attorney, but for not being personally present in the Court (which was then impossible) he was by the Arbitrary Power of the then Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys Out-Law'd for a Misdemeanour. (advertisement in 1689 edition)' Starkey has been linked to the Rye House plot of 1683, though there is little evidence to substantiate this, and his subsequent flight to Holland seems to have been largely to avoid arrest rather than because of his culpability. 
Evidently concerned for his safety, Starkey became a citizen of Amsterdam through the solicitation of Abraham Keck, at whose house the earl of Shaftesbury had recently died. In spring 1685 Starkey moved to Utrecht, where he mixed with the radical exile community, and a government spy described him as 'a greate rogue' (BL, Add. MS 41812, fol. 58). But he returned in the summer to Amsterdam, where his name was linked in reports with that of John Locke. Starkey was once more the focal point of a radical club where he was reported to have said 'that the ruin of the protestants was most assuredly designed throughout Christendom' by means of an Anglo-French treaty (BL, Add. MS 41818, fol. 99). By the end of the year he managed the affairs of the exiled Thomas Papillon. 
In 1688 Starkey assisted the Dutch invasion plans by publishing Williamite propaganda, such as 'Fagel's Letter', copies of which he shipped to England. He worked in partnership with Locke's friend and publisher Awnsham Churchill and William Churchill; like the former, he lent money to the new king in January 1689. He also saw an opportunity to print or reprint works of political theory that would support the revolution, such as works by Gilbert Burnet and a new edition of Lawson's 'Politica', which now carried a marginal gloss (presumably inserted by Starkey himself) which asserted the right of subjects to defend their rights. He was finally free to publish Bacon/Selden's 'Historical and Political Discourse of the Laws'. In an advertisement he explained that the earlier edition had been preserved 'with care and charge... for the benefit of all that are willing to know and maintain their Ancient Laws and Birth-Rights'. In February 1690 he was elected an assistant to the Stationers' Company but refused to take his place when he was denied the seniority to which he believed himself entitled. 
Starkey died soon afterwards, just when the political climate was turning in his direction. In October 1689 he had drawn up his will and left an 'account' of his estate which totalled $4250, of which his wife was to have $1500, his four daughters a further $2000 between them, and his son John a mere $200. John Dunton remembered him as a man who 'would talk well upon any subject and had good nature in his very looks... He was a brave asserter of English Liberties to his last breath' ('Life and Errors', 213). 


@@@@@


doc= 69253


Schilling, Richard Selwyn Francis (1911-1997), biochemist and occupational physician, was born on 9 January 1911 at Kessingland, Suffolk, the youngest of the four children of George Schilling (1866-1935), a general practitioner, and his wife, Florence Louise Loweth (1874-1950), daughter of a Lincolnshire farmer. George Schilling had studied medicine at St Thomas's Hospital, London, after which he held various hospital appointments and served as a ship's doctor. He then combined a one-man general practice with other local appointments including assistant medical officer to the Great Western Railway works hospital. An alcoholic, he died suddenly in May 1935. 
Richard Schilling boarded from the age of fourteen at Epsom College, where he excelled in rugby football, cricket, and boxing, and from which he passed the first MB. A scholarship enabled him to study medicine at St Thomas's Hospital, which he also represented at sport. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1934, and this allowed him to start immediately in practice; thus, when his father died Richard was able to maintain the general practice until it could be sold as a going concern. He completed the MB BS London in 1937, and on 28 August that year he married Heather, daughter of Clem Norman, a Dorset general practitioner. In a supremely happy marriage they raised a son and two daughters. 
Schilling began his career in occupational medicine late in 1935, when he joined ICI Metals as an assistant industrial medical officer. In 1939 he became a medical officer of factories in Manchester. He had joined the Royal Army Medical Corps in 1938 as a lieutenant. At the outbreak of war he was in France with a field ambulance and was evacuated from Dunkirk. Recalled to the factory inspectorate in 1940, he was seconded as secretary of the industrial health research board in 1942, when he participated in field studies with Donald Hunter in his department for research in industrial medicine at the London Hospital. In 1947 Schilling joined Professor R. E. Lane at the Manchester University department of occupational health, combining this work with part-time practice in an engineering works. In 1956 he was appointed director of the Rockefeller occupational health unit within the department of public health at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and a reader in the University of London. The unit became an independent department in 1959, with Schilling as its professor from 1960. In 1968 the department became an institute endowed by the Trades Union Congress (TUC) and it was formally opened by HM the queen mother in 1971. 
Schilling was a key figure in the expansion of occupational medicine from a minor interest to a recognized field of medicine, with its own faculty of occupational medicine formed in 1978 within the Royal College of Physicians, London. Although he was involved in early discussions and became a fellow of the faculty, Schilling remained largely detached from its development and it is not mentioned in his autobiography. He published on his investigations into byssinosis of cotton workers, the role of carbon disulphide in heart disease, and the health of seafarers, and he contributed to the committee of inquiry into trawler safety, whose report was published in 1969. 
A big man physically, Schilling was easy to deal with, but had firm principles and strong but well controlled feelings and a warm, infectious sense of humour. He was outstanding not only for his leadership, his scientific contributions and pre-eminent position in what was a relatively new and developing field, and as a teacher, but also for his humanity. He regarded himself as being the odd man out in his family in holding liberal or left-wing views and in being concerned for the underprivileged; his idealism and humanity shines through his autobiography, 'A Challenging Life: Sixty Years in Occupational Health' (1998). Associated with the 'British Journal of Industrial Medicine' (now 'Occupational and Environmental Health') since 1942 and as editor from 1951 to 1955, he established the journal as one of international scientific merit, and himself contributed numerous articles. 
Various presidencies, honorary fellowships, and other academic qualifications were conferred on Schilling; these culminated in his appointment as CBE in 1975. When he retired in 1976 his institute had an outstanding international reputation for teaching and research, but it was disbanded in September 1990, allegedly because the university was disenchanted by its links with the TUC and by the difficulty of recruiting a professor of suitable stature. In his autobiography Schilling himself referred to the closure of the institute as 'an act of economic vandalism [which] was the greatest blow to my professional career' ('A Challenging Life', 158). Latterly, as a consultant to Possum Controls, he was involved in improvements in the quality of life for the disabled. Schilling died of cancer at his home, 11C Prior Bolton Street, Canonbury, London, on 30 September 1997. After a plain funeral at the church he had attended at Hackney he was cremated at Finchley on 7 October 1997. 


@@@@@


doc= 69256


O'Cullenan, John (1584/5-1656?), Roman Catholic bishop of Raphoe, was born at Mullaghnashee, Ballyshannon, co. Donegal, the seventh and youngest son of Donncha Ballach O Cuileannain, gentleman, and his wife, Inion Dubh Ni Dhuibhir. The O'Cullenans, of royal Munster descent, were prominent followers of the O'Donnells of Tir Conaill, and Niall, Donncha's brother, and Cormac, his son, fought in Red Hugh's campaigns. Donncha's wife was presumably related to Emann Dubh O Duibhir, abbot of Assaroe. John O'Cullenan had at least one sister, mother of Father Philip Clery, reputedly martyred in 1642. The Cistercian abbey of Assaroe adjoined Mullaghnashee, and John had four Cistercian brothers, three at least, including Gelasius ['see below'], being abbots. 
Despite the disparity in their ages, John O'Cullenan's eldest brother was 
John O'Cullenan was fostered by Sir Hugh O'Donnell and then studied humanities at home for four years, going on at the age of twenty to the Irish College, Salamanca. He read theology at Louvain, Paris, Rome, and Rheims, where he became DTh. Tutor to the earl of Tyrconnell in Brussels, he was made vicar apostolic (1621), and then in 1625 (consecrated 1626) bishop, of his native diocese of Raphoe. Arrested in 1628 in an invasion scare, he was in 1636 gaoled for three months in Dublin Castle by an actively protestant administration. Imprisonment and penury took their toll on his health. Yet the bishops had made some progress in reorganizing Catholicism, and he as vice-primate, with extensive faculties of absolving and dispensing, was busy. While his chiefly rank merited him eulogy in seven poems in 'deibhidhe' metre by the Tir Conaill bards, he himself was aware of the pastoral value of the contemporary literary activity -- historical, ascetical, and apologetic -- in Irish. 
Taken captive again in 1642 O'Cullenan narrowly escaped the fate of the seventy-two insurgents accompanying him, who were slaughtered by the protestant Lagan forces in north-west Ulster, only to endure the rigours of a Londonderry dungeon for four years. He refused to conform to the established church and was eventually released, arriving in Kilkenny in April 1647. He supported Rinuccini's condemnation of the Ormond peace of 1646 and the cessation with Lord Inchiquin of 1648. One of the three bishops who followed the nuncio to Galway, he endured the months of siege of that city by the marquess of Clanricarde. At Ormond's instance he treated with Owen Roe O'Neill at Ballykelly in August 1649, but no agreement was reached. At this time the bishops, he among them, sought Catholic unity in defence of faith and king. Then in September 1650 he was chief of the committee of four bishops who at Jamestown made public the excommunication of all who supported Ormond, the viceroy. 
Driven to take refuge on Inishbofin, O'Cullenan and Bishop Lynch of Clonfert were exiled by the parliamentarians in 1653, and reached Brussels in April. With the divisions among Irish Catholics caused by Rinuccini's censures still persisting, O'Cullenan was now among those who called for a general absolution. Pope Alexander VII, however, demanded prior repentance and gave to O'Cullenan and three other named bishops sole power to absolve. The pope's brief (2 August 1655) was published in Belgium, prefixed by a passionate appeal to all who had opposed the censures to seek absolution. While this appeal, O'Ferrall thought, was the work of Dr Walter Enos, it appeared over the names of O'Cullenan (the only bishop of the four resident in Belgium) and his three colleagues. It may be taken as his curtain speech in the fateful Irish drama in which he had played a part. A list of Irish bishops in 1656 does not include his name, which suggests that he probably died earlier that year. He is buried in the chapel of the Blessed Virgin, in the church of Sts Michael and Gudule, Brussels. 


@@@@@


doc= 69257


Sarmiento de Acuna, Diego, count of Gondomar in the Spanish nobility (1567-1626), diplomat, was born on 1 November 1567 in Astorga in Leon, Spain, where his paternal uncle was bishop. Rightly has it been said that his family possessed more breeding than money. Through his father, Don Garcia Sarmiento de Sotomayor (died 1579), a minor courtier under Charles V, he was closely connected to the Sotomayor counts of Salvatierra; through his mother, Dona Juana de Acuna y Enriquez (died 1600), he could claim two kings among his ancestors, Pedro I of Portugal and Enrique II of Castile. 
Gondomar's early life was spent in the small seignorial house across the river from the town of Gondomar, the lordship of which his father, a younger son, had bought about the time of his marriage. Despite the death of his father when he was only twelve, Gondomar retained the most profound affinity for his eponymous home. His mother continued to live there until her death, and Don Diego constantly returned, adding to the house and estate whenever he could. Gondomar was conspicuously proud of where he had been brought up, and was unusually fond of enumerating its produce in his many nostalgic letters. In 1614 he wrote from London to a friend about spending a summer in Galicia, mentioning 'a small house and a fine little mountain of mine which I think of every day here, and that is what keeps me going' (Real Biblioteca, Madrid, MS II-2168, fol. 229). 
Virtually nothing is known of Gondomar's education, despite the fact that he became the greatest private collector of books in Spain, with his library in the city of Valladolid cited as one of the wonders of the age. He may have received some formal instruction in the nearby episcopal cities of Tuy or even Toro. In addition to his native Galician and Castilian, Gondomar probably acquired early on a firm grasp of French and Latin, the languages in which he conducted diplomatic business in London. French he may have practised with the merchants who frequented the various Galician ports, notably Bayona. Though perfectly able to converse in Latin, he never claimed a classical mastery. It is likely that his Sotomayor cousins oversaw his education, not only because his father had decreed that this branch should always be regarded as head of the family, but also because Gondomar was married to his cousin, Dona Beatriz Sarmiento de Mendoza (died 1586), on 27 December 1581, when he had just turned fourteen. 
As a first-born son Gondomar was marked out for a life of action. He may have fought on the Portuguese border at about the time of his first marriage, and it is probable that he was in Italy when his first wife died, childless, in 1586. During his absence his mother arranged his second marriage in 1588, to Constanza de Acuna y Avellaneda (died in or after 1626). She was another if more distant cousin, whose father had seen distinguished service in Italy and in the duke of Alba's army in Flanders, where he probably met Constanza's Netherlandish mother. According to the prenuptial agreement, Gondomar was to live with his wife in the northern Castilian city of Valladolid and be absent from her for no more than two months in the year, unless he was at court. The union proved blissfully happy, producing three daughters and four sons, though one son died shortly after birth. 
The early days of Gondomar's second marriage were interrupted by possibly his first encounter with the English. As lord of Vincios and Gondomar, and with responsibilities for the soldiers of the bishopric of Tuy, either he or an older cousin of the same name was obliged to return to Galicia to defend the coasts from any attack from Sir Francis Drake, who set sail in the spring of 1589 to support a pro-English pretender to the Portuguese throne. He must soon have returned to Valladolid, where on 6 December his first child, Lope Ambrosio (died 1618), was born, father of Diego, second count of Gondomar. Soon afterwards Gondomar undertook his first role at court. On 31 March 1590 he carried a motto during a joust attended by Philip II. It read: 'The torments which afflict me, stronger and firmer do they leave me'. This was prescient. For the next seven years Gondomar achieved little. He continued to oversee the defence of the Galician coasts and was rewarded with the perpetual governorship of the fortress of Monte Real in Bayona. He was also active in the church, joining the confraternity of Santa Maria de Esgueva, and later became a member of the military order of Calatrava, after proving that he was untainted by Jewish blood. 
Early in 1597 Gondomar was appointed 'corregidor' or royal representative in the city of Toro. He undertook a programme of modernization, including repairs to the bridge and to the highways, as well as securing supplies of wheat for the inhabitants. He also saw to it that the city acceded most readily to the crown's demands for taxation. All this made him an ideal choice for the much more important position of 'corregidor' of Valladolid, which in 1601 had once more become the capital of Spain and the principal residence of the royal court. He took up office on 14 September 1602, after declining various other posts, including the governorship of the Philippines. In addition to running the city Gondomar was intimately involved in arranging numerous royal festivals. This may have given him especial pleasure because it brought him into contact with numerous artists and poets, including Quevedo and Gongora, with the latter satirizing the tight watch Gondomar maintained over the comings and goings from the city. Less welcome was the fact that his new-found prominence also brought him to the attention of the duke of Lerma, Philip III's chief minister and the prime mover in translating the court from Madrid to his own city. The duke seems for some reason to have taken against Gondomar, and for as long as he remained in power prevented him from coming too close to the king and court. In 1605 Gondomar lost the position of 'corregidor' to the duke's twenty-year-old son, the count of Saldana. He followed the court on its return to Madrid in 1606 but failed to achieve any significant reward other than a place on the 'consejo de hacienda', which looked after the crown's finances. Early in 1612 he wrote an impassioned letter to Lerma asking to be made 'corregidor' of Madrid. It was no secret, however, that he hoped to become head of the council of Castile, the kingdom's main administrative body, in succession to one of his own cousins. 
Though Gondomar had consistently refused to consider an overseas posting in Spain's vast empire, Lerma's response was to engineer his appointment on 21 August 1612 as permanent ambassador to London. There had been rumours to this effect as early as June, and it was taken as a further sign of continued ducal hostility, though Gondomar was probably also offered a post in Seville, which too would have kept him away from the court. Perhaps the fact that if he undertook the ambassadorship he would be allowed to keep his seat in the 'consejo de hacienda' tipped the balance in favour of London. He finally embarked for England on 9 July 1613. Meanwhile, he had drawn up plans for the decoration of his family crypt in the church of St Benedict the Old (San Benito el Viejo), next to his house in Valladolid. He commissioned a final judgment, to include figures of Christ and the saints, and with images of Dona Constanza and of himself under the protection of Benedict, his patron saint. 
For all Lerma's wish to be rid of an irritating suitor, a new Spanish ambassador was being appointed at a crucial time for relations between London and Madrid. Since the ending of the Anglo-Spanish war on the accession of the Scottish king to the English throne, relations between the two dynasties had been good, despite occasional tensions in Ireland and the New World. But by 1612 the British king's friendship could no longer be taken for granted, especially as his children were all of or approaching marriageable age. James I's daughter, Elizabeth, was about to marry the foremost Calvinist prince in Germany, the elector palatine, Frederick V, whereas his heir, Prince Henry, was looking for a bride, possibly French. A renewal of protestant or anti-Spanish solidarity threatened Habsburg interests in the Low Countries and in Germany and Austria. 
Gondomar's motto was 'Osar morir da la vida' ('Risking death gives life'). His arrival in Portsmouth on 21 July 1613 was evidence of that as well as an auspicious beginning for an embassy based on his willingness to play for high stakes. When the captain of the English escort ordered him, in accordance with English custom, to lower the flags of King Philip III in salute to those of King James, Gondomar seized the opportunity to make his presence felt. He was told that the present king of Spain's father had done the same when he landed in 1554 to marry Mary Tudor. If Gondomar refused to strike his colours, the captain warned him, he would blow him out of the water. Fortunately, James was hunting nearby, and Gondomar wrote that day to explain his refusal, asking that he be allowed merely to return to Spain: 'because I was born of a good and honourable family, and I wish to emulate them; all of which obliges me to die, as I will, to defend my honour and duty, which is that these ships should enter and then return from this kingdom in the state that they left Spain.' The letter was passed to the king as he was about to kill a stag and, captivated by the swagger of the new ambassador, James made an exception for his entry into the country ('Correspondencia oficial', 3.71-86). 
Gondomar was accompanied to London by Dona Constanza. They kept on the embassy in a house just outside the city walls at the Barbican, taking over the lease at a cost of 720 ducats a year from John Egerton, earl of Bridgewater. Together they enhanced its existing reputation as the principal centre of Catholic worship in the city. From its chapel a bell rang out to announce mass or even give warning of a raid by the authorities. Many committed Catholics took up residence in the vicinity for protection. Gondomar described it as 'the parish and cathedral church for London' (Fernandez, 260). This was not simply his accustomed hyperbole. At the start of 1614 he reported that seventy-two people were either living in the embassy or were being fed there on a daily basis. Numbers were so great that on Sundays two services were held, one for his staff and the other a public celebration. The leading Catholic laywoman in London, the 48-year-old Dona Luisa de Carvajal, received up to 500 reales a month until her death on 23 December 1613. Her funeral in the ambassadorial chapel was determinedly ostentatious. In addition, Gondomar rented a house in the country. This he justified as necessary for his country's reputation, and his generosity as a host, not least with the products of his native Galicia, was duly noted. 
There can be no question of Gondomar's diligence as an ambassador. In the first year of his embassy he wrote over 100 letters to Philip III and almost half as many to the king's chief minister, the duke of Lerma. He also maintained an active intelligence network. He supplemented his many friendships at court with an impressive list of pensioners, often disguised in his accounts with names taken from romances of chivalry. Many of these pensioners he inherited from previous ambassadors; indeed, soon after he arrived in London he wrote to Philip III warning that, 'times being what they are and given what these people are like' he would doubtless be expected to expend more money ('Correspondencia oficial', 3.88). Despite C. H. Carter's suggestions to the contrary, the Spanish pensions were paid, albeit erratically. To scrutinize one of the many accounts Gondomar sent back to Madrid, in November 1617 he paid to 'Priam' (Katherine Howard, countess of Suffolk) 4000 ducats; to 'Socrates' (Admiral William Monson) and to 'Florian' (Lady Drummond) he handed over a total of 2250 ducats each. He usually reckoned that there were 4 ducats to the pound sterling, and these were all pensions established before he had arrived. Among the pensioners he had himself recommended, Secretary Sir Thomas Lake received his annual pension of 2000 ducats backdated for one and a half years, making 3000 ducats in total. Among other high-placed recipients, George Villiers's name appears for the first time when he received full payment of the annual pension of 6000 ducats which he had been awarded in August 1616, the month he was created Viscount Villiers. Even so, Gondomar was becoming disenchanted with the pensions he was expected to pay out, and he suggested to the king that the money might be better spent on Spain's armies. Really useful information, he said, came either from those who 'were devoted to the service of God' or those who could be induced by occasional gifts or demonstrations of friendship. Villiers's pension none the less increased as he made his way up the ranks of the English peerage as earl and then marquess of Buckingham ('Correspondencia oficial', 1.128-31). 
Gondomar's informants were not confined to the royal court. In September 1613 he announced that in the French ambassador's house there was 'someone extremely well placed and his confidant, who has offered to tell me what is going on and even pass me copies of his papers' ('Correspondencia oficial', 3.122). He also had his spies in the English parliament. During his second embassy an unnamed source provided him with a daily account of activities in the first session of the parliament of 1621, which he had translated into Spanish. His best sources of information were often the king and his ministers, however. Especially during the parliamentary crisis of late 1621 and the concomitant threats to the Rhineland, Gondomar was given copies of James's correspondence with his son-in-law or even with the House of Commons. On one occasion Gondomar was allowed to copy for himself a letter from General Mansfeldt in the Palatinate, even if the original had to be returned to Buckingham's safekeeping. Perhaps in terms of espionage Gondomar was most successful in exercising a watching brief over Ireland. Many Irish Catholics sought temporary refuge in the embassy before being provided with money and the necessary contacts in Flanders or Spain, and in this respect Gondomar was merely continuing his interest in the welfare of Irish exiles in Spain, the vast majority of whom had first landed in Galicia. 
In political terms Gondomar's principal task as ambassador was to smooth over the rough edges of the treaty of London, by which James had established peace with Spain shortly after arriving in his new kingdom. English trade in the New World, even as far north as Bermuda and Virginia, seemed to Spain to be no more than a continuation of the piracy that had typified Elizabeth's reign. Gondomar reiterated Spain's promise not to interfere in Ireland, in return for sterner treatment of the more notorious corsairs of the age. The most notable example of this involved Sir Walter Ralegh. Imprisoned in the Tower of London since 1605, Ralegh was released in 1616, principally because of an offer he made to sail to the Guyanas and discover the legendary source of gold known as El Dorado. In a 'demarche' worthy of the greatest ambassadors, Gondomar quietly referred the scholarly king of Great Britain to folio 584 of the third part of Antonio de Herrera's 'History of Philip II'. It confirmed that this now invaluable source of gold had already been visited by Ralegh some twenty years earlier. Not only that, it proved that the area was legitimately claimed by Spain and, to top it all, that the stories about the mine were 'laughable' ('Correspondencia oficial', 1.54-7). Gondomar extracted promises from James that if Ralegh were allowed to sail then an absolute guarantee would be given that no harm would befall Spanish settlements. Instead, Ralegh raided the Canary Islands before launching attacks in the New World, including upon San Tome in the Guyanas, where the governor, a relative of Gondomar, was killed. In June 1618 the ambassador had been given permission to return to Madrid, but Philip III ordered him to remain until Ralegh had been brought to justice. Gondomar kept up a barrage of complaints to the privy council and, in a letter of 13 July, he informed his king that he had personally told James that 'Ralegh and those who went with him should be sent as prisoners to your majesty so that you may order them to be hanged in the square in Madrid' (Canton, 125). Ralegh was duly taken prisoner on his return. News of his execution on 29 October 1618 reached Gondomar after he had left for Spain. Henceforth the ambassador was stigmatized by many English protestants for his marked role in the death of one of their heroes. 
The issue that came to dominate Gondomar's first embassy was the Spanish match. With the death of Henry, prince of Wales, in 1612, eyes focused on the marriage of Prince Charles. An anti-Spanish marriage, either to the house of Bourbon or with Savoy, seemed the most likely choice, but there remained the possibility of reviving plans to marry the heir to the British throne to Philip III's daughter, the Infanta Maria. In England one of Gondomar's closest allies in promoting this alliance was James's consort, Queen Anne. She had a particular fondness for the ambassador not only on account of her own Catholicism and of the Habsburg blood which, she liked to point out, ran through her veins, but also because both Gondomar and the queen viewed the match as a counterbalance to the protestant marriage of her daughter, Elizabeth, to the elector palatine. In 1614 the British minister in Madrid, Sir John Digby, raised the matter with Lerma, though firmly 'insinuating that it was of his 'motu proprio'' (Madrid, Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores, MS 243, fol. 1'v'). By the time Gondomar's first embassy was over the terms of a possible marriage were being negotiated, though without a sense of urgency on either side. 
The close links between Gondomar and James were apparent by the time of his first departure for home. Though he had secured his recall by citing evidence of his deteriorating health, Gondomar was feasted by the greatest nobles, including the lord chancellor, Francis Bacon, with whom he had enjoyed many a philosophical conversation, and by the earl of Arundel, who had passed on many titbits in return for his pension. His farewell from the king was memorable. Not only were 'the two James' -- the king and Diego -- in tears, but the former granted Gondomar a series of historic concessions. He was given the right to take out of England 'horses, dogs and falcons' (Madrid, Biblioteca Nacional, MS 9408). Further evidence of improved relations with Spain came from the fact that seventy Catholic priests were released from prisons all over England. (When the previous ambassador had left, shortly after Gondomar's arrival in 1613, a mere dozen had been released.) It fell to Gondomar to send for the priests, take them to London, and feed them, all at his own expense, before they marched out of the city with him in July 1618. Finally, in the most symbolic gesture of all, Gondomar was presented with the Spanish artillery captured by Drake and other English corsairs as a token of esteem of a quite exceptional magnitude. The departure of the countess of Gondomar was also marked, but in a less formal way. She also received many letters from fellow Catholics thanking her for all she had done, including one particularly ornate sheaf dated Channell Row, 1 October 1618, from Francis of Kildare (no doubt Frances Fitzgerald, countess of Kildare) promising her 'constant love' and saying how pleased she would be 'yf you would commaund any thing in this cuntrey' that was in her power to grant. (Real Biblioteca, Madrid, MS II-2160, fol. 45). The apprentices of London, however, had a different attitude to his departure and gave him a rowdy send off, much to James's disgust. Gondomar was informed that the king had taken the rare step of appointing members of his council to act as judges in the matter within the jurisdiction of the City of London. 
Gondomar had achieved a degree of intimacy with his royal host rarely paralleled in diplomatic history -- on occasion members of the English court called upon him to intervene on their behalf with King James. In 1619 William Lake wrote to him, even though he was now in Spain, in the hope that he would intercede for the release of his namesake and master Sir Thomas Lake and his family, who were imprisoned in the Tower of London. The family, Gondomar was told, had done nothing to dishonour either James or even Buckingham, and that the cause of the family's downfall (and William's loss of the office of Latin secretary to the king) was that James had received written reports from Brussels claiming that Lake was there being prayed for as 'the friend and protector of Catholics'. Gondomar was told that they were like 'lakes without fishes' (Real Biblioteca, Madrid, MS II-2160, no. 4a). Indeed, such was the perception of Gondomar's influence that even Buckingham sought his help, as at Christmas 1621 when he asked him to press James to be firm with his enemy, the earl of Oxford. Gondomar was listened to by the king (but by no stretch of the imagination was what he said always followed) because of their interest in a common goal, a marriage between the prince of Wales and the infanta. A union with the foremost Catholic power would greatly enhance James's claim to be a peacemaker among Christian princes, just as much as it would advance Gondomar's career at home. Yet there was also something entirely personal about their relationship. Gondomar's scholarship and bibliophilia attracted and flattered the king, as did his mannered Castilian sense of deference. These attributes the ambassador spiced with an agile wit. An example of this combination is that Gondomar said to the monarch that he, Gondomar, spoke Latin badly, like a king, whereas James spoke Latin well, like a scholar. His sense of humour also worked with the royal favourite. When Buckingham was raised from an earldom to the rank of marquess, Gondomar, who had himself been made a count on 12 June 1617 NS, congratulated him, as he said, most genuinely, even though it pained him to see him leaving the rank of count. After his return to England, Gondomar consolidated an easy relationship with Prince Charles, thus making himself a friend to king, prince, and favourite at one and the same time. His way with words did not endear him to everyone, however. In January 1614 he had confessed to Juan Hurtado de Mendoza, his confidant at the Spanish court and the king's secretary, that complaints had come back to him about the brevity of some ambassador's letters and 'the longwindedness of my own' (Real Biblioteca, Madrid, MS II-2168, fol. 67'r'). 
Despite Gondomar's personal triumph at the court of St James he was not oblivious to the underlying rivalry between Spain and Great Britain. He never forgot that he was the servant of the Spanish crown. In fact, his early dispatches as ambassador were marked by a barely concealed belligerence towards a protestant monarchy which he believed had imposed its religion against the will of the majority of its subjects. In November 1616 he composed a long dispatch dealing with all aspects of Hispano-British relations. If war were again advisable (and he felt that peace allowed England to build up her commercial wealth and naval prowess at Spain's expense), then he suggested that invasion should take place through Ireland or Scotland, where Catholic uprisings were to be expected. If through the latter, which he considered defenceless, it would take only eight days to reach London, 'because all is totally flat, and without a single castle or fortress anywhere' ('Cinco cartas', 66). 
During Gondomar's absence from England relations between Madrid and London deteriorated along with the situation in central Europe. James's son-in-law, the elector palatine, had accepted election to the Bohemian crown which the Habsburgs of Vienna felt belonged to them. In October 1619 Gondomar wrote to James to announce his return, saying that only the death of his eldest son, Lope Ambrosio, had detained him. In fact, his son had died twelve months earlier, and Gondomar was doing his utmost to avoid being sent as ambassador to Paris, let alone London. In the following month he wrote to Secretary Ciriza from Casarrubios, the village between Madrid and Toledo where he was staying, protesting yet again that he was 'of no use, since the matter of England requires someone who is healthy and robust' ('Correspondencia oficial', 2.240). His unwillingness to leave Spain and Dona Constanza accounts in part for the sentiments he expressed when consulted about James's protestations that he neither supported the elector Frederick's actions nor was in favour of an alliance with the Dutch. Like all heretic kings, he said, James would say anything to please, and the danger was that Spain would allow herself 'to be taken in by his words, while each year he took money from Seville and Lisbon in such abundance, only to build up his navy and support Spain's enemies' (ibid., 2.228). 
Gondomar left Spain in January 1620. This time he left Dona Constanza behind and travelled overland through France before reaching London on Wednesday 8 March. Lodgings were provided for him in the former residence of the bishops of Ely, in Hatton Gardens. He had his first audience with James the following Sunday at the royal mansion Theobalds in Hertfordshire. There a beam gave way and he took shelter in a stone doorway, while others, including the earl of Arundel, fell through a hole in the floor. Gondomar reported that this was nothing more than an unfortunate accident involving old wood and, in a rare rejection of his normal fears for his safety, he discounted the fact even though 'the puritans have tried and are trying to have me killed' ('Correspondencia oficial', 2.263-4). James's welcome for the ambassador was enthusiastic, and he announced in French to all that he looked just like an old friend of his, the count of Gondomar. In the subsequent discussions the king wanted to know if the war would spread out from Bohemia with the emperor pursuing his son-in-law and his family into their hereditary lands in the Upper and Lower Palatinate. Gondomar replied that this was the same as asking him what James would do if someone seized London. The ambassador faithfully reported what he called the puritan pressures on James to act decisively in defence of his grandchildren's inheritance. When a parliament was summoned in 1621 he advised Madrid that James was responding to pressures to be seen as doing something; it did not necessarily mean that war with Spain was imminent. Gondomar sent back to Madrid detailed accounts of events at Westminster. This included transmitting a copy of the Commons' declaration of June 1621. Madrid was left in no doubt that, if James ever did decide to break with Spain, then MPs at least claimed they were willing to offer up their lives and their money in defence of the Palatinate. 
The military situation became still more acute during the autumn, when the last fortresses loyal to Frederick in the Palatinate were under threat from pro-Habsburg forces, despite the token presence of English garrisons commanded by Sir Horace Vere. James's daughter and grandchildren fled to the Netherlands and the calls for intervention increased. With the return of Digby (now Lord Digby) from Brussels after the failure to achieve a ceasefire from the emperor and the elector, Gondomar was informed that James had no alternative but to recall parliament and ask for further supply, in order to be seen to be ready to go to his family's defence. Buckingham went to see Gondomar in Hatton Gardens. The favourite revealed the divisions within the king's innermost counsels. He poured scorn on Digby, saying he just wanted to make himself immortal with the puritans as the restorer of the Palatinate. Nothing would be done in the parliament without Buckingham's knowledge and approval, since 'the king trusted no one so entirely as him and myself', the ambassador related, 'because he knew that we had no other goal but peace and the common good' (Archivo General de Simancas, MS Estado 374, fol. 308ff.). Gondomar was summoned to see the king on the following day, Friday 2 November 1621. Anxious to transmit to Spain his keenness to maintain peace, James reminded Gondomar how even Digby had spoken warmly of the Spanish king's efforts to induce the emperor to call a halt to hostilities, but he also said he was determined to help Elizabeth 'recover and hold onto the state that she had married into'. James then uttered some of the most contested words of his reign. He would go to Newmarket and Gondomar was not to worry about what he might hear in parliament. He would leave Prince Charles to attend, 'with a secret commission... and if the parliament wanted to meddle in anything other than aid for the Palatinate, the Prince would dissolve it' (Pursell, 436). Money for the defence of the Rhineland was the sole reason why he was recalling the parliament, the king explained, and he himself was going to be far away so this could be undertaken without peers and MPs coming to him with their complaints and remedies. The ambassador was being reassured, nothing more. Buckingham then joined in, sniggering that they would not even send the money to the elector but use it against the common enemy. The king laughed and, taking the ambassador by the arm, said he was wrong if he thought the common enemy was the Turk. Rather it was the solemn burghers of Holland. Gondomar was asked to react coldly to the recall of parliament, so that the king's subjects would believe that a rupture with Spain was a distinct possibility. Digby, whom the royal trio blamed for the recall of parliament, also came in for some undignified mockery. Gondomar quaintly asked the king where he would think of putting the images which the puritans were making of Digby. 
James's words to Gondomar have been portrayed as indicating that the king deliberately 'sabotaged the parliament of 1621' (Pursell, 428). This is hard to believe, since towards the end of the parliament James struggled to come to a compromise which would enable him to extract some taxation from MPs. Certainly Gondomar feared that the parliament might pressurize the king into breaking with Spain and pursuing an anti-Catholic policy throughout the Stuart dominions as well as abroad. After hearing reports that his king had been disrespectfully spoken of during debates in the Commons, Gondomar informed Madrid that he had written at the end of November reminding James of the promise he had made before the parliament began. The ambassador apparently said that, had he not trusted 'the word and goodness of the king that he would punish and set things right with the speed and severity that was called for, I would have left his kingdoms within three days' (ibid., 440). Gondomar added that if only he had an army with him he would punish those responsible himself. That his threats were real enough is shown by the fact that he certainly wrote directly to the duke of Alburquerque, the Spanish ambassador in Rome, advising him that no further action should be taken on the dispensation for Charles's marriage, 'because though the king's intention is without doubt good, it is not known what he will choose to do, as he is not here', he being still at Newmarket. Gondomar's audacity meant that he had to write separately to his king, justifying why he had sent instructions to a fellow ambassador (Archivo General de Simancas, MS Estado 2558, nos. 17 and 16). In January 1622 parliament was formally dissolved. Gondomar was shown the draft of a proclamation announcing its failure, and he successfully lobbied for direct references to the abuse of the king of Spain to be removed on the grounds that this would be highly disrespectful to a prince with whom James claimed to enjoy amicable relations. James now needed the Spanish match more than ever, and Gondomar intensified his efforts to bring about a marriage on Spanish terms. He felt that if the prince of Wales could be induced to come to Madrid to collect his bride then it would be possible to persuade him to convert to Catholicism. 
Gondomar left England for the last time at the end of May 1622. With James's full approval he was recalled to Madrid in order to negotiate with Lord Digby, who had arrived in Spain to finalize details of the marriage between Charles and Maria. Before he left Gondomar had concentrated his efforts on persuading Charles that it might be necessary for him to travel to the court of Philip IV (who had succeeded his father in March 1621). In an astonishing aside, Charles apparently told him that if he were to send word from Madrid that he should come to collect his bride, he would travel in disguise, with just two servants in attendance, to 'place himself in the hands' of his most Catholic majesty (Redworth, 406). Negotiations carried on apace in Madrid, and in September 1622 Gondomar penned a letter to Buckingham, claiming that 'the decision has already been taken, and with enthusiasm, that the Prince of Wales should mount Spain'. Charles was advised to come to Madrid 'post haste' (BL, Harley MS 1583). Though Gondomar was premature in his advice, by December a final marriage treaty was sent to England, and confirmed early in January 1623. Gondomar's endorsement and the subsequent treaty helps explain Charles's decision to leave for Madrid the following month; he travelled in the belief that his bride was waiting for him. When he arrived in Madrid, Gondomar was the first Spaniard to be informed. His comment was 'Nunc dimittis' ('Lord, now let your servant depart in peace'). He duly reported the prince's arrival to Philip IV's favourite, the count-duke of Olivares. Gondomar was immediately promoted to the council of state. Both Gondomar and Olivares initially assumed that Charles had come to convert to Catholicism before taking his bride. By the time Charles left Madrid at the end of August 1623, Gondomar's advice was to wait until James actually carried out his promises to grant full toleration of Catholics before dispatching the infanta. As it turned out, Charles and Buckingham had irrevocably turned against the Spanish match. Within a year war seemed inevitable with Great Britain, and Gondomar was ordered at the end of October 1624 to return to London. Again he cited ill health and his departure was postponed until March 1625. He travelled as far as Irun, at which point news of James's death reached him. This he used to delay his journey further. After a stay in France, where ironically he was obliged as ambassador-extraordinary to offer his congratulations on the news of the prince of Wales's marriage to a French princess, he reached Brussels in October 1625. He drew up his will in January 1626; despite his deteriorating health he managed to commence his return to Spain. He died on 2 October 1626 NS in Casa de la Reina in Logrono; he was survived by his second wife. His body was transferred to the family vault in San Benito el Viejo in Valladolid and remained there until it was disturbed by French invaders in the nineteenth century. In 1990 the crypt of the church was restored to allow the count's remains to be returned to where he had always wished to be buried. 
Gondomar's notoriety during his time in England ensured that, for more protestant writers, he was the incarnation of the Machiavellian diplomat. Thomas Scott caricatured him in 'Vox Populi, or, Newes from Spayne' (1620) and in 'The Second Part of Vox Populi, or, Gondomar Appearing in the Likeness of Matchiavell in a Spanissh Parliament' (1624). In the following year he was again lampooned in Thomas Middleton's 'A Game at Chesse', which ran for nine nights before packed audiences at the Globe Theatre before being taken off, the playwright imprisoned, and the actors fined. 


@@@@@


doc= 69262


Pinkerton, John Maurice McLean (1919-1997), computer engineer, was born on 2 August 1919 at 18 Somerset Terrace, St Pancras, London, the elder son and eldest of the three children of John McLean Pinkerton (1890-1957), a surgeon, and his wife, Nora Dorothy, 'nee' O'Flyn (1880-1968), a medical practitioner. His family moved to Bath when he was six, and he was educated at King Edward VI Grammar School, Bath (1927-32), and Clifton College, Bristol (1932-7). As a schoolboy he developed an interest in science and radio, constructing sets of increasing complexity from the age of twelve. His parents wanted all their children to follow them into the medical profession, and while his siblings did, he thwarted their expectations by winning a scholarship to study natural sciences at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1937; he graduated with first-class honours in 1940. He then became a scientific civil servant, working on war-related radar research, first at the Air Ministry Research Establishment, Swanage (1940-42), and then at the telecommunications research establishment, Malvern (1942-5). In 1945 he became a research student under the physicist J. A. Ratcliffe in the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, obtaining a PhD in 1948. On 18 December the same year he married Helen Inglis McCorkindale ('b'. 1923), an administrative civil servant. They had a son and a daughter. 
While Pinkerton was at the Cavendish Laboratory, the Cambridge University mathematical laboratory was in the process of constructing a computer, the EDSAC, under the direction of Maurice Wilkes, whom Pinkerton came to know from attending his talks on computer developments. At the same time the catering firm of J. Lyons had decided to make a copy of the EDSAC for administrative purposes (there then being no commercially available computers). With Wilkes's recommendation, in January 1949 Pinkerton joined Lyons to become chief engineer for the LEO (Lyons' Electronic Office). A gifted and intuitive engineer, he made several innovations to ensure the LEO computer's suitability for business use, the most important of which was 'marginal testing', by which defective components were replaced in a planned manner instead of failing unpredictably in operational use. This became a standard industry practice. The 6000-valve LEO became operational in early 1951, and gradually took over much of Lyons office routine. Word spread wide in the business community and several other firms expressed interest in having a machine. So, in 1955 Lyons decided to go into the computer business and created a subsidiary, Leo Computers Limited. There Pinkerton oversaw the development of LEO's successors, LEO II and LEO III. He was appointed a director in 1959. 
The early 1960s brought intense American competition to the computer industry, resulting in an inevitable consolidation among the British players. In 1963 Leo Computers was taken over by English Electric, where Pinkerton became head of computer research. During 1967-8, with the urging of Harold Wilson's Labour government, the two major players in the British computer industry -- International Computers and Tabulators and English Electric Computers -- merged to form a national-champion computer manufacturer, International Computers Limited (ICL). After the merger Pinkerton became a member of the planning team that specified ICL's flagship computer range, the 2900 series, though he never subsequently found a role that fully matched his technical ability. He spent the remainder of his career in ICL as manager of strategic requirements, taking a special interest in office automation, computer-aided design, and standardization. He was prominent in external affairs, serving on the general assembly of the European Computer Manufacturers Association, of which he was twice president. He also represented ICL in numerous trade associations, government inquiries, and publicly funded research programmes. 
In his retirement, Pinkerton remained a force in British computing. He operated as a consultant, lectured frequently, and was a technical author and editor. He held various offices in the Institution of Electrical Engineers, was a council member of the British Computer Society, and was a member of court of the Worshipful Company of Information Technologists (founded in 1982 to promote the information technology profession in the City of London). 
Tall, spare of frame, and bespectacled, Pinkerton had on first introduction an academic and slightly austere manner which then quickly warmed. His eclectic interests and pastimes included theatregoing, classical music and opera, the visual arts, bridge, crosswords, photography, and do-it-yourself projects of all kinds. He and his wife entertained at home frequently, and cultivated a wide circle of friends. He died at his home, Thornbrake, Sandown Road, Esher, Surrey, on 22 December 1997, and was buried at Cobham cemetery after a funeral service at Christ Church, Esher, on 5 January 1998. He was survived by his wife and their two children. The Institution of Electrical Engineers subsequently established the annual John Pinkerton lecture and the Worshipful Company of Information Technologists the John Pinkerton journeyman award in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 69267


Steel, Robert Walter (1915-1997), geographer and university administrator, was born in Station Road, Theale, Berkshire, on 31 July 1915, the elder son of Frederick Grabham Steel (1875-1948), Congregational minister, and his wife, Winifred Barry, 'nee' Harrison (1888-1974). After the family moved to Gorleston, Norfolk, he was educated at Great Yarmouth grammar school, then, following another move, at Cambridge and County High School for Boys. Entering Jesus College, Oxford, as an exhibitioner, he graduated with first-class honours in geography in 1937, having won the Royal Geographical Society's essay prize for 'The trade of the United Kingdom with Europe' (published in the 'Geographical Journal' in 1936). A Drapers' Company scholarship in 1937-8 provided for research on Sierra Leone, leading to the higher Oxford degree of BSc in 1939, and initiating a lasting involvement with sub-Saharan Africa. Appointed to a departmental lectureship in geography in 1939, he married a fellow Oxford geographer (a graduate of St Anne's College), Eileen Margaret Page ('b'. 1915/16), elder daughter of Arthur Ernest Page, gentlemen's outfitter, of Bournemouth, at Richmond Hill Congregational Church, Bournemouth, on 9 January 1940. Their lifelong partnership was one of shared geographical interests and a close family life, with two daughters, Alison and Elizabeth (both of whom graduated in geography), and a son, David. 
The Second World War interrupted Steel's academic career, although he remained in Oxford to work on African affairs for the naval intelligence division of the Admiralty from 1940 to 1945. In 1945-7 he was geographer on the interdisciplinary Ashanti social survey, in the cocoa-producing area of the Gold Coast, enriching his understanding of the socio-economic and environmental aspects of development. Friendships with local people were among the most rewarding and lasting of many made over the next fifty years and reflected the qualities of the man as much as the geographer. Returning to Oxford in 1947 as lecturer in colonial (later Commonwealth) geography and (from 1951) lecturer at St Peter's Hall, he became official fellow and tutor in geography at Jesus College in 1954. 
Appointed in 1957 to the John Rankin chair of geography at the University of Liverpool, in the oldest-established honours school of geography in Britain, Steel expanded undergraduate and postgraduate programmes and the range of staff research. Studies of Africa and the tropics developed significantly. He identified closely with all aspects of departmental life even when increasingly caught up in university affairs, as dean of the faculty of arts (1965-8) and pro-vice-chancellor (1971-3). 
A lasting commitment to the people of Africa shaped Steel's scholarly interests. His initial research, based on fieldwork in Sierra Leone in 1938, was done mainly on foot in a country with a very limited transport infrastructure. He met African people in their homes and fields and came to understand their communities and environments. His appreciation of the social and economic significance of these relationships was greatly enhanced by his work in the Ashanti survey of 1945-7. A pioneering paper with his Oxford colleague E. W. Gilbert on 'Social geography and its place in colonial studies' (published in the 'Geographical Journal' in 1945) promoted a growing involvement of British geographers with African studies. Africa continued to occupy much of his life, including a visiting professorship at the University of Ghana in 1964 and research in many parts of Anglophone Africa. His presidential address to the Institute of British Geographers, 'Problems of population pressure in tropical Africa' (published in the institute's 'Transactions' in 1970) underlined the centrality of relationships between population and land in the cultural, political, and economic contexts of African society. Interdisciplinary studies were fostered through the African Studies Association of the UK (of which he was president in 1970-71) and the Royal African Society (of which he was a vice-president from 1977). Eileen often accompanied him on research trips and they collaborated on a text published as 'Africa' (1974). 
Steel's presidential addresses to section E of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 'Geography and the developing world' (1965), and to the Geographical Association, on the needs of the world's 'have-nots' (1973), made a strong case for the practical relevance of the discipline allied to a characteristically humanitarian concern for people in the developing world. Growth in the breadth of those interests was reflected in 'Geographical Essays on British Tropical Lands' (1956) and 'Geographers and the Tropics: Liverpool Essays' (1964), both co-edited with R. Mansell Prothero. 
The invitation to become principal of the University College of Swansea in 1974 was unexpected. Confronted by student unrest, not of his making, Steel won over the conflicting parties by calm and balanced assessment and a streak of toughness. The challenges of providing for growth and enhanced academic status at a time of diminishing resources were met with integrity, administrative skill, hard work, and a genuine interest in other people. Rebuilding administrative and academic systems, and through care for all his charges -- students, academic colleagues, and support staff -- he enhanced morale and achievement in the college. A building programme including the sports hall and the Taliesin Arts Centre was a legacy of the Steel era and a reflection of his range of interests. If there were reservations over appointing an Englishman, Steel's background at Jesus College, the 'Welsh college', was reassuring. He was vice-chancellor of the University of Wales in 1978-81, and a Swansea colleague recalled that he discharged his duties 'like a true Welshman' (private information), though without command of a language that, he confessed, was too difficult for him. 
The Steels' commitment to Swansea and south Wales was impressive. As principal, Steel did much to repair and foster town-gown relations: a local MP commented that he 'contributed enormously to our community'. The decision to remain in Swansea after retirement in 1982 extended their activities. Steel was involved with the Lower Swansea Development Group (1979-88) and the Glamorgan Trust for Nature Conservation (1982-6) and was chairman of Swansea Civic Society (1988-97). A lasting contribution was to the Swansea festival of music and the arts: as chairman (1982-95) he raised its international status. He was on the board of the Wales Advisory Body for Local Authority Higher Education (1982-6) and became vice-president of the Workers' Educational Association of South Wales in 1997. 
A busy retirement also involved membership of the Economic and Social Research Council (1983-6), and chairmanship of its international activities committee; he had convened the informal group that had successfully approached the chairman of its predecessor body, the Social Science Research Council, in 1966, after geography had been excluded from its original list of disciplines. A much esteemed chairman of the governors of Westhill College of Higher Education, Birmingham -- a unique Free Church college -- from 1981 to 1995, Steel became president of the Council for Church and Associated Colleges (1990-94). His liberal views on higher education were much valued on the council of the Open University. A Commonwealth visiting fellow at Carleton University, Ottawa, in 1970, and a founder member of the Commonwealth Geographical Bureau (of which he was director from 1972 to 1978), he was chairman of the Commonwealth Human Ecology Council (1988-90), for which he had written a report, 'Human Ecology and Hong Kong' (1975). 
Bethel United Reformed Church in Sketty was a focus for Steel's worship and friendships, and for many activities. Religious commitment extended to national concerns and interdenominational relations, in particular through the United Reformed Forward Policy Group, which he chaired. Christian values were central to his private and public life, and his attitude to people, regardless of status, reflected them. But he was not stuffy or self-righteous; he had a sense of fun and knew how to relax, whether as willing under-gardener to Eileen, or in a shared enjoyment of music. 
Steel had a lifelong involvement with British and international geographical organizations and those relating to Africa. A fellow of the Royal Geographical Society for over fifty years, he was awarded its Murchison grant in 1948 and was a member of its council (1939-53 and 1968-71). A member of the Institute of British Geographers from 1938, he served on its council from 1947 to 1960, and was its secretary (1948-50), honorary editor (1950-60), and president (1968); he was made an honorary member in 1974, and in 1983 he wrote the institute's history, published for its fiftieth anniversary. A member of the Geographical Association from 1945, he was president in 1973 and an honorary member from 1982. In addition to maintaining his geographical interests in Africa he served on the councils of the universities of Lesotho (1981-6) and Swaziland (1987-91). 
Steel's impressive array of honours included four honorary fellowships and five honorary doctorates; he was appointed CBE in 1983. A gentle, modest, steadfast man, he believed that geography, particularly of the peoples of tropical Africa, was a human and humane study. He died of cancer at his home, 12 Cambridge Road, Langland, Swansea, on 29 December 1997 and was survived by his wife, Eileen, and their three children. His funeral service was at the Bethel United Reformed Church, Sketty, on 3 January 1998, and a memorial service was held at St Mary's Church, Swansea, on 24 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 69273


Taylor, (May Doris) Charity, Lady Taylor (1914-1998), prison administrator, was born on 16 September 1914 at West Lea, York Road, Woking, Surrey, the third daughter and youngest of four children of (Wron) George Clifford, journalist, and his wife, Emma Ada, formerly Cundy. Her father wrote on snooker and angling for the 'News of the World'. Brought up in Huntingdon, Charity excelled at Huntingdon grammar school and trained in London as a doctor at the London (Royal Free Hospital) School of Medicine for Women. In the late 1930s Dr Clifford was a house surgeon at the Royal Free Hospital and the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital. She married Stephen James Lake Taylor (1910-1988), also a doctor, on 3 October 1939; two sons and a daughter were born between 1940 and 1950. Resolved to continue working, Charity Taylor in 1942 became an assistant medical officer at HM prison Holloway, the largest women's gaol in Britain. Conditions were bad there during the war, as internment of Nazi-sympathizers caused overcrowding. Despite soap shortages, Dr Taylor improved hygiene and won promotion to medical officer. 
Charity Taylor became the first ever female governor of Holloway prison in 1945. Though reluctant to abandon medicine, she wanted to show that a woman could run a major gaol as well as a man (if not better). Portraits of Elizabeth I, Joan of Arc, and Florence Nightingale adorned her office walls. Women's magazines liked to interview the pretty young brunette who combined motherhood with a career commonly associated with severe spinsters. The governor explained that she virtually worked from home, since the Taylors lived in the big battlemented governor's house within the prison complex. Having children may have given her greater insight into certain problems: her study of women gaoled for child neglect in 1948-9 concluded that their offences were due to inadequacy and ignorance rather than to conscious cruelty. 
The 'Criminal Justice Act' 1948 allowed some liberalization of the prison regime. More letters and visits were permitted. Access to libraries and recreation improved. Dr Taylor had an open mind on the value of psychiatry. Everyone must stand on their own two feet, she believed, but she could be a good listener as well as a great talker. To boost prisoners' self-esteem, she let them use make-up and choose the colour of their uniforms. The range of educational opportunities widened, though a special pre-release course failed to attract many participants. More successful was the jam factory founded in 1951. 
The governorship of Holloway was the toughest job in the women's prison system. With the start of 'open' prisons at Askham Grange and Hill Hall, the population of Holloway dropped to about three hundred after 1952 -- less than half full -- yet the proportion of 'unreformables' grew. Alcoholism and self-harm were common, and tension mounted at the time of executions: Styllou Christofi in 1954 and Ruth Ellis in 1955. Dr Taylor arranged separate blocks for remand prisoners, first-time offenders, and younger inmates. She deemed the work of a governor easy so far as prisoners were concerned: a written code determined their respective roles. 
Holloway was a traditional radial prison, opened in 1852, and now grimly antiquated. The governor blamed her own chronic rheumatism on the damp. Its closure, promised in 1938, was postponed in 1939 and 1950; redecoration in brighter colours failed to disguise the pervading gloom, against which Charity Taylor struggled to create a calm and domestic atmosphere. She was certain that cleanliness, orderliness, and discipline had a good effect. Visitors compared her to a firm and efficient headmistress. 
Lady Taylor acquired her title in August 1958 when her husband, Labour MP for Barnet (1945-50), became Baron Taylor of Harlow on receipt of a life peerage. In 1959 she took charge of the whole structure of female prisons and borstals in England and Wales as assistant commissioner and inspector of prisons (women) -- a post renamed assistant director when the Prison Commission was turned into a department of the Home Office in 1963. Of a total prison roll of 26,000 in 1959, fewer than one thousand were women, but the very smallness of the service presented difficulties, as it could render specialized programmes uneconomic. Lady Taylor was a proficient administrator who assimilated information and made decisions with extraordinary rapidity. She put much effort into training staff and opened a women's prison at Styal, Manchester, in 1963. Plans for another in Essex foundered in 1965, however: the long-awaited redevelopment of Holloway could not begin until 1970. Lady Taylor was a member of the General Advisory Council of the BBC (1964-7). 
When Lord Taylor accepted the vice-chancellorship of the Memorial University of Newfoundland in 1967, Charity took early retirement and accompanied him to Canada, where she became president of the Newfoundland and Labrador Social Welfare Council (1968-71). They returned to Britain in 1973 to live near Llangollen. Widowed in 1988, Lady Taylor died at the Princess Royal Hospital, Haywards Heath, Sussex, on 4 January 1998. Her fourteen years at HM prison Holloway had banished any doubt about women governing women's prisons. 


@@@@@


doc= 69279


Grizell Steevens (1653-1747), his sister, born in Wiltshire, were the twin children of John Steevens (died 1682), an English royalist clergyman, and his wife, Constance. The family left Wiltshire for Ireland some time after 1654, and John Steevens was made rector of St Mary's, Athlone, by Charles II in 1664. Richard Steevens received his education at the Latin school in Athlone and in 1670 entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he obtained a scholarship in 1674 and graduated BA in 1675 and MA in 1678. He seems to have been intended by his father to enter the church, and took deacon's orders; however, he proceeded no further in the ministry, and, possibly following his father's death in 1682, instead chose the medical profession. In 1687 he received the degree of MD from his university. 


@@@@@


doc= 69281


Trease, (Robert) Geoffrey (1909-1998), author, was born in Nottingham on 11 August 1909, the third son and youngest child of George Albert Trease (1873-1932), a wine merchant, and his wife, Florence Dale (1874-1955), a doctor's daughter. He won a scholarship to Nottingham high school, where he edited magazines, wrote a play produced by the school dramatic society, and published at his own expense a slim book of poems which, by his own account, sold virtually no copies. He won a classics scholarship to Queen's College, Oxford, but after 'one year of Oxford at its dryest, unrelieved by one flash of inspiration, humour or understanding from any don concerned with me', went down without a degree (Trease, 'Whiff of Burnt Boats', 101). After social work in the East End, from which he emerged with strong left-wing convictions, he scraped a living for two years from Grub Street literary work, falling back in the end on private school teaching. Here he met Marian Haselden Granger Boyer (1906-1989), a fellow teacher, and they were married on 11 August 1933, his twenty-fourth birthday: a marriage which lasted until her death fifty-six years later. They had one daughter. 
Without money or prospects, but still intent on a literary career, Trease struggled on, pouring out articles and short stories at a guinea or so a time. The turning point was when he came across a book translated from the Russian, 'Moscow has a Plan', in which a Soviet author dramatized the first five-year plan for the benefit of young readers. Trease had not thought of writing for children, but it now struck him that the boys' adventure stories of his day were still reflecting a vanished world of imperialism and unquestioned privilege. Why not a book for children with a proletarian hero and a left-wing message? The idea was put to a Marxist publisher, Martin Lawrence, who immediately offered him a contract; the result was 'Bows Against the Barons' (1934), a Robin Hood story meant to show the seamy side of merrie England, with Robin as a champion of the poor. 
Although Trease was to write over 100 more books, mostly historical novels for young readers, this was probably the most significant, not only in determining his future career but also in its effect on children's books. It stimulated a growing demand for down-to-earth realism, and its dialogue, in plain contemporary English, helped to do away with the 'gadzookery' that had traditionally characterized historical fiction for the young. 

'Bows Against the Barons' sold in vast numbers in a Russian translation, and produced a sum in blocked roubles that enabled Trease and Marian to spend five months in the Soviet Union. It was followed by a second 'proletarian' novel, 'Comrades for the Charter' (1935), and, among much other writing, a play, 'Colony', performed at the left-wing Unity Theatre on the eve of the Second World War. None the less, Trease was gradually getting the propagandist urge out of his system, and there was little trace of it in 'Cue for Treason' (1940), which was about a company of strolling players in Shakespeare's day and featured a plot against the first Queen Elizabeth. This was probably his most popular book and was to stay in print for many years. 
After wartime service in the army education corps, Trease continued mainly to write historical fiction for children. He did not like to be thought of as only a children's writer, however, and produced a handful of adult novels, which had modest success, as well as plays for stage and radio. A study of children's books, 'Tales out of School' (1949; revised in 1964), made a powerful impact. In it, besides pillorying some outdated attitudes, Trease insisted on the cultural importance of children's literature and urged authors, publishers, and the public to take it seriously. He believed, not unreasonably, that this book helped to bring about the rise in the quality and standing of children's literature which took place over succeeding decades. He himself continued steadily at work and gradually progressed from restless young pioneer to grand old man, becoming the unquestioned doyen of British children's writers. But as the years went by, commentators found newer and younger writers more exciting. Trease's imagination, though serviceable, did not soar. His stories were planted firmly on the ground. He never went in for fantasy, and his evocations of the past did not achieve the intensity of Rosemary Sutcliff or the brilliance of Leon Garfield. But he went on writing and his books continued to sell. 
Trease worked indefatigably for his profession. He was the first chairman of the Society of Authors children's writers group, was prominent in the campaign to end outright payment for copyright, and was chairman of the society's management committee in 1972-3. In 1979 he became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. He was unfailingly helpful to aspiring writers, and at Colwall, in the Malvern Hills, where he and his wife lived for many years, he was a mainstay of the local writers' circle. He had a lasting interest in Russia and in the theatre, and one of his last novels, 'Shadow under the Sea' (1990), was set in the Crimean coastal resort of Yalta in the brief period of Gorbachov's supremacy. Late in life, to be near his daughter, he moved to Yomede Park, Newbridge Road, Bath, where he died on 27 January 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 69282


Newbigin, (James Edward) Lesslie (1909-1998), missionary and theologian, was born on 8 December 1909 at 4 Tanquerville Terrace, Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, the second child of Edward Richmond Newbigin (1863-1940), shipping merchant, and his wife, Annie Ellen Affleck (died 1962). His father was of Northumbrian, and his mother of Scottish descent. Both parents were convinced Presbyterians. His father was the owner and manager of a shipping company based in Newcastle upon Tyne, but was interested in a radical approach to national issues. After primary schooling in Newcastle and secondary as a boarder at the Quakers' Leighton Park School, near Reading, Newbigin gained entrance in 1928 to Queens' College, Cambridge, where he read geography and economics with a view to joining his father's firm. His energies were soon occupied with debating and with the Student Christian Movement (SCM). At a camp for unemployed men in south Wales in the summer of 1929, he saw, in a sleepless night of worry at his own failure to handle such a situation, a vision of Christ on the cross reaching 'down to the most hopeless and sordid of human misery, and yet promis[ing] life and victory' (Newbigin, 12) -- a conviction that was to shape the rest of his life. 
A year later, at an SCM conference, in a moment of quiet prayer Newbigin believed he received an unambiguous 'order' to offer for ordination, and was startled by a suggestion later that day that he join the SCM staff when he graduated in 1931. So he went to Glasgow as one of two Scottish secretaries, the other being Helen Stewart Henderson (1907-1999), daughter of the Revd Robert Henderson. Newbigin quickly knew he was to share his life with her. In fact, because of the strict rules of the Church of Scotland for its missionaries, they could not marry until 20 August 1936, just before they set out for India. Meanwhile Newbigin made good use of his two years of working with students and the three of theological studies at Westminster College, Cambridge, to develop an unusually penetrating and clear intelligence. A short book, 'Christian Freedom in the Modern World' (1937), in response to Macmurray's 'Freedom in the Modern World' of 1932, was finished on the boat. 
During an initial intensive period of study of Tamil, in which he became outstandingly fluent, indeed eloquent, Newbigin suffered a severe leg injury in a bus accident and had to return to Scotland. On returning to India in September 1939 the Newbigins were stationed in Kanchipuram, Madras, where as 'district missionary' until 1946 Newbigin gained a profound respect for the people of humble villages and for the potential of the Christian leaders among them. He was increasingly drawn into discussions towards the unity of three denominations (Presbyterian and Congregational, Methodist, Anglican) -- to such good effect that in the epoch-making service on 27 September 1947 inaugurating the united Church of South India he was one of the fourteen new bishops consecrated. His diocese was Madurai and Ramnad, in south-east Tamil Nadu, where he was soon immersed both in the inner-church work of preaching and caring for the congregations and in the wider care for the health, economic possibilities, and political prospects of the total community, which involved him in searching discussions with leading Hindus. 
On leave in 1946-7 Newbigin faced the bitter arguments in Britain over this pioneering inter-church union, and he provided a deeply theological approach to their resolution in his first major book, 'The Reunion of the Church: a Defence of the South India Scheme' (1948, revised edn, 1960). The reputation this earned him was heightened by his 'A South India Diary' (1951, revised edn, 1960), a winning portrait of a church growing from its local roots and of a caring, imaginative bishop. In August 1948 he shared, as a delegate of the Church of South India, in the inaugural Amsterdam assembly of the World Council of Churches (WCC), with many of whose leaders and staff he was acquainted from SCM days. He served on the group drafting the assembly's 'Message' and presented to the plenary session its eventual text, largely his own work. So began an oft-repeated story within that council: Newbigin, like William Temple between the wars, almost always proved able to produce from complex debates a text of shining clarity and good sense, offering a reconciling, forward-looking view that earned general agreement. 
The Madura years saw Newbigin active alike on the Indian church scene and on the international level, where the advent of air travel made it possible for him to share in key meetings of both the WCC and the International Missionary Council (IMC); the IMC's founding conference in Edinburgh in 1910 had provided the essential impetus for the WCC, and it was now actively debating integration with it. In 1952 he delivered the Kerr lectures at Glasgow, published as his second major book, 'The Household of God' (1953), on the nature of the church. In 1957 -- to his surprise, indeed dismay -- he was approached about becoming general secretary of the IMC, an appointment confirmed by its 1958 assembly in Ghana. So he left India in mid-1959, by which time he had delivered lectures at Harvard, published in 1961 as 'A Faith for this One World?', and written for the IMC an influential quasi-manifesto, 'One Body, One Gospel, One World: the Christian Mission Today' (1958). 
Based at first in London, from 1962 in Geneva, Newbigin was widely acclaimed as the leader of the 'world mission' constituency later gathered in the division of world mission and evangelism of the WCC -- travelling, preaching, writing, and consulting and being consulted by church leaders in every continent. One of his major contributions was the section report on unity from the WCC's third assembly (1961). This for the first time offered a vision of what God's will and gift of unity could look like, starting from the local level with 'all in each place who are baptized into Jesus Christ and confess him as Lord and Saviour' and climaxing with a vision of Christians who have 'a corporate life reaching out in witness and service to all and who at the same time are united with the whole Christian fellowship in all places and all ages in such wise that ministry and members are accepted by all, and that all can act and speak together as occasion requires for the tasks to which God calls his people. ('The New Delhi Report', 1962, 116)' Newbigin also took a leading role in the world mission conference at Mexico in 1963 under the theme 'Mission on six continents', at which the old, hurtful distinction between 'sending' and 'receiving' churches could be overcome in the agreement that Christ's mission was now entrusted to each local church to pursue in its own place and way, with the support -- and on occasion correction -- of all other local churches: a vision of catholicity in mission that remains a keystone of the ecumenical movement. 'The Relevance of Trinitarian Doctrine for Today's Mission' (1963) brought his distinctive theological approach to a wider audience. 
Yet Newbigin did not altogether enjoy the Geneva years, and was happy to be elected bishop in Madras and to return to India with his wife Helen -- their four children (three daughters and a son) by now grown up -- in mid-1965. His years there brought constant demands on him from the local, national, and international levels. He remained active in the WCC, especially in its 'faith and order' commission. Addresses continued to appear in book form: 'Honest Religion for Secular Man' (1966), his riposte to the debate around John Robinson; 'The Finality of Christ' (1969), originally given in Yale University; and 'The Good Shepherd: Meditations on Christian Ministry in Today's World' (1974, revised edn, 1977). 
In 1974 Newbigin and his wife travelled back to retirement in the UK by local transport, carrying only two suitcases and a rucksack from Madras to Munich. Forbidden to cross Iraq or Syria, they hitch-hiked with a friendly Turkish workman from Tabriz to the Armenian border, and thence to Erzurum and Cappadocia. They had decided to live in Birmingham, in order that Newbigin could serve the Selly Oak Colleges as a part-time lecturer in mission studies. His work there resulted in 'The Open Secret: Sketches for a Missionary Theology' (1978, second edn, 1995). He was also soon caught up in many other activities, not least in the United Reformed church (URC), in which the English Presbyterians had united with the Congregationalists, and which was pursuing the possibility of further unity with the Methodists and the Church of England. Newbigin served as the URC's national moderator in 1978-9, also as one of its representatives on the churches' unity commission, whose plan for 'covenanting for unity' of 1980 fell victim, like the Anglican-Methodist unity scheme ten years earlier, to an insufficient majority among the clergy in the general synod of the Church of England, though not without a hard-fought battle also in the URC. 
In 'The Light has Come: an Exposition of the Fourth Gospel' (1982), Newbigin published a magisterial commentary on 'St John', while 'Unfinished Agenda: an Autobiography' (1985, second edn, 1993) provided an engaging, fast-paced, and attractively humble record. Addresses and articles continued to pour from his portable typewriter. Notable among them were 'The welfare state' for Westminster Abbey's Gore lecture; 'What is 'a local church truly united'?' for the 'Ecumenical Review'; 'A Christian perspective on the city' for 'Faith in the City of Birmingham', a twenty-page summary of the theology many had missed in the national report 'Faith in the City'; 'Your Kingdom Come' (1979), biblical reflections on the theme of the WCC's world mission conference at Melbourne in 1980; 'Mission in Christ's Way' (1987), in preparation for the next at San Antonio, Texas, in 1989; and 'Come Holy Spirit -- Renew the Face of the Earth', a lecture towards the 1991 WCC assembly in Canberra. As a former director of the world mission commission he was a guest at the Texas conference, giving an outstanding impromptu after-hours address. In November 1996 he flew, his last major journey, to spend a few days at the corresponding conference in Salvador de Bahia, Brazil, where his brief but far-sighted contribution was welcomed with great warmth. 
Meanwhile Newbigin had given fifteen years to what he called 'the most intensely missionary period of my life', engaging at depth with the underlying assumptions and unspoken convictions of the 'Western, post-Enlightenment' culture that was spreading all over the world and sapping the foundations of religious traditions, including Christian faith. This began when a planning group of the British Council of Churches, considering a major 'church and society conference' for 1984, ran into uncertainty. Newbigin offered to draft a sketch of what its discussions could be indicating, and within ten days had sent a fifty-page manuscript which many who read it, including both the Anglican and Roman Catholic archbishops, found deeply exciting. It became 'The other Side of 1984: Questions for the Churches' (1983), sold worldwide in many different languages and editions. It was followed during the next ten years by 'Foolishness to the Greeks: the Gospel and Western Culture' (1986), 'The Gospel in a Pluralist Society' (1989), 'Truth to Tell: the Gospel as Public Truth' (1991), and three chapters in 'Faith and Power: Christianity and Islam in 'Secular' Britain' (1998) -- all pursuing his passionate concern for the nature of truth and obedience to God's will in a society and culture that had grown indifferent to this entire genre of question. In these years he lectured frequently in Europe and North America, with a memorable visit to India for the fiftieth anniversary of the IMC's Tambaram world mission conference. 
After a move to live in sheltered housing in London in 1992, Newbigin was often invited to speak at Holy Trinity, Brompton, sanctuary for evangelicals and charismatics -- hardly his lifelong supporters but among whom he found an attentive audience for his central theological concerns. A heart-warming service in September 1997 celebrated his fifty years as a bishop, all spent in leadership of united and uniting churches. Despite a number of health scares in earlier years, it was only at Christmas 1997, on a visit to his eldest daughter in Manchester, that his heart started to give out; he died, not without thought-provoking reflections shared with those visiting his bedside, in south London on 30 January 1998. His funeral service was at the Dulwich Grove URC on 7 February, led jointly by a Nigerian Anglican and a British URC minister; his body was cremated at nearby Norwood the same day. A memorial service was held in Southwark Cathedral on 28 March. He was survived by his wife, Helen, and their four children. 
Newbigin was one of relatively few British Christians to have reshaped the thinking and witness of the worldwide church in the twentieth century. He was noted for his combination of five characteristics. In his speaking and writing, he stood out for the fluency of his rigorous, yet unfailingly attractive, fair, and persuasive argument with major strands in current debate. This was invariably grounded in an unshakeable belief in the centrality of God, and in God's initiatives in Jesus and in the Spirit, as the deepest fact and truth underlying everything else. He discerned the universal horizon of whatever he dealt with, whether the dilemmas of a Western welfare state or a dialogue with Hindu friends in India or Handsworth. He always held together in a profound wholeness and integrity both faith and life, both religious teachings and social practice, both the concerns of an individual and the needs of society, God's purposes for both the church and the world. All of these were bathed in the courtesy and infectious laughter of a man who had long since forgotten how to think of himself more highly than he ought to. 


@@@@@


doc= 69283


Stokes, Elizabeth (fl. 1723-1733), pugilist and prize-fighter, was probably a Londoner by birth; no early details of her life are known, but she was billed 'of the famous City of London' and termed the 'City Championess' ('Weekly Journal', 1 Oct 1726). A notable early leader in female stage combat for financial gain, she was one of the rare examples of a fighter of either sex who during the first half of the eighteenth century featured in confrontations using weapons (such as the back-sword and quarterstaff) as well as fists. Contrary to some beliefs, no protagonist was required to take part in both during the same contest, although boxing matches did occur occasionally on the undercard of the encounters with weapons. Overall, Stokes participated more in the latter, generally advertised as 'trials of skill', including competing with her husband, James ('fl'. 1716-1738), against other couples. However, in these mixed paired trials the women seem to have fought only against each other and not against the men. Nevertheless, there is evidence that Stokes engaged in sword bouts with at least one male opponent, Edward Sutton's wife once refusing her challenge on the grounds that if 'she can conquer the Champion of Kent [the customary description of the renowned Sutton] at Flats, she must do the same to me at Sharps' ('Daily Advertiser', 22 Aug 1733). Pugilistic contests, though, appear to have been without exception between members of the same sex and never involved mixed pairs, and in the City Championess's fistic battles she always seems to have been billed individually against another female. 
Stokes may well have been the Elizabeth Wilkinson of Clerkenwell who fought a lengthy contest with Hannah Hyfield of Newgate Market in June 1722 in which both protagonists held a half-crown in each hand, the loser being the first to drop her money. The encounter, for 3 guineas, occurred at the Bear Garden, Hockley in the Hole, near Clerkenwell Green. In the summer of 1723 the City Championess was advertised to meet, in boxing battles, the similarly named Joanna Heyfield of Newgate Market (possibly the same person) on two occasions (the first was prevented by inclement weather and the second she won), and also a Billingsgate fish-woman, Martha Jones. She was, commented the 'London Journal' soon afterwards, by now equal to any of her sex with her fists (as well as apparently with her vulgar tongue), and had gained the admiration of the mob attracted to such entertainments. In October the City Championess may have participated in her first major trial of skill, since in an advertisement for an engagement with Elizabeth Bedford she expressed her desire to show that 'I am as well qualify'd ['sic'] in the Noble Science of Defence as I am in the Art of Boxing'. The weapons to be used were the back-sword, sword and dagger, sword and buckler, and quarterstaff ('Daily Post', 1 Oct 1723). These same weapons were also listed when she was billed with James Stokes against Sutton and a woman from Kent in August 1725 in an early example of the successful husband and wife pairing. 
By 1726 Stokes was contesting at her husband's 'New Amphitheatre, in Islington Road, near Sadler's-Wells', being advertised with her opponent Mary Welch, in a trial of skill in the October, to fight in 'close Jackets, short Petticoats coming just below the Knee, Holland Drawers, white Stockings and Pumps' ('Daily Post', 3 Oct 1726). When the two were billed to meet again in the same month Welch claimed to have been at least her celebrated opponent's equal in their recent encounter. During the next year Stokes's intended activities included three summer mixed paired engagements against Welch and her future husband Robert Barker, two with James, and the other with William Gill. In April 1728 Stokes was bold enough to challenge Welch (now Barker) and one Elizabeth Hughes to fight her on the same afternoon, both to be paid 5 guineas each should either gain a victory over her. This appears to have elicited no response, although Stokes, in the June and August, was certainly advertised to meet the former. These trials of skill were scheduled to be at her husband's establishment, the first event also to feature two of her scholars and the second to have a special gallery for women. At the end of 1728 the Stokes partnership was billed to compete against another experienced husband and wife, Thomas and Sarah Barret (Barrett). In that year, too, boxing matches were planned at James Stokes's amphitheatre between his spouse and an ass driver from Stoke Newington, Anne Field. One was cancelled because of poor weather and Field blamed her inferior performance in the rearranged event (when yet another was advertised) on several gentlemen having forced her to drink with them. 
Trials of skill announced in 1729 and 1730 in which Stokes was to be teamed with her husband included those against Charles Wright and his scholar Mary Waller; Thomas and Sarah Barret; Joseph Paddon and the curiously named Engine Woman; Edward Sutton and a Kentish female he had tutored; and Felix Mac-Guire and a woman whom he had trained from infancy. By 1732 Stokes (now known as the European Championess) had fought, according to a notice for forthcoming attractions at her husband's amphitheatre, '45 Stages, and never yet been conquered, the last before his Royal Highness the Duke of Lorrain' ('Daily Journal', 12 June 1732). The next year appears to be the last in which Stokes was noticeably active. In an advertisement during that summer for what seems to have been her final appearance together with her husband (the Barrets again being the opponents), the pair claimed that they remained undefeated. Shortly afterwards Stokes was due to be partnered first by Sutton and then the Lancastrian Richard Banks against Richard Richbell and his wife, Martha, and Mac-Guire and his spouse, Letitia, respectively. 
Besides her highly successful career as a fighter, Stokes appears to have assisted her husband by seconding him in some of his trials of skill, for Joseph Paddon once invited him to contest without any seconds, 'his Wife particularly excepted' ('Daily Journal', 27 July 1730). Further details of her later life and death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 69285


Appleton, Honor Charlotte (1879-1951), artist in black and white, was born on 4 February 1879 at 30 St Michael's Place, Brighton, Sussex, one of four children of John Hoblyn Appleton (1834/5-1881), formerly vicar of St Mark's, Staplefield, Sussex, and his wife, Georgina Rachel Maud, 'nee' Wilkie. As a child she enjoyed playing with her two older sisters, Rachel and Alice Mary, and her younger brother, John. She painted watercolours while still a young girl (including a small one dated 1888 depicting two 'Kate Greenaway' little girls in bonnets). After attending the art branch of the South Kensington Schools she went on to Frank Calderon's school of animal painting, and then in 1901 enrolled with her sister Alice at the Royal Academy Schools. 
Appleton started her career as an illustrator in 1902, while a student at the Royal Academy Schools, writing as well as illustrating 'The Bad Mrs. Ginger' (the first of several books that she wrote for children). Her next important illustrative work was for an edition of William Blake's 'Songs of Innocence' in 1910. She was also a watercolour painter who exhibited at the Royal Academy, but for more than forty years she was primarily an illustrator of books for young children. She illustrated over 150 children's books, using delicate watercolours and black and white pen drawings, and on a few occasions using pen and wash. Very businesslike as an illustrator, she spent long hours studying children at play. She is best known for her illustrations to the 'Josephine' books by Mrs Henry Craddock, which are all concerned with a small girl playing with her family of dolls, including a sailor-suited duck called Quackie Jack who appears in many of the books in the series. David Wootton wrote that Appleton's images depict for the most part 'an exquisitely naturalistic depiction of the girl's life, only occasionally -- but increasingly -- suggesting that the dolls with which she plays are also alive' (Wootton, 136). She used outline drawings in black and white, and soft colours for the plates. Her illustrations were often from a floor-level viewpoint that showed adults from the knees down and appealed to young children, who naturally had the same perspective. Some of her other work, particularly the colour illustrations, has been criticized for its vague and pretty romanticism and lack of definition. Fiona Halpin, however, in an exhibition catalogue issued in 1990 justly praised the Josephine illustrations for capturing 'the air of innocence inherent in children without clouding it in sentimentality' (Halpin, [p. 4]). 
Appleton, who did not marry, died on 30 December 1951 at Brooklands Nursing Home, Haywards Heath, Sussex, having lived for the whole of her working career at 3 Ventnor Villas, Hove. She died just before she could see a planned exhibition of seventy-two of her original paintings for illustrations which was held at Hove Public Library in 1952 and later displayed in galleries around Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 69288


Stone, (Alan) Reynolds (1909-1979), engraver and letter cutter, was born at Eton College, Buckinghamshire, on 13 March 1909, the eldest of the three children and the only son of Edward Wellington Stone (1867-1936), an Eton housemaster, and his wife, Laura Neville (1872-1925), the daughter of J. E. Bovill, a corn merchant of Dorking. His mother had studied drawing under the painter and Slade professor of fine art Henry Tonks. His father's sister married the writer Compton Mackenzie. Stone was educated first at Eton and then at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he read history, in which he obtained second classes (second division) in both parts of the historical tripos (1929 and 1930). 
Stone began work at the Cambridge University Press under a scheme inaugurated by Walter Lewis, the university printer, for the training of graduate apprentices. It was here that he began his first experiments as an engraver, first on pieces of type metal and later on boxwood. Two great influences of this period were F. G. Nobbs, the press overseer, and the work of Stanley Morison, at that time typographical adviser to the Cambridge University Press. Morison was in part responsible for the revival of interest in classical letter forms and had edited three volumes of 'Fleuron', a typographical periodical, which Stone read at Cambridge. In 1932 he spent a formative fortnight at Pigotts, the home and workplace of the master craftsman and engraver Eric Gill, who had such a profound effect on modern typography and design. Stone found the atmosphere of worship and work at Gill's too powerful; he felt a need to make his own way. 
In 1932 Stone moved to Taunton to work for the printers Barnicott and Pearce. It was there that he produced some of his first engraved designs, including his first book-plate for Armide Oppe. Two years later he left to pursue his own career as a freelance engraver and designer, and exhibited book-plates at the 'Sunday Times' book exhibition, where he first attracted critical attention. 
Until the Second World War, Stone worked on numerous book-plate designs, armorial devices, and illustrations. Notable books he illustrated include 'The Shakespeare Anthology' (Nonesuch Press, 1935), 'The Praise and Happinesse of the Countrie Life' (Gregynog Press, 1938), and 'The Confessions of J. J. Rousseau' (Nonesuch Press, 1938). 
In 1938 Stone married Janet Woods ['see below'], with whom he had two sons and two daughters. They moved to Bracken Cottage, Bucklebury, Berkshire. In 1939 he taught himself to cut letters in stone, and his mastery of this form led to various important commissions, such as the memorials to Alfred Duff Cooper, Viscount Norwich (1955), Sir Winston Churchill (Westminster Abbey, 1965), T. S. Eliot (Westminster Abbey, 1966), and Lord Britten (Aldeburgh, 1977). 
During the war Stone worked with the RAF in photo interpretation, but still produced engraved designs. The post-war period saw some of his finest work, including illustrations for Adrian Bell's 'The Open Air' (1936 and 1949) and designs for 'Breviarium Romanum' (1946), commissioned by Stanley Morison. He also engraved devices for 'The Times', notably the masthead, introduced in 1951. 
Stone moved with his family to Dorset in 1953 to the Old Rectory, Litton Cheney, Dorchester, where he lived for the rest of his life. In 1955 he designed the coat of arms for Her Majesty's Stationery Office and in 1963-4 the $5 and $10 notes for the Bank of England (using his daughter Phillida as the model for Britannia); she subsequently married the documentary film-maker Jonathan Francesc Gili. Stone contributed the article on Gwendolen Raverat to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. He always painted, often using his watercolours as starting points for engravings. The wilderness of his large wooded garden with its stream and ponds was a constant source of inspiration. He had one-man exhibitions at the Aldeburgh Festival (1958), the Arts Council (1959), Agnews (1965 and 1969), and the New Grafton Gallery (1972, 1975, and 1978). Stylistically he was a descendant of the engraver Thomas Bewick (1753-1828) and, in lettering, of the Renaissance calligraphic masters. He achieved near perfection with his engraved alphabets and roman capitals on wood and stone. He was appointed CBE in 1953 and a royal designer for industry in 1956, and in 1964 was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. 
Stone was a man of quiet charm and humour whose friendship was greatly valued. He died, following a stroke, on 23 June 1979 in Dorchester, Dorset. 
Stone's wife, Janet Clemence Stone (1912-1998), photographer and hostess, was born on 1 December 1912 at Cromer, Norfolk, the fourth of the six children of Edward Sydney Woods (1877-1953), bishop of Lichfield, and his wife, Clemence Rachel, 'nee' Barclay (1874-1952). Two of her brothers became bishops. Educated at the Perse School for Girls, Cambridge, a finishing school in Lausanne, and the Royal College of Music, she started a singing career as a soprano but ended it after marriage. She became a notable hostess, entertaining at Litton Cheney leading writers, painters, and intellectuals including John Betjeman, J. B. Priestley, Benjamin Britten, Kenneth Clark, Henry Moore, Iris Murdoch, and John Bayley; she and her husband were particularly close to Murdoch and Bayley. She often photographed her guests (she also undertook commissions for books and magazines), and at Murdoch's suggestion, published some of her portraits in 'Thinking Faces' (1988). After Stone's death she moved to Salisbury, Wiltshire, where she died on 30 January 1998, survived by her four children. Some of her portraits are in the National Portrait Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 69294


France, Sir Arnold William (1911-1998), civil servant, was born on 20 April 1911 at St John's Road, Knutsford, Cheshire, the only son, and oldest child, of William Ernest France (1880-1939), bank manager, and his wife, Catherine Moncrieff, 'nee' Ames (1879-1963), teacher of dancing. He was a boarder at Bishop's Stortford College (1924-8). In 1929 he followed his father into the District Bank, where he worked for eleven years in the Manchester area, sometimes looking after small branches in the Peak District. On 27 April 1940 he married Frances Margaret Linton Palmer (1913-1998), whom he had met on a walking tour in Austria. She was the daughter of Dr J. C. L. Palmer. 
It was during the Second World War that France first began to show distinction. Conscripted into the Royal Corps of Signals in 1940, he served for three years with the Sudan defence force. Transferred to Cairo, and on the basis of his banking experience, he was seconded to be deputy economic and financial adviser to the minister of state, Middle East. He made such an impression that in 1945 he gained a place at the Treasury as a principal. He was then assigned mainly to overseas finance and became assistant secretary in 1948 and under-secretary in 1952. He became third secretary in 1960, and worked with Edward Heath on Britain's abortive application to join the European Common Market. 
Transferred to the Ministry of Health as deputy secretary in 1963, at a time when an expensive recasting of the National Health Service was being considered, France was permanent secretary between 1964 and 1968. The system of primary health care had rested on individual medical practices and standard payments to doctors. Under the 1966 charter of general practice a range of special payments encouraged the development of group practice, the building of new and well-equipped surgeries, and the hiring of ancillary nursing staff. As right hand man to Kenneth Robinson, the minister of health, and with the authority of an ex-Treasury official France was crucial to the successful outcome of the negotiations with the medical profession. He was appointed KCB in 1965. Between 1968 and 1972 he was chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue. As chairman he focused on management and staff relations, rather than on detailed tax policy, and oversaw the opening of the Inland Revenue's first computer centre at East Kilbride. He was advanced to GCB in 1972. 
After retiring from the public service in 1973 France was a director of Pilkington Brothers (1973-81), Tube Investments (1973-81), and the Rank Organization (1973-83). He lived at Lingfield, Surrey, from 1948 until his death. Between 1973 and 1981 he was chairman of the board of management of Lingfield Hospital school, where the needs of multi-handicapped children with epilepsy were very close to his heart. He was a committed Anglican, and for many years churchwarden and treasurer of his local church. Between 1973 and 1978 he was chairman of the Church of England's central board of finance, presenting sets of figures in a way even the least numerate could follow. In all his activities he worked towards consensus by listening and persuading, but succeeded in getting effective and timely results. 
France was a devoted family man, with four daughters, and, towards the end of his life, seven grandchildren. He died on 2 January 1998 at Ashurst Park, Fordcombe Road, Langton Green, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, following a stroke. The funeral and cremation were on 12 January 1998 at St John the Evangelist, Blindley Heath, Surrey, where his ashes were later interred. His widow died on 22 December 1998. They were survived by their four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 69295


Field, Xenia Noelle (1894-1998), prison reformer and horticulturist, was born in Secunderabad, India, on 25 December 1894, the daughter of Thomas Hermann Lowinsky (died 1932), general manager of the Hyderabad-Deccan mines, and his wife. Xenia's unusual Christian names reflected the fact that her mother liked the sound of Russian words and that she was born on Christmas day. A year later the family returned to England, where her father worked as a stockbroker. They lived at Tittenhurst Park in Berkshire, a house with an 80 acre estate where Xenia began to share her father's enthusiasm for gardening. He built up an outstanding rhododendron collection, was a Royal Horticultural Society (RHS) gold medal winner, and encouraged his daughter in her passion for auriculas for which she, in later years, was similarly rewarded. 
Lowinsky was educated at Heathfield School, and at a finishing school in Paris, and as a young woman her first professional interest was the theatre. She had three plays performed in the West End and also published short stories, but by the mid-1920s she was devoting most of her time to charitable works, becoming vice-president of the British Red Cross. In 1936 she married Dr James Field, a medical practitioner who had lived and worked in India. He was considerably older than his wife, and the childless marriage ended after only five years with his death in 1941. 
At the start of the Second World War, Field joined the WVS, but soon left to concentrate on the problem of salvage disposal under the Ministry of Supply; by the time the war ended Field was head of the improbably named Women's Organization for Salvage and Recovery, which encouraged housewives to turn over their aluminium saucepans for the war effort. She was greatly motivated by her minister, Herbert Morrison, who became her political mentor; under his influence she was elected to represent Paddington North for Labour on the London county council in 1946. She lost the seat in 1949 and stood as an unsuccessful parliamentary candidate for North Somerset in 1950 and Colchester in 1951; she remained an active Labour supporter until 1982, when she joined the nascent Social Democratic Party. 
Shortly after the war Field became a magistrate, and she then first developed what became a lifelong interest in penal reform. In the early 1950s she initiated Christmas concerts in the London prisons, consistently persuading leading performers to oblige; she also began the Field lectures in which prominent speakers were invited to talk in the main London prisons. She was awarded an MBE in 1958 for her prison work, and her book 'Under Lock and Key: a Study of Women in Prison' (1963) was a major contribution to the subject. Field persuaded the Salvation Army to set up the first bail hostel in Britain in 1971, thus initiating a practice that later became an established and official procedure for those homeless persons awaiting trial who hitherto had always been held in prison. Field's interest in gardening saw material fruit in the publication shortly after the war of 'Window Box Gardening', a book that caught the eye of Sylvester Bolam, then editor of the 'Daily Mirror'. He invited her to write a weekly gardening column for the paper, and this she did for almost forty years. She became a familiar figure at Royal Horticultural Society events, and continued to make lively and incisive contributions to discussion until well into her nineties. Horticulturally, Field was no innovator, but she wrote and talked good common-sense gardening that appealed to a wide audience; despite her upbringing on a country estate, her best contributions were paradoxically on town gardens. She drew on her own experience of gardening at her home in Holland Park, London, to produce 'Town and Roof Gardens' in 1967, and her contribution and influence were recognized in the award of the RHS's Veitch gold medal in 1972. The Salvation Army benefited materially from Field's devotion to its cause when she arranged for it to be the beneficiary of the Field Foundation, a substantial charitable trust that she had set up, having astutely multiplied many times the capital left to her by her father. Her own great longevity led her to recognize the problems that old age brings, and as she approached her century she gave funds for postgraduate study into age-related problems at Hammersmith Hospital. Xenia Field died of a stroke on 24 January 1998, at Goldsborough Nursing Home, 40-46 Ladbroke Road, Kensington, London, in her 104th year. 


@@@@@


doc= 69298


Pasmore, (Edwin John) Victor (1908-1998), artist, was born on 3 December 1908 at Chelsham House, Chelsham Road, Surrey, the eldest son of Edwin Stephen Pasmore (1866-1927), physician and specialist in mental diseases, and Gertrude Eva Screech (1884-1974), amateur painter. His early life was comfortable, and the milieu in which he grew up was artistic -- not only did his mother paint, but his father was a man of taste who collected objects of virtu. His younger brother Stephen recalls him single-mindedly drawing battleships and aeroplanes in the nursery during the First World War. Pasmore's evident passion for painting was encouraged to such an extent that while at Harrow School (1922-6) he painted a competent copy of Landseer's 'Dignity and Impudence'. 
The art master at Harrow, Maurice Clarke, proceeded to introduce Pasmore to the work of the French impressionists, but the boy was equally impressed by Rembrandt and the late works of Turner, and was fascinated by the conceptual side of art as instanced in Leonardo's notebooks and Joshua Reynolds's 'Discourses'. He tried to paint what he saw, mainly landscape and still life. The sudden death of his father in 1927 deprived Pasmore of all immediate hopes of becoming a professional artist, and he became a clerk in the public health department of the London county council. 
Pasmore worked for the London county council for ten years, refusing all promotion so that he might reserve his energies for painting in his spare time. From 1927 until 1931 he attended evening classes at the Central School of Arts and Crafts under A. S. Hartrick, a cosmopolitan figure who had known Van Gogh, Gauguin, and Lautrec. In 1931 he began to show with the London Group, and in 1932 he joined the London Artists' Association. Pasmore continued his self-education largely through copying the masters, at this point taking the Fauve paintings of Matisse and Bonnard as examples, and holding his first solo show. He began to mix with the British avant-garde, made lasting friendships with William Coldstream and Claude Rogers, and experimented with abstraction rather before he properly understood it, participating, with Ivon Hitchens and Ceri Richards among others, in a ground-breaking exhibition, 'Objective abstractions', at Zwemmer's Gallery (1934). 
Although impressed by the abstractions of Ben Nicholson, Pasmore returned to traditional naturalism, under the influence of Sickert and Bonnard, and destroyed his early abstract efforts. The depression of the 1930s saw the development of realistic art with a social conscience, and Pasmore soon became involved with his friends Rogers and Coldstream in founding the Euston Road School to teach these new principles. Pasmore, however, was more drawn to the discipline of measuring with a plumb line, that is to say towards a science of objective picture making, than to any specific social or political stance. He was now able to give up his job with the London county council, largely because of the enlightened patronage of Kenneth Clark, newly appointed director of the National Gallery, who undertook to pay Pasmore a stipend in return for paintings. This open show of support made all the difference to the young artist, and his work assumed increasing authority. 
On 3 June 1940 Pasmore married the artist Wendy Blood ('b'. 1915), with whom he had two children. At the outset of the Second World War, the Euston Road School was dissolved and Pasmore registered as a conscientious objector. None the less he was conscripted in October 1941, trained as an NCO and earned something of a reputation as a marksman. He was subsequently sent for guards officer cadet training at Sandhurst, whereupon he once more proclaimed himself a conscientious objector and walked out of barracks. He was declared a deserter and imprisoned for six months. Finally, in September 1942, after appearing before a number of tribunals, he was completely exempted from military service and allowed to get back to his painting. 
The influences of Whistler, Conder, and Japanese prints are discernible in Pasmore's work of this period, but Chinese painting, particularly of the Song dynasty, was also a key inspiration. Bombed out of their flat in Ebury Street in 1941, the Pasmores stayed with friends and Victor buried himself in the writings of Cezanne, Gauguin, and Van Gogh. He pondered colour theory and was fascinated by what he saw as the gap between the paintings and the ideas of the post-impressionists. His own work developed. The apparently pointilliste paintings of the Thames at Chiswick, with which he rapidly made a name for himself, have strong curvilinear frameworks that suggest a spiral movement. This may owe something to Turner, and it was a motif to which Pasmore returned. 
In 1943 Pasmore took up the post of visiting teacher at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts. He was an inspiring tutor, remembered with affection by such diverse students as Terry Frost and Euan Uglow, and continued working there until 1949, after which he worked at the Central School for five years. In 1954 he was appointed director of painting in the School of Fine Art, King's College, University of Durham, a post he held until 1961. Meanwhile his painting had undergone what many saw as a 'road to Damascus' conversion: Pasmore had 'gone abstract'. 
Pasmore's landscape paintings had become increasingly tentative and abstract, and the seminal Picasso exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum (1945-6) had emphasized what he interpreted as the crisis in modern painting. Instead of returning to fauvism or cubism, however, Pasmore pursued a more independent abstract mode after the example of Klee, Mondrian, and Ben Nicholson. The period 1947 to 1951 was largely transitional, with Pasmore making and exhibiting abstract paintings and collages. Then in 1951 he made his first abstract reliefs, announcing that easel painting was dead. Shock was general. The influential critic and general arbiter of taste Herbert Read called it the most revolutionary event in post-war British art, and opinion was split. Pasmore, a gifted public speaker with a touch of the prophet, enjoyed the notoriety, and in writing, lecturing, and teaching, set about the promulgation of his revised views. 
Pasmore showed considerable courage in 'going abstract' just at the point when he was establishing a reputation as a realist painter. In fact his work had become increasingly concerned with structure and pattern, light and space, shape and colour, and the only way forward he could detect was in terms of abstract form. He became even more active as a teacher, running a department at Durham specifically devoted to research and experiment into the language of abstract form. His influence, combined with that of his colleagues Harry Thubron and Richard Hamilton, changed art education. Even more concretely, Pasmore was appointed consultant architectural designer (1955-77) for the development of part of Peterlee New Town, co. Durham, which enabled him to design constructivist art on a scale one could walk through. 
Pasmore had too restless an intelligence to sit for long on his laurels. By the mid-1960s he felt that geometrical reliefs were too limiting, and he returned to painting. He thought of himself as a modern romantic, and always talked of the modern revolution in painting which involved for him a synthesis of objective representation with subjective freedom of expression. To this end he developed a rich abstract language of line and colour, taking universal symbols from nature such as the spiral and interlocking shapes (derived from waves and swirling snow), and employing a variety of marks from the stippled to the sprayed, but generally suggestive of organic form. His work was lyrical, essentially musical, intuitive, full of clouds of evocative colour and a wandering though exact line. 
In 1964 Pasmore made his first graphics, and for the rest of his life printmaking was a central part of his working practice. Unfailingly inventive, he worked with a number of different print workshops in London and in Rome, producing a steady stream of etchings and screen prints. Sometimes these were combined with the mystical or romantic poetry he liked to write. He was never idle, acquiring a house and studio in Malta in 1966, and making environmental paintings in the courtyards there from piled blocks of rough-hewn honey-coloured stone, daubed paint on walls, and a painted swimming-pool in which, on occasion, would float a solitary orange from an overhanging tree. One courtyard became a refuge for all the stray cats of the island, others were open-air studios. Towards the end of his life Pasmore reintroduced figurative imagery into his paintings, making copies of pictures by Picasso and Turner, and creating allegories of man's relationship with his environment. He never ceased to experiment and push beyond the boundaries of his art, and this was his lasting strength. 
Pasmore was rewarded with international sales and celebrity, and with honours in Britain. In 1959 he was made CBE and in 1981 Companion of Honour, and he was elected a Royal Academician in 1983. Among his many exhibitions were retrospectives at the Tate Gallery in 1965 and 1980, at the Yale Center for British Art in 1988, and at the Serpentine Gallery in 1991. In 1990 he selected 'The artist's eye' at the National Gallery. He was not noted for his diplomatic skills. When he first met Kenneth Clark, who became one of his staunchest supporters, Clark was trying a new frame on one of the Turners in the National Gallery. Pasmore told him abruptly that he had no taste. Yet they became friends. For all his brusqueness and quasi-military bearing -- the gruff delivery and the barking laugh -- Pasmore could be immensely charming. There was humour in his bright black eyes, as well as intelligence. If there was obstinacy in his make-up, it was the very quality which ensured that his career took the unusual and rewarding course that it did. He died, survived by his wife, at his home, Dar Gamri, at Gudja in Malta, on 23 January 1998, and was cremated at Kensal Green four days later. His work is held in many public collections including the Tate, Manchester City Art Gallery, Leeds City Art Gallery, Wakefield City Art Gallery, the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, Aberdeen Art Gallery, the Arts Council, Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, the Museum of Modern Art, New York, and the Art Gallery of South Australia, Adelaide. 


@@@@@


doc= 69304


Craig, Edward Anthony (1905-1998), film and stage designer and artist, was born on 3 January 1905 in London, the third child and first son of (Edward Henry) Gordon Craig (1872-1966), the renowned theatrical designer, and Elena Fortuna Meo (1879-1957), a virtuoso violinist. Theatre and art were in his blood. His paternal grandparents were the actress Ellen Terry (1847-1928) and the architect and designer Edward Godwin (1833-1886); his maternal grandfather was the artist Gaetano Meo (1849-1925), whose commissions included mosaics in St Paul's and Westminster cathedrals and Ernest Debenham's London mansion. 
Gordon Craig lived a turbulent, romantic existence, and was absent for most of Teddy's infant years, which were spent in Southminster, Essex. Teddy never had a formal education, instead living a bohemian life, travelling around Europe with his parents and sister Nelly; he had periods in London and Kent with Ellen Terry, but the family finally settled in Rapallo on the Italian riviera. At the age of twelve he became his father's pupil assistant. Craig was a temperamental and impatient taskmaster, who expected him to become a Renaissance man on the wing. Teddy mastered a vast range of crafts, becoming an expert draughtsman, model-maker, wood-engraver, printer, and photographer, helping his father to produce the journal 'The Mask' and other publications. 
By 1926 Teddy had become his father's indispensable helpmate and business manager, and seemed destined to spend his life in his father's shadow. But he was determined to become independent, taking the first steps in 1923 by adopting a pseudonym, 'E. Carrick', for his wood-engravings ('carrick' being the Irish equivalent of the Scottish 'craig'). When his father sent him to London in 1927 Teddy jumped at the opportunity to break free. Armed with charm, enthusiasm, and boundless talent, he kept himself afloat by designing book jackets, selling wood-engravings, and writing art criticism. But like his father he was a man of vision, and he saw cinema as the art of the future. 
A chance meeting with his stepgrandfather, the actor James Carew, led to Craig's first break into the film world. In 1927 Edward Carrick, as he was to be known professionally for the rest of his film career, began working for the enlightened film-maker George Pearson at the Welsh-Pearson-Elder company, at Stoll Studios, Cricklewood. His first film was directed by Theodore Komisarjevsky, and he was soon being touted in the press as the youngest art director in England. With the security of his new job Carrick married Helen Ruskin Godfrey (1899-1960), the sister of an architect, on 23 October 1928, at the Paddington register office, London. Their two children, John ('b'. 1931) and Helen ('b'. 1934), followed the family's artistic path, John as an illustrator, Helen as a photographer and an author-illustrator of children's books. Following the collapse of Pearson's Cricklewood operations owing to the advent of sound, Carrick earned a precarious freelance living. He persuaded the restaurateur Peppino Leoni to display art at his Quo Vadis restaurant in Soho, founding the 'Grubb Group' of artists, who held annual shows throughout the 1930s. Along with wood-engraving and book illustration, writing also kept Carrick busy: he became one of cinema's first practitioners to write extensively about design. 
Carrick also painted murals on commission. One was for the stage director Basil Dean. About to go into film production, he invited Carrick to become the art director at his new studios in Ealing. Carrick worked there from 1931 to 1935, designing, among others, the screen version of John Galsworthy's 'Loyalties' (1933), a trio of Gracie Fields musicals, 'Lorna Doone' (1934), and 'Midshipman Easy' (1935), for which he built an ingenious ship atop scaffolding on the studio lot. Carrick's attention to period detail for 'Lorna Doone' was much admired, and several of his designs were acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum. By now Carrick was in demand, and in 1935 he became art director for the short-lived Criterion Film Productions, founded by Douglas Fairbanks jun. and Marcel Hellman. 
Carrick was always generous in sponsoring and nurturing new talent, and in 1937 he founded the first film school in England, the AAT (Associated Artist Technicians') School, at 14 Soho Square. After bomb damage caused its abrupt closure early in the war, Carrick continued to formulate his ideas, teaching and inspiring people through his groundbreaking textbook on art direction, 'Designing for Moving Pictures' (1941; revised in 1949 as 'Designing for Films'). Although film was Carrick's primary occupation, throughout the 1930s he was also busy designing London stage productions, including 'Macbeth' at the Old Vic (1932), Emlyn Williams's psychological thriller 'Night must Fall' (1935), and J. B. Priestley's allegory 'Johnson over Jordan' (1939). During the war years Carrick's gift for scenic realism proved invaluable as art director for the Crown Film Unit and the various service documentary units. Working with directors like Humphrey Jennings, Harry Watt, and Pat Jackson on such classic documentaries as 'Target for To-Night' (1941), 'Fires were Started' (1943), and 'Western Approaches' (1944), Carrick made a direct contribution to the war effort, coping all the while with budgetary and rationing restrictions and government red tape. 
After the war Crown's output shifted to peacetime concerns. When Crown moved from its base at Pinewood Studios, Carrick stayed to become supervising art director for the Rank Organization. Here he gave many new talents their first film work, and proved a gifted administrator as executive art director for Rank's umbrella organization, Independent Producers. Always active in promoting film design as an art form, Carrick continued to write and lecture about film-making and design. He became one of the prime movers behind the first British film designers' guild, the Society of British Film Art Directors and Designers. He also organized the society's showcase exhibition 'British Film Art' at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1948, and compiled an invaluable related catalogue, 'Art and design in the British film: a pictorial directory of British art directors and their work' (1948). 
Through all the vicissitudes of the industry in the 1950s and early 1960s Carrick continued to design films, primarily as a freelance, bending his talents to a range of material: wartime stories ('Gift Horse', 1951), thrillers ('Tiger Bay', 1959), romantic comedies, pop musicals, Hammer horror ('The Nanny', 1965, starring Bette Davis). In 1960 he did his only designing for television, of 'Macbeth' for America's prestigious series 'Hallmark Hall of Fame'; filmed in colour on location in Scotland with Maurice Evans and Judith Anderson, it was a play he knew well, as he had designed productions at the Old Vic in 1932 and Stratford in 1949. In 1965 he retired from film design to concentrate on research, writing, and lecturing. He wrote a biography of his father, 'Gordon Craig: the Story of his Life', which was published in 1968 two years after Craig's death, and a book about baroque theatre construction, a subject dear to his heart. 
Carrick and his first wife, Helen, had separated about 1940 and later divorced; on 15 December 1956 he married Patricia Craig, 'nee' Marchant, but this marriage collapsed in 1957. He married (Evelyn) Mary Timewell ('b'. 1922), a film production secretary, on 10 September 1960 at Aylesbury, and they settled into a long and happy marriage, living first at Cutler's Orchard, Bledlow, and then at Southcourt Cottage in Long Crendon, Buckinghamshire. Despite ill health in his final years, Teddy Craig remained enthusiastic, ebullient, and charming to the end. When he spoke about the past and his enthusiasms, the years would drop away. He died, survived by his wife, on 21 January 1998 at Victoria Cottage Hospital, East Street, Thame, Oxfordshire, and was cremated on 29 January at Oxford crematorium, Headington. 
Thanks to Craig's passion for collecting and preserving things (his father sometimes referred to him as 'the Magpie'), there are Craig/Carrick collections at the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin, and the British Film Institute, London. His work is also in the collections of the British Museum, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the Yale Center for British Art. 


@@@@@


doc= 69308


Tildesley, Miriam Louise (1883-1979), anthropologist, was born on 1 July 1883 in Walsall Street, Willenhall, Staffordshire, the second daughter of William Henry Tildesley, curry-comb maker, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Fisher. She was educated at King Edward's Grammar School for Girls, Aston, Birmingham (1894-9) and at King Edward's High School for Girls, Birmingham (1899-1902). 
Tildesley's parents were reluctant to send her on to higher education, having done so for two of her sisters who went to Girton and to Newnham. From 1912 to 1914 she was trained as a teacher in north London, obtaining a National Froebel Union certificate. She spent three years teaching. Afterwards she was involved in wartime statistical work, under the aegis of Professor Karl Pearson, head of the department of applied statistics at University College, London. She took a six-month course in elementary statistical theory and practice. In 1918 she was appointed Crewdson Benington research student in craniometry, again under Pearson, who was also Galton professor of eugenics and head of the biometric laboratory at University College, London. A summary of her research work was published as 'A first study of a Burmese skull' in 'Biometrika' (12, 1921). 
In 1920 Tildesley was appointed by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research to work on the human osteological collections at the Hunterian Museum at the Royal College of Surgeons under Arthur Keith. In 1923 she was made a research assistant there in charge of the human osteological collection. Also in 1923 she produced her best-known work, 'Sir Thomas Browne: his skull, portraits and ancestry' (originally in 'Biometrika', 15, 1-76); it was also published separately with thirty-four plates and a pedigree. From this study of the disinterred skull of a seventeenth-century physician, she raised the possibility, already hinted at by similar work on the skull of Bentham, that there might be no connection between craniometric data and intelligence. Later she was appointed a curator of human osteology at the museum, and was chairman of the Comite de Standardisation de la Technique Anthropologique during the 1930s. She wrote several articles about the anthropological and archaeological use of teeth, including 'Dentition as a measure of maturity' ('British Dental Journal', 1928, 1-8). In 1939 she was elected a fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute. 
In 1921 Tildesley had obtained three months' leave from her anthropological work to make the first of several visits to Albania, her interest in which had been aroused by an American friend, Charles Telford Erickson, who had established a school of agriculture there. Later she took a leading role in the Friends of Albania Committee, established in August 1942 with the support of the deposed King Zog I. Latterly her interest in Albania was reflected in her academic work; for example 'The Albanian of the north and south' ('Biometrika', 25, 1930, 21-9). She was appointed MBE for her services to anthropology. 
Miriam Tildesley died, unmarried, on 31 January 1979 at Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire. She was cremated in Wolverhampton. 


@@@@@


doc= 69310


Hasluck, Margaret Masson (1885-1948), ethnographer, was born on 18 June 1885 at Chapelton, Drumblade, near Elgin, Scotland, the eldest of the nine children of John Hardie, a farmer, and his wife, Margaret Leslie. Brought up jointly by her grandparents, she was educated at Elgin Academy before taking first-class degrees in classics from Aberdeen and Cambridge universities. In 1910 she became the first woman nominated for a studentship at the British School at Athens. In the following summer she joined a dig in Anatolia under William Ramsay. 
In Athens, Margaret met the distinguished archaeologist Frederick William Hasluck (1878-1920), and they married at her home in Scotland on 26 September 1912. For the rest of her life she blamed herself for her husband's early death, convinced that the tuberculosis that slowly killed him had been contracted on a trip to Konia in 1913. The trip had been his wedding present to her; the destination had been her choice. After his death she spent many months assembling and editing his notes for posthumous publication. 
Gradually Hasluck returned to her own work and interests. In 1921, having received a travelling fellowship from Aberdeen University, she began ethnographic fieldwork in Macedonia and Albania. From 1923 she lived in Albania, where her husband had studied the Bektashi. She became 'the first west European scholar, female or male, to do systematic, sustained, ethnographic work' in large parts of the country (Clark, 128). She travelled all over Albania, in all weathers and by all modes of transport, spending whole seasons in the mountains. Her extensive notes and data covered a wide variety of topics: from local dialects, coinage, and customs, to witches, blood feuds, and botany. She sent dozens of artefacts to the Marischal Museum in Aberdeen. Indeed, in methodology and commitment, Hasluck far surpassed her contemporary Edith Durham (1863-1944). Unlike Hasluck, Durham never learnt Albanian, for example, and she spent only a fraction of Hasluck's sixteen years in the country. 
In 1935 Hasluck settled in the town of Elbasan, where in the following year she built a house. Elbasan was also the home of Lef Nosi, a distinguished Albanian patriot and a cabinet minister in Albania's first government. He shared her interests in archaeology and ethnography and the pair became very close, though the claim by Albanian communist writers that Hasluck was Nosi's mistress is impossible to substantiate. Whatever the relationship, it too ended in tragedy. In April 1939, on the eve of the Italian invasion of Albania and for reasons still unclear, King Zog demanded that Hasluck leave the country. She never returned to Albania or saw Nosi again. A member of a puppet government set up by the Germans in 1943, he was shot by Albania's communist regime in 1946. 
In February 1942, while living in Cairo, Hasluck was recruited by the Special Operations Executive (SOE) and charged with exploring possibilities of encouraging resistance in occupied Albania. During the First World War both she and her husband had spent time working for British intelligence, as had many members of the British School at Athens. At that time her own work had been of little account, but she now assumed a significant role. From Istanbul she established lines into Albania and sought to recruit exiled Albanians for operations. By 1943 she was back in Cairo as head of SOE's Albanian section, briefing SOE operatives before they parachuted into Albania, teaching them the rudiments of the language, and providing and collating intelligence. Within SOE she became known affectionately as Fanny Hasluck, a reference to the many younger FANYs, women of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry, who worked for SOE in administrative roles. For her tireless efforts she was appointed MBE in 1944. 
To Hasluck's great dismay, however, SOE came to support Albania's communist-led partisans, the most committed and dynamic of the country's guerrilla bands. And as the partisans became stronger, threatening to tear apart the pre-war Albania she had known of relative peace and established order, she resigned, although it is likely her deteriorating health also played a part. Early in 1944 she was diagnosed with advanced leukaemia and given little time to live. SOE considered it possible that overwork had exacerbated her condition. 
Margaret Hasluck was a tall, handsome woman whose height and bearing had, on occasion, caused her to be mistaken in Albania for a man. To the end, her life interspersed moments of distinction and achievement with others of terrible tragedy and loss, but any depression she may have nursed was disguised beneath enormous reserves of energy, enthusiasm, and kindness. Yet she could be obstinate and impatient, traits that could alienate her even from friends. And though she loved and was rigorous in fieldwork, self-doubt made her slow to publish. Had she published more and for a wider audience, she might have become as well known as Edith Durham. 
After spells spent for health reasons in Switzerland and Cyprus, Hasluck moved to Dublin, where she died of leukaemia on 18 October 1948. She was buried beside her parents in the churchyard at Dallas, Scotland. Her most significant work, 'The Unwritten Law in Albania' (1954), a comprehensive study of the Albanian custom of blood feud, was published after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 69317


Robinson, John Armstrong (1925-1998), diplomatist, was born on 18 December 1925 at 47 Lavender Gardens, Wandsworth, London, the son of Samuel Robinson, assistant principal in the Colonial Office, and his wife, Eleanor Ann, 'nee' Motley. His education, at Westminster School (where he was a king's scholar) and Christ Church, Oxford, was punctuated by two years in the RAF (1944-6). He graduated with a second-class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1949, and joined the foreign service in August the same year. His first overseas posting was to New Delhi, in 1950. There he met Marianne Berger, a diplomatist in the Swiss service. They married in 1952, and had a son and a daughter. Robinson returned to the Foreign Office in the year of his marriage. He went subsequently to Helsinki (1953-6) and to the commercial department of the British embassy in Paris (1956-8). But it was when he returned to London to work on European economic affairs that he found his metier. 
In the 1950s Whitehall was united in thinking European integration a pipe dream. The Foreign Office did not think that the German lion would ever lie down with the French lamb. The barons of the Board of Trade and the Treasury considered that freeing trade completely within Europe would never be acceptable, in particular to a France that had been protectionist since Colbert. The way forward, everyone in London agreed, was to reduce trade barriers modestly and multilaterally, thus enabling Britain to remain apart from Europe and to retain its preferential trading links with the Commonwealth and its special relationship with the United States. But a few of the post-war entrants to Whitehall began to challenge these assumptions. Robinson was foremost among them. When overseas economic questions came up for discussion in Whitehall, the Foreign Office line had been one of magisterial indifference. Suddenly this began to change. A young, forceful diplomat was challenging other departments on their own ground. 
Robinson was a natural candidate for the delegation which, after Harold Macmillan's application in 1961, sought to negotiate Britain's entry into the European Community (EC). He moved to Brussels and played throughout the negotiations a role far more important than was warranted by his rank or years. Edward Heath, who as lord privy seal headed the negotiating team, thought particularly highly of him. After General de Gaulle vetoed the British application in 1963, Robinson stayed at the now strengthened, permanent United Kingdom delegation to the EC in Brussels, developing still further his knowledge of the community scene. 'To get into the Community', Sir Con O'Neill later wrote, 'this country had to follow an extremely strait and narrow path, maintaining the true objective, overcoming disappointments, above all resisting the temptations of plausible but inadequate alternatives. The man who did most for many years by rigorous argument and strong determination to hold us to this strait and narrow path is Mr John Robinson. (O'Neill)' When negotiations for British entry into the EC started again in 1970, Robinson (who in 1968-70 headed the European economic integration department in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, with the rank of counsellor) was an indispensable choice for a key role. He fulfilled this as in effect the deputy and troubleshooter of Sir Con O'Neill, appointed in 1970 the head of the delegation at official level. It was a negotiation of formidable complexity, not least because the EC had broadened and deepened its scope since the failure of Britain's previous attempt at entry. At home opposition was rife, and the difficulty of finding solutions acceptable to British domestic and overseas interests was never-ending. Robinson was a man of extraordinary vision. He saw from the outset how and at what pace the negotiations would evolve. Like a Roman prophecy, events unfolded as he had predicted. At the end of the negotiations O'Neill said that Robinson's contribution had been indispensable. 'He knew everyone, understood everything, foresaw everything, did everything' (O'Neill). 'I sought his advice many hundreds of times, and can scarcely remember an occasion when I failed to follow it' (O'Neill). 
Robinson's later years as a diplomat were less happy. After spells as assistant under-secretary of state in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (1971-3) and as ambassador to Algeria (1974-7), he moved to Washington in 1977 as minister and deputy to the ambassador, Peter Jay. Both were men of exceptional quality but a difference of temperament did not make for an easy working relationship. After a spell at the United Nations dealing with Palestinian problems Robinson was appointed ambassador to Israel in 1980. This was not an inspired appointment: the Israelis regarded him with suspicion after his successful dealings with Palestine in New York, and in 1981 he decided to take up an offer of early retirement from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. He became a market gardener outside Cordes in France, where he found contentment. Deteriorating health, though, finally forced his retirement to Switzerland. He died there on 16 January 1998. He was survived by his wife, Marianne, and their two children. 
Robinson's more conventional colleagues saw him as having stumbled on the road to a knighthood and a major embassy. But he had no time for pomp and circumstance. He was by nature a doer, more akin to Milner's 'kindergarten' in South Africa in the early 1900s than to the urbane diplomatic round. He had a lively sense of humour and could be the most charming of companions, but he had a steely edge and neither rank nor protocol would dissuade him from pressing his case when he thought it in the public interest. Hugo Young described him as the 'militant vanguard' of the European cause in the Foreign Office. With his vision, knowledge, and relentless hard work, he made a bigger contribution to the integration of Britain in Europe than any other diplomat of his generation. 


@@@@@


doc= 69320


John Cooper (d. 1729/30), art auctioneer, was the leading figure in this field during the 1720s, as well as co-publisher of Hogarth's 'Hudibras' (1726) and publisher of 'The Hampton Court Beauties' (1727). It would appear that father and son fell out, since John was left in Edward's will 'one shilling British money and no more by reason I have already given him a greater part or share out of what I had than by his behaviour to me he hath deserved'. John Cooper was probably the auctioneer whose widow was Elizabeth Cooper, compiler of 'The Muses Library' and author of 'The Rival Widows' (1735). 


@@@@@


doc= 69322


Villiers, James Michael Hyde (1933-1998), actor, was born on 29 September 1933 at 1A Devonshire Terrace, London, the son of Eric Hyde Villiers, a retired brandy distiller, and his wife, Joan Ankaret Talbot. He was educated at Abberley Hall preparatory school, Worcestershire, where he became stage-struck, and at Wellington College, Berkshire. He trained for the stage at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and made his professional debut at the summer theatre, Frinton, as William Blore in Agatha Christie's 'Ten Little Niggers' (1953). His first London appearance was at the Prince's in 'Toad of Toad Hall' (1954) with the Shakespeare Memorial Company. In 1955 he joined the Old Vic, where he played such parts as Trebonius in 'Julius Caesar', Antenor in 'Troilus and Cressida', and Bushy in 'Richard II'. The last two he also played on the company's North American tour (1956-7), when he made his New York debut in 'Richard II' at the Winter Garden. While spending a year with the English Stage Company at the Royal Court, he appeared in Nigel Dennis's religious satire 'The Making of Moo' (1957). 
Villiers, who claimed descent from George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, and kinship with the earl of Clarendon, quickly became a distinctive character actor. His aristocratic demeanour and plummy accent made him instantly recognizable and much in demand at a time when it was fashionable for actors to have regional accents or a rough edge; not far beneath the surface was a haughty disdain, a supercilious arrogance which usually lent itself to dislikeable characters, some merely ironic or sardonic, others decidedly chilling. His essential good nature, though, ensured that life was enjoyed as fully off the stage as on it. 
In 1960 Villiers appeared in the melodrama 'Tomorrow -- with Pictures' at the Lyric, Hammersmith, before transferring to the Duke of York's, but subsequent stage roles in the decade were usually lighter, such as Frederick Knott's 'Write me a Murder' (1962) at the Lyric, 'Everybody Loves Opal' (1964), and Brigid Brophy's 'The Burglar' (1967), both at the Vaudeville. He was, though, becoming more visible in films and on television. His film debut, a bit part in 'Carry on Sergeant' (1958), was followed by Tony Richardson's 'The Entertainer' (1960), an unlikely heroic part in 'The Clue of the New Pin' (1961), and a string of roles in films which epitomized the 1960s, including three for director Joseph Losey -- 'The Damned' (1961), 'Eva' (1962), and 'King and Country' (1964) -- two Agatha Christie films -- 'Murder at the Gallop' (1963) and 'The Alphabet Murders' (1966) -- Clive Donner's 'Nothing but the Best' (1964), Roman Polanski's 'Repulsion' (1965), 'The Nanny' (1965), as the father opposite Bette Davis, Michael Winner's 'You Must be Joking!' and Bryan Forbes's 'The Wrong Box' (both 1966), as well as 'Otley' (1969), by Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais. He made numerous television appearances, especially in plays -- 'The Siege of Manchester' (1965), 'A Piece of Resistance' (1966), and 'The Fantasist' (1967) -- and was a notable Charles II, to whom he bore more than a passing resemblance, in the series 'The First Churchills' (1969). On 20 August 1966 Villiers married Patricia Nora Donovan ('b'. 1942/3), a solicitor's assistant, daughter of William Victor Donovan, a retired RAF officer; they divorced in 1984. 
The high point in Villiers's stage career was as Victor Prynne in John Gielgud's revival of Noel Coward's 'Private Lives' (1974) at the Queen's, opposite Maggie Smith and Robert Stephens; some critics felt he improved on Laurence Olivier's original. Villiers played Belcredi in Pirandello's 'Henry IV' (1974) at Her Majesty's opposite Rex Harrison, and later that year appeared at the Oxford festival as the Earl of Warwick in G. B. Shaw's 'Saint Joan' and, with an excellent comic performance, in Andre Roussin's 'The Little Hut'; the latter transferred to the Duke of York's. He played Sir Ralph Bonnington in Shaw's 'The Doctor's Dilemma' (1975) at the Mermaid, and was in an unlikely combination at the Old Vic, 'The White Devil' and 'The Ghost Train' (1976). He also enjoyed himself as both Mr Darling and Captain Hook in 'Peter Pan' (1979) at the Shaftesbury. Among his later roles were Lord Thurlow in 'The Madness of George III' (1991) at the National and Mr Brownlow in the hit revival of 'Oliver!' at the Palladium (1994). 
Through the 1970s and 1980s Villiers remained just as busy on small and large screen, 'enjoying to the full the advantages of the character actor, who often proves more durable than the leads in whose shadows he often lurks' ('The Times'). His many television appearances included 'Lady Windermere's Fan' and 'The Millionairess' (both 1972) and 'Pygmalion' (1973), as Professor Higgins, and in the two mini-series 'Fortunes of War' (1987) and 'Hemingway' (1988). He was excellent as the prime minister's sad brother in 'House of Cards' (1990); a final role was as Buster Foxe in Anthony Powell's 'A Dance to the Music of Time' (1997). His films included 'Blood from the Mummy's Tomb' (1971), 'The Ruling Class' (1972), with long-time friend Peter O'Toole, 'Joseph Andrews' (1977), 'Saint Jack' (1979), 'For your Eyes Only' (1981), 'Under the Volcano' (1984), 'Scandal' (1989), 'Let him have it' (1991), and, his last, 'The Tichborne Claimant' (1998). 
Villiers was married again, on 30 July 1994, to Lucinda Claire Noelle (Lucy) Jex ('b'. 1959/60), a secretary, daughter of Alan Jex, a retired pilot. Away from acting he was a keen follower of cricket and football. He died on 18 January 1998 of cancer at Arundel Hospital, Sussex. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 69323


Beattie, John Hugh Marshall (1915-1990), social anthropologist, was born on 8 May 1915 at 14 Harthill Avenue, Allerton, Liverpool, the only son and first of the two children of John Crawford Beattie (died 1916), a civil servant and surveyor of taxes, and Maria Jean Jones (1886-1958), a nurse. His parents, who married in 1912, were both born in Ireland: his father came from the north and his mother from a farming family in co. Wicklow. John Crawford Beattie was given civil service postings in Liverpool, and then in Carlisle, near where John Hugh Marshall Beattie was baptized at Stanwick on 31 October 1915. Beattie senior died in an accident at sea on 3 November 1916, while returning on the 'Connemara' from a visit to Ireland before planning to enlist; the boat was struck by a collier, and sank with the loss of nearly all on board. His widow returned to Ireland with the children, and settled in Monkstown on the outskirts of Dublin. John Beattie attended Dublin high school (1927-33), and then Trinity College, Dublin, where he took a BA degree in mental and moral science in 1937 (and was awarded first place, gold medal, and moderatorship research prize). He then held the position there of assistant lecturer in logic and ethics (1938-9). 
Unusually for a philosopher, Beattie decided to apply for a post in the home or colonial service, and was accepted for the latter. The first stage was a training course in Oxford (1939-40) which introduced him to the study of Africa and to anthropology. He was posted to Tanganyika in 1940, and served in Lake Province. On home leave after the war he married Honor Mary Davy (1917-1978) on 27 December 1946. She was an accomplished cellist, who continued to teach and perform throughout her adult life. They returned together to Tanganyika. John was initially posted to Tunduru in the Southern Province, and then transferred to the secretariat in Dar es Salaam, where he served in the department of African affairs and government and became clerk to the legislative and executive councils. A distinguished career in colonial administration no doubt lay ahead. 
However, Beattie's interest had been captivated rather by the people and cultural complexities of Africa itself. During a period of accumulated leave in 1949-50 he opted to take the diploma course in general and social anthropology at Oxford, and subsequently decided to leave the colonial service to return to academia. Having gained the BLitt in 1951 with a thesis about checks on political power in African societies, he left for field research in the kingdom of Bunyoro-Kitara in Uganda, before returning to become a university lecturer (later senior lecturer) in social anthropology at Oxford in 1953. After a further period in Uganda in 1955, during which he was acting director of the East African Institute of Social Research, he completed his DPhil in 1956 with a thesis on Bunyoro. In the same year John and Honor acquired the lovely old residence known as The Cottage, Headington Hill, a warm and welcoming family home where their children, Hugh and Frances, were now growing up. 
Already a member of Lincoln College, Beattie became a fellow of Linacre House (later Linacre College) in 1964. This appointment recognized his strengths both in teaching and in research in a discipline which was then finding its feet. He was playing a key role in defining the character of post-war British social anthropology, and also becoming well known in the United States (where he was a fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford in 1959-60 and again in 1966-7). A devoted colleague and disciple of Professor E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Beattie endorsed the shift he advocated from a 'natural science' approach in anthropology to a style informed rather by historical, literary, and culturally sensitive insights. Although Beattie was personally agnostic, his writings evidence deep respect for religion in general and for the moral views of others, which he saw as an essential part of social life and action. He excelled as a sympathetic teacher. His introductory book 'Other Cultures: Aims, Methods and Achievements in Social Anthropology' (1964) became a standard teaching text, well known internationally in English (and translated into Japanese, French, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Malay). In addition to his reflective writings on topics such as ritual, sacrifice, aspects of the self, and objectivity in anthropology, he published two short but influential ethnographic books ('Bunyoro: an African Kingdom', 1960, and 'Understanding Bunyoro', 1965, illuminating his own field methods). He later made an innovative contribution to historical anthropology with 'The Nyoro State' (1971). Beattie was greatly distressed at news reports of strife in Uganda during his later years. Although he was not able to follow through his research into this later period, his writings remain a testimony to the cultural riches of the country, and now constitute an important historical source in themselves. 
Beattie is remembered for his courteous, if firm, defence of the integrity of 'the native point of view' and the importance of ethnographic evidence in the face of ambitious theoretical claims of the kind then being put forward by proponents of French structuralism. On Evans-Pritchard's retirement, Beattie accepted an invitation from the University of Leiden to take up a chair of African studies (cultural anthropology), which he held from 1971 to his own retirement in 1975 and return to Oxford. Here he continued to write and to participate in academic activities, but the loss of his wife, Honor, in 1978 led him to withdraw more into private life. He eventually developed Parkinson's disease and died of that condition, aggravated by bronchopneumonia, on 13 April 1990 at Guysfield Residential Home, Willian, Letchworth. He was cremated at Luton on 24 April 1990. A memorial service was organized by Linacre College and held for him at St Cross Church in Oxford on 7 July 1990. 


@@@@@


doc= 69333


Taylor, Jonas Dearnley (1829-1902), building society manager, was born on 19 January 1829 at Skircoat, Halifax, the son of William Taylor, woollen manufacturer. Apart from his nonconformist upbringing, which had a formative influence upon his life, other aspects of his childhood and youth remain obscure. He attended King Cross Wesleyan Methodist Sunday School, Halifax, but later became associated with Sion Congregational Church and then Park Congregational Church, of which he became a founder member in 1869, deacon, and secretary. After leaving school he became a solicitor's clerk with the Halifax attorneys E. M. Wavell and later Stocks and Franklin, before founding his own firm of chartered accountants. At the time of his death he was the oldest chartered accountant in Halifax. He married first, at the age of nineteen, on 21 April 1848 at Halifax parish church, Martha Ann Eastwood (1824/5-1893), the daughter of Thomas Eastwood, a cloth dresser, and soon after her death he married at St Paul's Church, South Kensington, London, on 7 September 1894, his second wife, Ellen Sarah Hill (1857/8-1935), the daughter of John Hill, a butcher, whom he had met returning to England from the United States of America. He loved the company of children, and his first wife 'bore him a numerous family'. 
Taylor is principally remembered for his pioneering role in the foundation and development of the Halifax Permanent Benefit Building Society, of which he was secretary for almost half a century from its foundation in February 1853 until his death in September 1902. He was a member of the deputation which secured from the chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue exemption for the society from income tax in 1864. He evidently possessed a genius for organization and a talent for bookkeeping, patenting several labour-saving devices in that connection. He urged the development of a strong branch network, and during his term of office the society acquired some fifty branches, mostly in Yorkshire, including major branches at Huddersfield, Hull, Leeds, and Bradford. He also maintained strict controls on expenditure. During his lifetime the number of head office staff never rose above ten, and staff salaries and office running costs were kept as low as possible, for example by drafting letters on reused envelopes. At the time of his death the society had acquired assets of $1.5 million sterling. Taylor was respected for his integrity and for his 'foremost thought' that 'should a person bring money to the society, he should receive it back again' ('Home Owner', 5). He was a Liberal by conviction but took no active part in politics; when approached to contest a seat in the local municipal elections, he suddenly withdrew at the last moment. However, he served briefly in 1848 to 1849 as secretary of the Halifax Co-operative Trading Society and in 1857 he became a leading campaigner for public baths in the town. He also helped to promote a major model housing development of some 300 dwellings at West Hill Park, Halifax, to 'encourage thrifty artisans, clerks and others to obtain freehold dwellings for themselves', for which the Halifax Permanent advanced loans amounting to nearly $45,000 (J. Hole, 'The Homes of the Working Classes with Suggestions for their Improvement', 1866, 75). 
Photographs and a portrait in oils commissioned by the Halifax Permanent Benefit Building Society from the artist Ernest Moore shortly before Taylor's death reveal a man of medium height and portly build with silvery white hair and neatly trimmed beard and moustache. A former colleague later recalled that he usually 'came to business attired in a dark morning coat and striped trousers' sporting a top hat and umbrella and 'always commanded much attention', particularly when 'slowly picking his way through the crowds', escorted by a junior clerk laden with heavy bags of cash on his regular journeys to the Halifax Joint Stock Bank to bank the receipts from the society's branches (Hobson, 57-61). In business, he was 'autocratic, but kind and with a sense of humour' (ibid., 61), 'of quick temper, but readily conciliated' ('History of the Halifax Permanent Benefit Building Society', 137), and had 'a brisk and energetic manner' (Hobson, 57). He was 'a strict disciplinarian in the office' and a stickler for punctuality. The mainspring of his character was 'a strong and rather simple kind of faith', and in private life 'nothing pleased him better than to spend an evening at home in the company of some of his friends, especially men associated with him in church activities' (ibid., 537-61). 
Shortly after presenting his forty-ninth annual report to the society's annual general meeting, Taylor's health began to fail, and he died on 3 September 1902 at Bute House, 6 The Crescent, Bridlington, Yorkshire, from diabetic gangrene. He was survived by his second wife, but by only two sons and one daughter from his first marriage. After an impressive funeral service at Park Congregational Church, Halifax, Taylor was buried at the Halifax general cemetery, Lister Lane, Halifax, on 6 September. His funeral procession was headed by the directors of the Halifax Permanent Benefit Building Society, bankers and solicitors, surveyors and auditors, staff at the society's head office, branch secretaries, and agents. In his eulogy, the Revd G. S. Smith described him as 'a man of minute detail' who was 'straight as an arrow in all his dealings and righteously indignant with all who deviated from the right course' ('Halifax Guardian', 13 Sept 1902). One local newspaper in its obituary maintained that he had 'probably done more to encourage thrift than any other single individual' in the town of Halifax, where an extraordinarily large proportion of householders were owner-occupiers ('Halifax Courier'). His tombstone inscription recorded simply that he had been a founder and for fifty years secretary of the Halifax Permanent Benefit Building Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 69334


Mitchell, Joseph Harger (1859-1936), banker, was born on 21 January 1859 at Cross Hill, Greetland, near Halifax, Yorkshire, the youngest child of George Mitchell (1818-1886), grocer and joiner, and his wife, Mary Harger, 'nee' Holroyd. Both his paternal and his maternal ancestors hailed from Greetland, an industrial village, where Mitchell lived throughout his life. His family had strong Methodist roots and he attended the Greetland Wesleyan Chapel and Sunday school from an early age. He was educated at the Greetland Wesleyan day school before proceeding in 1871 to Heath grammar school, Halifax, where he gained many prizes and was appointed head boy in his final year. He inclined towards a legal career and passed the preliminary examination of the Incorporated Law Society, but then accepted a post on the staff of the Halifax Equitable Building Society in 1876, rising from junior clerk to managing director of the society. On 24 July 1884 at Greetland Wesleyan Chapel he married Harriet Shaw ('b'. 1859), the youngest daughter of Jacob Shaw, woollen weaver and mason, and Elizabeth ('nee' Parr). They had two daughters and two sons, one of whom, George, a promising Halifax solicitor, was one of eleven young men from the chapel killed on active service in the First World War. His parents established an institute at the chapel in his memory in 1920. 
Under Mitchell's leadership the Halifax Equitable Building Society, founded in 1871, expanded rapidly to become one of the largest building societies in the United Kingdom, second only in size and status to the Halifax Permanent Benefit Building Society, with which it merged in 1927. Mitchell worked at the head office of the society in Halifax and then managed branches at Elland, Greetland, and Stainland, before his appointment as secretary of the society in 1897. For the next twenty-five years 'his driving power, enthusiasm and untiring efforts' as secretary led to an enormous expansion in business (Alderson and Ogden, 24). At the end of his first year as secretary he was specially commended by the board of directors. In the five years following his appointment the society doubled the number of its customers to 3600. By 1914 the number of open accounts had more than trebled to 12,031. By 1921 it had nearly doubled again to 23,445, when the society's assets, which had stood at $163,780 when Mitchell was appointed secretary, had reached $3,126,302. Mitchell also established a reserve fund, which by 1921 amounted to $50,000. 
In 1898 Mitchell proposed the establishment of a bank to extend the financial services provided by the society to customers who wished to start small businesses or needed private banking accounts. The directors were initially sceptical and asked Mitchell if he could quote a precedent for his proposal. His reply was that 'it was for them to make precedents not simply to follow them' (Alderson and Ogden, 74). They eventually agreed to his proposal and the Halifax Equitable Bank commenced business on 1 January 1900, with an issue of 2000 $1 shares. However, applications for shares exceeded the number issued by ten times and the initial allocation was raised to 2395. At the end of the first year the bank had accumulated assets of $7921 and a dividend of 4 per cent was declared; by 1911 the assets totalled $148,185 and the dividend was 10 per cent, and by the end of 1920 the assets had reached $1,176,092 and the dividend was 16 per cent. Despite the misgivings of some directors that the bank, which was under the same management as the building society, might detract from the strength of the latter, by 1921 the Halifax Equitable Building Society was fourteen times as large as it was when the bank was founded. It had also acquired a network of fifty-five branches, forty of which were within a radius of 12 miles of Halifax. In 1908, in a speech to the Building Societies Association meeting in Halifax, Mitchell claimed that the amount invested in building societies in his district was forty times as great in proportion to population as the average for the whole country. 
Mitchell was elected to the board of the society in 1920 and appointed managing director in 1921. His retirement from ill health in 1921 after over fifty years' 'devoted and distinguished service to the society' (Hobson, 83) provided the opportunity for the amalgamation of the Halifax Equitable with the Halifax Permanent Benefit Building Society, to become the largest building society in the world. On his retirement the combined assets of the Halifax Equitable Building Society and the Halifax Equitable Bank totalled nearly $14 million, and the staff had increased from an assistant manager and a clerk to a workforce of a hundred. 
Outside the business world Mitchell was well known for his work as a Methodist local preacher, temperance leader, politician, and educationist. The Greetland Wesleyan Sunday school and Young Men's Improvement Society had a formative influence on his youth and he subsequently taught in the Sunday school for nearly sixty years; preached in every nonconformist chapel pulpit in the district; and held every office open to a layman in his local Methodist circuit. A lifelong teetotaller, he was honorary secretary of the Halifax and District Band of Hope Union. He was also an advocate of a progressive educational system 'with well-staffed and well-equipped schools' ('Halifax Daily Courier', 5 March 1936) and served on the Halifax district technical instruction committee for eleven years; the Elland-cum-Greetland school board for eighteen years, including six years as chairman; and as the first chairman of the Greetland and Stainland education committee. In 1887 he was unanimously elected a member of the Greetland local board and held the seat until 1892. On the formation of the Greetland urban district council in 1894 he was elected at the head of the poll of twenty-one candidates and was subsequently appointed chairman of the council. Liberal in politics, he served as secretary of both the Greetland and West Vale Liberal Association from its formation in 1885 and the parliamentary division of Elland Liberal Association. He was also a founder member of the 1899 Club, a pioneering Yorkshire young Liberal association. He served as deputy registrar of marriages for the district and was chairman of the Greetland military service tribunal during the First World War. Finally, in 1923, he was appointed to the commission of the peace for the West Riding. 
Photographs of Mitchell in 1921 reveal a smart-suited businessman with a strikingly healthy complexion, receding silvery hair, and a neatly trimmed beard and moustache. He died in the Duke of York Nursing Home, Duckworth Lane, Bradford, on 5 March 1936, of hypostatic pneumonia and a subacute intestinal obstruction. He was survived by his wife. His funeral service was held at Greetland Wesleyan Methodist Church on 9 March, followed by burial in the adjoining graveyard, where his maternal great-great-grandfather had been the first interment. The Revd Donald G. Brook in his eulogy observed that while Mitchell had 'made his way in the business world' and had 'reached the heights' by 'hard work and tenacity of purpose', he had 'ever kept in touch' with the local community, and 'many people in lowly dwellings had reason to be grateful to him' ('Halifax Daily Courier', 9 March 1936). 


@@@@@


doc= 69335


Mary Pordage (d. 1668)], widow of William Freeman of St Clement Eastcheap, and daughter of one Lane, probably of Tetbury, Gloucestershire. They were married that day at St Gregory by St Paul's, London. Their first child, Samuel Pordage (d. in or after 1691), was baptized on 29 December 1633 at St Dionis Backchurch. 


@@@@@


doc= 69336


Sutton, Katherine (fl. 1630-1663), prophetess, lived in England during her early life and subsequently emigrated to the Netherlands about 1659. Although nothing of her parents or of her origins is known, a broad outline of Sutton's life can be gathered from her spiritual autobiography, 'A Christian Womans Experiences of the Glorious Working of God's Free Grace' (published in Rotterdam in 1663). 
Sutton was a governess by profession, and in her youth she was drawn 'into a darck corner of the land' inhabited by 'many Papists', possibly Lancashire (Sutton, 2). She then married 'a man that was much in practical duties' with whom she had a number of children, at least two of which died prematurely (ibid., 3, 5-6, 10). 
Sutton's life was marked both by intense religious experience and by robust journeying. She recalls marching 'many miles' through 'all weathers' to attend worthy sermons and, in her quest to join a suitable congregation, she relocated with her family at least once in England before travelling twice overseas. The first journey abroad may have been prompted by Archbishop Laud's reforms of church practices in the early 1630s: Sutton resolved to separate from 'such a way of worship' after 'Altars were reared up', following which 'the Lord carried mee over the Sea', she states, 'where I did injoy further and fuller communion with himself in his ordinances' (Sutton, 6-7, 10). By the late 1650s she had set sail for the Netherlands, suffering a shipwreck in which her writings (recalling 'thirty years experiences') were lost (ibid., 21-2). 
The most remarkable aspect of Sutton's life lies in her gift for 'spiritual singing', first experienced while out walking in February 1655 (Sutton, 13-14; Smith, 5-6, 332-3). Filled with the spirit, Sutton suddenly found herself able to sing extempore verse prophecies predicting England's imminent destruction and claiming 'that God would afflict that nation' with war and other calamities for its 'sins'. At one point, Sutton 'had an opportunity to declare this to some that then were in high places': after disregarding her counsel, 'they were soon brought down and laid low' (Sutton, 14-16). Occurrences of such singing apparently intensified around 1658, immediately before Sutton's removal to the Netherlands. However, not all her songs prophesied national doom. Many of the inspired hymns were devotional in nature, as are those collected at the end of her account. 
Doctrinally, Sutton's faith was broadly Calvinist or Reformed, asserting foremost that salvation is by 'grace' and not 'by workes of righteousness' or 'of our selves' (Sutton, 33). Denominationally, it seems that Sutton was a Baptist, having rejected early on 'the evil and falseness' of paedobaptist 'Christening' and being later 'baptized together' with other adult members of her church (Sutton, 7, 12). More specifically, she may have been associated with English Particular Baptists, as 'A Christian Womans Experiences' includes a laudatory preface by the renowned Particular Baptist divine Hanserd Knollys. 


@@@@@


doc= 69341


Shippen, Anne (1763-1841), journal writer, was born on 24 February 1763 at Shippen House in Philadelphia, the elder surviving child and only daughter of William Shippen (1736-1808), physician and professor in anatomy, and his wife, Alice (1736-1817), daughter of Colonel Thomas Lee and sister of Richard Henry Lee and Arthur Lee. 
Anne Shippen and her only brother, Thomas (1765-1798), grew up in their father's elegant town house on the corner of Fourth Street, Philadelphia, between Walnut and Spruce streets, opposite the anatomy theatre in which he lectured on anatomy and midwifery. Between her fourteenth and sixteenth years, while Philadelphia was occupied by the British army during the war of independence, Nancy (as she was known) was sent to Mrs Rogers's school in Trenton, New Jersey. Occasionally she and her mother visited her father at army camp, where he was briefly and controversially director-general of the continental army's hospital department. 
On her return to Philadelphia in 1779 Anne was heavily courted by Louis Guillaume Otto, youthful delegate to the French legation. Otto wrote her impassioned and teasing love letters, apparently with some success. Her mother offered tentative support for the match but her father, mindful that 'a Bird in hand is worth 2 in a bush' ('Nancy Shippen: her Journal Book', 101), married her on 11 March 1781 to the wealthy, well-established, but rakish Colonel Henry Beekman Livingston (1750-1831) of New York. On the day after Christmas that year Anne gave birth to a daughter, Margaret 
(Peggy; 1781-1864)
. But the marriage was not a success; within two years Anne was living again under her father's roof and, within three, all hope of returning to her husband had faded. Only a brief reconciliation would occur, in February 1785. 
Anne Livingston began her journal in the spring of 1783, on her return to the paternal household. It inspired or was inspired by the journal of her friend Bushrod Washington, son of Martha Washington, and by proclaimed impulses of self-improvement and regulation. The journal documents her attendance at the Second Presbyterian Church and her religious and secular readings alone and with friends. In the vellum-covered volumes, prompted by the emerging culture of sensibility, she dwelt on her feelings and sentiments. The journal lays out her hopes for her daughter's education and the companionate ideal of marriage that had eluded her, drawing on the moral and fictional writings of Rousseau and Richardson. 'Why was I form'd with a heart of sensibility!' she asked rhetorically (Library of Congress, journal, 8 April 1784). The journal reveals, too, her informal and formal socializing -- sledding, sewing circles and tea-tables, Bartram's Gardens and Peale's Museum, balls and assemblies. But Otto's return to Philadelphia and his short-lived marriage to her sister-in-law Elizabeth Livingston (died 1787) tried her tranquillity. 
The journal was kept carefully for several years but dwindles to a melancholy religiosity and a resigned celebration of duty over happiness. Beyond its pages the historical record tells only of Anne Livingston's failed attempt to divorce her husband -- after Elizabeth Livingston's death -- in 1789. The difficulty of obtaining a divorce in New York was only sharpened by her parents' resistance and by the troubling implication that she would lose custody of Peggy to her husband, though she was by now supported by her impressive mother-in-law, Margaret Beekman Livingston. Eventually, and after Otto's departure, her husband arranged a divorce in Connecticut; the final diary entry of the journal book (1791) mentions the divorce as a fact. From 1797 to her death in Philadelphia on 23 August 1841 Anne Livingston and her spinster daughter lived, seemingly quietly and permanently together, in Philadelphia. 


@@@@@


doc= 69347


Susannah Whitrowe (c.1662-1677) and Jason Whitrowe ('c'.1671-1677). Nothing certain is known about her parents, childhood, or education. She may be the Joan Robinson who married Robert Whitrow at St Clement Danes, Westminster, on 17 January 1657; if so she may have been the daughter of Morgan and Ellin Robinson who baptized their child at St Botolph without Aldgate in February 1630. In a work of 1692 she cited Marcus Aurelius on the virtues of retirement, suggesting that she had a degree of familiarity with classical texts. She was called to prophesy in Bristol and London shortly before the plague arrived in London in 1665. She presented herself as a sign of repentance, by fasting, wearing sackcloth, and giving aid and counsel to plague victims. She was initially allied with the Quakers, but she later broke with them and declared that she was not a member of any sect or 'gathered People' ('Humble Address', 1689, 13). Neither her name nor that of her daughter appears in a manuscript list of Quakers active in the period held by the Friends' Historical Library in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 69349


Savage, Elizabeth, 'suo jure' Countess Rivers (1581-1651), courtier and victim of popular violence, was the daughter of Thomas Darcy, third Baron Darcy of Chiche (died 1640), later created Viscount Colchester (1621) and Earl Rivers (1626), and his wife, Mary Kitson (died 1644), daughter of Sir Thomas Kitson of Hengrave, Suffolk. On 14 May 1602 she married Thomas Savage ('c'.1586-1635), with whom she had a large family of eleven sons and eight daughters. Savage was the eldest surviving son of Sir John Savage of Cheshire and his wife, Mary Allington, daughter and coheir to Sir Richard Allington, from which family he inherited the manor of Melford Hall, Suffolk. Savage inherited his father's baronetcy in 1615; in November 1626 he was created Viscount Savage. At his death, on 20 November 1635, Elizabeth inherited Melford Hall, which together with St Osyth Priory in Essex formed her principal residences. Her father died in February 1640 and was succeeded by her eldest son, John Savage, as Earl Rivers; fourteen months later, on 21 April 1641, she herself was created Countess Rivers 'suo jure', for life. 
Elizabeth Savage inherited from her father and husband the political and religious allegiances that were to bring her ruin in the civil war. Both men were closely associated with the court of Charles I, both had links with the duke of Buckingham, and both played a role in their respective counties (Essex in the case of the former and Lancashire and Cheshire in the case of the latter) in the enforcement of Caroline policy. Elizabeth and her husband both served at the court of Charles I, Thomas as chancellor to Queen Henrietta Maria; Elizabeth, as a lady of the bedchamber, was a close companion of the queen, after whom she named one of her daughters. These appointments reflected the family's strong Catholic links. Elizabeth's father was suspected of being a church papist, but he enjoyed royal protection against recusancy legislation. The houses at both St Osyth and Long Melford formed little islands of Catholicism surrounded by neighbouring communities with a strong commitment to puritanism. Knowledge of the family's Catholicism and of the presence of Jesuit priests had made them an object of popular rumour as well as of official action, her father being excluded from the county magistracy. 
The political instability brought about by the collapse of Charles I's personal rule and parliament's emphasis on a Catholic conspiracy as the explanation for their inability to secure a settlement with the king heightened rumour and suspicion. In January 1642 Countess Rivers's sister spoke of being daily threatened by the common sort of people. Parliament's call for action against Catholics worsened the family's position. Elizabeth was presented to the Essex courts as a recusant and her house was searched for arms on the order of parliament. In August 1642 the crowds at Colchester who had attacked Sir John Lucas there went on to attack Catholics in the belief that this was what parliament really wanted. Although many Catholic families were affected, Countess Rivers became the most famous victim. Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, included an account of her fate in his 'History of the Rebellion' and the royalist newsbook writer Bruno Ryves gave a detailed (and colourful) account in his newsbook, 'Mercurius Rusticus'. At St Osyth the crowds ransacked and plundered the house. Forewarned, the countess had fled to her other house at Long Melford but the crowds followed her there and all but destroyed that house as well, the countess claiming only just to have escaped as the crowds broke in. The family of the present incumbent at Melford Hall, Sir Richard Hyde Parker, have preserved a colourful story of the countess's fleeing the house and throwing into a nearby pond a box with the strings of pearls that are to be seen in her portrait at the hall. Seven years later the Essex minister Ralph Josselin, on a trip to Melford, noted, 'I saw the ruines of that great [house], plundered out and desoloate without inhabitants', while St Osyth was later said to have remained uninhabited for the next seventy years ('Diary of Ralph Josselin', 174). The countess put her losses at some $100,000 and claimed not to have been left even a change of apparel. 
Although the popular attacks on her may have attracted wider support from those opposed to the family's association with Charles I's regime and offended by their estate policies as major landowners and their use of their extensive religious patronage to appoint ministers of crypto-papist or Arminian leanings (several of whom were also attacked), Countess Rivers was able to secure support from those who shared neither her religion nor her politics. The earl of Holland in asking Sir Thomas Barrington to support her acknowledged the difference in religion, but noted that in the countess her Catholicism 'is governed with more modesty and Temper than I ever sawe it in any person' (BL, Egerton MS 2646, fol. 197'r'). Parliament ordered the restitution of her goods, but this seems to have had only limited effect, her problems being compounded by a rent strike by her tenants. After a second episode in which parliamentarian soldiers invaded her house and took away her goods, she sought permission to go to France in May 1643. In 1648 she petitioned successfully to be allowed to compound for her estates sequestrated by parliament. However, the attacks, combined with the fines imposed on her and her son Earl Rivers, declared a notorious papist by parliament in July 1642, took a heavy toll. At her death, on 9 March 1651, she was said to be bankrupt. She was buried at St Osyth with her Darcy ancestors. 


@@@@@


doc= 69350


Maund, John (1823-1858), physician and analytical chemist, was born in High Street, Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, on 12 March 1823, the fourth of the six surviving children of Benjamin Maund (bap. 1790, d. 1864), bookseller, botanist, and horticulturist, and his wife, Sarah Green (1792-1857). Dogged by a delicate constitution, he was tutored privately in Kidderminster by William F. Matthews from 1834 to 1838 before being apprenticed to Mr Welsby, a surgeon of Prescott, Lancashire. In 1843 he went to the University of Glasgow where he gained several prizes, including first prize in pharmacology. In 1844 he moved to London, where he was assistant surgeon at St Pancras Infirmary. In 1845 to 1846 he visited Paris to further his medical training. He gained membership of the Royal College of Surgeons (1844-5), the licence of the Society of Apothecaries (1846-7), a doctorate of medicine from St Andrews University (1849), and certificates from the Royal College of Chemistry and the Royal Polytechnic Institution in London. In 1853, having sold his practice in Harlow, Essex, he emigrated to Australia with his eldest sister, Eliza, intending to take up less fatiguing work as an analytical chemist. However, Maund, a man of exceptional personal qualities, could not ignore the tremendous medical problems facing Melbourne in the early gold rush years and immediately set up again in general practice. In 1855 he helped unite two professional bodies into the Medical Society of Victoria, and in 1856 was founding editor of the 'Australian Medical Journal'. 
Maund's greatest achievement arose from his concern for the many mothers whose babies were being born in tents, at the roadside, even on the wharf, and in 1856, together with Dr Richard Tracy, he founded the first lying-in hospital (later the Royal Women's Hospital). He was awarded a doctorate of medicine 'ad eundem' from the University of Melbourne. As Victoria's first analytical chemist he undertook important research into Melbourne's water supply, especially on the Yan Yean Reservoir scheme. Maund died unmarried on 3 April 1858 at his home, 53 La Trobe Street East, Melbourne, from a sudden attack of what was probably typhoid and was buried in Melbourne general cemetery two days later. He was deeply mourned for his professional skills, his personal qualities, and his devotion to the poor. The hospital commissioned his portrait, his father unveiled a memorial window to him in St John's, Bromsgrove, and Ferdinand Mueller named a new genus of the rush family after him, 'Juncanigineae Maundia'. In 1964 the annual Tracy-Maund memorial lectures were instituted by the Australian Medical Association. 


@@@@@


doc= 69351


John Nugent Fitch (1840-1927), lithographer and printer, whom he had trained in botanical drawing. Their work together for the society, typified by Daniel Oliver's 'Botany of the Speke and Grant Expedition' (1872-5), and in joint folios such as Robert Warner's 'Select Orchidaceous Plants' (3 ser., 1862-81) and J. E. Howard's 'Quinology of the East Indian Plantations' (1869-76) resulted in hundreds of superb botanical lithographs. Fitch was made a fellow of the society in 1857, and his nephew in 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 69358


Bradshaw, Henry (c.1500-1553), judge, was the only surviving son of William Bradshaw of Wendover, Buckinghamshire, who died in 1537. He was admitted to the Inner Temple from Barnard's Inn in 1521. Although he was temporarily put out of commons for quarrelling in 1529, he was called to the bar about that time and became a bencher in 1536 when he gave his first reading. He served as double reader in 1542, notwithstanding that he had the king's letters to be excused (as a law officer), and was treasurer for three years from 1544. It was probably during the 1540s that he erected chambers in the inn, known for a while as Bradshaw's Rents; these were on the east side of what became Tanfield Court, near the present library staircase. 
Bradshaw married Jane (died 1598/9), daughter of John Hurst of Kingston and widow of William Mainwaring (died 1529) of East Ham, Essex; they had four sons and four daughters. In 1540 he was appointed solicitor-general, and he was promoted to attorney-general in 1545. The latter appointment enabled him to act as a justice of assize, and he went on the midland circuit from 1545 until his death. Edward VI renewed his office of attorney-general, which he held until 21 May 1552 when he became chief baron of the exchequer in succession to Sir Roger Cholmeley. He did not take the coif, but his arms were displayed in the windows of Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, where barons of the exchequer seem sometimes to have been given privileges. After little more than a year in office, he died on 27 July 1553, and was buried at Halton in Buckinghamshire. 
Besides his paternal estate at Wendover, Bradshaw also left estates and houses at Halton (where he kept a study) and at Noke in Oxfordshire, where his widow lived on until her death. By his will, made in 1546, he established a charity under which his executors were to hire eight craftsmen 'well instructyd in their misteris' to live in Wendover, Halton, and Noke and 'take and instructe in their mysteres and handycraftes such poor folke and childreyn bothe men and women kynde as shalbe put to them' by his widow or his heirs, or the vicar of Wendover; they were to be fed, clothed, and lodged out of the profits of their own labours (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/36, fols. 122'v'-124). This arrangement was to last for twenty years. There are three kneeling figures of Bradshaw on memorial brasses: in a long gown on his father's brass at Wendover and in judicial robes both on his own monument at Halton and on his wife's at Noke. 


@@@@@


doc= 69359


Browne, Sir Humphrey (d. 1562), judge, was a younger son of Thomas Browne of Longhouse in Abbess Roding, Essex, and Mary, daughter of Thomas Charlton, perhaps Sir Thomas Charlton (died 1465), speaker of the House of Commons. His elder brother, Wistan, was the father of Sir Anthony Browne, who was for four years a fellow justice of the common pleas. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in the 1490s and gave his first reading in 1516. By this time he was already a justice of the peace for Northamptonshire and Essex. In 1521 he became a serjeant-at-law, and in 1530 one of the king's serjeants. He was removed from the office of king's serjeant in 1532, and imprisoned in the Tower, both for hunting in Waltham Forest and for advising felons on how to avoid forfeiture of their goods. The lawfulness of his imprisonment was discussed in the Star Chamber, a major constitutional debate reported briefly by Spelman. Browne was obliged to grant his land in Waltham to the crown, and having done this he sought his reinstatement in 1533, with the backing of the earl of Wiltshire and Lord Rochford; but he was not in the event restored until 1535. 
By 1537 Browne was being actively considered for the next vacant judgeship, though he claimed not to be interested because it would cause him financial loss. In 1540, however, he was again removed from office and sent to the Tower, this time for advising on a method of feudal tax avoidance. The conveyancing device in question so worried the government that it was necessary to pass the 'Statute of Wills' in 1540 to remove the threat. Such a double disgrace was unprecedented, and yet, once more, it proved merely temporary. In 1542 Browne was appointed one of the justices of the common pleas and served for twenty years. As a judge he transferred to the western circuit, having previously (as a serjeant) ridden on the northern, midland, and home in succession. By 1559, according to Plowden, he was 'so old that his senses were decayed and his voice could not be heard by the audience' ('Les commentaries', fol. 190). 
According to the 1559 pardon, Browne was also of Terling in Essex. His will mentions the rectory of Maldon and the manor of Manuden, both in Essex, and also manors in Gloucestershire and Middlesex. In 1516 he married Elizabeth, the widow of Nicholas Shelton (died 1515), alderman of London, from whom he apparently acquired his house in St Martin Orgar; she was still living in 1541. In 1531 the house was the subject of a burglary recorded in the king's bench files. He later built a mansion house in Cow Lane, London, on land formerly belonging to Watton Priory, Yorkshire, with six messuages in St Sepulchre's parish on the east side of his 'great gate'. His second wife (shown as the first in the visitation pedigrees) was Anne or Amy Mordaunt, daughter and coheir of Henry Vere of Addington. With his third wife, Agnes, a daughter of John Hussey, Baron Hussey, and granddaughter of Chief Justice Sir William Hussey, he had three daughters: Mary, Christian, and Katherine. Christian was mother of the first earl of Thanet. Katherine was to marry as her second husband William Roper, chief clerk of the king's bench, biographer of Thomas More, and ancestor of the lords Teynham; by her first she was ancestor to the marquesses Townshend. Browne left one son and heir, George, who can hardly be the George Browne admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1528. 
Browne died on 5 December 1562, and was buried in the church of St Martin Orgar on 15 December. Agnes was his executor, and was sued in 1572 for diverting water to the house in Cow Lane through a conduit installed by her late husband. He bequeathed all his law books to Anthony Browne, his nephew and fellow judge, in return for assisting his widow as overseer of the will. 


@@@@@


doc= 69360


Caryll, John (1460s-1523), law reporter, was born into an obscure Sussex family in the 1460s. As a young man, he occasionally spelt his name Caarle, which may import a peasant origin. By March 1485 he was studying law in the Inner Temple, and it is likely that he entered the inn as a protege of John Baker, a bencher of the inn who also came from Sussex. He was a justice of the peace for Sussex from 18 February 1496 until his death. In 1493 he obtained the third prothonotaryship of the court of common pleas in succession to Humphrey Coningsby under an agreement that he would pass the office on in due course to Coningsby's son. Caryll held the office until he became a serjeant-at-law in 1510, when it passed to William Coningsby. During this period as a prothonotary, Caryll also practised privately, both as attorney and counsel, and from 1495 he was clerk of assize on the western circuit. 
Caryll served as treasurer of the Inner Temple in 1507-8, and in 1510 as serjeant-elect delivered a second or third reading, the text being part of the 'Statute of Marlborough'. Four years later, on 1 June 1514, he was taken into the royal service as a king's serjeant. His will mentions three wives, the last of whom survived him. The first was Griselda, or Gresild (died 1498), daughter of Henry Belknap (died 1488) of Sussex; her sister Alice was the wife of William Shelley, the future judge, who was another member of this Sussex circle belonging to the Inner Temple. Griselda died in 1498, and Caryll married as his second wife Margaret, sister of Thomas Ellenbridge of Merstham, Surrey, with whom he had two sons. As his third wife, Caryll married Jane, daughter of Chief Justice Sir Robert Rede, with whom, according to his will, he had four more sons. 
Caryll is one of the first identifiable English law reporters. His reports were well known by their author's name until the beginning of the seventeenth century. In 1602 about half of them, beginning in 1496, were printed by John Croke from a manuscript formerly belonging to Robert Keilwey. This edition, which has always been cited as 'Keilwey', was reprinted in 1633 and 1688. Although Croke did not mention Caryll as the reporter, it is obvious that the reports cannot have been written by Keilwey himself, who did not become a member of the Inner Temple until the 1530s, and indeed no such claim is made anywhere in the printed book. Whether Keilwey's manuscript was even the autograph is doubtful, since the latter is known to have passed to Caryll's eldest son, John (died 1566), and there is no reason why he should have parted with it during his lifetime. Keilwey was a close friend of the son, who was about ten years his senior in the Inner Temple, and was presumably given an opportunity to copy from his manuscripts. Other copies were certainly made, and the reports were known later in the century both to Dyer and Coke. Coke, indeed, once referred to 'the written report of the famous Caryll of the Inner Temple' (translated from BL, Add. MS 16169, fol. 192). 
The Keilwey text did not, however, represent the whole of Caryll's reports, which began about 1486 or 1487. The earliest notes attributable to him are in BL, Harley MS 5158, a collection of year-books which contains the names of Baker and Caryll in the 'explicits', and the name Johannes Caryll on the original vellum cover. Among the glosses and insertions are cases written in the second half of the 1480s, together with a number of disputations from the Inner Temple. The whole manuscript is full of marginal notes and cross-references, some of them attributable to the younger John Caryll, who refers in several places to Caryll's reports by name and in two places more explicitly cites 'the reports of my father' and 'the abridgment of my father'. A number of other manuscript texts can be attributed to Caryll, and these in turn enable the identification of the wrongly dated vulgate year-books of Easter and Trinity terms 13 Hen. VII (fols. 18-29) and the whole of 16 Hen. VII, first printed by Tottell in 1555, as being from the same source. From all these texts an edition has been published by the Selden Society. 
By and large the reports are in the same anonymous style as the year-books, with a preponderance of common pleas cases, though there is some internal corroboration of authorship in the mention of five or six cases from the western circuit in 1503-5 when Caryll was clerk of assize there. There are more numerous personal touches after 1514, when Caryll became king's serjeant; there is then a heavy emphasis on crown business, including notes of the duke of Buckingham's claims of that year, the Hunne affair of 1516, the May day riots of 1517, the earl of Derby's case, the important cases of 1515 and 1519 on benefit of clergy and sanctuary -- in which Henry VIII himself is reported as threatening to 'have that reformed which is encroached by abuse' (Croke, 191) -- and numerous references to revenue practice. With the exception of a brief note, the reports end in 1519, four years before Caryll died. It is a notable coincidence that the printed year-books of Henry VIII begin the next year and continue in series until Easter term 1523, the very term before the serjeant's death. Yet there is a difference of style and content between the two series, not to mention a complete absence of reports after 11 Hen. VIII in any of the manuscript texts of Caryll, and so the reports of 1520-23 cannot convincingly be attributed to the same hand. Unlike John Port and John Spelman, Caryll generally kept his disputations completely separate from his reports of cases in the courts, which are written as a chronological register in the year-book tradition. Learning exercises from the Inner Temple are nevertheless found in several of the Caryll manuscripts that contain reports; and a substantial series from the 1480s was printed in 'Keilwey' (fols. 102'v'-137) as 'Casus incerti temporis'. 
Caryll died on 17 June 1523, and was buried in London, at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, in the aisle where the judges and serjeants sat. Little is known of his estate at death, though his principal property transactions were evidently in the vicinity of his seat at Warnham in Sussex. The serjeant directed in his will that his eldest son, John, was to be: 'sett to the lernyng of the lawes of the land, and he to have yerely for his exhibition in the Temple x s. at the lest, which I knowe will suffise for his exhibition yf he lyve and use himself well and honestly and wysely like a lerner and student.' John was already a member of the Inner Temple, and before he became a bencher in 1537 had followed in his father's footsteps as a reporter of cases and of Inner Temple moots. In 1540 he was offered the coif, which he declined, taking instead the office of attorney-general of the first-fruits and tenths, whence he was promoted in 1544 to the lucrative office of attorney of the duchy. He held the duchy office until his death on 10 March 1566, turning down the coif twice more, and continued reporting cases until at least 1560, though his reports (which were printed by the Selden Society in 2004) are not so full or as authoritative as those of his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 69361


Densell, John (d. 1536), serjeant-at-law, was the son of Remfry Densell and his wife, Katherine, daughter of John Skewys. He came of a Cornish family whose name derived from Densell or Denzil in the parish of Mawgan in Pydar. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1504 at the instance of his maternal grandfather, and was elected a bencher in 1520, four years before his first reading (which was on the 'Statute of Westminster II' c. 45). His signature appears frequently on bills in chancery during Wolsey's chancellorship, and he also practised in the requests. By 1526 he was counsel to Dartmouth corporation, and in 1530 became a justice of the peace for Cornwall. At an unknown date he married Mary (died 1540), daughter of Sir William Lucy of Chalvercote. 
Densell achieved some fame in the profession by reason of his second reading, given in Lent 1530, on the 1489 'Statute of Fines' (4 Hen. VII c. 24). This circulated very widely over the next century, and at least ten manuscript texts still survive. It was printed in 1662, to accompany Coke's reading on fines, as 'Le reading del Monsieur Denshall, sur l'estatute de finibus fait anno 4. H. 7'. The year after delivering this reading, on 12 or 13 November 1531, he was chosen to be a serjeant-at-law, and delivered a third reading (on an unknown subject) as serjeant-elect. He did not, however, live long enough to secure a major appointment. He died on 3 January 1536, and in accordance with his instructions was buried in the chancel of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex. 
Family tradition had it that Densell 'was no corrupt or griping lawyer, for he made no improvement at all of his estate' (Holles, 54). He did, nevertheless, add to his Cornish properties an estate at Hendon in Middlesex and a house in St Giles's parish. He appointed his wife as his sole executor, 'to whom', he said, 'I commyt all my truste to do for my sowle as hir kynde harte shall thinke meate'. They had two daughters. Anne married Sir William Holles (died 1591), and their eldest son was named Denzil after her father; their great-grandson was the well-known parliamentarian Denzil Holles. Alys married the Cornishman William Reskymer. 


@@@@@


doc= 69362


Ernley, Sir John (c.1464-1520), lawyer, was the son of John Ernley (died 1465), landowner of Sidlesham near Chichester, Sussex, and his wife, Margaret (died in or before 1485), daughter of Nicholas Morley (1410-1472x4) and Joan Waleys, both of Glynde, near Lewes, Sussex. The family had been lords of the manor of Earnley near Chichester since the thirteenth century, and Ernley rose from local to national prominence in the administration of justice and finance under Henry VII and Henry VIII. 
Ernley probably owed his upbringing, and certainly his marriage, to John Wood of Chichester, who may have been his stepfather -- having possibly married Margaret Ernley at some point after 1465. After a preliminary legal education at an inn of chancery ('c'.1478-80) he was admitted to Gray's Inn. In 1485 Wood left Ernley extensive property in St Olave Old Jewry which had belonged to his brother, Sir John Wood, treasurer of the exchequer and speaker of the House of Commons in 1483, on condition that he marry Wood's great-niece Margaret Dawtry ('c'.1470-1518); they married shortly after 1485. Ernley secured this inheritance only after litigation to oust the treasurer's widow Margery. By 1490 he was established in London, noticed by his students as an increasingly conspicuous member of the Sussex circle gathered around Edmund Dudley at Gray's Inn. 
In his county Ernley sustained a substantial legal practice as feoffee, arbitrator, commissioner, and justice, joining the home assize circuit as an associate in 1496 and 1497 and the county bench the following year. He acquired ecclesiastical patronage in the same decade, acting as steward of a Battle Abbey manor in the west of the county, taking a place among Edward Story, bishop of Chichester's council, and beginning the family's tenure of the episcopal manor house at Cakeham, Sussex, to which he may have added its innovative brick tower. 
During these years Ernley had, at least as counsel, an unremarkable practice in the central courts. But in the first decade of the new century his horizons expanded. He began to act as one of Dudley's feoffees, and it was almost certainly to Henry VII's minister that he owed his unheralded appointment as attorney-general, replacing the out of favour James Hobart on 12 July 1507. Having paid a premium of $100 for his office Ernley readily joined Sir Richard Empson and Dudley in the financial exactions for which they alone became notorious. The association also paid dividends in Sussex, where Ernley may have involved Dudley in his local affairs to enable his cousin Agnes Morley's foundation of Lewes grammar school in December 1507. 
Henry VIII reappointed him on 28 April 1509 and, though Empson and Dudley went to the block, Ernley prospered. Within a year he devised a scheme to thwart the claim of Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham, to the office of constable of England, despite secretly admitting that he had a strong right to the title. His adroit handling of such issues soon brought him additional responsibilities. One of the most frequent attenders among the judicial members of the king's council he was assiduous in enforcing royal rights to feudal revenues and took an active role in parliament: forty-nine bills were committed to the attorney- or solicitor-general in the assemblies of 1510, 1512, and 1515. His disqualification by office from the order of serjeants-at-law was no handicap to advancement: he remained at Gray's Inn, probably as senior bencher, and in 1510 began to ride the northern assize circuit. He took the home circuit for a year in 1516-17, the western circuit until 1519, and the Norfolk circuit for the rest of his life, almost invariably paired with another Gray's Inn man. Increasingly in demand as a feoffee Ernley was 'especial good master and friend' (BL, Add. MS 5813, fol. 116'r') to the University of Cambridge, on whose behalf he obstructed a writ of 'praemunire'. 
Ernley invested his growing wealth in Sussex, not always scrupulously. There is more than a suspicion that he exploited Dudley's fall to gain outright possession of the manor of Sheffield in Fletching near Lewes, which Roger Lewknor had ceded to Dudley's feoffees in 1508 in a successful bargain to escape conviction for murder. While in the Tower of London, Dudley made provision in his will to defeat Ernley's ambitions; the title remained in dispute in chancery and on the latter's conscience until the end of his life, when he compensated Lewknor's family in his will 'not of duty... but of my charity' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/20, sig. 3). 
When Robert Rede, the chief justice of the court of common pleas, died on 8 January 1519 corners were cut to put Ernley in his place. Having spent a single day as a serjeant-at-law he replaced Rede on 27 January in the first documented instance of a private call. As well as three puisne judges, Ernley's elevation 'per saltum' passed over the entire order of the coif. He was knighted that spring but the hopes vested in him came to a premature end when, after only five terms in his new court, he died on 22 April 1520, still in his mid-fifties, having requested burial at Sidlesham, near Chichester. His wife had predeceased him in August 1518. Although his son William Ernley (1501-1546) enjoyed an ample inheritance, followed him at Gray's Inn, and sat for Chichester in the parliament of 1542, he failed to achieve his father's eminence. The family's fortunes were to be carried on by its Wiltshire branch, descended (to the subsequent confusion of genealogists) from Ernley's elder brother, John Ernley ('b'. 1461/2) of Fosbury and Bishops Cannings. 


@@@@@


doc= 69363


Foster, Sir Thomas (1548-1612), judge, was born at Hunsdon, Hertfordshire, on 10 August 1548, the son of Thomas Foster (died 1571?), possibly a yeoman in the queen's household, of Hunsdon, and his wife, Margaret Browning (died 1585x99). Foster was admitted to the Inner Temple from Clifford's Inn on 16 October 1571, but the date of his call to the bar is uncertain; it probably occurred after his marriage on 22 July 1575 to Susan ('c'.1552-1626), daughter of another Thomas Foster, of Iden, Sussex, and certainly before he delivered a reading at Clifford's Inn in 1584. He enjoyed a thriving practice in Westminster Hall, and from 1593 Foster was retained as fee'd counsel by the city of London, where he also worked with the Company of Skinners, while serving in his native county as steward of the manor of Amwell Parva or Rusheyne. Called to the bench in January 1595, Foster delivered his reading on 32 Hen. VIII c. 32 in August 1596. In January 1600 he was among fourteen Inner Temple benchers levied for the Irish campaign, although he paid only the minimum contribution of $10. 
Foster was one of those nominated as serjeants-at-law towards the end of 1601 but not actually called until May 1603, after James I's accession, when he named Robert Cecil, Lord Howard of Walden, and Lord Hunsdon as patrons. Appointed serjeant to Queen Anne in 1603, and to Prince Henry in 1604, when he was also knighted, Foster was mentioned as a possible attorney of wards in October 1605. But not until November 1607 did he gain further promotion, as puisne justice of common pleas. Foster died in London on 18 May 1612, shortly after his nomination by Thomas Sutton as one of the original governors of the Charterhouse School, and was buried on 11 June in Hunsdon church under an elaborate tomb with full-length effigy. A manuscript treatise in Cambridge University Library (Add. MS 8945, fols. 1-27'v'), 'A brief declaration of the use of the law by Justice Foster', is substantially identical to the text published in 1629 as the second part of 'The Lawyer's Light', where it is attributed to John Dodderidge, although Francis Bacon has also been identified as author. 
Thomas Foster's religion is unknown, but his widow was presented as a recusant before the Hertfordshire quarter sessions in the early 1620s. His youngest son, the royalist Sir Robert Foster (1589-1663), served as a judge under both Charles I and Charles II. 


@@@@@


doc= 69364


Gell, Anthony (d. 1583), law reporter, was the first son of Ralph Gell ('c'.1491-1564) and his first wife, Godeth, daughter of Nicholas Ashby of Willoughby on the Wolds. The Gell family had owned Hopton Hall near Wirksworth, Derbyshire, for many generations, but Anthony seems to have been the first member to obtain a grant of arms. He became a student at Clement's Inn, and his notes of the lectures given there in 1543-4 by his Derbyshire neighbour Richard Blackwall (died 1562) are now in Cambridge University Library. Blackwall may well have been his patron. In 1545-6 Gell served as principal of the inn -- an office frequently held by a young man, elected by his peers -- and was by this time practising as an attorney of the common pleas. The following year he was specially admitted to the Inner Temple, where he was later called to the bar. 
Gell's printed and manuscript law books remained in the library at Hopton Hall until the twentieth century, but they have become partly dispersed. They include a copiously annotated copy of the 1537 edition of Fitzherbert's 'Natura brevium'. Two of the manuscripts contain a unique series of law reports from the common pleas, written in Gell's hand and probably, for the most part, of his own taking. The first, now in the Library of Congress, begins with the year books of 13 Richard II, 18-19 and 26-7 Henry VIII, as in print, and then a series in the same style as the printed year books of Henry VIII running from 1541 to 1555, with a few later additions. The second volume, now in the Derbyshire Record Office, continued the series from 1557 to 1562. Gell seems to have kept these reports to himself, and they were not copied or cited by contemporaries. They include the earliest known reported case on the doctrine of consideration. 
Gell became a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1559 but paid 40 marks to be excused from reading in 1563. He died, unmarried, on 29 June 1583, and was buried in Wirksworth church, where there is a bearded effigy in a long gown of flowered damask and an inscription describing him as 'sapiens jurisque peritus' ('wise and skilled in the law'). Part of his gains from the law went to found and endow the grammar school and almshouses at Wirksworth. His nephew Thomas (1595-1657) was recorder of Derby and also became a bencher of the Inner Temple. The Gell family remained at Hopton Hall until the 1970s. 


@@@@@


doc= 69365


Harpur, Richard (d. 1577), judge and law reporter, was the son or grandson of Henry Harpur of Rushall, Staffordshire, son of the MP John Harpur (died 1464). He came to the attention of Sir John Port (died 1540), justice of the king's bench, at whose instance he was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1537 from Barnard's Inn. Not long after Port's death he married Jane, daughter of Sir George Fynderne and Elizabeth Port (the judge's daughter), and thereby acquired estates in Derbyshire, where he settled at Swarkestone. He was closely associated with the younger John Port in various transactions, and referred to him in his will as 'my deare frend'. 
Harpur's vacation practice was chiefly in Derbyshire and Staffordshire, though he was also connected with Port's native city of Chester and became an alderman there. In 1543 he acquired the clerkship of assize on the Oxford circuit in succession to John Port the younger, and held that office until he took the coif. He was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1552, and two years later autumn reader, becoming a serjeant-at-law at the first general call of Elizabeth I's reign in April 1559. He was well known as a reporter of cases in the common pleas from at least the 1550s until the 1570s, and his reports survive in numerous manuscripts. The texts associated with Harpur commonly begin in 1546, though with respect to the first twelve years or so it has proved difficult to separate his work from that of William Dalison (d. 1559). 
On 18 May 1567 Harpur was appointed a judge of the common pleas in succession to Sir Anthony Browne, and he also followed Browne on the northern circuit. He made his will on 9 July 1576. After ten years as a judge, he died on 29 January 1577; he was buried in accordance with his testamentary wishes in Swarkestone church, where there is a full-length recumbent alabaster effigy in judicial robes and collar of SS -- a distinction apparently still sometimes worn by puisne justices -- with his wife lying beside him, and a ribbon between their hands inscribed 'Cogita mori' ('Think on dying'), the motto of his mourning rings. Besides Swarkestone Harpur left a farm at Milton and extensive estates in Derbyshire and neighbouring counties. His libraries at Swarkestone and Serjeants' Inn were divided between his sons John and Richard. John (died 1622), the eldest, was member of parliament for Derbyshire in 1597 and 1604, and knighted in 1603; John's son Henry was created a baronet in 1626. The seventh baronet assumed the additional surname of Crewe. 


@@@@@


doc= 69366


Hesketh, Richard (c.1475-1520), lawyer, was the second son of Robert Hesketh of Rufford, Lancashire, a family long settled in those parts. His younger brother Hugh Hesketh became bishop of Sodor and Man in 1513. Richard was admitted to Gray's Inn in the late fifteenth century and is mentioned as an attorney in a common pleas case of 1500. A private dictum attributed to 'Hasket' occurs in the year books for the same year but is probably attributable to 1502. Hesketh gave his first reading about 1508 on the 'carta de foresta', and a written version of this exposition of the forest law made the name of Hesketh familiar to all lawyers in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Although never printed, the reading had a wide circulation and still survives in at least twelve manuscript texts, some of them translated from French into English. The texts are anonymous, but the author is identifiable from an internal allusion when he puts a case concerning an indictment of someone called Hesketh, omitting the name Richard. John Manwood cited 'M. Hesket' several times in his 'Forest Law' (1598), though on folio 21 he wrongly confused him with Bartholomew Hesketh, who was clerk of the peace at Lancaster. 
By the time of his first reading, Richard Hesketh was king's attorney and serjeant in the county palatine of Lancaster, and deputy chief steward in the north parts for the duchy of Lancaster. In 1515 he gave his second reading in Gray's Inn, on the 'Statute of Merton', and the following year was appointed a baron of the exchequer at Lancaster. His wife was named Elizabeth; no other details are known of her. He died in 1520, when he was probably still in his forties. By his will, dated 11 August and proved on 13 November 1520, he desired to be buried in the family chapel at Rufford, where he had founded a free school. 


@@@@@


doc= 69367


Jenour, John (1465/6-1542), legal official, was the son of William Jenour of Stonham Aspal, Suffolk, and Katherine Whiting. He and his brother Robert Jenour (died 1536) both became officers of the common pleas, John being mentioned as an attorney in the rolls of the common pleas for 1491. In 1503 he became filazer of the common pleas for Devon, Dorset, and Somerset, and in 1513 was promoted to be second prothonotary. From 1510 he was clerk of assize on the midland circuit. He had been a member of the Middle Temple before 1501, and served as treasurer in 1517-20. As a prothonotary he was one of the officials responsible for settling the forms of pleading and entries, and he is mentioned several times in the law reports. A fair copy of his great book of entries, which was an acknowledged authority and sometimes cited in court, is now in the Library of Congress, Washington (Phillipps MS 26752). It includes some earlier cases taken from the collections of William Copley, chief prothonotary from 1468 to 1490. Though never printed, it had some influence on the anonymous 'Intrationum liber' of 1546. 
A number of Jenour's pupils or under-clerks can be identified, thanks to an obituary note written by Chief Justice Catlin, and the list shows what a remarkable influence he had on the judiciary of the next generation. His pupils, all Middle Templars, included four future chief justices -- Sir Robert Catlin himself, Sir Robert Brooke, Sir Anthony Browne, and Sir James Dyer -- and two puisne judges, Corbet and Freville. According to the 'Visitations of Essex' Jenour married in 1500 Anne, daughter of John Fincham of Outwell, Norfolk; however, his widow was called Alice (died 1549). Jenour died, aged seventy-six, on 17 September 1542, and was probably buried according to his testamentary instructions in the chancel of Temple Church. There was formerly a monumental inscription at Great Dunmow, Essex. Besides his property in Essex he left a house and garden in St Bride's, Fleet Street, leased from the bishop of Salisbury. His eldest son, Richard (1511-1548), to whom he left his book of entries, was a member of parliament and clerk of the court of surveyors. To his second son, Robert, he left the manor of Rendham Hall, Suffolk, 'so that he contynue his study and lernyng in the Temple'. His nephew Richard Lone (died 1581) was third prothonotary of the common pleas. 


@@@@@


doc= 69368


Kitchin, John (d. in or before 1588), legal writer, was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1544 and called to the bar there in 1547, but nothing is known of his date of birth or parentage. A reading he gave at the inn in 1564 on the Henrican 'Statute of Leases' (32 Hen. VIII c. 28), which survives in more than one manuscript copy, contains an interesting discussion of the elements required to enact a statute, as well as a lengthy exposition of how to make a good lease. Appointed reader again in 1572 and treasurer in 1575, Kitchin regularly attended pension meetings at the inn during his lifetime. Little else is known of his career except that he practised in the city of London courts. Kitchin was buried at Islington; his son John was granted administration of his estate in 1588. 
In 1580 and 1581 Kitchin published two works of some professional importance, 'Le court leete et court baron' and 'Retourna brevium novelment corrigee'. Both were built on content and formats that had previously been available in manuscript as well as print, but Kitchin reconstituted them with exposition under alphabetical headings that gathered together a great deal of learning from the year-books and later case law. Addressing 'Le court leete' to students at the inns of chancery, and claiming that his intention was to improve their knowledge, he expressed the hope that professionally trained lawyers would soon completely replace those stewards of manorial courts who were merely the 'servants' of the lords and 'ignorant in the law' (Kytchin, preface). Indeed, he went so far as to suggest that any manorial court not kept by a properly trained lawyer should be subject to forfeiture under 'quo warranto' proceedings. Quoting from a range of legal authorities stretching from Bracton and Britton to Fortescue, St German, and Staunford, Kitchin acknowledged that one purpose of manorial courts was to maintain the interests of the lords, but he also placed them within a broader framework of royal, as opposed to seigneurial, justice that had been ordained for the punishment of enormities and nuisances to the 'publique' within the precinct of the courts. 'Le court leete' was republished many times in the 1580s, the 1590s, and during the course of the seventeenth century, often along with 'Retourna brevium'. 


@@@@@


doc= 69369


Pollard, Sir Richard (d. 1542), law reporter and exchequer official, was the second son of Sir Lewis Pollard (d. 1526), the judge, and Agnes, daughter of Thomas Hext of Kingston, near Totnes, Devon. Admitted to the Middle Temple in 1519, by 1529 he was acting as counsel in the court of requests. Before 1527 he had married Jacquetta, daughter of John Bury of Colliton, Devon; the eldest of their four children was the MP Sir John Pollard (died 1575). He became a justice of the peace for Devon in 1532, and was under-steward of Tavistock Abbey. He may safely be identified as the Pollarde whose law reports, running mostly from 1522 to 1535 but arranged under alphabetical headings (like Port's and Spelman's), were available to and partially preserved by Christopher Yelverton (BL, Hargrave MS, 388). They were printed in 2004. He seems also to be the 'Pollard, apprentice' whose successful argument for the crown in 'Lord Dacre's case', in Easter term 1535, prepared the way for the 'Statute of Uses' the following year. This success transformed the king's revenues and must have commended Pollard strongly to Thomas Cromwell. In May 1535 he was appointed king's remembrancer of the exchequer, an office that he held until his death. 
Pollard was selected to read in the Middle Temple in the summer of 1535, but the exercise was curtailed after eleven days because of plague. He was busily engaged about this time on a committee to consider the codification of canon law, following the break with Rome in 1534; Pollard was in favour of a complete fusion with the common law, at any rate with respect to criminal jurisdiction, but the committee failed to produce an agreed conclusion. In the ensuing few years he became active in the suppression of the monasteries, and is said to have spent many hours in prayer before Thomas Becket's shrine at Canterbury before supervising its defacement. He also served in parliament (perhaps as member for Taunton) in 1536, and again (representing Devon) in 1539 and 1542. His usefulness in the crown service was unaffected by Cromwell's fall, and in 1542 he was knighted and appointed second general surveyor to the court of surveyors; but on 10 November 1542 he died, while still in his forties. He had been assessed by the lay subsidy commissioners the previous year as having an income of $230 from lands and fees; and his greatest prize through the dissolution was Forde Abbey, which he purchased in 1540 and made his seat. He bequeathed a gold salt to Sir Richard Rich, whom he appointed overseer of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 69370


Roper, John (d. 1524), legal official, was the son of John Roper (died 1487) of Swalecliffe, Kent, sometime sheriff of that county, and his wife, Margery, daughter and coheir of John Tatershall. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 8 July 1486, and called to the bar a few years later, perhaps before he was added to the commission of the peace for Kent in 1493. In Easter term 1498 he became chief clerk (or protonotary) of the king's bench by appointment of Sir John Fyneux, the chief justice, whose daughter Jane (died 1544?) he had married by 1495. His tenure over the next quarter of a century coincided with an expansion of the court's business through the development of bill procedure, for which Roper was responsible, and of the substantive remedies over which Fyneux presided. It has been suggested that they headed a kind of 'Kentish mafia' operating the court for their own profit. Profit they undoubtedly did. The tax survey of 1523 found that Fyneux and Roper had more personal wealth than any other lawyer in the land. And a number of fellow Kentishmen were preferred to clerical offices in the court while they held sway. On the other hand, their reforms undeniably improved the quality of justice and were overdue. 
In 1518 Fyneux agreed to a resettlement of the clerkship on Roper and his eldest son, William Roper (1495x8-1578), biographer of Thomas More, who held it until the reign of Elizabeth. Indeed, successive members of the Roper family were to enjoy the office by a succession of life estates until the seventeenth century. John Roper did not give up his legal practice by reason of his administrative duties. He read twice in Lincoln's Inn (in 1504 and 1508), is mentioned as counsel in the court of requests in 1505, was appointed counsel to the Cinque Ports in 1505, and was retained as counsel by the duchy of Lancaster from 1512; his signature as counsel is found on bills in chancery after 1515; and he was steward of the liberty of Battle Abbey by 1520. In 1519 he was commissioned to hear poor men's causes in Thomas Wolsey's remodelled court of requests. On 3 July 1521 he was appointed the king's attorney-general, an office that he held concurrently with the chief clerkship until he died. 
The exchequer records give the date of Roper's death as 29 March 1524, which seems more likely than 7 April, the date given on his monument, since his successor as attorney-general was appointed on 1 April. He was buried in St Dunstan's, Canterbury, where his tomb chest still remains, but without the brass figures and inscription plate, which were long ago removed. He left four children. William, who became sole chief clerk of the king's bench, inherited a house at Eltham, Kent, as well as the one in Canterbury. The second son, Christopher (died 1558/9), of Lynsted, Kent, and Gray's Inn, MP for Rochester in 1553, was father of John Roper, who was elevated to the peerage as Baron Teynham and settled the chief clerkship on trust in 1616. Eleanor (or Helen) married Sir Edward Montagu, chief justice of the common pleas, and his other daughter, Elizabeth, married first John Pilbarowe of Lincoln's Inn, baron of the exchequer, and then Leonard Sandell, clerk of the crown in the king's bench. 


@@@@@


doc= 69371


Treherne, George (d. 1528), lawyer, came from a Welsh family and was perhaps resident in Herefordshire, where he had many professional connections. In 1498 and 1503 he was accused before the king's council of disorder in what seems to have been a fracas involving the inns of court and chancery, and so it appears he was a member of an inn of chancery by the former date, though 1503 is the year of his admission to Lincoln's Inn. He was practising as an attorney of the common pleas, for Herefordshire clients, by 1500, and continued to do so until the 1520s. However, the demarcation between attorneys and counsel was not yet rigid and Treherne also practised as an advocate. He is mentioned as counsel at Buckinghamshire assizes in 1516, at Hereford assizes in 1519, and at Bridgnorth assizes in 1523, and as counsel in the court of requests in 1520. He became a bencher of his inn in 1518 and two years later, in the autumn of 1520, delivered his celebrated reading on the 'carta de foresta'. This was the best-known exposition of the forest law before the publication of the treatise by John Manwood, and still survives in nearly forty manuscript texts, some in law French and some translated into English. One manuscript contains what purports to be a continuation of the reading with a brief exposition of 11 Hen. VII c. 8, concerning usury, but this is not mentioned in any of the other versions. 
Treherne read again in 1525, but the subject of his second reading is not known. He held few public offices, though as early as 1501-2 he served as escheator for Herefordshire and by 1513 he was acting steward or under-steward of St Katharine's Hospital near the Tower of London. Although he presumably maintained a home in Herefordshire, where he was on the commission of the peace from 1525 until his death, he is invariably described in records as 'of London'. He seems to have married twice. His first wife, whom he married before 1508, was Elizabeth, widow of Richard Horton of Burford, Oxfordshire. His second wife was called Margaret; she survived him and married Richard Tracy. He died after January 1528, when he acquired a manor in Gloucestershire, and before September 1528, when an action of debt was brought by his widow. He may have left children. A John Treheyron was receiver in London for New College, Oxford, in the 1530s; and a Thomas Treheyron was sued for dues by Gray's Inn in 1539. 


@@@@@


doc= 69372


Yorke, Roger (d. 1536), law reporter, was probably a son of the Exeter merchant Walter Yorke (died 'c'.1505) and his wife, Waltera. In a chancery petition which refers to his brother Walter, also a merchant, having become a prisoner of war, he is described as 'Roger Yorke of Excestre, student of Grayes Inne in Holborn' (TNA: PRO, C 1/561/23). This dates from after 1517, but 'student' here is a flexible term analogous to 'apprentice' of the law. Yorke was probably admitted to Gray's Inn soon after 1506, being Edward Montague's junior when he became a serjeant, and by 1516 he had been called to the bar long enough to become an ancient. In 1522 he was elected autumn reader, but the exercise was postponed to Lent 1523. Already he seems to have become an established practitioner, for he was assessed for the poll tax that year as having $66 a year. His name is found on over forty bills in chancery in the time of Cardinal Wolsey. Although he had a small property in St Paul's parish, Exeter, in 1522, he settled at Wellington in Somerset, probably soon after marrying Eleanor, daughter of Sir Hugh Luttrell of Dunster in that county, his stepmother's second husband, about 1520. His second wife was Margaret Erneley. From 1524 he was named in the commissions of the peace for both Devon and Somerset, and from 1531 for Wiltshire as well. 
In 1531, as serjeant-elect, Yorke delivered a second reading in Gray's Inn on 'Prerogativa regis', notes from which survive. When he was created serjeant in November 1531 he was the most junior of the call, and he was still quite young when he died on 2 February 1536. His son and heir, Thomas, was then aged fifteen. Yorke's principal legacy to posterity was his series of law reports, which survive in four manuscript versions but were unidentified until the 1970s. The reports (which were printed by the Selden Society in 2003) were mostly written in the 1520s and 1530s, though one or two can be dated to the first decade of Henry VIII's reign. The cases are arranged under non-alphabetical headings, and are interspersed with notes from learning exercises in Gray's Inn, including one of John Spelman's readings, several notes from the western circuit (at Exeter, Salisbury, and Yeovilchester), and, after 1531, some memoranda of discussions in Serjeants' Inn. 


@@@@@


doc= 69373


Unwin, Nora Spicer (1907-1982), wood-engraver and illustrator, was born on 22 February 1907 in Tolworth, Surrey, the youngest, with her twin sister, Nancy, of five children of George Soundy Unwin (died 1950) and Eleanor Mary, 'nee' Eady. The Unwin family had been involved in printing and publishing for several generations, founding a printing company (Unwin Brothers) and two different publishing houses (T. Fisher Unwin and later George Allen and Unwin) in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and from an early age the children were exposed to the processes of book-making. Nora attended Surbiton high school, and went on to study at Leon Underwood's studio in London (1923-5), the Kingston School of Art (1925-7), and the Royal College of Art (1927-31). During her childhood wood-engraving had begun a vigorous revival and was used not only for the production of prints but also for book illustration. Her artistic training included various techniques, of which wood-engraving and book illustration were the most important for her future career. 
In 1925, while still at college, Unwin received her first commission, from her great-uncle, the publisher T. Fisher Unwin, for a black and white drawing for the dust jacket for a children's book by Edith Nesbit ('Five of Us and Madeline'). Many of her engravings depict scenes from nature, and one of the early books she illustrated in this way was Charles Elton's 'Exploring the Animal World' (Allen and Unwin) in 1933; in the same year she illustrated the Allen and Unwin Christmas catalogue with cartoon-like pen sketches. She also engraved prints and from 1930 entered the annual exhibitions of the Society of Wood Engravers. In 1932 she was admitted as an associate of the Royal College of Art, and in 1933 became an associate of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers and a fellow in 1946. During her lifetime she made more than 200 wood-engravings, many of which were used for book illustrations. Unwin was also a watercolourist and used other techniques for her book illustrations, but it is on her engravings that her reputation rests. In 1938 Campbell Dodgson, keeper of prints and drawings at the British Museum, chose her engraving 'Antelope and Young' as the cover illustration for 'Prints of the Year 1938', which guaranteed her recognition as one of the country's leading wood-engravers. Her work after that date, done mostly in North America, only added to her stature. 
In 1937, through her sister Nancy, Unwin met Elizabeth Yates, an American writer who was living in London with her husband William McGreal. Though this relationship was at first a purely professional one, with Yates and Unwin collaborating on magazine articles and children's books, it blossomed into a solid partnership and a lifelong friendship with both Yates and her husband. After the American couple returned to the United States in 1939, Unwin spent the war years in England, caring for children who had been evacuated to the countryside for its relative safety. Fortunately this gave her time to continue engraving and illustrating books, and with Gwendy Caroe, the mother of the children she was looking after, she wrote and illustrated 'Lucy and the Little Red Horse' (1943). It was through Yates that Unwin obtained her first American commission in 1942, to illustrate 'Under the Little Fir', and in 1949 Unwin accepted an invitation for an extended stay with her friends in New Hampshire. She lived in New England for the rest of her life, with just short visits back to her family and friends in England. 
In the United States, Unwin illustrated many more books, her best perhaps being the twenty-five engravings she did for John Kieran's 'Footnotes on Nature' (1947). She also produced many engravings, and for many years taught wood-engraving at the Sharon Arts Center, Sharon, New Hampshire, and in various other schools and centres in New England. She wrote at least fourteen books for children, exhibited at Sharon and at many other galleries including the Print Club of Albany, New York, and at the Boston Atheneum. In 1952 she was elected to the Society of American Graphic Artists, and in 1953 was admitted as an associate of the National Academy of Design in New York, the American counterpart of the Royal Academy. In 1976 she was elected a full lifetime academician for her outstanding work as a graphic artist and engraver; this placed her firmly in the front rank of her profession. Predeceased by her sister Nancy in 1980, Nora Unwin died, unmarried, in Wayland, Massachusetts, on 5 January 1982. There is a major collection of her engravings at the Sharon Center, and she donated correspondence and books to the McCain Library at the University of Southern Mississippi. 


@@@@@


doc= 69374


Rooke, Noel (1881-1953), wood-engraver, was born on 30 December 1881 in Bedford Park, Acton, London, where he lived all his life. His father was Thomas Matthews Rooke (1842-1942), a portrait painter and a member of the Royal Watercolour Society who had worked with Burne-Jones, Sydney Cockerell, and Ruskin, and his mother Leonora Jane, 'nee' Jones. Noel Rooke was educated in France, at the Lycee de Chartres, and at the Godolphin School, Hammersmith, and studied art in London at the Slade School of Fine Art (1899-1903) and later at the Central School of Arts and Crafts under W. R. Lethaby and Edward Johnston. 
The mid-nineteenth-century explosion in the production of books and magazines ensured that engravers and other artists could not cope with the demand for their work, and, in the hands of commercial engravers, wood-engraving became a purely reproductive medium. In the latter part of the century the introduction of a photographic means of reproduction was the answer to cope with the still growing demand for illustrated reading material. The subsequent 'process' print was a speedier but less satisfactory alternative, and the most popular of these processes and perhaps the most unsatisfactory was the half-tone. Rooke became dissatisfied with the photographic reproduction of his drawings, and at some time in 1904, inspired by discussions with Edward Johnston, he began to make wood-engravings that could be printed directly from the block. It was of course a slower method once again, and thus more expensive, so that most books with wood-engravings were produced by private presses until, in the 1930s and 1940s, commercial publishers such as Constable and Dent began to use that process, turning the woodblocks into metal plates. Rooke in turn inspired Eric Gill to start engraving, and between them these two fostered the revival of wood-engraving in Britain. Together they helped reinstate the 'white line' technique that Thomas Bewick and William Blake had developed some hundred years earlier. Wood-engraving for book illustration, however, was slow to be recognized as an acceptable art school subject, and it was not until some ten years later that Rooke began to teach it at the Central School, where he had been appointed teacher of illustration in 1905. Though he was not the first to teach the subject (Sydney Lee had started to teach wood-engraving at the Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts in 1904-5), Rooke was certainly responsible for raising the status of wood engraving as an independent and teachable graphic medium (Selborne, 57). 
Rooke was appointed head of the school of book production at the Central School in 1914, and it is as a teacher and as one of the chief originators of the modern movement of wood-engraving that his primary importance lies. He illustrated only a few books himself. He made some brilliant drawings of hands for Edward Johnston's 'Writing & Illuminating & Lettering' (1905), and he illustrated with watercolours both R. L. Stevenson's 'Travels with a Donkey' (1909) and his last book, the 'Flowers of Marsh and Stream' by I. A. Williams, published by King Penguin in 1946. He used simple wood-engravings with large black areas for two books, Rupert Brooke's 'The Old Vicarage, Grantchester' (1916) and his own 'The Nativity: the Birth of Christ from the Gospel According to Saint Luke', which he did for the Golden Cockerel Press in 1925. For thirty years he taught wood-engraving for illustrating and decorating books. Many of his students became eminent engravers and illustrators, among them John Farleigh, Robert Gibbings, Vivien Gribble, Clare Leighton, George Mackley, and Margaret Pilkington, and Rooke was responsible for many of his students receiving commissions from publishers. 
In 1920 Rooke had become a founder member of the Society of Wood-Engravers, and in the same year he was elected an associate of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers. His 'Woodcuts and Wood Engravings' (1926) describes the origin and character of the (then) present school of engraving and cutting. On 31 December 1932 he married Celia Mary Twistleton-Wykeham-Fiennes, one of his pupils. He died at the West London Hospital on 5 October 1953. 
Rooke's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 69375


Tarrant, Margaret Winifred (1888-1959), artist and illustrator, was born on 19 August 1888 at 1 Stanley Villas, St James's Road, Battersea, London, the only child of the artist Percy Tarrant (1855-1934) and his wife, Sarah Wyatt (1846-1934). Encouraged by her father, she excelled at drawing and painting from an early age, and while attending Clapham high school won several awards which encouraged her to become an art teacher. However, concerned about her ability to instruct, she decided that teaching was not for her and, after discussion with her father, became a full-time artist and illustrator. 
In 1907 the family moved to Gomshall, in Surrey, and in 1908 -- at the age of nineteen -- Margaret Tarrant undertook her first commission, to illustrate Charles Kingsley's 'The Water-Babies' for J. M. Dent & Sons. Other commissions followed, including 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland' (1916), 'Fairy Stories from Hans Christian Andersen' (1917), and 'Nursery Rhymes' (1914; 5th edn, 1922) for Ward Lock & Co., and two sets of postcards for the Oxford University Press. She also illustrated some twenty books for the publisher George G. Harrap between 1915 and 1929. Always concerned with improving her techniques, she attended several courses at Heatherley's Art School during this period. 
In 1920 Tarrant began working regularly for the Medici Society, a long and fruitful association which led to her being made a shareholder in the company in 1938. During the 1920s she illustrated a highly successful series of fairy books for the company. These were first published at the same time as the rather better known series of 'Flower Fairy' illustrations by her friend and sketching partner Cicely Mary Barker, who was later to become an executor of Margaret's will. 
In 1934 both of Tarrant's parents died within three months of each other. Her father had always been an inspiration to her, and she had written to the Medici Society during his final illness: 'I miss his ever ready criticism and help with my work so much... I may say that I have no other relatives' (priv. coll.). Shortly after this, Tarrant moved to Peaslake in Surrey, and she soon became a well-known figure in the community there. Although she never married, she made many loyal and long-lasting friends, both through her painting and her membership of the local church. Her friends described her as full of energy, travelling around the area on an ancient bicycle to save petrol, despite not always being in the best of health herself. Many neighbours were used as models for her pictures. She was well known for her love of animals and for her formidable cat companion, Bobby. 
A deeply religious individual, Margaret Tarrant was inspired to paint many spiritual and scripture-based paintings, which the Medici Society published as prints and postcards. She was her own harshest critic, and later regretted the sentimentality of some of these paintings, such as 'All Things Wise and Wonderful', first published in 1925. Ironically, it is probably for these pictures that she is best remembered. 
While her paintings and illustrations were often of fairies or religious subjects, Tarrant believed fervently in sketching from life, though her finished works often exhibit a much romanticized style. Many of her paintings were bordered with leaves and flowers characteristic of the arts and crafts movement and the art nouveau style which she much admired. Her true love lay in painting wild flowers, of which she had an extensive knowledge, and she considered the illustrations for a series of wild flower postcards published by the Medici Society between 1937 and 1952 to be among her best works. 
Shortly before the Second World War Tarrant was finding it hard to be inspired in her work, so in 1936 the Medici Society financed a six-week trip to Palestine. It was hoped that she would produce more paintings in the same vein as 'All Things Wise and Wonderful'. Bravely travelling only with a female artist friend, Margaret said of her visit to the Middle East: 'I think they [the Medici Society] expected some more of my children's cards but with an Israeli flavour, but they didn't get them -- Israel wasn't like that' (priv. coll.). 
During the early 1950s Tarrant's eyesight began to deteriorate, a source of great frustration to her. Her health in general was not so good, although she still made the effort to go into the countryside and sketch from life whenever she could. Eventually multiple myeloma (a type of cancer causing gradual deterioration of the bones) was diagnosed, and Tarrant spent some months in hospital bearing her illness with characteristic good humour and inner strength. She died at her home, Troon, Wonham Way, Peaslake, on 28 July 1959, leaving some pictures to friends and the rest of her estate to twelve charities. Her work is still popular and much of it remains in print as greetings cards, postcards, and prints. 


@@@@@


doc= 69376


Knowles, Reginald Lionel (1879-1950), book designer and illustrator, was born on 4 March 1879 at 16 Plimsoll Street, Poplar, in east London, the second son of Ebenezer Caleb Knowles, an author and musician who worked as a merchant's clerk, a native of Worcestershire, and his wife, Emma Dece Scutt, who became a teacher at the infant's department of Woolmore Street school, Poplar. He had four siblings: Charles Francis (1876-1936), an artist and writer; Marion Charlotte (1880-1882); Hubert George (1882-1949); and Horace John (1884-1954), an artist and illustrator. There is little published information about the Knowles family, but according to two manuscripts in the central library of Tower Hamlets, one by Horace Knowles and another by a former neighbour in Poplar, the three boys attended the Craft School in Aldgate. When Reginald left school, probably shortly before 1900, he began working as an artist for the publishing house of J. M. Dent. He was responsible for designing the title-page openings, the endpapers, and the hand-drawn lettering for the titles on the spines for 'Everyman's Library', the first fifty volumes of which were published in February 1906. The various borders, used for the frontispieces and title-pages of the different subject groups into which 'Everyman's Library' was divided, featured intertwining leaves and flowers. Although Knowles's designs were clearly derived from the work of William Morris and Laurence Housman, they were distinctive and successful, and were used for thirty years, until 1935. At that time the elaborate art nouveau work was replaced by a series of small abstract designs by Eric Ravilious and the hand-drawn lettering by typeset titling in Eric Gill's Perpetua Roman typeface. 
In 1911 the Society of the Divine Compassion and the Whitwell Press, which was owned by the society, began the publication of a high-quality religious journal, 'Ecclesia'. Knowles was appointed art editor, and was responsible for many decorative borders, head- and tailpieces, and other illustrations, as well as for the overall design of the magazine. An extensive but incomplete file of the journal is held at the British Library: from this it appears that publication ceased in 1915 or soon after, and that Knowles held the post of art editor throughout its brief life. During the First World War, Knowles, with his brother Charles, worked for the Carlton Studios; Reginald was appointed art manager. 
Knowles later founded his own studio, and continued to undertake commissioned work for Dent and for other publishers, including George Newnes, Jarrolds, Cassell, and George Allen, for whom he drew lettering for the title-pages and spines and designed bindings, many recognizable by their highly decorated, gold-blocked front boards. At the time of his death, on 26 December 1950, at his home, 80 Pollard's Hill South, Croydon, he was working on a design for a series of books to be published by Frederick Muller. He was survived by his wife, Lena. Better known as a book designer and decorator, he also illustrated several books, some in colour but most in black and white. He collaborated with his brother Horace on at least two early books, both published by Freemantle, H. Lee's 'Legends from Fairyland' (1907) and G. W. Dasent's translation of 'Norse Fairy Tales' (1910). Many of his illustrations are rather static, and though some are quite effective, such as those for W. Brown's 'My River' (1947), they are too derivative to be completely successful. 
Reginald's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 69377


Horace John Knowles (1884-1954), was born on 22 July 1884 at 57 Bow Lane, Poplar. He was educated at George Green's school in Poplar and the Craft School in Aldgate. Although he was initially apprenticed as an engineering draughtsman, his early collaboration with his brother Reginald led to his becoming a full-time freelance artist some time later, first producing illuminated addresses on vellum and illustrating several church magazines before turning to book illustration proper. His best work was done in pen and ink, with which he produced very decorative, delicate drawings in black and white, often of scenes of the countryside. His finest production is perhaps 'Countryside Treasures' (1946), which he wrote as well as illustrated, the text handwritten and decorated with initial capitals printed in green. The last major task of his career, which he worked on for five years, was to produce some 500 illustrations and maps for a commemorative edition of the 'Bible' to celebrate the third jubilee of the British and Foreign Bible Society. He died on 21 August 1954 at his home, 82 Bishops Park Road, Croydon, and was survived by his wife, Laura. 


@@@@@


doc= 69384


Brock family (per. c.1895-1960), illustrators and painters, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 69385


Henry Matthew Brock (1875-1960) on 11 July 1875. 
H. M. Brock, as he was to sign his work, described himself as an illustrator and watercolour artist. From 1895 until the outbreak of the First World War, Charles and Harry, as he was known to the family, were in the front rank of British book and magazine illustrators, with Charles also becoming established as a portrait painter. In order to avoid confusion with the unrelated homonymous portrait painter who was the son of the sculptor Sir Thomas Brock, Charles dropped his second forename in signing his work. His initial training was largely in the studio of the Cambridge sculptor Henry Wiles. Charles Brock came to public notice as an illustrator in the 'black and white' school led by Hugh Thomson with 130 pen drawings for Thomas Hood's 'Humorous Poems', published in Macmillan's attractive 'Cranford' series in 1893. His wash drawings for the Tyneside publisher Walter Scott, who brought out 'The Humour of Germany' and 'The Humour of America' in that year, made less impact. In 1894 Macmillan printed a further 100 of Charles's pen drawings in an edition of Swift's 'Gulliver's Travels', also in the 'Cranford' series. In the following year Macmillan published Galt's 'Annals of the Parish' and Jane Austen's 'Pride and Prejudice', both in its 'Illustrated Standard Novels' series. By this time, Charles was in great demand and was working for other publishers, including Service and Paton, who published his illustrations to Scott's 'Ivanhoe' (1897) and Goldsmith's 'Vicar of Wakefield' (1898). A high point of his work for Macmillan came in 1896 with a two-volume edition of Charles Kingsley's 'Westward Ho!'. 
The same publisher also brought H. M. Brock to prominence with Captain Marryat's stories, 'Jacob Faithful' and 'Japhet in Search of a Father', both issued in the 'Illustrated Standard Novels' series in 1895. In the following year Harry produced over 100 pen drawings for Cassell's edition of W. M. Thackeray's 'Ballads and Songs' and in 1898 illustrated Elizabeth Gaskell's 'Cranford' for Service and Paton. Later reprints of this title carried colour plates from his watercolours. In 1898 he illustrated 'Scenes of Child Life', by Lady Frazer. This was the first of a number of school texts in French to be illustrated by H. M. Brock, Siepmann's 'Primary French Course' following in 1902 and H. F. Collins's 'French Course for Schools' in 1929-30, all published by Macmillan. Harry's pen drawings, which were much more forceful than those of his brother, gave a convincing, if imaginary, picture of French life. In 1928, when the opportunity to illustrate standard novels was almost non-existent, Harry painted thirty-two watercolours for G. Bell & Sons' 'New French Picture Cards', published to accompany textbooks by Marc Ceppi. Before the end of the First World War, the brothers contributed to 'Punch', and over seventy articles and stories in the 'Strand Magazine' carried their illustrations. 
Both Harry and Charles Brock benefited greatly from their introduction to the fledgeling London publisher J. M. Dent, for whom they jointly provided watercolour drawings for a set of Jane Austen's novels in 1898. Both were attracted to the architecture, furniture, and costume of the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries and set about gathering period artefacts for their studio, which they shared with Richard, although his interests did not lie in period illustration. Notable examples of Charles's work are the watercolours he provided for Dent's 'English Idylls' series (1904-9) and 'English Essayists' series, where his pen drawings are to be found in two volumes of Lamb's 'Essays of Elia'. Harry's major contribution to this series was in the three-volume 'Breakfast Table' essays of Oliver Wendell Holmes of 1902, which led to a series of well-known posters for Chivers, the Cambridgeshire jam manufacturers. He also provided the drawings for 'Essays of Leigh Hunt' and 'Essays of Douglas Jerrold' (both 1903), and 'Sir Roger de Coverley and other Papers from The Spectator' (1905). The strength of Harry's drawing is particularly obvious in W. E. Mallett's 'Introduction to Old English Furniture', issued by Newnes in 1906. 
Because of their versatility and willingness to take on such a wide variety of work, it is believed that the Brocks did not command the respect publishers accorded Arthur Rackham and Edmund Dulac, who were much less prolific. As a result, they did not have the opportunity to work on the lavish picture books issued by such publishers as Heinemann and Hodder and Stoughton between the turn of the century and 1914. Charles's best opportunity was to contribute coloured illustrations for Sampson Low's boxed, limited issues of Blackmore's 'Lorna Doone' (1910) and three of Jeffrey Farnol's popular historical novels. Harry's finest colour work came in the large-format books of fairy tales published in 1913 and 1914 by Frederick Warne. Unlike his brothers, Richard Brock illustrated few standard novels. His work was published in such annuals as 'The Prize' and 'Chatterbox' and, in general, restricted to the illustration of children's stories, where his drawings appear weak when compared with those of Harry, who illustrated the popular school stories of Desmond Coke. 
Much of the Brock brothers' later income came from uninspiring periodicals, children's annuals and the cheap 'budget' books sold in chain stores. Charles was also in demand in Cambridge as a portrait painter specializing in college and local dignitaries, and Richard apparently made a modest income from paintings, mainly in oils, of the local landscape. Both Charles and Harry were interested in the theatre: with Russell Flint, Charles illustrated 'The Mikado' (1928) and 'The Yeomen of the Guard' (1929), while Harry produced posters for the D'Oyly Carte Company and large coloured illustrations which appeared in the Christmas numbers of 'The Graphic', 'Holly Leaves', and 'The Sphere'. He also provided a large number of attractive watercolour drawings of Gilbert and Sullivan characters for cigarette cards issued by John Player & Sons in 1925 and 1926. 
The depressed years of the 1930s severely curtailed the market for illustration. Richard illustrated girls' stories for Blackie & Sons while Charles provided watercolours for Harrap's handsome editions of Charles Dickens's 'Pickwick Papers', 'Christmas Tales', 'Nicholas Nickleby', and 'Martin Chuzzlewit' (1930-32). His best work of this period is in Annie and Eliza Keary's 'The Heroes of Asgard' (1930) and Mrs Molesworth's 'The Cuckoo Clock' (1931), both published by Macmillan. Charles provided spirited colour work for the book jackets of Jeffrey Farnol's novels, a task subsequently taken over by Harry after 1938. All three brothers exhibited at the Royal Academy and also at the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, Harry being elected to the Royal Institute in 1906 and Charles in 1908. Charles, who had married Annie Dudley Smith, died in Cambridge on 28 February 1938. The couple had no children. Harry Brock died in Cambridge on 21 July 1960, survived by his widow, the former Doris Joan Pegram, and his children Margaret, Joan, and Bevis. It is not known where or when Richard died. 


@@@@@


doc= 69386


Richard Henry Brock (b. early 1870s), landscape painter, was also born in London, before the family moved to Cambridge where Thomas Alfred Brock, mathematician, was born, followed by 


@@@@@


doc= 69387


Marmion, Joseph Aloysius (1858-1923), abbot of Maredsous and author, was born on 1 April 1858 in Dublin, the son of William Marmion (1820-1878), a corn factor, and his wife, Herminie Cordier (1820-1894), a Frenchwoman and language teacher who had recently gone to Ireland. They lived first at 57 Queen Street, but later moved to 2 Blackhall Place, Dublin. There were nine children in the family. 
Marmion received his first formal education at St Laurence O'Toole's school, St John's Lane, Dublin. In January 1869 he began his secondary education at Belvedere College, Dublin, remaining there until December 1873. By then he had passed his matriculation examination and also successfully gained a scholarship which entitled him to a place in Holy Cross College, Clonliffe, the Dublin diocesan seminary. During the next five years he obtained the degree of BA from the Royal University of Ireland, and studied both philosophy and theology with a view to becoming a priest in the Dublin diocese. In December 1879 he was sent to Rome to complete his theological studies. He lodged at the Irish College, but enrolled as a student at the College of Propaganda, Rome, where in 1881 he completed his studies for the priesthood, being awarded the gold medal as the most outstanding student of the year. He was ordained priest in Rome on 16 June 1881. 
In the summer of 1881 Marmion returned to Ireland. His first appointment, in September 1881, as priest in the archdiocese of Dublin, was to a curacy in the parish of Dundrum, co. Dublin. There he built up a considerable reputation for himself as a very caring pastor. His name was still remembered in this parish at the end of the twentieth century in the name of the large day-care centre in Dundrum village, Marmion House, managed by a voluntary group, the Marmion Society, to look after the old and the infirm in the parish. After only a year in Dundrum, Marmion was appointed professor of philosophy at his former alma mater, Holy Cross College, Clonliffe. He held this position from September 1882 to October 1886. At the same time he served as chaplain to the Redemptoristine convent in Drumcondra, Dublin, and to the prisoners in Mountjoy gaol. 
Despite his success as pastor and professor Marmion felt himself called to lead a more contemplative life. For some years he had been in touch with the Benedictine monks of the abbey of Maredsous, Belgium, which had been founded in 1872. There were no Benedictine monasteries in Ireland at this time, but in any case Marmion wished to emulate the ancient Irish monks, who went into exile as the supreme sacrifice. He entered Maredsous on 21 November 1886 as a novice. Following the custom of the time Marmion was given a new name, Columba. At the end of his time as a novice, on 10 February 1888, Marmion made his first profession as a monk. Three years later, on 10 February 1891, he made his solemn or final profession. He remained in Maredsous, living the monastic life of study and prayer, until 1899, when he was sent to Louvain, the leading Catholic university town in Belgium, as part of a team to establish a monastery there called Mont Cesar (later called Kaisersberg). He spent the next ten years in Louvain as prior of Mont Cesar with special responsibility for the studies of the young monks. During this time Marmion built up a reputation as a popular retreat giver and spiritual director, and was also in demand as external examiner in theology at the university. Much of his time was also taken up writing letters -- some two thousand of which have been preserved -- giving spiritual advice to people who sought his counsel. 
On 28 September 1909 Marmion was elected the third abbot of Maredsous. He received the abbatial blessing in Maredsous on 3 October 1909. During his long tenure of office (1909-23), he ruled over a community of some 130 monks, which proved a time consuming and tiring business. However, these domestic or monastic commitments did not deter him from numerous external interests and pursuits. From March 1913 to October 1914 he became involved in the Caldy affair. The Anglican Benedictine community on Caldy Island, under their abbot, Aelred Carlyle, decided to join the Roman Catholic church. Marmion was one of those who helped to see this transition successfully carried through. 
Soon after the First World War broke out, in August 1914, Marmion was obliged to leave Maredsous, and brought his junior monks to Ireland, where they found asylum at Edermine House, near Enniscorthy. He remained in Ireland until early 1916, when he made his way back, via England and Holland, to the abbey of Maredsous. In the post-war years he found himself caught up in a number of physically exhausting enterprises. First he was asked to send a group of Belgian monks to occupy the Benedictine abbey of Dormition in Jerusalem, replacing temporarily the German monks, who had been expelled by the occupying British authorities. This venture lasted from December 1918 to September 1920, when the German monks were allowed to return. Marmion's second, and perhaps most lasting, undertaking, was the setting up, in 1922, of the Belgian congregation of Benedictine abbeys. This meant a separation from the pre-war Beuronese (German) congregation or confederation, a necessary step, given the anti-German feelings in Belgium at this time. 
During his final years as abbot of Maredsous, Marmion produced three books of spirituality in French, which have since become classics, translated into fifteen languages. The English titles are: 'Christ, the Life of the Soul' (1917), 'Christ, in his Mysteries' (1919), and 'Christ, the Ideal of the Monk' (1922). Marmion's last public appearance was at the golden jubilee celebrations of the founding of the abbey of Maredsous, on 15 October 1922. Two months later he had an attack of influenza, being one of the many who succumbed to the epidemic then raging in Belgium. He rallied somewhat and was able to spend a week in Antwerp in early January 1923, when he had his portrait painted by Joseph Janssens. By 26 January he was diagnosed as having bronchial pneumonia, which was complicated by uraemia and a high fever. He died on 30 January 1923 at 10 p.m. in Maredsous. The funeral took place on 3 February. He was laid to rest in the abbots' vault, under the shadow of the abbey church. Marmion was beatified on 3 September 2000. His feast day is 3 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 69392


(Mary) Pamela Gordon, marchioness of Huntly (1918-1998), the twin of Oswald, Kemsley's fifth son, was born on 13 June 1918 at Granville, Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire. She grew up at Kemsley's Buckinghamshire house, Farnham Royal, and was educated at North Foreland Lodge School, North Foreland, Kent. On 15 March 1941 she married Douglas Charles Lindsey Gordon, twelfth marquess of Huntly (1908-1987), premier marquess of Scotland: they had one son and one daughter. Huntly had inherited the title in 1937 from his great-uncle, the spendthrift eleventh marquess, who in 1922 sold the estate of Aboyne Castle, Aberdeenshire. Pamela's Kemsley wealth largely restored the Huntly family fortunes, enabling her husband to buy back the ruined castle and 900 acres. During the Second World War she drove ambulances in Aberdeen, and she was later active in charity work in the city. Encouraged by her father, from 1940 to 1959 she was a director of Aberdeen Journals, a Kemsley subsidiary. She also wrote a weekly column under the name of Mary Meldrum (a Huntly title). A motor-car enthusiast, she owned various unusual models; she also qualified as a pilot. She played bridge to international standard and represented Britain at canasta. Her marriage ended in divorce in 1965, and Huntly remarried in 1977. Their son, Granville Charles Gomer Gordon ('b'. 1944), became the thirteenth marquess. She died on 29 January 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 69396


Edwards, Monica Le Doux (1912-1998), writer, was born on 8 November 1912 in Belper, Derbyshire, the second daughter and third of the four children of the Revd Harry Newton (died 1939) and Beryl F. Le Doux, 'nee' Sargeant (died 1969?). Her early education was at Beecholm College, Thornes House School, and Wakefield high school. 
In 1927 Harry Newton left St Andrew's, Wakefield, for the living of Rye Harbour, Sussex. There, though her sister was sent to school and her two brothers had a tutor, Monica's education ceased. She roamed Rye Harbour, sailed with fishermen, rode shepherds' ponies, and helped at a riding school. After a year of freedom she was sent to St Brandon's School for the daughters of clergy in Bristol. Monica hated the school, but encountered a good English teacher who encouraged her to write. 
In 1928 the Rye Harbour lifeboat was lost and Monica walked the shore helping to identify the bodies of the crew as they were washed up. Many of them were her friends. She wrote of this in 'Storm Ahead' (1953). 
One of Monica's friends was William Ferdinand (Bill) Edwards (1903-1990), a part-time fisherman, nearly ten years her senior. They worked on an acrobatic and tumbling routine which they performed between the acts at local theatres and pageants and which was pictured on postcards. Her parents felt she was too young to marry and suggested a separation until she was twenty-one. Monica obeyed, but on 10 November 1933, two days after her twenty-first birthday, she married Bill Edwards and her father officiated. They had two children, a daughter, Shelley, born in 1935, and a son, Sean, born in 1943. 
By 1946 Monica, living in Send, near Woking, was hankering for country life. She bought Pitlands Farm, Thursley, Surrey, a near derelict, mainly seventeenth-century farmhouse, at an auction. They renamed it Punch Bowl Farm and Bill Edwards gave up his job as a lorry driver to make the house habitable and farm the land. Monica learned to milk and, finding herself the breadwinner, began to write the first of her thirty-five books. 
In 1947 two books for children were published. 'Wish for a Pony' was the first of the fifteen Rye Harbour / Romney Marsh series which drew on her girlhood experiences. Edwards always regretted that it was her most successful work and, to her indignation, labelled her as a writer of pony books. She always asserted that the ponies were only incidental in her stories of country life. 'No Mistaking Corker', the first of the eleven Punchbowl Farm series, was a disappointing second work but after it Monica seemed to find her voice: one book a year in each series followed with reliable regularity. 
All her child characters were middle class and Tamzin Grey, the protagonist of the Marsh books, was, like Monica, the daughter of an absent-minded vicar. The sea and boats are central to this series covering five years in the lives of the chief characters -- two boys and two girls. Their adventures include shipwreck, smuggling, and the rescue of oiled seabirds and a dolphin. Monica was delighted when she was compared with Arthur Ransome; she much admired his work and acknowledged his influence. 
The Punchbowl Farm children are concerned with farming the land and the joys and tragedies of caring for their animals. Yet they also have adventures involving the supernatural ('The Spirit of Punchbowl Farm', 1952), buried treasure ('Frenchman's Secret', 1956), a heath fire ('Fire in the Punchbowl', 1965), and an escaped puma ('The Wild One', 1967). 
In 1960 Monica Edwards was voted children's writer of the year, jointly with Captain W. E. Johns, the creator of Biggles. She took her writing seriously and her style improved over the years. She believed that books for children needed strong plots and careful research; she was proud of the fact that she used actual locations and real animals. She was a strong-minded person and the authorial voice is sometimes evident: the reader is told rather than left to discover and, even when death and disaster are involved, emotion is held firmly in check. 
Edwards also wrote for adults. These autobiographical books convey her love of the countryside and her passion for wildlife. The first, 'The Unsought Farm' (1954), described the renovation of the house and the development of her farm. It was followed by 'The Cats of Punchbowl Farm' (1964) and 'The Badgers of Punchbowl Farm' (1966). In 1968 Bill Edwards had a horrific tractor accident, chronicled in 'The Valley and the Farm' (1971). He survived his severe head injuries but during his long spell in hospital it was decided that the farm must be sold. They were able to keep Smallbrook valley and the old orchard on which they built a bungalow, Cowdray Cross. Without the farm, Monica had more time for badger watching, reading, gardening, and travelling abroad. She was also president of the Thursley Horticultural Society. Her last book, 'Badger Valley' (1976), utilized the meticulous field notes which she kept from many nights watching and photographing badgers with specially designed equipment. 
Bill Edwards died in 1990. When Monica's sight began to fail and she could no longer walk in the valley, the badgers, missing her treats of raisins and peanuts, made regular visits to her at the bungalow. Monica Edwards died on 18 January 1998. Her ashes were buried with Bill's in Smallbrook valley, which she left to the Woodland Trust. There is no memorial. 
The readership of Monica Edwards's children's books began to fall while she was still writing. She ascribed this to television and a changing world. Collins failed to reissue the books after the mid-1970s. Goodchild republished nine of the titles in the 1980s, but they did not appeal to the new generation of children. However, her erstwhile fans remember the books with great affection, there are many collectors, and secondhand copies are hard to find. The autobiographical books, also out of print since the late 1970s, were reissued in large print in the 1990s. Their picture of rural life in the pre-technology era is historically interesting, but the descriptions of badger watching cannot compete with the intimate photography of television's wildlife programmes. 


@@@@@


doc= 69398


Powell, (John) Enoch (1912-1998), politician, was born on 16 June 1912 in Flaxley Lane, Stetchford, Birmingham, the only child of Albert Enoch Powell (1872-1956), schoolmaster, and his wife, Ellen Mary (1886-1953), daughter of Henry Breese, a policeman, of Liverpool, and his wife, Eliza. The Powells were of Welsh descent, though by the time of John Enoch's birth had lived in the Black Country for four generations, working first as miners and then in the iron trade. He grew up in a household where learning and self-improvement were prized. His father was an elementary school headmaster, and his mother gave up her own teaching career on her marriage. As soon as her son could grasp the letters of the alphabet, she put them up on cards around her kitchen and taught them to him. By six he was a precocious reader, and would lecture his parents on the subjects of his previous week's reading each Sunday evening. Thanks largely to his mother's coaching he won a scholarship to King Edward's School in Birmingham in 1925; and after a term there she taught him Greek (in which she herself was self-taught) so he could transfer to the classical side of the school. He also became an accomplished clarinettist, and contemplated a career in music. However, by the time he left school in 1930, on a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, he had collected almost all the school prizes for classics, and had begun his own translation of Herodotus. That achievement and a love of Thucydides made him decide on a career as a scholar. Since there was already a well-known classicist named J. U. Powell -- and J. E. Powell feared confusion with him -- the boy known as Jack to his parents now began to style himself J. Enoch Powell, in confident anticipation of his own fame in his chosen field. 
Powell maintained this academic excellence at Cambridge, whence he graduated with first-class honours in the classical tripos in 1933. At university as at school he was a loner, obsessed with scholarship. From the start of his undergraduate career he was submitting articles analysing fragments of Greek texts to learned journals. In his spare time he also undertook papyrological research. He had very little social life. Under the influence of A. E. Housman he developed his skills as a textual critic, an arid branch of study but one that gave the logician in Powell great satisfaction. He became the first freshman ever to win Trinity's Craven scholarship, which he soon followed with the college's Greek prose prize. He won many such trophies at Cambridge, notably the Porson prize and the Sir William Browne medal. 
Powell for a time considered a career in the diplomatic service, his linguistic skills already extending beyond the classics and into French, German, and Italian. However, he accepted his father's advice that the fellowship Trinity offered him after a year of postgraduate study, and at the remarkably early age of twenty-two, was too good to turn down. None the less, he found Cambridge suffocating. He spent much of his three and a half years as a fellow of Trinity studying ancient manuscripts in Italian libraries, mainly in the course of work on Thucydides. His translation of that author was published in 1942, and his other main work of research, his 'Lexicon to Herodotus', appeared in 1938. His translation of Herodotus into the English of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible' -- not an affectation, but a means of accentuating its antiquity -- did not appear until 1949. 
As an emotional outlet, Powell started to write poetry, lyrics that appear heavily, if not extremely, influenced by Housman. There is not just a metrical similarity, but also a thematic one, Powell (like the author of 'A Shropshire Lad') being obsessed with early death and echoing a repressed sexuality. Two volumes were published before the war, 'First Poems' in 1937 and 'Casting off' in 1939. His poetry was influenced by his belief that the First World War had been interrupted, not ended, and that battle would be rejoined soon. His other main cultural obsession was with German thought and literature, though he developed a distaste for Germany after the rise of Hitler. Attracted to atheism as a schoolboy reading 'The Golden Bough', he was confirmed in that mindset by a thorough reading of Nietzsche in his twenties. 
Powell determined to beat Nietzsche's record of securing a professorship by the age of twenty-four. However, universities to which he applied rejected him as soon as they discovered his age. Eventually one took the bait: and in the winter of 1938, still aged twenty-five, Powell was on the flying boat to Australia, to become professor of Greek in the University of Sydney. On arrival he stunned the vice-chancellor by informing him that war would soon break out in Europe, and that when it did he would be heading home to enlist in the army. The next eighteen months were a time of torture for Powell, as he witnessed from afar the abasement of his country before Hitler, yet felt powerless to do anything to expiate the shame. On 4 September 1939 he kept his promise, and started for England. With no military experience he had trouble enlisting, eventually doing so as a private soldier in the Royal Warwickshire regiment, but only after passing himself off as an Australian. Selected for officer training within weeks, he was commissioned second lieutenant in May 1940, and began a long and unsuccessful struggle to be posted to the front line. Recognizing this officer's superior intellectual abilities -- he had by now added various other languages, from Russian to medieval Welsh, to his armoury -- the army had no intention of allowing Powell to do anything other than staff jobs. Though he found these frustrating, he nevertheless played an important part in the war. 
In October 1941 Powell was posted to Cairo, where he was soon promoted major. For the next two years he helped mastermind the attack on Rommel's supply lines that contributed so much to his defeat and the German evacuation of north Africa. The hardest time for Powell was seeing brother officers go to their deaths at El Alamein, while he remained in comparative safety. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel in August 1942 and given command of an intelligence group, MI (Plans). In this capacity he attended the conference between Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill at Casablanca in the spring of 1943, an event that would have a profound intellectual effect upon him. He confronted the American political mind for the first time, and it made him profoundly anti-American. He believed from that moment that America's main war aim, and in the peace that followed its main foreign policy aim, was to extinguish British imperial and strategic power. 
With the war effectively over in north Africa, Powell determined to be posted to India, for a chance of fighting the Japanese. Although he secured the posting, he was no more successful at seeing action. He arrived in Delhi in August 1943, having been appointed a military MBE for his work in north Africa, and soon set about helping to plan the war in the Far East. Despite having pressed his case with General Orde Wingate, he was kept at staff work to the end of the war and beyond. However, he found India deeply rewarding. He loved the country, its cultures and peoples. He learned Urdu and immersed himself in the native literature, and it was in India that he acquired the love of architecture that became a main antiquarian interest in later life. By 1945, promoted brigadier, he was one of a small commission charged with settling the shape of the Indian army after the war, the report on which he wrote single-handedly. With early independence that hard labour, too, bore less fruit than it might have done. The commander-in-chief in India, Sir Claude Auchinleck, offered Powell the commandant's post at what was intended to be the Indian equivalent of Sandhurst. Powell turned this down, and returned to England in February 1946. Even at this late stage he still had an unshakeable belief that India would remain British indefinitely. He had formed the ambition to be viceroy, and thought that the best way to accomplish this was from the House of Commons. 
Despite having voted for Attlee in the 1945 election -- not for ideological reasons, but to punish those responsible for Munich -- Powell was a visceral tory, and it was to the Conservative Party that he went on his arrival in London. As a brigadier and former fellow of Trinity he cut an impressive figure. He was immediately appointed to the party's parliamentary secretariat, later merged into the research department. He shared an office with Iain Macleod and Reginald Maudling, and together they set about shaping the party's policies for its renaissance in the 1950s. 
Powell's viceregal ambitions crumbled in February 1947, when Attlee announced that Indian independence was imminent. Powell was shocked by the change of policy, so much so that he spent the whole of the night after it was announced walking the streets of London, trying to take it in. He came to terms with it by becoming fiercely anti-imperialist, believing that once India had gone the whole empire should follow it. This logical absolutism explained his later indifference to the Suez crisis, his contempt for the Commonwealth, and his urging that Britain should scrap any remaining pretence that she was a world power. 
Although he could no longer achieve his main ambition, Powell had unintentionally stumbled upon a new, more passionate love, that of parliament itself. Being a member of parliament would now be an acceptable end in itself. That same winter he fought a hopeless by-election for the Yorkshire mining seat of Normanton, and then set out to find a seat he could win at the next general election. It was not easy. Despite his political, academic, and military qualifications, his manner was off-putting. A spare man of medium height, he had his hair cut 'en brosse' which, with his intently staring eyes and stern demeanour when not among intimates, made him rather terrifying. He spoke in an exact way, with a slight but metallic west midland accent. He had little small talk, and at that stage no point of contact with women. When he finally secured the nomination for a seat -- Wolverhampton South-West, in December 1948 -- the agent advised the selection committee not to be put off by his 'short hair on end and his bulging eyes' (Heffer, 126). 
For the next year Powell nursed the constituency carefully, cutting down and finally resigning from his work at the research department. He was returned at the general election of 1950 after a campaign run like a military operation. He became an active opponent of the government, and with Macleod and other new members formed the One Nation group of MPs. In June 1950 he rebelled against his party by refusing to support the Schuman plan, adoption of which would have made Britain one of the founder members of the European Coal and Steel Community, forerunner of the European Union. This act of independence set back his career, but was indicative of Powell's anti-careerist view of politics. Through One Nation he articulated a radical, free-market Conservatism for which there was then little sympathy in the party. He and Macleod both specialized in the health and social services, but it was Macleod who, to Powell's chagrin, was invited to become minister of health in the spring of 1952, barely six months after the Conservative Party had regained power. Later that year Powell refused a job at the Home Office with responsibility for Welsh affairs, saying that he was interested only in an economic ministry. He had to wait three years for another offer, while his contemporaries clambered up the greasy pole. 
Powell's emotional life had been somewhat unconventional. A religious experience in 1949 caused him to abandon his militant atheism. His poetry revealed turbulent inner forces that he otherwise kept repressed. A double volume of it was published in 1951: 'Dancer's End', a collection of verse written during the war, and 'The Wedding Gift', written in a period of 'epic struggle' with his emotions in the summer of 1950 (Powell, ix). The 'struggle' had been to persuade the first woman with whom he had fallen in love -- at the age of thirty-eight -- to marry him. He failed. He had earlier had two intense friendships with men, one a pupil at Cambridge and the other a brother officer in India, but there is no evidence that they had a physical side. He married, on 2 January 1952, Margaret Pamela Wilson ('b'. 1926), a former colleague from Conservative central office, who provided him with the settled and happy family life essential to his political career. They had two daughters. 
In the Commons, Powell demonstrated a wide range of expertise in his speeches and interventions, whether on his pet social services interests, or on defence, or on the constitutional questions that were becoming of deep interest to him. He believed his speech in March 1953 on the 'Royal Titles Bill' was the finest of his life. He argued in it that the substitution of the idea of the queen's 'realms' for 'realm' was 'literally meaningless' ('Hansard 5C', 512.242). It was an early example of his opposition to the idea of a Commonwealth as a sticking plaster for the wound left by the amputation of empire, and helps explain why he was not one of those tories distressed by the failure of the Suez operation in 1956. 
In 1954 One Nation published a pamphlet entitled 'Change is our Ally', mostly written by Powell and his friend and colleague Angus Maude. It argued for a fast retreat from the planned economy in order to maximize efficiency. However unclubbable and intellectually isolated Powell was, his sheer ability could not be ignored indefinitely. On 21 December 1955 Anthony Eden appointed him parliamentary secretary to Duncan Sandys at the Ministry of Housing. He soon mastered the detail of the 'Housing Subsidies Bill' then before parliament. He took charge of measures on slum clearance and, finally, oversaw the 'Rent Bill'. This was a measure close to Powell's radical heart, deregulating leaseholds and decontrolling many rents after years of wartime and post-war state control. Such was the assurance and technical mastery Powell displayed that, after barely a year, he was promoted on 14 January 1957 to the most important departmental post outside the cabinet, that of financial secretary to the Treasury. 
There, Powell could take on the Keynesian forces whose essentially socialist doctrine still underpinned the Conservative government. With sterling depressed after the debacle of Suez in late 1956 and the country living beyond its means, tough measures were needed to steady the economy. Together with the economic secretary, Nigel Birch, Powell impressed upon the chancellor, Peter Thorneycroft, that inflation was the government's doing. The three men agreed in the summer of 1957, largely under Powell's guiding influence, that inflation was a monetary phenomenon; and that only by strict control of the money supply could it be eliminated and sound money restored. Two basic tools were used to enforce this discipline. First, the bank rate was increased in September 1957 from 5 to 7 per cent. Second, Thorneycroft told his cabinet colleagues in the summer of 1957 that they would have to pare back government spending in 1958-9 to the levels of the previous year. Fearing political damage, they were reluctant to agree, and the prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was at best ambivalent. This studied freedom from conviction by the then prime minister, whom Powell regarded as an actor-manager rather than as a politician, would be at the root of Powell's later intense -- and reciprocated -- dislike of him. 
Powell had long been attracted by the economic ideas of the Manchester Liberals of the nineteenth century, tying in as they did with his belief in the individual over the corporate state. It was also, for him, a matter of logic that inflation was caused by having too much money in circulation, and therefore by governments. He reinforced these views with later readings of Hayek and Adam Smith, but he came to them largely by his own reasoning. As financial secretary, he had to deal directly with the spending bids of ministers. The matter came to a head in a series of cabinet meetings at the turn of 1957-8, when Thorneycroft -- armed with intellectual arguments by Powell -- refused to back down from demanding that a further $50 million of spending cuts had to be found. On 6 January 1958, when Macmillan refused to back the chancellor, Thorneycroft and his two colleagues resigned. Powell's doubts about Macmillan, although he served him again, matured into contempt. 
In this first period on the back benches after holding office, Powell suffered increasing frustration, though he continued to make a name for himself as both a thinker and a politician. He used his time to return to some literary work put aside earlier. Since the late 1940s he had been working on a history of the House of Lords, and he took up that task again wholeheartedly, though it was not published until 1968, and then only covered the period to 1540. He also wrote a shorter book entitled 'Great Parliamentary Occasions' (1960), reflecting his love of the institution. More substantially, in 1959-60 he wrote an important tract of liberal economics, 'Saving in a Free Society' (1960); and, after a relative parliamentary silence in 1958 (once he had signalled his opposition to the legislation introducing life peerages), he began once more to make weighty contributions from the back benches in 1959. The most significant of these was his speech in July 1959 on the Hola Camp massacre in Kenya, in which he attacked British policy in the colony. In it, he argued that the government could not: 'have African standards in Africa, Asian standards in Asia and perhaps British standards here at home... we must be consistent with ourselves everywhere... we cannot, we dare not, in Africa of all places, fall below our own highest standards in the acceptance of responsibility. ('Hansard 5C', 610.237)' The Hola Camp speech won Powell many new admirers on all sides of the house, and distanced him further from the old imperialist tory party. He had repudiated the Suez group of tory MPs, even before Suez, having detected as early as 1954 an unwillingness and incapacity on Britain's part to defend what remained of its empire. It was the logical end of his idea that, once India had gone, there was no point in preserving the rest of the empire, of which India had been the focal point. During the Suez crisis itself in 1956 he took no part, recognizing the futility of the convulsions through which most of his colleagues were going. He had felt, and recovered from, such pains in 1947, when India went. His attack on the treatment of the Kenyans in Hola is difficult to reconcile with later accusations that he was a man motivated by theories of racial superiority. Powell believed that, where British rule still pertained, so too should a principle of 'civis Romanus sum', with the same standards of justice that applied in Britain applying in her colonies too, irrespective of the race of those governed. 
When Thorneycroft was brought back into the cabinet on 27 July 1960 as minister for aviation, Powell felt that he could in honour return to serve Macmillan. His three years as minister of health were intellectually satisfying for him, as he set about reforming the National Health Service and making it more responsive to its patients. He suspected that the service was run more for the benefit of its staff than of its clients, and his subsequent experiences confirmed him in this -- and compelled him to try to improve matters. He won the funding for a ten-year hospital building programme, which he announced in 1962. He established a programme to close and demolish the Victorian lunatic asylums, which he found offensively dehumanizing. He instituted regular meetings with chairmen of regional health authorities, and often toured hospitals to meet health service staff. In July 1962 he was promoted, in the same post, to the cabinet: although Macmillan found him uncongenial, he could not ignore Powell's prodigious talent in a party that was short of it. 
In a parliamentary career of thirty-seven years Powell had just fifteen months in the cabinet. Once he found his feet he proved a powerful force for radicalism, out-arguing more experienced and less ideological colleagues for a programme based on liberal economics and the dismantling of the socialist state. Even he, though, had to make compromises. Under collective responsibility he supported an incomes policy in which he did not believe -- for he felt, as a monetarist, that it had no effect on inflation. It caused him great intellectual, as well as political, difficulty when nurses threatened industrial action in the spring of 1963 over pay limits. As the party prepared for the election due by the autumn of 1964, Powell's was a rare voice arguing for a return, effectively, to the liberal economics of the period before 1914. Such calls were met with incomprehension from colleagues, and derision from economists for whom Keynesianism was the only possible orthodoxy. 
In the leadership campaign in the Conservative Party caused by the resignation of Macmillan in October 1963, Powell and Macleod, who had fallen out in previous years, made common cause to try to have R. A. Butler made the next leader. Butler was an odd choice, given the scale of their divergence on policy. However, Powell felt a personal loyalty to him that dated back to his time in the research department in the late 1940s. He regarded him as having the most intellectual and moral integrity of any of the available candidates. Butler had also, like Powell, seen through Macmillan early on. When Butler failed to press his case, Powell, like Macleod, refused to serve under Lord Home. Powell harboured no animosity towards Home, but felt that having opposed his candidacy so strongly it would be hypocritical to serve under him: 'I'd have to go home and turn all the mirrors round' was how he justified his position (Heffer, 331). 
Powell used his new-found freedom to argue in public for policies and remedies he had hitherto advocated in private. As well as pleading for his party to be released from the pointless strait-jacket of incomes policies, he advocated other courses that became the basis of Thatcherism over a decade later -- denationalization and deregulation chief among them. Although this won him new followers on the intellectual right, his former colleagues regarded his interventions as unhelpful, with Quintin Hogg likening his ideological fervour to that of Chairman Mao. Noting, for almost the last time, the dangers his individualism might pose to his party, Powell remained anonymous when he wrote three articles under the byline 'A Conservative' for 'The Times' in April 1964. All attacked the lack of ideas, decisiveness, and principle in his party, and made a strong impact. Powell was widely supposed to have been the author of at least one of the articles: but he denied having any hand in them, and the truth was revealed only after his death. 
When the Conservatives went into opposition in October 1964, Powell returned to the front bench as transport spokesman. He spent an unhappy nine months in that post, estranged from the issues on which he felt so passionately. When Douglas-Home resigned from the leadership in July 1965, Powell joined Edward Heath and Reginald Maudling in the party's first elective leadership contest. He came a distant third with just fifteen votes, but observed 'I left my visiting card' (Heffer, 385) -- by which he meant that he had laid down a marker for the future on behalf not only of himself, but also of his liberal-nationalist values. It was at this time that the term 'Powellism' first came into vogue to describe his doctrine: the coinage itself a tribute to Powell's intellectual influence. The doctrine was consolidated by the publication in July 1965 of the first of several collections of his speeches, 'A Nation Not Afraid', subtitled 'The Thinking of Enoch Powell'. 
Heath offered Powell the pick of shadow portfolios. To general surprise, Powell -- who might have been thought, given the burden of many of his speeches, to covet the post of shadow chancellor -- asked to be defence spokesman. This was not only because he was interested in the disposition of the armed forces, but also because he wished to alert his party to the changed role of Britain in the world through the prism of the country's defences. In addition to the economic heresies he believed his party was committing, he felt equally strongly that it had not yet recognized the realities of Britain's post-imperial condition. This policy brought him into immediate conflict with Heath. A speech at the party's annual conference in October 1965, in which Powell advocated British withdrawal from east of Suez, caused shock waves in America. Heath, who had initially praised the speech, felt forced, under diplomatic pressure, to repudiate his colleague within days. Powell believed passionately in a European-based defence strategy; and in the election campaign of 1966 he attacked the notion that the Wilson government might be preparing to send British troops to Vietnam to assist the Americans. Although Powell did this at the urging of Conservative central office, Heath felt embarrassed by this, too, and sought to distance the party from what Powell appeared to have been saying. 
After Heath had lost the election in 1966, he was urged by some colleagues to sack Powell from the front bench; Heath summoned his defence spokesman and asked him to follow the party line more closely in his pronouncements. He also asked him not to comment on matters within the portfolios of others. It was not merely that there were disagreements over defence. Keen still to repudiate socialist control, Powell had stepped up his advocacy of denationalization, and had been seeking to expose the futility both of incomes policies and of general economic planning in a free society. The Conservative Party, being in a quandary about the alternatives, was reluctant to depart from the consensual orthodoxy on any of these questions. Whatever assurances Powell may or may not have given Heath at his meeting, he continued to advocate the principles in which he firmly believed, on defence or on anything else. He felt that collective responsibility could not, under the British constitution, exist for an opposition in the same way as for a government; and that it was the job of experienced politicians like himself to try to develop policy irrespective of their nominal shadow responsibilities. In saying this he was merely following the precedent of how Churchill had conducted opposition in Powell's time in the parliamentary secretariat and the research department. Fatally, Powell chose to ignore the fact that Heath, being far less self-confident as a politician than Churchill and with no comparable record of achievement, was less happy to give colleagues a free rein. 
Since the mid-1950s, Powell had, when in government, argued on departmental committees that mass immigration was having a damaging effect on certain parts of the country where immigrants tended to settle. His own experience in Wolverhampton confirmed him in this view. Powell's detractors later falsely claimed that he had, in fact, encouraged such immigration to staff the National Health Service during his time as minister of health. The truth was that ever since he had, as a party official, advised the then home affairs spokesman, Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe, to oppose the 'British Nationality Bill' of 1948, Powell had worried about the capacity of British communities to absorb and integrate large concentrations of immigrants without causing social unrest. He had believed this in 1948 not because of racism on his part, but because of the impossibility, as he saw it, of offering British citizenship to the hundreds of millions of people living in the old empire. He felt, too, that there was a lack of logic in giving such a privilege to those who, because their countries were becoming independent, no longer had any allegiance to the crown. Later, when he came to sit for Wolverhampton South-West, he also had the empirical evidence of the strains and difficulties he witnessed among his own constituents. He argued, too, that his objections would be the same even if substantial numbers of Europeans arrived in one community 'en masse'. 
In the spring of 1968, at a time when his relations with Heath and many of his colleagues were strained in any case, Powell expressed dissatisfaction with his party's relatively conciliatory position on the 'Race Relations Bill' which was then going through parliament. He felt that the Conservative leaders, few of whom sat as he did for constituencies with large immigrant populations, simply did not understand the unhappiness of many people at what was being done to their communities without their having been consulted. Heath and Hogg, the home affairs spokesman, thought that they had dealt successfully with Powell's reservations, since Powell gave them no indication at a meeting of the shadow cabinet where the question was discussed that he had any unresolved difficulties on the matter. However, on 20 April 1968 Powell made a speech at the Midland Hotel, Birmingham, about immigration. This speech thereafter defined his place in British political culture. He told the story of a little old lady, the last white woman in her street, who was taunted by immigrants and had excrement pushed through her letterbox. Sensing the chorus of execration that was about to break over him, he said that he had no right to remain silent when things such as this were happening to his electors. He predicted that, unless something was done to stop mass immigration, there would be a breakdown in public order. 'Like the Roman,' he told his audience, quoting Virgil, 'I seem to see the River Tiber foaming with much blood' (Powell, 'Freedom and Reality', 1969, 213-19). 
Heath, angry at being caught unawares by the speech, decided that it was racist in tone, and sacked Powell the next day. The political class sided with Heath, but there was widespread public support for Powell. A month after his speech Gallup found that 74 per cent of people agreed with Powell, 15 per cent disagreed, and 11 per cent did not know (Gallup, 1026). He received over 100,000 letters in the weeks after his speech, only a small proportion of which disagreed with him. Heath, by contrast, had the obloquy of his party's grass roots heaped upon him. Trade unionists, to the embarrassment of the Labour leadership, marched to the Commons from the London docks and the Smithfield meat market in support of Powell. Although the furore was hard on Powell and particularly upon his wife and two daughters, he came to terms with his sudden celebrity, and sought to take advantage of the freedom his new position on the back benches allowed him. 'I felt like a man walking down a street who is hit on the head by a tile falling from a roof... I saw it immediately that I would never hold office again; and I determined to make the best use I could of my circumstances. ('The Independent', 9 Feb 1998)' Much criticism was directed at Powell for his use of the 'little old lady'. Despite the best efforts of the press, she was never traced; nor was her daughter-in-law, who lived in Northumberland, and who had written the letter highlighting the old lady's concerns. The letter itself was not found in Powell's papers after his death, though he meticulously kept all other significant documents. To opponents of Powell's, some details in the letter seemed incredible. There was also suspicion that it was a hoax, and that Powell had failed to check its, and her, bona fides. In future speeches on the question he was careful to give chapter and verse when citing examples of tension provided to him by correspondents. 
After the Birmingham speech Powell stepped up his programme of political speeches around the country, though for years he was pursued by demonstrators who attempted to disrupt his meetings. Despite the forces ranged against him in the liberal establishment and the media, he succeeded in establishing himself as a formidable political force, thanks largely to his powers of communication. He became adept at the television and radio interview, and carefully timed his speeches to command press attention. As his Birmingham speech showed, he was an early master of the sound bite. His message was enhanced by the drama of his public performances -- an intensely charismatic style based on his hypnotic combination of staring eyes and a metallic tone of voice. His language was memorable, his convictions clear, his naked patriotism a direct appeal to the masses. His friend and political opponent Tony Benn later observed that 'people listen to him fascinated by his intellect and clarity and he mesmerises Labour MPs like rabbits caught in a headlamp' (Benn, 55). 
At the Conservative Party conference at Blackpool in 1968 the evidence of support for Powell within his party disconcerted the leadership. Although heckled by a few, Powell was rapturously received when he dismissed the caution and lack of radicalism of his former colleagues with the Nietzschean observation: 'Whatever the true interest of our country calls for is always possible' (Heffer, 483). Powell was no longer bound by any sort of collective responsibility, and did not in future allow his thought or his words to be trammelled by any considerations of party orthodoxy, or of loyalty to its leadership. This meant that, in expounding matters of policy, he could steal an initiative, and appear to have trumped the less radical impulses of his colleagues. A coherent framework of ideology was, by the late 1960s, fully in place, rooted in economic liberalism and social nationalism. It was not a menu from which it was possible to dine a la carte. One who admired him greatly, Margaret Thatcher, recalled that 'the very fact Enoch advanced all his positions as part of a coherent whole made it more difficult to express agreement with one or two of them' (Thatcher, 147). None the less, by the time Mrs Thatcher left office, almost the only parts of the Powell doctrine she had not come to embrace were his anti-Americanism and his opposition to the death penalty. 
After 1968 Powell fought to acquit himself of the charge of racism, with the support of unlikely friends such as Michael Foot, a prominent left-wing Labour MP. However, it was a badge that was uncritically attached to him by his opponents, for the rest of his life. Powell was infuriated when anyone referred to his speeches on 'race', for he claimed that he had never offered any opinions on the subject. 'It so happens that I never talk about race', he said during the 1970 election campaign. 'I do not know what race is' ('The Guardian', 6 June 1970). His speeches, he said, were about immigration. He had no time for genetic or scientific theories of race, but relied on analysing the demographic and cultural effects of mass immigration on an area with a distinctly different culture. He was most concerned not about absolute numbers of immigrants, but at the pace of growth in an immigrant population overwhelmingly comprising people of child-bearing age. Powell was strongly influenced by what he perceived to be the racial tensions in America caused by the creation of ghettos, and was concerned that such a phenomenon should not be allowed to happen in Britain. Over the next few years he returned in his speeches frequently to immigration, his task made easier by less than honest presentation of the immigration figures by the government. The 'Commonwealth Immigrants Act' of 1971, passed by the next Conservative government in a belated attempt to limit immigration, was in part the result of Powell's raising of public consciousness on the question. However, even as late as 1985 he urged a policy of voluntary repatriation, to prevent areas of Britain having Asian or African-descended populations that were a third of the total. Otherwise, he warned, 'it will be a Britain unimaginably wracked by dissension and violent disorder, not recognizable as the same nation as it has been, or perhaps a nation at all' ('The Times', 21 Sept 1985). Powell was speaking in the wake of riots at Handsworth in Birmingham, a predominantly immigrant-populated suburb. These riots were but the latest in a string of inner-city disturbances in the early 1980s that many thought justified another component in Powell's objections to mass immigration: its effect on public order. 
Eventually Powell's reliance on statistics and facts in his speeches, and his avoidance of anything smacking of prejudice or of what was conventionally understood to be racism, forced his opponents to take him seriously in a way they would not have done had he been a simple bigot. He highlighted practical problems of housing, education, and crime caused by the concentration of immigrants in geographically small areas like his own constituency. These were issues to which politicians had no choice but to respond. The Labour cabinet minister Anthony Crosland, for one, recognized the deep feelings of his party's own working-class supporters, with whom Powell was striking a chord. Angered by the self-righteousness with which these sentiments were labelled 'fascist', he wrote in 1973 that 'to condemn such feeling as racialist is libellous and impertinent. They ['sic'] reflect a genuine sense of insecurity, and anxiety for a traditional way of life' ('The Observer', 21 Jan 1973). However, the emotion with which Powell invested his pronouncements on immigration undeniably whipped up unhealthy sentiment among some of the less discerning of his audience. He could not be held responsible for the actions of those who took his words, contrary to their intention, to legitimize hostility towards immigrants. None the less, many blamed him for the racist feeling that grew in Britain in the late 1960s and beyond. Powell himself believed that the growth of such feeling was the consequence of failing to act on the problem he had identified at Birmingham. He also believed firmly that he did not, as a parliamentarian, have the right to remain silent. He shared with Walter Bagehot a belief that parliament should mirror national opinion, and debate national concerns. In a speech on 7 September 1968 he warned that 'people rightly look to see their wishes and views voiced and discussed in parliament and if, over a long period, they feel this is not happening a dangerous estrangement can set in between electorate, Parliament and Government' ('Sunday Times', 8 Sept 1968). 
It was not just on immigration that Powell felt that parliament was ignoring the concerns of the people: he felt it was true on foreign policy, the Commonwealth, free trade, taxation, and crime too. As a result, and in his new-found populist clothes, he was keen to attack the political orthodoxy on an even broader basis than before. The unifying theme was his regard for the freedoms, integrity, constitution, and customs of the British nation, and his mounting sense that the public shared that regard. His attack on immigration was the first salvo on this nationalist front, and he continued to stress the integrity and identity of the nation in speeches on that and other topics. He said at Wolverhampton on 9 June 1969 that 'we have an identity of our own, as we have a territory of our own... the instinct to preserve that identity, as to defend that territory, is one of the deepest and strongest implanted in mankind' ('The Times', 10 June 1969). 
On the fringe of the Conservative Party conference in 1968 Powell delivered his 'Morecambe budget'. In it he argued that with drastic cuts in public spending, and the reduction of the role of the state, the standard rate of income tax could be halved (from 8's'. 3died to 4's'. 3died in the pound). That autumn he put himself at the head of a cross-party movement to prevent the House of Lords from being reformed as a result of a deal done by the two front benches in the House of Commons. So successfully was the government impeded during the committee stage of the 'Parliament (No. 2) Bill' early in 1969 that the prime minister, Harold Wilson, was forced to abandon the measure. 
In March 1969 Powell opened a new front, on the possibility that Britain might join the European Economic Community. This drew great criticism from his own side, for opposition to entry had hitherto been confined largely to the Labour Party. As supporters of Heath pointed out, Powell had sat quietly in the cabinet in 1962-3 when Macmillan had, unsuccessfully, tried to take Britain in. Powell argued that he was consistent: he had voted against the Schuman plan in 1950 and had supported entry hitherto only because he had been convinced that the Common Market was simply a means to secure free trade. Now it was clear to him that the sovereignty of parliament was in question, as was Britain's very survival as a nation. This nationalist analysis powerfully attracted millions of grass-roots Conservatives and others, and as much as anything else made Powell the implacable enemy of Heath, a fervent pro-European. 
When Wilson went to the country in June 1970, Powell was at odds with his party's leadership on almost all the main questions. His second collection of speeches, 'Freedom and Reality' (1969), was selling well and had been reprinted, indicating the following he could command by his dissent. Under his economic influence, however, his party was preparing to fight on a manifesto -- hammered out at a meeting at the Selsdon Park Hotel early in 1970 -- that deferred to the free market more than had any manifesto since the war. Powell's election address in Wolverhampton mentioned the Conservative Party only once: his was a personal manifesto that went well beyond what Labour caricatured as 'Selsdon man'. 
Heath's victory, predicted by almost no one, was a shattering blow to Powell. He felt his chance of leading his party -- a notion that had come to seem more feasible to him as he examined his postbag and witnessed the great displays of admiration that met him as he tirelessly toured the country -- was at an end. Until early in 1971 he licked his wounds and made relatively few public pronouncements. He was waiting for Heath to make mistakes, and only then would he attack. Such opportunities soon came. Since 1968 Powell had been an increasingly frequent visitor to Northern Ireland, and in keeping with his general British nationalist viewpoint sided strongly with the Ulster Unionists in their desire to maintain British rule. From early in 1971 he opposed, with increasing vehemence, Heath's approach to Ulster, the greatest breach with his party coming over the imposition of direct rule in 1972. By then, though, other matters had caused Powell and his party to undergo a divorce in all but name. 
The Common Market was the main cause. The Conservatives had promised at the 1970 election to negotiate about entry, that entry to be accomplished only with the full-hearted consent of the British parliament and people. When Powell saw Heath sign an accession treaty before parliament had even debated the issue, when the second reading of the bill to put the treaty into law passed by just eight votes on second reading, and when it became clear that the British people would have no further say in the matter, he declared open war on his party's line. He voted against the government on every one of the 104 divisions in the course of the 'European Communities Bill'. When finally he lost this battle, he decided he could no longer sit in a parliament that was not sovereign. In the summer of 1972 he prepared to resign. 
As he was about to do so, Powell changed his mind. He felt compelled to stay in parliament to articulate the fears of his supporters about a new wave of mass immigration, caused by the expulsion of Asians from Uganda by the dictator Idi Amin. Powell argued, and in law was correct, that Britain had no legal obligation to accept these refugees: but the government dismissed his objections and admitted the Ugandan Asians for humanitarian reasons. The issue was the subject of a noisy debate at the party conference in October 1972, at which Powell spoke. Unusually, a vote was taken, in which a two-to-one victory for the leadership barely disguised the support Powell commanded at the grass roots. 
In the following month the issue that brought down the Heath government, not least because it gave Powell his most formidable line of assault against it, blew up. Heath had told the country in 1970 that he would not countenance an incomes policy. Having expanded the money supply at the astonishing rate of 30 per cent a year, Heath came to the House of Commons in November 1972 to announce the introduction of prices and incomes controls, in an attempt to counter the rampant inflation that had resulted. The government would not, however, admit to having caused the problem, which went back to the unlearned lessons of 1957-8. Powell could see at once not just a flagrant breach of promise, but an utterly futile and politically damaging measure in the making. In an electric moment he asked Heath, on the floor of the Commons, whether he knew 'that it is fatal for any Government or party or person to seek to govern in direct opposition to the principles on which they were entrusted with the right to govern'. He asked, further, whether Heath had 'taken leave of his senses' ('Hansard 5C', 845.631-2). The personal breach between the two men, hitherto kept largely private, was out in the open. 
From then until the government lost the general election of February 1974, Powell's position of open dissent became a matter of keen public and media interest. Substantial grass-roots dissatisfaction with Heath led to various 'Powell for prime minister' campaigns, which Powell ignored. However, he maintained his high-profile attacks on various elements of government policy in speeches inside and outside the Commons, which led colleagues loyal to Heath to demand that he have the whip withdrawn from him. However, Heath and his chief whip, Francis Pym, did not wish to make Powell more of a martyr than he already was. A speech by him at Stockport in June 1973 seemed the final straw, for he signalled clearly in it that his party no longer merited the loyalty of its supporters. He rode out the wave of anger that this provoked, though some in his constituency by this time felt that he was trying their patience. At his constituency party's annual general meeting in December 1973 he successfully faced down criticism, and gained the support of his activists for his campaign, though some remained implacably hostile. He argued that he was fighting on the platform on which he and his party had been elected in 1970, a platform that Heath had largely abandoned. He disappointed his association officers by refusing to tell them what he would do if Heath called an early election. It had become apparent to them that Powell would have difficulty standing as a Conservative in such an election, but he maintained that he saw no prospect of one being called. This was disingenuous, for he well knew that in the following eighteen months he would have to make up his mind. 
The matter was forced far more quickly than anyone had expected. An essential part of Heath's new strategy was to impress upon trade unions that they had to accept pay restraint. With grim inevitability this provoked a confrontation with the miners that came to a head in December 1973 - January 1974. A shortage of coal caused Heath to announce a three-day working week for industry, and power cuts for domestic consumers. Powell believed that, having adopted this confrontational stance, Heath would now follow it through to maintain his political authority. However, when Heath called an election on what was represented as the issue of 'who governs?', Powell was outraged. Though it had long been hard to see how he could ever have stood again as a Conservative, given his extensive disagreements with the leadership, his hand was now forced. As soon as he heard that the election had been called, he sent a letter to his association in Wolverhampton saying that he would not be a candidate. His supporters there felt a keen sense of betrayal, as did adherents of Powellism across the country, who felt that that was no time for him to be ditching the Conservative Party -- not least for his own sake. 
For the first fortnight of the three-week campaign Powell said nothing in public, except to deliver a theological sermon at a church service. However, in the five days before the poll he made two speeches, at Birmingham and at Saltaire in Yorkshire, to anti-EEC rallies. At both he implied heavily that people should vote Labour, as Labour was committed to a referendum on continued membership of the EEC, which Britain had joined thirteen months earlier. At the second meeting, when Powell compared Heath unfavourably with Wilson, a heckler cried out: 'Judas!' Powell shouted back: 'Judas was paid! Judas was paid! I am making a sacrifice!' (Heffer, 709). 
Heath stayed in office for four days after the election, trying to form a minority government. Powell took great pleasure in his failure to do so, but had also to confront the fact that he had apparently ended his own political life too, and was despised by many Conservatives. There could be no possibility of any reconciliation while Heath remained leader, or while the party remained committed to Europe and to failed methods of economic management. Several Conservative associations approached Powell and asked him to be their candidate, but he declined all such offers. He was also approached by representatives of the Unionist coalition in Northern Ireland. They suggested he might be a Unionist candidate in the election the minority Labour government was expected to call within months. Powell agreed, and when a vacancy arose for a candidate in the Down South seat he was adopted to fill it. At the election of 10 October 1974, after seven months in the wilderness, he was back in the Commons. 
As an Ulster Unionist MP, Powell had to devote much of his time to a cause in which he firmly believed -- the maintenance of British rule in Ulster -- but this inevitably took him away from mainstream political issues. A posthumous victory for Powellism in the removal of Heath from the Conservative leadership seemed to bring him no comfort, even though Heath's successor, Margaret Thatcher, set about establishing policies drawn straight from Powellite economic doctrine. Speaking of their ideological sympathies, she said that 'economically we both hold the same views... I originally got them from Enoch, but also of course Keith Joseph took them up, and we developed them' ('Odd Man Out'). Joseph, too, had learned them from Powell, who had directed him towards the Institute of Economic Affairs during the 1960s. Joseph's influence on Mrs Thatcher was profound, and through him, therefore, Powell's was more profound still. Nevertheless, for some years Powell was hostile to Mrs Thatcher, partly because he felt that women were unsuited to the House of Commons and to high politics, but also because he doubted the strength of the ideological conversion of those who had sat happily in the Heath cabinet. Inevitably, many also felt that his feelings stemmed from pique at having missed a golden opportunity for himself. 
Powell regained some of his clout during the 1974-9 parliament by persuading his Unionist colleagues to support the Labour government after it lost the slim majority it had won at the October 1974 election. Although this support was given in return for favours to Ulster, and undeniably advanced the Unionists' interests, it deepened the sense of betrayal that Conservatives felt towards Powell. His greatest achievement was to secure increased parliamentary representation for Northern Ireland at Westminster. In the end, though, even he could no longer bring himself to support the Callaghan government. The Unionists were instrumental in its losing the vote of confidence on 28 March 1979. 
Powell was returned for Down South a second time at the election of May 1979, but regarded Mrs Thatcher's victory as 'grim' (Heffer, 820). Her clear majority meant that an influential role for the Unionists in general, or for Powell in particular, was over. Powell maintained a big national following, and was still greatly in demand as a speaker, as a journalist, and as a television and radio performer. As he approached his seventies there were signs of his mellowing, the public face of unbending, logical sternness now and then complemented by revelations of the poetical side of his character. He also took up new political interests, not least his sponsorship of a private member's bill in the 1984-5 session of parliament to ban embryo experimentation. The bill failed, but only after a long battle in which every trick of parliamentary procedure was used to try to keep it alive. 
In time Powell reached an accommodation with the Conservative government, giving warm support not just to its monetarist economic policies but also to Mrs Thatcher's determination to retake the Falkland Islands after the Argentinian invasion of April 1982. He had regular meetings with Mrs Thatcher, who valued his counsel highly. As a result of this relationship he was again able to advance Ulster's cause with Downing Street. However, his public denunciation of the 1985 Anglo-Irish agreement as an act of treachery put relations back into the freezer, where they remained for some years until finally thawed. In response to that agreement Powell reluctantly joined all his Unionist colleagues in resigning his parliamentary seat and fighting a by-election in January 1986. He had won in 1983, but his majority had narrowed thanks to a growing nationalist vote and to his being opposed by a Democratic Unionist. In the by-election Powell had no Unionist opponent, and won. However, at the general election of 1987 Powell's thirty-seven-year parliamentary career ended when he lost the seat to his Social Democratic and Labour Party opponent. Although he had known victory was uncertain, he was devastated by the result. He was offered a life peerage, which was regarded as his right as a former cabinet minister, but declined it. He argued that, as he had opposed the bill that established life peerages in 1958, it would be hypocritical for him to take one. 
Instead, Powell resumed a life of scholarship. He had long wanted to write a study of the Greek 'New Testament', and began with a controversial book, 'The Evolution of the Gospel' (1994), on the gospel according to 'St Matthew', which among other things called into question whether there had literally been a crucifixion of Christ. He published his 'Collected Poems' in 1990, the availability of some of which after half a century out of print made him 'glad in a vaguely melancholy sort of way' ('Collected Poems', vii). He continued to speak at public meetings regularly into his eighties, and assumed a unique place as a public figure -- though one who, to the end, provoked fierce emotions. 
In 1994 Powell was diagnosed as suffering from Parkinson's disease. He fought the affliction with his customary resolution, despite mounting incapacity. For the last few years of his life he managed occasional pieces of journalism, co-operated in a television documentary about his life in 1995, and began but did not complete work on a study of the gospel according to 'St John'. He died on 8 February 1998 in the King Edward VII Hospital for Officers in London. Dressed in his brigadier's uniform, he was buried in his regiment's plot in Warwick cemetery on 18 February 1998. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. 
Powell claimed that 'all political lives, unless they are cut off in midstream at a happy juncture, end in failure, because that is the nature of politics and of human affairs' (Powell, 'Joseph Chamberlain', 1977, 151). Not only did Powell not become prime minister, or even leader of his party: he served in the cabinet for only fifteen months, and it was usually by his own will that he did not hold higher offices. He made no concessions to those who might otherwise have tentatively explored his way of politics. Also, when he entered into conflict with Heath and his supporters after 1968, much of that conflict, while rooted in ideology, took on a personal tone that indicated a strong animus on Powell's part against some of his rivals. He himself revealed that, on the morning after the general election of February 1974, he went to his bathroom 'and sang the 'Te Deum'' on reading that Heath had failed to secure a majority -- something he in part attributed to his own role in that campaign. He added: 'I didn't mean it vindictively', though towards the end of his life he admitted 'I had had my revenge on the man who had destroyed the self-government of the United Kingdom' (Heffer, 710-11). 
Powell was also prevented from maximizing his influence during his political prime because of what many felt to be the contradictory nature of his philosophy: the contrast of his liberal economics with his high tory social policy, notably on immigration. At the height of his popularity, induced as it was by his views on immigration, he often spoke over the heads of some of the audiences who came to hear him by treating them to detailed discourses on, for example, the theory of floating exchange rates. He also allied himself with causes that allowed his opponents to stigmatize him as reactionary and anti-populist. He was, for example, opposed to legislation to prevent discrimination against women, though he took this view for precisely the same reasons for which he opposed laws against race discrimination. He found them an affront to individual liberty, and believed that the market, if allowed to work, would eliminate discrimination through a meritocratic pursuit of profit. Such rarefied arguments were seldom appreciated by the general public, though on greater reflection their logic became more apparent. 
However, as a populist figure Powell had few rivals in his generation, and his long-term political influence was considerable. Much of the programme of what came to be called Thatcherism was propagated by Powell during the twenty years before Mrs Thatcher came to power. In British political terms he was the father of monetarism and privatization. His example spurred on a group on the Thatcherite right of the Conservative Party who exposed and attacked the moral and logical contradictions of the policy of John Major, particularly towards Europe. The shift to the right by the party under William Hague brought it more into line with Powell's doctrine than ever before, highlighting the Powellite mixture of liberal economics and social conservatism. Nor was Powell's influence confined just to what had once been his own party. In the months before his death he saw a Labour chancellor of the exchequer pursuing precisely the monetary policy he, Thorneycroft, and Birch had advocated, and so been forced to resign. His warnings of the constitutional dangers of British membership of the European Union came to be recognized as having some validity in the late 1980s and 1990s, after the 'Single European Act' and the treaty of Maastricht. In an age when the presentation of policy often took on greater importance than the policy itself, Powell exemplified the ability of the well-organized, coherent politician to survive attack by the media, and ultimately to capture them and put them to work for his own cause. 
On the issue with which Powell's name is inevitably most associated -- that of the risks of conflagration provoked by mass immigration -- his worst predictions have not come true, though he argued to the end of his life that the early part of the twenty-first century would see him vindicated. None the less, like Joseph Chamberlain and scarcely anyone else in the twentieth century, he established with the public a reputation as a political figure that is usually accorded only to prime ministers. His main motivations -- patriotism, and a profound understanding of how the people of England valued their liberties and wished to be left alone by the state -- touched an undeniably popular chord. His was above all a career that demonstrated how a superfluity of principle and a loathing of pragmatism preclude success in politics by any conventional measure. It also showed how intellectual originality and the radicalism it strives to beget were for much of the twentieth century regarded with suspicion, and even fear, in British political life. 'I may have failed', he told a television interviewer in 1989. 'That does not mean I was wrong' ('The Independent', 9 Feb 1998). 


@@@@@


doc= 69403


Francis, (Bertram) Frederick (1919-1998), engineer and businessman, was born on 15 October 1919 at 30 Sumatra Road, Hampstead, London, the only child of Walter Henry Francis ('b'. 1892), businessman, and his wife, Florence Eleanor Dell ('b'. 1898). Fred, as he was usually known, was educated at Finchley Catholic grammar school, though he belonged to the Church of England. He left at the age of fourteen and took a job at an electrical engineering company, moving on in 1934 to the office of a shopfitter's, where he learned administrative skills. In 1939 he founded his own tool-making business in Mill Hill, and the company operated twenty-four hours a day to provide supplies for the war. It was his intention to join the RAF -- he had already obtained his pilot's licence -- but he felt better employed in production. After the war, he took a flight in a light aircraft, and was hooked; within three weeks he had bought his own plane, and he remained passionate about flying for the rest of his life. 
His firm thrived after the war, but Francis became bored and turned to making toys, which he had wanted to do since his childhood. He founded Minimodels in 1947, and demand became so great for the tin-plate toys that in 1953 the company moved to a purpose-built factory in Havant, Hampshire. This also allowed him to sail, and for a time he lived aboard his 46 foot yacht, 'Yvalda', which was moored in Chichester. In 1952 Francis had patented a keyless clockwork winding mechanism, and now he placed it in a range of metal-bodied model racing cars: these 'Scalex' cars, and the complementary 'Startex' range, were very popular -- perhaps in response to the scarcity of toys during and immediately after the war -- but the toy trade proved capricious and demand soon collapsed. 
In 1956, however, Francis saw a demonstration by Victory Industries of 'rail racing' -- battery-powered model cars, guided by the raised edges of a roadway. An exceptional engineer, he quickly adapted his Scalex models to take an electric motor; he also devised a track system with metal rails carrying an electric current in two parallel grooves, along which players could guide the cars. Since the name of Scalex was well established but the cars were now electrically powered, the new product was called Scalextric; it was unveiled in January 1957 at the annual Harrogate toy fair. It was a sensation. The price for the most basic set was $5 19's'. 6died, and by 1958 demand was far greater than production capability -- and even the North American market, for a long time impenetrable to British toys, began to ask for more. He felt that the availability of layouts in shops for public use ensured the toy's rapid success. On 1 November 1958 Francis sold Minimodels to the Lines Brothers Group, the world's largest toy manufacturer. 
Francis decided to return to London, where he dabbled with pile-driving in the Thames and invested in a company that towed wood pulp, Tough-Henderson, which by 1965 was very profitable. But he again decided to move on, sensing that the company would suffer with the emergence of container vessels. A great Francophile who frequently sailed in and around that country, Francis set off for the Mediterranean in his new boat, 'Fredela'. On his return, he accepted an invitation from Victory to join the company as a technical adviser; in 1966 their slot-racing game was voted the best on the market by 'Which?' magazine. The following year, when he returned to Chichester, he met Diane Elizabeth Haines ('b'. 1945); they married on 3 April 1978 and had two daughters, Catherine and Julia. This was his second marriage, an earlier marriage in 1956 to a woman named Hazel having lasted only a few months. 
During the 1960s and 1970s Francis also spent time thinking about winches. He had been unhappy with their performance during the building of 'Fredela', and had made a fully enclosed electric winch himself; it pleased him so much that in 1963 he marketed a commercial version. Although it preceded the mass-produced yacht, and although many in the industry mistrusted electricity on boats, it soon became well known and he later developed a new model, of which a modified version was used by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution. He sold the company when it was doing well, but in 1977 he saw the market expanding and returned to business with a third generation of the 'Francis winch', which the lifeboat institution also adopted. 
Meanwhile there was still a demand for Scalextric. Sales had decreased at the end of the 1960s because of inflation, but the game, its basic design virtually unchanged, remained in production, now competing against the appeal of the home computer. Francis also entertained children by talking at local schools about the birth of Scalextric and its success. 
In 1985 Francis was diagnosed with cancer of the lymph system and was given a year to live; he survived for thirteen years. He sold his winch-building company, but spent time restoring old motorbikes and continued to sail in his beloved 'Fredela'. He died peacefully on 6 January 1998 after a viral infection forced him into St Richard's Hospital, Chichester. Ten days later he was buried near his home, in St James's Church in Birdham, Sussex. His wife, Diane, and their two daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 69411


Middleton, George Humphrey (1910-1998), diplomatist, was born on 21 January 1910 at 47b Welbeck Street, Marylebone, London, the son of George Close Middleton, insurance broker and banker, and his wife, Susan Sophie, formerly Elphinstone, 'nee' Harley. He spent much of his boyhood in Paris, where his father was chief representative of Lloyds Bank. He went to school at St Lawrence College, Ramsgate, and read French (in which he was bilingual) and Spanish at Magdalen College, Oxford, graduating with a third-class degree in 1931. He then spent a year in Heidelberg, learning German. 
Middleton entered the consular service in 1933, serving initially as vice-consul in Buenos Aires (1933-4). While there he married, on 29 October 1934, Elizabeth Rosalie Okeden (Tina) Pockley, detective novelist (as Elizabeth Antill), and daughter of Harry Pockley, of Roma Downs, Roma, Queensland, Australia. There were no children of the marriage. Middleton then filled vice-consular posts in Asuncion (1934-6), New York (1936-9), Lemberg (1939), Cluj (1939-40), Genoa (1940), and Madeira (1940-43). There followed a short spell in the Foreign Office before he was transferred to Washington as second secretary in 1944. He was promoted first secretary there in 1945. This service in Washington marked him out for higher things. 
In 1947, by which time the consular and diplomatic services had been amalgamated in the foreign service, Middleton was appointed assistant head of the personnel department in the Foreign Office. He became head of that department in 1949, with promotion to counsellor. With the post-war reconstruction examinations in process to fill the gaps left by an absence of regular recruitment during the war, this was a post of considerable importance, which Middleton filled admirably. One of his achievements was to secure cancellation of the unkind and pointless ban on the adoption of children by foreign service officers. He also inaugurated a far-sighted policy of appointing senior ex-consular officers to a spell of duty in the Foreign Office, to contribute to the unification of the service. He was made a CMG in 1950. 
In 1951 Middleton was transferred to Tehran as counsellor, and there had to cope with the problem of the nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company by Prime Minister Mossadeq. With the ambassador withdrawn, he became charge d'affaires from 28 January 1952 to 31 October 1952, when the staff of the embassy was expelled, with Middleton organizing a cross-desert convoy via Baghdad and Damascus to Beirut. He next served, on secondment to the Commonwealth Relations Office, as deputy high commissioner in New Delhi from 1953 to 1956, a well-earned promotion. It was followed by his appointment as ambassador to the Lebanon, the first of his posts in the Arab world. There, using his fluent French (he was not an Arabist), he had to cope with the virulent anti-British riots that followed the ill-fated British invasion of Port Said in the Suez campaign. He was made a KCMG in the new year's honours list of 1958. 
Further promotion followed when Middleton was made political resident in the Persian Gulf in 1958. This was an important post, supervising British relations with all the sheikhdoms in the Persian Gulf and with the sultanate of Oman. It fell to Middleton on 19 June 1961 to sign the treaty recognizing the independence of Kuwait, by now a major oil producer with growing investments in the City of London. This event stimulated an Iraqi claim to sovereignty over Kuwait, and in early July 1961 Middleton had to mastermind the landing of British forces in Kuwait to ward off an Iraqi invasion. 
This success marked the end of Middleton's service in the Persian Gulf. He returned to Buenos Aires as ambassador to Argentina from 1961 to 1964. He then served in the senior Arab post, Cairo, as ambassador to the United Arab Republic from 1964 to 1966, when he was expelled on the breach of diplomatic relations in a widespread African protest at British policy towards Ian Smith's unilateral declaration of independence in Rhodesia. He was appointed briefly to the 'ad hoc' committee on United Nations finances but retired early from the foreign service in 1966. 
Middleton's marriage had been in trouble towards the end of his foreign service career. He was divorced on 1 November 1971 and on 10 November that year he married Marie Elizabeth Camille Francoise Middleton, who had also been divorced. She was the daughter of George Sarthou, medical practitioner; she had changed her name to Middleton by deed poll before the marriage. With her Middleton had a son, George Alexander, to add to a stepson and a stepdaughter. 
Middleton was in demand after his retirement in a variety of commercial and industrial posts. These included consultant in the Industrial Reorganization Corporation (1967-8), and directorships of Overseas Medical Supplies Ltd, Britarge Ltd, and Decor France Ltd. He was chairman of the executive committee of the British Road Federation in 1972, and chief executive of the British Industry Roads Campaign from 1969 to 1976. Towards the end of his life he chaired Mondial Expatriate Services Ltd, from 1988 to 1991. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. He also chaired the Bahrain Society, the Anglo-Peruvian society, and the British Moroccan Society. He was made a commander of the order of merit of Peru and a chevalier of the Lebanon's national order of the Cedar. In his last years he suffered from cancer of the colon. He died at his home, 1 Carlyle Square, Chelsea, London, on 12 February 1998, and was survived by his wife, son, and two stepchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 69418


Hinsley, Sir (Francis) Harry (1918-1998), cryptanalyst and historian, was born on 26 November 1918 at 28 Rowland Street, Walsall, the son of Thomas Henry Hinsley, ironworks waggoner, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Adey. He went to the local elementary school and then to Queen Mary's Grammar School, Walsall, and in 1937 won a scholarship to St John's College, Cambridge, to read history. Although he obtained a first in part one of the historical tripos in 1939, he never completed a first or any subsequent degree. When the Second World War broke out he was recruited to the naval section at the Government Code and Cipher School at Bletchley Park. Congregated there was a group of young, highly accomplished men and women, living a completely secret life in conditions somewhat resembling a physically uncomfortable university senior common room. Young as he was, Hinsley became the leading expert on the decryption and analysis of German wireless traffic, and, particularly after the capture of German Enigma code machines and materials, which allowed their settings to be broken, played a vital role in supplying the Admiralty with crucial intelligence analysis derived from Admiral Doenitz's signals. This information helped to win the battle against U-boats in the Atlantic. His powers as an interpreter of decrypts were unrivalled and were based on an ability to sense that something unusual was afoot from the tiniest clues. He was not always believed, particularly in early days. His warning, for example, that something was happening in the Baltic just before the German invasion of Norway went unheeded. 
Only after 1979, with the publication of the first of his five monumental volumes of 'British Intelligence in the Second World War', was it possible for Hinsley to discuss the significance of what he and others had achieved at Bletchley Park during the war. He said that the long period of enforced silence was made easier because he could at least discuss it with his wife, Hilary Brett Brett-Smith (1914-1998), the daughter of Herbert Francis Brett Brett-Smith, Goldsmiths' reader in English at Oxford from 1939 to 1947, whom he married on 6 April 1946, and who had been there too. The official history dealt with both successes and failures and set out to be dispassionate in every way. It was thought to be heavy-going and dry, but Hinsley, who had wrestled with every kind of sensitivity during its writing -- internal and those of foreign governments, occasionally to the point of threatening to give up the whole project -- simply responded that 'it was meant to be bloodless' (personal knowledge). When all was over, however, he supplied a highly entertaining edited version of Bletchley Park memoirs under the title 'Codebreakers: the Inside Story of Bletchley Park' (1993), which served to add the flesh and blood excluded from the official account. Perhaps most interesting of all was his personal assessment of the ultimate result of the intelligence effort. It had not been a 'war winner' but was a 'war-shortener'. He thought that the war might have been as much as two years longer without it, certainly one year. 'Without it', he often said, 'Rommel would have got to Alexandria. The U-boats would not have done us in. But they would have got us into serious shortages and put another year on the war' (personal knowledge). 
Following his wartime service Hinsley returned to St John's College, Cambridge, where he had been elected a research fellow in 1944. He became a university lecturer in history in 1949, reader in the history of international relations in 1965, and professor of the history of international relations in 1969. He also served as president (1975-9), then master (1979-89), of St John's College, and as vice-chancellor of Cambridge University (1981-3). He was a great teacher, an important writer, and a notably competent administrator. Countless generations of undergraduate historians at Cambridge remembered the extraordinarily vivid way in which he taught them, but the research school in the history of international relations that he established in the 1960s and 1970s was one of his greatest achievements. The combination of the books he himself was writing, particularly 'Power and the Pursuit of Peace' (1963) and 'Sovereignty' (1966), and the work that his PhD students did and subsequently published, showed interconnections between the evolution of the philosophy of international relations and the realities as they unfolded. This changed the way in which both international relations and their history were studied, and the result was an alteration in the intellectual basis of discussion. Few scholars achieve such turning points but Hinsley was one. It was particularly remarkable because, partly as a result of the war, he did not have any research training, nor did his own books proceed from empirical work: in his case, information was supplied to support an argument, not the other way round. 
Hinsley's work demonstrated two preoccupations: the first was the evolution and function of the state, the relationships that develop between states, and the effect of this on the actions of politicians and rulers. The second was the wish to show how, taking the long view, an essentially rational interpretation of history revealed a record of progress in the conduct of affairs. His near-passion for evaluating the significance of the existence of the state did not, however, leave him able only to conceive of a state-centric world either in the past or the future. The tools he used to describe how his own world worked were equally useful in analysing the pre-state world and in predicting a very different world system in the future. Late in life he would explain with some glee that the evident transfer of power from weak states to international humanitarian institutions in some parts of the world was wholly explicable in the terms he had developed to discuss the idea of sovereignty. It is a tribute to the depth of his approach to international relations that idealists could claim him for his optimism while entirely rejecting the basis for it, and realists could feel comfortable with his techniques while being entirely unable to accept his conclusions. This was not a case of being all things to all men -- he was completely his own man; what he created was a quarry sufficient to supply stone for many different structures. 
For many of his students, it was Hinsley's analytical skill so honed at Bletchley Park that affected them most. Whether in private -- and always unstinting -- discussion or at the famous weekly seminar he ran for all interested parties at every level, from behind a thick pall of pipe smoke, he reacted to the wider implications of what had been discovered or reassessed; and he would comment rapidly, almost electrically, on the true significance of what he had just heard or read. He never forgot any student he had taught or been tutor to, and his students never forgot their exposure to how he thought about things and the often striking language he used to describe what he thought. They also never forgot the risk of personal annihilation which visiting him entailed. The threat came from showers of books which could and did fall from hopelessly overstressed and ancient shelves. He had the gift of total concentration on the person he was dealing with, whatever the circumstances, and was perfectly capable of forgetting that there were often other people waiting in his room during tutorial consultations. Both the skills and the gratitude of his students were laid out in two books: 'British Foreign Policy under Sir Edward Grey' (1977), which he edited, and 'Diplomacy and Intelligence during the Second World War' (1985), edited by Richard Langhorne. 
Hinsley was a strikingly rich character, almost a phenomenon of nature, in contrast to his bespectacled and physically slight appearance. He took his turn at the tasks of university administration, perhaps more as a duty than as a pleasure. He reached the peak both at college and university level, and, apart from a mild tendency to be testy with people who failed to take a common-sense view of hard realities, he was gently conservative and even sometimes parsimonious as an administrator but always as patient and persistent in this role as he was in academic life. He was made OBE for his work at Bletchley in 1946 and knighted in 1985. He died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 16 February 1998, of lung cancer, and was survived by his wife, Hilary (who died shortly after him), and by their three children, Clarissa, Hugh, and Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 69420


Bird, Ruth (1899-1987), historian and schoolteacher, was born on 26 May 1899 at 62 St Quintin Avenue, Kensington, London, the second of the two children of George Bird (1863-1912), entrepreneur and engineer, and his wife, Theresa Mary (1867-1953), daughter of Thomas Edwards, chemist, and his wife, Hannah. The Bird family had been wealthy London merchants during the nineteenth century, but the early death of Ruth's father in 1912 proved detrimental to his family's finances. Ruth's brother, Harold (1896-1962), was educated at Charterhouse School and from 1909 until 1917 Ruth boarded at Elstree Grange in Eastbourne, where her academic ability was recognized in her outstanding success in public examinations. 
Ruth Bird studied at Bedford College, London, from 1917 to 1922. In 1920 she was the only historian awarded first-class honours in the BA examinations. In May 1921 she received the inaugural grant of the Amy Lady Tate scholarship, which covered tuition fees and use of the newly opened Institute of Historical Research, while she studied at Bedford College under the direction of J. W. Allen and Miss Jeffries Davis. Her master's degree, awarded in December 1922, was the ninth history MA in the college's history, but the first distinction. 
Ruth Bird started teaching at Truro Girls' High School in 1923. In 1926 she moved to the Wyggeston Grammar School for Girls in Leicester where she remained until she retired in 1959, having been senior mistress. She obtained no specific teaching qualifications, but loved her chosen career, and was an inspirational and enthusiastic classroom teacher. Her former pupil Professor Claire Cross described her as 'perhaps the greatest (teacher) I ever met' (private information). 
A small, slight figure, with a short severe hair cut, Ruth Bird possessed great natural authority and a remarkably warm smile. She dressed simply, lived humbly, and owned little. Ruth's membership of the Anglican third order of Franciscans and her commitment to its principles of humility and simplicity explain her exceptionally austere and frugal lifestyle, rather than lack of funds. She was initially linked with the order at Burnham Priory at Taplow and later with the convent at Lingfield. Her vicar at Horsted Keynes knew Ruth as a dedicated 'practising Christian, devout and faithful in her prayer life, in worship and private study' (private information) and although her beliefs were private and she was no evangelist she saw no separation between secular and spiritual worlds. Her faith was evident. 
Although she was a keen traveller and a teacher who emphasized the international perspective to history as a means of furthering peace among nations, Ruth Bird's own scholarly studies were consistently local. Her main publication, 'The Turbulent London of Richard II' (1949), was a revision of her master's thesis, 'Civic factions in London and their relation to political parties, 1376-1399', which she prepared for publication during a year's refresher in 1935-6 at the London School of Economics. Her thorough research enabled her to analyse the intricacies of the shifting alliances between the city's guilds, thus revealing deep political and personal complexities, which have precluded any subsequent simplistic assessment of the situation. 
While in Leicester Bird co-wrote entries on the villages of Humberstone and Knighton for the Leicestershire 'Victoria county history' (1958). On her retirement to Sussex in 1963 she immersed herself in the local history of Horsted Keynes, where she co-wrote a history of the village, and edited two volumes of 'day books' kept by Giles More, a seventeenth-century incumbent of the parish church of St Giles. The second part of 'The Journal of Giles More' appeared as volume 68 of the Sussex Record Society in 1971. At the time of her death Ruth Bird was co-writing a history of the local Horsted Keynes school, a seventeenth-century charitable foundation by Archbishop Robert Leighton. 
Ruth Bird's health was undermined in her later years by a weak chest, though she remained mentally alert. She died in hospital in Haywards Heath on 24 January 1987 aged eighty-seven, and her ashes were buried in Horsted Keynes churchyard on 31 January 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 69422


Lewis, Paul (1739x41-1763), highwayman, was born either in Ireland or at Herstmonceux, Sussex. He was one of ten children of an Anglican clergyman and appears to have come from a respectable family: Lewis himself drew attention to the good character of his ancestry in a plea against his death sentence, identifying a family line related to Archbishop William Laud and grandfathers who had served as chaplains at the Tower of London and to Lord Scarbrough. 
When aged about six Lewis was sent to a 'good Foundation-school' where he remained for six or seven years but made no progress, 'such was his Incapacity, so impenetrable his Head to the Rudiments of Learning' ('Select Trials', 4.271). On his removal from the school, Lewis fell among 'gay, idle young fellows' (ibid.) before he entered the army as a matross based at Woolwich. Rather than rescue him from his dissipation, military life heightened Lewis's sense of social ambition and love of sartorial display, resulting in substantial indebtedness to a tailor which 'obliged him to decamp and quit this genteel Support' (ibid.). Lewis next joined the navy, in which he became a lieutenant and saw action at the reduction of Cherbourg, the battle of St Cast (1758), and the capture of Guadeloupe (1759). Though commended for his bravery, in the West Indies he also gained a reputation for deception and robbery, having tricked fellow sailors out of money, for which he was forced to desert his ship. 
On his return to England, Lewis took up as a highwayman, his first recorded crime being the robbery from a carriage travelling between Newington and Vauxhall, Surrey, in 1761. During the following year he was tried four times, and on each occasion acquitted, once at the county assizes and three times at the Old Bailey. On the evening of 12 March 1762 Lewis performed what proved to be his final assault when he attempted to rob, and then shot at, Joseph Brown, a farmer from Willesden, Middlesex. Lewis was subsequently apprehended by a witness and held captive by the more powerful Brown until, after protesting his gentlemanly status, he was released. Lewis then prepared to fire on Brown for a second time before he was once more overpowered and detained by a constable. Tried at the Old Bailey, Lewis was on this occasion found guilty of robbery and attempted murder and sentenced to death. 
In the final days before his execution (4 May 1763) Lewis scandalized the Newgate authorities with his blasphemy and high living (funded by his father, whom he tricked out of money during a visit). Once more he assumed the character and habits of a young gentleman for which he was honoured with the title of Captain in a reference to a former fictional inmate of the gaol, the swaggering highwayman Captain Macheath from John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' (1728). 'His Behaviour was such, as shocked every one who were Witnessed of it' ('Select Trials', 4.273). To the young James Boswell, however, Lewis's conduct proved less clear-cut. On 3 May Boswell, denied a sight of John Wilkes at the Tower of London, had decided to visit the prisoners at Newgate where he met Lewis, to whom the impressionable young Scot was drawn by a display of gentlemanly bravado and fine dressing: 'Paul... was a genteel, spirited young fellow. He was just a Macheath... dressed in a white coat and blue silk vest and silver, with his hair neatly queued and a silver-laced hat, smartly cocked. Poor fellow! I really took a great concern for him, and wished to relieve him. ('Boswell's London Journal', 251-2)' Lewis, together with the forger John Rice and the house burglar Hannah Dagoe, were led to Tyburn to be hanged on the following day. Despite his earlier contempt for the notion of redemption, Lewis now addressed the crowd from the scaffold, warning others not to follow his example and lamenting his untimely death at 'not twenty-three' ('Select Trials', 4.271). One spectator who took Lewis's conduct to heart was Boswell, then attending the first of what became frequent visits to spectate at the gallows. As he wrote in his journal for 4 May, he had long been fascinated with the idea of Tyburn and the opportunity to witness the death of so beguiling an individual as Lewis proved irresistible. Historians now see Boswell's somewhat macabre interest as one example of a wider late eighteenth-century culture of sympathy or sensibility which prompted spectators to test their capacity for emotional sensitivity when faced with the plight of the condemned prisoner. 
Deeply moved by what he saw at Tyburn, Boswell's desire to be thought a man of feeling instead plunged him into an intense period of melancholy and nightmares which continued to plague him, on and off, throughout his life. On the one hand Lewis's impact demonstrates the ease with which fashionable manners could degenerate to a debilitating pathology in the mind of hypochondriacs like Boswell. Equally, that it was the fate of a gentlemanly and gallant highwayman that proved so moving highlights the inherent snobbery of eighteenth-century sentimental culture; significantly Boswell felt no need to comment on, nor experienced lingering horrors for, Lewis's fellow victims, the sober John Rice and the plebeian Hannah Dagoe. 


@@@@@


doc= 69423


Walker, Robert (1755-1808), Church of Scotland minister and subject of a painting by Henry Raeburn, was born on 30 April 1755 at Monkton, Ayrshire, the second son of the Revd William Walker (1719-1774), minister of that parish, and Susanna, 'nee' Sturment, widow of Thomas Latimer, a Virginian merchant. In 1760 William Walker was translated to the Scottish church at Rotterdam, where no doubt the young Robert learned to skate. Following his mother's death, Robert's father married Elizabeth Lawson, widow of William Robertson, merchant of Rotterdam. 
Robert Walker returned to Scotland and on 24 April 1770 was licensed to preach, at the unusually early age of fifteen, by the presbytery of Edinburgh. It was not until 27 November 1776 that he was ordained to the charge of Cramond, near Edinburgh, to which he was presented by Willielma, Lady Glenorchy. On 19 August 1784 he was called to the first charge of the Canongate Kirk, Edinburgh. He remained there for his entire career with what was then a good stipend. Clearly a popular and sociable man, in 1779 he was elected a member of the Royal Company of Archers and was appointed their chaplain in 1798. In January of the following year he joined Edinburgh's Skating Society and in 1784 his name first appears in the minute book of the Wagering Club. 
On 8 May 1778 Walker married Jean (died 1831), daughter of John Fraser of Borlum, writer to the signet, and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Brown. The couple had two daughters and three sons. During his career Walker published a modest number of works, including a collection of 'Sermons' (1791), along with a further three sermons which appeared individually, his 'Observations on the national character of the Dutch and the family character of the house of Orange' and 'The Psalms of David Methodized' (both 1794). He also contributed a description on the Dutch table game of kolf to John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account' (vol. 16). 
Walker's celebrity rests today on his being the subject of Henry Raeburn's 'The Skating Minister', though it is not known how the two men met. Considerable debate has surrounded the dating and attribution of the work, and the identity of the skater. Formerly identified as one of Raeburn's earlier works (claimed by the sitter's family to have been completed in 1784), it is now regarded as a product of the experimentation and intense activity that followed the artist's return from Rome in 1786, which would date the portrait to the early 1790s. 'The Skating Minister' was privately owned until 1949, when it was purchased by the National Gallery of Scotland. Walker's portrait continues to attract considerable interest among scholars and the public, and is now one of Raeburn's most popular and best-known works. Walker died in Edinburgh on 13 June 1808. By his will, of which Raeburn was a trustee, he left all his movable goods to his eldest son, John; no mention of skates appears in the bequest. 


@@@@@


doc= 69424


Strachey, James Beaumont (1887-1967), psychoanalyst and translator, was born on 26 September 1887 at 69 Lancaster Gate, London, the last of the thirteen children (three of whom died during infancy) of Sir Richard Strachey (1817-1908), scientist and geographer, and his second wife, Jane Maria Strachey (1840-1928) ['see under 'Strachey, Sir Richard], daughter of Sir John Peter Grant (1807-1893) and his wife, Henrietta ('b'. 1817). Both his parents belonged to renowned upper-middle-class families whose activities during the nineteenth century were primarily geared towards the development of stable public policies in the Indian provinces. 
Until the age of ten James was tutored in the privacy of the family home. Emotionally serene and intellectually precocious, he rapidly developed a love for literature and the arts, mainly through the influence of his mother, who was the dominant force in the house and who often organized small literary salons for her children and their friends. In 1897 he was sent to board at Hillbrow School near Rugby, where he was watched over by his elder cousin Duncan Grant, who later became the most prominent Bloomsbury painter. There James befriended Rupert Brooke, with whom he subsequently engaged in a rich and revealing correspondence. After leaving Hillbrow, Strachey attended secondary school as a day boy at St Paul's in London until autumn 1905, when he stepped into the footsteps of his older brother (Giles) Lytton Strachey and entered Trinity College, Cambridge. Ralph Strachey and Oliver Strachey were also his brothers, and his sisters included Philippa Strachey, Dorothea Bussy, and (Joan) Pernel Strachey. Ray Costelloe ['see 'Strachey, Rachel Pearsall Conn] married his brother Oliver. 
At Cambridge, James was soon adopted into the ranks of the Conversazione Society, a secret undergraduate fraternity which was commonly referred to as the Apostles and which, apart from Lytton, also counted Leonard Woolf and John Maynard Keynes among its members. As a freshman Strachey was reunited with Rupert Brooke, for whom he developed a profound attraction, which remained unconsummated, if not unanswered. 
Owing to persistent procrastination and a lingering indecisiveness about his future career Strachey graduated from Cambridge with an ordinary degree in 1909, and took up a position as assistant editor of 'The Spectator', the journal edited by his cousin John St Loe Strachey. While reviewing the activities of the Society for Psychical Research, James came across 'The Future of Science', a posthumously published book by F. W. H. Myers, one of the society's earliest members, in which reference was made to the works of Sigmund Freud. Intrigued by the psychological acumen of Freud's theories Strachey started exploring the field of psychoanalysis, an investigation which would eventually prompt him to start an analysis with the master himself. 
Shortly after Rupert Brooke's premature death in 1915 James became simultaneously attracted to Noel Olivier -- the youngest daughter of Lord Sydney Olivier of Ramsden, a founding member of the Fabian socialists -- and Alix Sargant-Florence [Alix Strachey (1892-1973)], born in Nutley, New Jersey, USA, on 4 June 1892. She was the daughter of the British artist Mary Sargant-Florence (1857-1954) and the American musician Henry Smythe Florence (1864-1892), who died in a swimming accident six weeks after his daughter's birth. Her brother was the economist Philip Sargant Florence. After preparatory school Alix attended Bedales School before spending a year (1910) at the Slade School of Fine Art. In 1911 she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, where she read modern languages. After returning to London from St Petersburg in January 1915 Alix lived with her brother in his flat in Bloomsbury. Here she attended the weekly Bloomsbury salons at which James Strachey was also present. At the time James looked frail and fragile, with a pale complexion and delicate bodily features which, were it not for his newly grown beard and studious bespectacled gaze, would have given him a strongly effeminate appearance. Noel Olivier and Alix Sargant-Florence were both recognized as stunningly beautiful women, although on different ends of the aesthetic spectrum. Whereas Noel epitomized the curvaceous elegance of the Rubenesque figure, Alix had, possibly through illness, acquired an androgynous look which, in combination with her tall and slender build, equipped her with a definite if undefinable charisma. Alix's extraordinary display of a masculine body and a feminine soul sparked off James's curiosity, and though the attraction was mutual, Alix was often more in pursuit of James than vice versa. 
James and Alix were married in St Pancras register office on 4 June 1920, after they had already been living together for more than a year at 41 Gordon Square, Bloomsbury, London. Some six months later they settled in Vienna, where James commenced his analysis with Freud. At the time Alix had no intention to enter analysis, yet after a sudden attack of palpitations she too engaged herself in a treatment with Freud. James and Alix stayed in analysis until spring 1922, when they both returned to London and became members of the British Psychoanalytic Society. 
During the first weeks of their analysis Freud asked James and Alix to translate some of his recent works into English, a request which signalled the beginning of one of the most heroic undertakings in the history of psychoanalysis. Indeed, while James started his own psychoanalytic practice -- he was the training analyst of D. W. Winnicott -- and pursued his analytic training with James Glover, and Alix undertook successive analyses with Karl Abraham, Edward Glover, and Sylvia Payne, the couple became more and more involved in the translation of Freud's 'oeuvre'. From 1927 until 1950 James translated twenty-six of Freud's essays in close collaboration with Alix, who also published translations of works by Karl Abraham, Melanie Klein, and Otto Fenichel. Considering the amount of time and effort they put into the Freud translations it probably does not come as a surprise that the Stracheys' own original output remained fairly small. Throughout his life James published no more than four essays, the most influential being 'The nature of the therapeutic action of psychoanalysis' (1934), in which he advanced the notion of 'mutative interpretation'. Apart from a handful of concise articles Alix published 'A New German-English Psycho-Analytical Vocabulary' (1943), a monograph on war ('The Unconscious Motives of War: a Psycho-Analytical Contribution', 1957), and an extended essay on national identity ('Psychological problems of nationhood', 1960). 
After the Second World War, James's acclaimed work of translation and annotation developed into the herculean project of the 'Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud' in twenty-four volumes, the first instalments of which were released in 1953 and the last of which, apart from the index, was published in autumn 1966, shortly before James's death. For almost twenty years James and Alix committed themselves wholeheartedly to their task, rendering Freud's words into a unified, scientific vocabulary. As James grew older and immersed himself more in the meanderings of Freud's text, he became 'an almost exact replica' (Holroyd, 12) of the master, sporting a short white beard and round, dark-rimmed spectacles. In recognition for his meticulous, scholarly labour of love he was awarded the Schlegel-Tieck prize for translation in 1966. James Strachey died in Wycombe General Hospital, High Wycombe, on 25 April 1967 after suffering a heart attack. Alix Strachey died at the couple's home, Lord's Wood, Marlow Common, Great Marlow, on 28 April 1973. 
Despite the fact that the 'Standard Edition' remains a prime source of reference for numerous Freud researchers all over the world, owing to the translation's consistency and its invaluable critical apparatus, many criticisms have been levelled at its terminology and the purportedly dehumanizing tendencies of Strachey's scholarship. One of the principal stumbling blocks for many authors has been Strachey's decision to render the common German words of 'Ich', 'Es', and 'Uber-Ich', which Freud used to designate the three instances of his so-called second topography, with the Latin terms 'Ego', 'Id', and 'Superego', instead of adopting the more common-sense option of 'I', 'It', and 'Above-I'. It remains to be seen whether the new complete English translation of Freud's works, which was started in 2002 under the general editorship of Adam Phillips, will be able to overcome these problems, while maintaining coherence and consistency, and thus replace the 'Standard Edition' as the Freud translation of preference within the Anglo-American world and beyond. 


@@@@@


doc= 69427


Grace Babthorpe (c.1563-1635)], the daughter and sole heir of William Birnand of Knaresborough; they had four sons and three daughters. It was a marriage with major consequences in religious and ultimately in financial terms. Grace Babthorpe was a zealous Roman Catholic who later earned the praise of a Jesuit chaplain as 'the pillar of religion' in the East Riding. She had her children baptized at home by a Roman Catholic priest, took great pains over their religious upbringing, and kept them away from protestant services. In 1599 the Babthorpes were employing a Roman Catholic schoolmaster, William Boyes, who found himself in trouble for teaching without a licence. 



@@@@@


doc= 69429


Aitken, (Adam) Jack (1921-1998), lexicographer and philologist, was born on 19 June 1921 in Edinburgh, the only son and eldest of the three children of Adam Aitken (1896-1958), miner, and his first wife, Alexandrina Sutherland (1896-1931). He was baptized into the Church of Scotland at Bonnyrigg at the age of six, but as an adult was agnostic. He was educated at Lasswade secondary school, Midlothian. With the support of the school and his minister, the Revd Oliver Dryer, he left home at the age of sixteen together with his younger sister Hope. He was able to continue his education thanks to a school bursary, and as the son of a miner he was able to obtain further bursaries that allowed him to enter the University of Edinburgh in 1939. His higher education was interrupted by the Second World War. Although philosophically a pacifist he served from 1941 to 1945 in the Royal Artillery and took part in the Normandy landings and in the war in north Africa, rising to the rank of sergeant-major. He was commended for bravery by Field Marshal Montgomery in 1944. 
Aitken graduated MA with first-class honours in English language and literature from Edinburgh in 1947. In 1948 he was appointed assistant to the editor of 'A Dictionary of the Older Scottish Tongue' ('DOST'), Sir William Craigie; assistant lecturer in English language at the University of Edinburgh; and research fellow at the universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Aberdeen. On 19 June 1952 he married Norma Ward (later known as Chandra) Manson ('b'. 1927), a teacher for the National Childbirth Trust, with whom he had three sons and a daughter. 
From 1954 to 1964 Aitken was lecturer at Edinburgh and Glasgow; he was promoted to senior lecturer at Edinburgh in 1965, and reader in 1975. From 1971 these positions were part-time, and from 1979 he devoted himself full-time to 'DOST', of which he was editor from 1956 until his retirement in 1986. In 1981 the British Academy awarded him the biennial Sir Israel Gollancz prize. In 1983 he was awarded a DLitt by the University of Edinburgh, and he was appointed honorary professor in 1984. In 1987 he was presented with a Festschrift: 'The Nuttis Schell: Essays on the Scots Language Presented to A. J. Aitken', edited by Caroline Macafee and Iseabail Macleod. 
A. J. Aitken's major achievements were his work on 'DOST', which became a much more inclusive and more sophisticated work under his direction (vol. 3 onwards) than it had previously been, and his other publications on the Scots language. He also effectively established Scots as a university teaching subject. He was an early adopter of computer-assisted methods in the arts: with others he created the 'Older Scottish Textual Archive' of over 1 million words of running text. He published numerous articles and edited collections of papers on Older and Modern Scots and on lexicography. He was editorial consultant and pronunciation editor of the definitive one-volume dictionary of Scots, 'The Concise Scots Dictionary' (1985). Revised versions of three of his most important contributions, on Older Scots orthography, phonology, and stylistics, are included in the preface to volume 12 of 'DOST', and his posthumous monograph 'The Older Scots Vowels' was prepared for publication by the Scottish Text Society. A cassette tape 'How to Pronounce Older Scots', with accompanying booklet, was published by Scotsoun in 1996. His name is attached to a sound law, Aitken's law, which he himself called the 'Scottish vowel-length rule'. 
Aitken was active in the institutions of his disciplines. He chaired the language committee of the Association for Scottish Literary Studies from 1971 to 1976. Of the Forum for Research on the Languages of Scotland he was chairman from 1978 to 1981, and honorary president from 1994 to 1997. He was also vice-president of the Scottish Text Society from 1985, honorary preses of the Scots Language Society from 1994, honorary vice-president of the Scottish National Dictionary Association from 1995, and honorary vice-president of the Robert Henryson Society from 1996. His influence was international: he served variously as adviser and consultant on several major dictionary projects, including the 'Dictionary of Sanskrit on Historical Principles', the 'Dictionary of Middle English', the 'Dictionary of Early Modern English Pronunciation', and the 'Dictionary of Old English'. He was looked to as the leading expert on Scots, and gave generously of his time in talks to the public and expert advice to colleagues all over the world. Aitken was known as a man of great personal integrity as well as scholarly dedication. For a period after the war and up to 1956, he was a member of the Communist Party. He was also a member of the ex-services branch of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. 
Apart from brief stays in Iceland in 1951 and India in the late 1960s, Jack Aitken lived in Edinburgh all his adult life. He died of ischaemia at his home, 5 Bellevue Crescent, on 11 February 1998, having had a heart by-pass operation twenty years previously, and was cremated at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh, on 18 February 1998. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 69430


Bassey, Okon Asuguo (1932-1998), boxer and sports administrator, was born in Creek Town, Calabar, Nigeria, on 3 June 1932, the eldest of five sons of Chief Asuquo Bassey. He was educated at Creek Town School, Calabar, and Ahmaddiya School, Olowogbowo, Lagos, and it was during this time that he first took up boxing. He turned professional at the age of sixteen and won his country's flyweight title in 1949 by outpointing Dick Turpin (not to be confused with the English boxer of the same name). He lost a rematch but outpointed Steve Jeffra in 1951 to win the bantamweight title. 
Aided by Douglas Collister and Jack Fransworth, two Nigerian-based Englishmen with boxing contacts at home, Bassey left for Liverpool in 1952. Managed by Peter Banasko, a local former boxer and one of the few black British managers active at the time, Bassey made his British debut in January 1952: a fourth-round knock-out of Ray Hillyard at Liverpool Stadium. Eighteen contests followed (with fourteen wins) in the year. Stocky and powerfully built, Bassey packed a knock-out punch in either hand but was also a technically gifted boxer. These skills, together with his pleasant demeanour, professionalism, and humility outside the ring, quickly endeared him to the British boxing public. 
In February 1953 Bassey took a significant step up in class by meeting the former European bantamweight champion Luis Romero in Manchester. Bassey won by an eighth-round knock-out. Next was the highly rated Londoner Sammy McCarthy. Again Bassey won. A rare defeat followed, however, to Derry-born Billy 'Spider' Kelly, in London. Seven wins from eight contests in 1954 were followed by five victories in 1955. In November 1955 Bassey was matched with Kelly for the empire featherweight title. Bassey was not expected to win the contest but, in a superlative display of skill and strength, he stopped Kelly in the eighth round. He left Peter Banasko for George Biddles after this contest. On 3 December 1955 he married Maria Williams ('b'. 1934/5), machinist, of Liverpool; she was the daughter of Benjamin Peter Williams. 
After successfully defending his empire title in April 1957 Bassey next visited America, where he surprised many by his conclusive points victory over the world-class Puerto Rican Miguel Berrios. Two months later he was matched with the European champion, the French Algerian Cherif Hamia, for the vacant world featherweight title in Paris. Although he was knocked down in the second round, his non-stop style bewildered Hamia, and in the tenth round the referee stopped the contest in Bassey's favour. Bassey, the first Nigerian to hold a world boxing title, was duly made MBE, and in the process became the first Nigerian to hold such an honour. 
Having relinquished the empire title to concentrate on his world crown, Bassey's first defence came in April 1958. Few expected him to beat the upcoming Mexican Ricardo Moreno in Los Angeles. Again, however, Bassey stunned the 20,000 partisan crowd, by knocking Moreno out in the third round. He also beat former world champion Willie Pep in a non-title bout in Boston. His second and last defence of his world featherweight title came against the talented American Davey Moore, and their clash in March 1959 in Los Angeles proved to be the toughest of his career. After a fierce contest lasting thirteen rounds, Biddles refused to send his fighter out for the fourteenth round; he explained later that owing to cuts Bassey could not see. The return match, in August 1959, ended in similar fashion at the end of the tenth round. Aged only twenty-seven, but knowing that his best years were behind him, Bassey sensibly chose to retire. 
On his return to Nigeria, Bassey was appointed director of physical education and was given the job of coaching the Olympic boxing team. He wrote an instructional book, 'Hogan on Boxing' (1963), before producing two Olympic medallists: Nojeem Mayegun (1964) and Isaac Ikhouria (1972). He was awarded the (Senegalese) Lion of Africa award in 1973, and Nigeria's highest honour, membership of the order of the Niger, in 1979. Meanwhile, his first marriage having ended in divorce, in 1977 he married Mary Magdalene. There were eight children of his two marriages. 
As the first black African boxing champion since Battling Siki (Baye Phal) in the 1920s, Bassey enabled Nigerian boxing and sport to expand beyond both their own and Africa's borders at a time of increasing Western awareness of African culture. His influence long remained a force in his country of birth and he was at the end of the twentieth century voted the greatest Nigerian athlete of the century, above fellow boxer Dick Tiger (also Liverpool-based for a time), basketball player Hakeem Olajuwon, and footballer Christian Okoye. He died in the early hours of 26 January 1998 at his home in Apapa, Lagos. 


@@@@@


doc= 69432


Bush, Geoffrey (1920-1998), composer, was born on 23 March 1920 at 84 Strode Road, Kilburn, London, the son of Charles Christmas Bush, schoolmaster and author, and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Chart. His parents separated soon after his birth, and he never saw his father again. Brought up by his mother, he was a chorister in Salisbury Cathedral (1928-33), where under Walter Alcock he learned to admire the centuries-long tradition of English church music, and where the foundations of his enduring Christian faith were laid. At Lancing College (1933-8) his early efforts at composition came under the critical discipline of Jasper Rooper. However, his real musical mentor was John Ireland, who helped to strengthen his sense of an English identity even when his interests broadened to include, especially, French and Russian music. In 1938 he went up on a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, where he gained a second class in classical moderations and took his BMus in 1940; he was awarded the MA and DMus in 1946. While at Oxford he became a close friend of the composer Bruce Montgomery, already making a name for himself as a detective story writer under the name Edmund Crispin. Bush even lent a hand with a genre he always enjoyed, and earned a fleeting appearance in one of Montgomery's stories as a hard-pressed film composer. A pacifist, he spent the Second World War as assistant warden of a Welsh children's hostel before returning to Oxford. 
Bush had continued to compose, and the first of his six operas, 'The Spanish Rivals', was produced at Brighton in 1948 and for the Festival of Britain in 1951. He meanwhile married, on 15 April 1950, Julie Kathleen McKenna ('b'. 1924/5), physiotherapist, daughter of Curtin McKenna, chartered secretary; they had two sons, Andrew and Paul. Bush's distinguished career as a teacher began with extra-mural lecturing in Oxford in 1947. In 1952 he moved to the extra-mural department of London University, where he remained in various capacities until 1987. He was also visiting professor at King's College, London, for twenty years from 1969. There he was a much admired lecturer, adept at conveying the importance of strict disciplines and serious ideas with the urbanity and wit that were also to make him a popular broadcaster. 
Bush's first symphony had its premiere at the 1954 Cheltenham festival, where a number of his works were played and where he was a familiar and popular figure. It includes a blues-influenced slow movement in memory of Constant Lambert, some of whose tastes Bush shared; he enjoyed jazz as well as American musicals. The same festival saw the premiere of what was to be his most popular work, the overture 'Yorick', which had already won the 1949 Royal Philharmonic Society prize. A second symphony followed in 1957, but its neglect until a recording in 1994 contributed to his abandoning the form. In any case, some of his most characteristic music, in a long and wide-ranging list of works, was in smaller forms, and reflected the breadth but discrimination of his literary tastes. These included settings of Chaucer, Herrick, Shakespeare, Jonson, Shelley, Wilde, Kathleen Raine, and Stevie Smith, as well as medieval lyrics and modern limericks. His operas ranged from pacifist subjects, including 'The Equation' (1967), a bleak work for the Sacred Music Drama Society, to 'Lord Arthur Savile's Crime' (1972), a piece for students with a wealth of witty and sly musical allusions that well suit Wilde's story. He admitted to being happiest writing songs and operas, when he could find the right words. 
Bush's championship of English music also took him to scholarly work: he edited several volumes of the series 'Musica Britannica', works by John Ireland and other English composers, among them Elgar, and an anthology of English song. He also served on the Composers' Guild of Great Britain, the Arts Council, and the Performing Right Society. He was made an honorary fellow of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, in 1986. 
Though his music ranged wide and encompassed many forms, Bush's most characteristic works were shorter ones in which the lyrical qualities and directness of utterance he sought were most naturally realized. His books included a lively collection of essays, partly autobiographical, 'An Unsentimental Education'. The appreciation and affection he enjoyed in the musical world were demonstrated at a seventieth birthday concert presented at the Wigmore Hall, London, by the Songmakers' Almanac, 'A celebration of English song, 1850-1990', its title referring to a tradition to which he had made a valuable contribution. In person, he was a genial, bespectacled man, usually bow-tied, quick and intelligent in conversation, witty and far from uncritical about contemporary developments he deplored, but essentially kind and generous. He died at his home, 43 Corringham Road, Golders Green, London, on 24 February 1998, of prostate cancer. He was survived by his wife, Julie, and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 69455


Davis, Richard (1617/18-1693x1700), bookseller, was baptized at All Saints' Church in Oxford on 16 August 1618, the third of eight children of William Davis ('fl'. 1609-1651), bookseller, and his wife, Mary (died 1651). In December 1639 Richard followed his father by becoming a licensed university bookseller ('stationer'), as later did his brother Nicholas; their elder brother Thomas graduated from the university. Over the next few decades Richard Davis became Oxford's leading bookseller. Besides large holdings in theology, medicine, law, and the sciences, his stock -- which included works from many continental presses -- ranged from the esoteric (a Turkish grammar, a Syro-Chaldean dictionary, histories of Lapland and Barbados) to books on cookery or the propagation of vegetables. Aeschylus and Eusebius shared shelf space with Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, and Restoration drama. Among his customers were the antiquaries William Fulman (who bought and borrowed books by courier) and Anthony Wood. 
From 1646 onwards Davis also made a major contribution to academic publishing, being solely or partly responsible for over 250 books; many, including works by Boyle, were scientific. Such was his reputation that when plague prevented the Royal Society from publishing three numbers of its 'Philosophical Transactions' in London, they turned to Davis to produce them. 
Davis's shop and home -- the present 14-15 Oriel Street, Oxford -- were leased him by Lincoln College, but in 1663 he also rented the old Congregation House from the university as a warehouse for his expanding stock. Soon afterwards drunken undergraduates on their way home late one night were puzzled to see a light in the building at that hour, and suspected an illegal conventicle; they thought these suspicions confirmed when, listening at the window, they heard Davis say 'O the 'bible'! I had almost forgot the 'bible''. A proctor and other dons were hastily summoned, but they 'going with great speed and bursting open the doors... found none but Mr. Richard Davis the bookseller and his wife and boy looking out books to exchange at London' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 1.509). 
Davis's first wife was dead by 21 April 1685, when he married Susannah Adams (1627/8-1700), widow -- probably a connection, though not the relict, of his friend the bookseller John Adams. Wood sourly implies that this explains the subsequent collapse of Davis's business, since the following August he 'shut up his shopwindows for debt' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 3.157), but the expenses of Davis's publishing ventures are a more likely cause. His stock of over 40,000 books was sold off in four great sales (the catalogues of which survive) from 1686 to 1692. A contemporary pamphlet describes the interest these aroused, libraries and lecture halls emptying as scholars flocked to the saleroom. In spite of his reissue of three works in 1690, the bankruptcy effectively marked the end of Davis's career. In March 1693, when he was seventy-five, he was summoned as a witness in a libel suit; his signature is found in the records of the trial, but he had little information to give. Probably by February 1695 he was dead, for another tenant rented his house. He was certainly dead by 1700, when his widow died at the age of seventy-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 69464


Wheeler, (William) Gordon (1910-1998), Roman Catholic bishop of Leeds, was born on 5 May 1910 at Hillcrest in the village of Dobcross, Saddleworth, Yorkshire, the first child of Frederick Wheeler (1880-1971), cloth bleacher and finisher, and his wife, Marjorie (1881-1938), daughter of William Barber Upjohn of Worsley, Lancashire, and his wife, Mary. His only sibling, Marjorie Elizabeth, was born in 1912. Gordon Wheeler (as he was always known to family and friends) was baptized at St Mark's parish church, Worsley, on 3 July 1910, and his family's deep Anglican faith was a formative influence on his early life and career. He was educated at Manchester grammar school (1924-9) and at University College, Oxford (1929-32), from where he graduated with a second in history. He then chose to study for the Anglican priesthood at St Stephen's House, Oxford (1932-3); he was ordained to the diaconate in December 1933 by the bishop of Chichester, George Bell, and in December 1934 he was ordained priest by the bishop of Derby in All Saints' Cathedral, Derby. Between 1933 and 1936 he served as curate at St Bartholomew's, Brighton, and at St Mary and All Saints, Chesterfield, and then at Lancing College, Sussex, as an assistant chaplain and master. From an early age he identified firmly with the Anglo-Catholic wing of the Church of England, and he developed an admiration for Cardinal Newman. At various times he considered whether to become a Roman Catholic; he finally decided to do so in 1936 and was received into that church at Downside Abbey on 18 September of that year. Subsequently he went to Rome and the Beda College (1936-40) to prepare for his ordination to the Roman Catholic priesthood. This took place at Westminster Cathedral on 31 March 1940 and was performed by the archbishop of Westminster, Cardinal Hinsley. His first appointment in the Westminster diocese was to the parish of St Edmund, Edmonton, as assistant priest. He remained there until 1944, when he joined the staff of Westminster Cathedral with responsibility for editing the 'Westminster Cathedral Chronicle'. In 1950 he became the Catholic chaplain to the University of London. Pope Pius XII appointed him a privy chamberlain in 1952. 
In 1954 the archbishop of Westminster, Cardinal Bernard Griffin, appointed Wheeler administrator of Westminster Cathedral, a post he held for the next ten years. In 1955 he was created a domestic prelate to Pope Pius XII, and the following year he became a chaplain to the British Association of the Sovereign and Military Order of Malta. From 1991 to 1995 he was the association's principal chaplain. 
Wheeler enjoyed a reputation as an able administrator, a fine intellect, and a man of great charm and wit. It was accepted that he was destined to become a bishop, and in 1964 Pope Paul VI appointed him coadjutor bishop of Middlesbrough, to assist the bishop of the diocese, George Brunner. He was consecrated bishop by the apostolic delegate Archbishop Igino Cardinale at St Mary's Cathedral, Middlesbrough, on 19 March 1964. He expected in due course to succeed Bishop Brunner, but in 1966 he was appointed as the seventh bishop of Leeds, following the translation of George Patrick Dwyer to the archdiocese of Birmingham the previous year. He was enthroned as bishop of Leeds in St Anne's Cathedral, Leeds, on 27 June 1966. He retired on 10 September 1985 and was granted the title of bishop emeritus of Leeds. 
Although Wheeler's cultural and educational background may have differed from that of most of his fellow bishops in the English Catholic church of the 1960s, he shared with them a common task: implementing at diocesan level the far-reaching decisions taken by the Second Vatican Council of 1962-5. To that end he established the Wood Hall Pastoral and Ecumenical Centre in 1967, the Diocesan Pastoral Council, and the Diocesan Justice and Peace Commission: all important initiatives which placed him at the forefront of post-conciliar reform. In 1971 he became the first English bishop to ordain married men to the diaconate; he also accepted as candidates for the priesthood several married Anglican clergymen who had converted to the Catholic faith, although their ordinations did not take place until after Wheeler retired. In later years, and in hindsight, he tended to regret that his initiatives had not achieved more to disseminate the fruits of the Second Vatican Council, and wondered whether it would have been preferable to concentrate on promoting this aim in the parishes both among priests and lay people. 
This self-assessment was rather severe, for Wheeler had achieved much. Undoubtedly he was at heart a theological and liturgical conservative; nevertheless he accepted that the church has always undergone development in these and other areas. Thus he accommodated and, indeed, promoted innovation; it was this, together with his sympathetic approach to troubled individuals and situations, which enabled him to guide his diocese through the upheavals and controversies of the period relatively unscathed, not least through the aftermath of the 1968 encyclical 'Humanae vitae'. Wheeler's achievement was an example to the wider English Catholic church and helps to explain why he was seen by some as a potential archbishop of Westminster when Cardinal Heenan died in 1975. In the event it was Gordon Wheeler who promoted the cause of Heenan's eventual successor, the abbot of Ampleforth, Dom Basil Hume. 
Having taken part himself in the later sessions of the Second Vatican Council, Wheeler envisaged the spiritual and intellectual renewal of the church through a balanced consideration and implementation of its decrees, in contrast to what he saw, from the viewpoint of a 'progressive traditionalist', as frequently expressed misinterpretations and misrepresentations. In 1969 he published a pamphlet entitled 'Let's Get this Straight' in which he argued that the council was not the cause of 'unrest and uncertainty' but was in fact 'God's answer' to the troubles and problems of the age. At the national level he was able to influence some of the most significant changes to emerge from the council, through his membership of the National Liturgical Commission, which he chaired from 1970 to 1975, and of the International Commission on English in the Liturgy. His loyalty to the council was evident in 1980, when he ceded fifty parishes from the Leeds diocese to form the greater part of the new diocese of Hallam, centred on Sheffield; as a consequence his former auxiliary bishop, Gerald Moverley, became the first bishop of Hallam. In this way Wheeler accepted the principle that a modern diocese should, as far as possible, be of a size which enables a single bishop to provide effective administration and pastoral care. 
As bishop of Leeds Wheeler lived at Eltofts, near Thorner, on the outskirts of the city in a style characterized by 'warm hospitality, gracious manners [and] the highest standards', in the words of Cardinal Basil Hume ('Diocese of Leeds Directory 1999', 124). In retirement he went to reside at the College of the Blessed Virgin in Headingley, where he was cared for by the Little Sisters of the Poor. As his successor, Bishop David Konstant, later recalled, Wheeler's retirement was 'everything that such a time should be' ('The Tablet'), and it was during these years that he wrote his memoirs, 'In Truth and Love' (1990), and compiled a collection of homilies and essays, 'More Truth and Love' (1994). He died on 20 February 1998 at Mount St Joseph's home, Shire Oak Road, Leeds, and his funeral took place at St Anne's Cathedral on 3 March; on the same day he was buried in the crypt of St Edward's Church, Clifford, near Boston Spa in Yorkshire. While some may have regarded Gordon Wheeler as 'the last of the prince-bishops' ('The Guardian'), on its own this would be a superficial judgement; he was a man of strong faith and deep prayer, a holy man who was also 'an urbane and effective diocesan bishop' ('The Times') at one of the most turbulent periods in the modern history of the Catholic church. 


@@@@@


doc= 69477


Henry Hills junior (c.1654-1710x12) was almost as notorious as his father's. Following a request by the East India Company in January 1670 to 'send out an able Printer' to Bombay to print 'some of the Ancient Braminy Writings', Hills was offered the post in April 1674. However, on his arrival in India, Hills's English types were not sufficient for the proposed printing so new types were cut locally by Indian metalworks; as a result, several sheets had been printed in 'the Banian character' by January 1677, probably in Surat (Primrose, 102). Hills evidently proved a disappointment: a letter from India to London dated 21 January 1679 described Hills as: 'not being found here anyways usefull in his profession... he hath given soe little content that it was thought convenient to discharge him... especially being at soe high a sallary as $50 per annum and to doe nothing for it. (ibid., 102-3)' Hills was back in London by 7 July 1679 when he was freed by patrimony into the Stationers' Company and elected to the company's livery; he bound his first apprentice the following June. 


@@@@@


doc= 69478


Cross, Frank Leslie (1900-1968), Church of England clergyman and patristic scholar, was born on 22 January 1900 at home in the High Street, Honiton, Devon, the eldest of three children of Herbert Francis Cross (1868-1957), a pharmacist, and his wife, Louisa Georgina (1869-1946), daughter of William Joseph Randall. His father sold his pharmacy and retired to Bournemouth in 1911. Cross attended Allhallow's School, Honiton (1908-11), and then Bournemouth School (1911-17), from where he won the domus scholarship for natural science at Balliol College, Oxford. After war service, he read the honour school of chemistry, in 1920 obtaining honours in part one with crystallography. He then switched to theology, in which he took a first in 1922. Winning the senior Denyer and Johnson prize enabled him to spend two years in Marburg and Freiburg working on a thesis on Husserl. In 1925 he was ordained deacon to the title of tutor and chaplain of Ripon Hall (priest in 1926). In 1927 he was invited to become a priest-librarian at Pusey House. For a time he combined this office with that of chaplain of Ripon Hall, apparently unworried by differences in churchmanship. He was appointed university lecturer in the philosophy of religion in 1934 and from 1935 to 1938 he was also Wilde lecturer in natural and comparative religion. In 1944 he was elected Lady Margaret professor of divinity. To this chair was attached a canonry in Christ Church and a large house. He tried to persuade the principal of Mirfield College to set up a theological college in the house. After the death of his mother, his father and younger sister came to live there, but he continued to provide cheap lodging for pious students. 
Cross's first book was 'Religion and the Reign of Science' (1930), but his main interest gradually moved from the philosophy of religion to the church fathers. In 1933 he published a study of J. H. Newman; in 1935 (with P. E. More) a collection of extracts from the works of seventeenth-century Anglican divines; and in 1939 a students' edition of Athanasius's 'De incarnatione'. On the death of Darwell Stone in 1941 he took over for five years the editorship of the future 'Patristic Greek Lexicon' and wrote a life of Stone (1943). He produced an edition, with English translation, of Cyril of Jerusalem's 'Lectures on the Christian Sacraments' (1951). He had meanwhile embarked on the book eventually to be published in 1957 as 'The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church'. This quickly became a standard work of reference. It was formally commissioned by Geoffrey Cumberlege in 1939, but the diaries of Tom Parker (at one time co-editor) suggest that work had begun earlier and that from the start Cross's enthusiasm was the driving force. The final shape was certainly due to his persistence. He wrote many of the entries himself and those he commissioned from others were nearly all reworked by him to give the book uniformity of style. His wide interests and enthusiasms led him to turn from one project to another. The book on Athanasius foreshadowed in his inaugural lecture was never written, and his main contribution to scholarship in the narrower sense lay in articles which drew attention to things which were obvious once they had been pointed out. He had a keen sense of how people behave. Thus he saw how the second recension of Dionysius Exiguus's 'Codex canonum' had conflated material from different councils of Carthage and by sorting out the documents in a pioneer article ('Journal of Theological Studies', new ser., 12, 1961, 227-47) he made sense of the history of the African councils from 393 to 419. Similarly, he recognized the difference in character between literary and liturgical manuscripts, comparing the latter to timetables compiled for practical use, not to preserve an archetype ('Journal of Theological Studies', new ser., 16, 1965, 61-7). He had taken the degrees of DPhil in 1930 and DD in 1950 and in 1967 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. 
At the end of the Second World War, Cross was involved in re-establishing contact with German Christians. He went to Germany and invited German academics to Oxford, arranging seminars and lectures. When Patrick McLaughlin suggested to him that a gathering of scholars interested in the period before the division of Christendom into East and West would foster reunion, he readily agreed to convene such a meeting. The first international conference on patristic studies took place in 1951, to be followed by five others in Cross's lifetime. He arranged publication of their proceedings in 'Texte und Untersuchungen', helping many to get their first works in print. A parallel concern to bridge the gap between academic theologians and the parish clergy led to conferences called 'Theology and ministry' which developed into international congresses on 'New Testament' studies held in the years between patristic conferences. Towards the end of his life he arranged conferences for members of religious orders, both active and enclosed. 
Intensely shy, Cross was known for his silence. His lectures and sermons were painful. He found social contact difficult, but once the initial barrier was penetrated, his sincerity and goodwill were so apparent that he inspired devotion, and he had a great capacity for persuading people to do things. He was diligent both in work and worship; as a canon he attended every office in the cathedral when he was in Christ Church, and laid on extra services in term time. He was a frequent visitor of religious houses at home and abroad. He was found dead on the morning of 30 December 1968 at the Priory House, Christ Church, Oxford, and his ashes were interred in the cathedral garth. 


@@@@@


doc= 69482


Maybee, Robert (1810-1891), poet, was born on 1 April 1810 in his parents' cottage, Windmill Cottage, near the windmill on Peninnis Head, St Mary's, in the Isles of Scilly, the fifth of ten children of William Maybee, who moved to Scilly from the Isle of Wight to take up employment as a mill worker, probably in 1798, and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Mumford, a local girl whom he had married on 26 December 1798. The windmill closed in 1826 and William Maybee died in 1834, but Florence continued to live in the cottage together with some of her children, including Robert. During this time she compiled a list of their dates of birth and of the dates of death for four of her children who had predeceased her, and from this it appears that she may have had some ability in reading and writing; if so, she failed to pass on this accomplishment to her son Robert, who remained illiterate. Florence Maybee died in 1852, and after forty-two years' residence Robert was obliged to move out of the cottage into lodgings in Hugh Town. It was about this period that he began to compose his verses. 
For all his life Maybee was poor and scraped a living from various jobs. For much of the time he was a hawker, making trips on the packet boat to Penzance to take back fruit to sell in Scilly. A verse from one of his early compositions reads: '
It was many a long summer day 

I hawked them round the town 

And had to work till ten at night 

To earn one half a crown. 
(Baxter, 37)' The income he received from such trading he supplemented by reciting or singing his verses to customers. He relied on memory, but later sold his verses in printed form or at least exchanged them for a meal. He depended upon finding people to write down his words for him, one of whom was the kindly Dr Moyle, and this opens the possibility that his amanuenses may have assisted in matters such as syntax and punctuation. 
In the winter months between about 1855 and 1860 Maybee worked on a farm on St Agnes; in the summer months he helped in the construction of the Bishop Rock lighthouse. In 1883, while working on Tresco, he composed an account of his life, which gave a picture of many happenings in Scilly in his lifetime and is also the main source of biographical information about him. His account was always graphic, as for instance when he described kelp-making, an important early nineteenth-century industry in Scilly, and he was always interesting, even if some of his historical detail is now discounted. He entitled the account 'Sixty-Eight Years Experience on the Scilly Islands', and in it he claimed to have composed about sixty poems, but only about nineteen were written down and are still available, the earliest being from 1871. He certainly composed some before this, because he appeared before the local magistrates in 1857 charged with selling his ballads about the streets without a licence. 
Maybee's writings reveal his native charm but his verses seem childlike, and in this there may be a parallel with Alfred Wallis, the St Ives painter 'discovered' by Ben Nicholson in 1928. Both started their work late in life, untutored and lacking learning and sophistication. Wallis is termed a 'primitive' painter, and Maybee could be called a 'primitive' poet. Not for him flights of fancy or erudite allusions; instead, his verses were simple and unmannered, telling a tale (often of shipwreck) in words short, familiar, and commonplace. Some Scillonian children learned them by heart and could recite them at will. Even at the end of the twentieth century, when in the company of older Scillonians one had only to utter the first line: '
Dark on the Gilstone's rocky shore 

' for others to complete the verse thus: '
The mist came lowering down 

And night with all her deepening gloom 

Put on her sable crown. 
(Baxter, 24)' A description of Maybee at the age of about seventy-five referred to him as 'a pathetic little man with a kind face, yellowish curls, and red-rimmed eyes' (Baxter, introduction). He spent his last five years in the local poorhouse, dying there, unmarried, in 1891. Today Maybee is remembered not only in the Scillies but also in the USA, where the Maybee Society is devoted to researching the whole Maybee family. 


@@@@@


doc= 69495


Barton, Sir Derek Harold Richard (1918-1998), organic chemist, was born on 8 September 1918 at Grenfell, Sun Lane, Gravesend, Kent. His father, William Thomas Barton, was a carpenter, his mother was Maud Henrietta, formerly Lukes. He was educated at Tonbridge School, Kent, but he had to leave without any qualifications after his father's sudden death in 1935. For the next two years he worked in the family timber business but, convinced that there must be something more interesting in life, he attended Gillingham Technical College to pass the necessary examinations, including the Imperial College entrance examination. For financial reasons he had to choose London University, and he entered Imperial College in 1938. After only two years' study Barton obtained the top BSc with first-class honours in chemistry. Research in organic chemistry with Professor I. M. Heilbron followed. During the Second World War research on a topic of national interest was encouraged and Barton chose the synthesis of vinyl chloride, for which he received a research fellowship from the Distillers Company. In this he collaborated with a refugee German chemist named Mugdan who had spent his working life in industry. From him Barton learned how a practical industrial chemist would approach a problem. 
This early work involved the gas-phase pyrolysis of dichloroethanes. Barton studied this process using glass apparatus. At first the reaction was rapid but it slowed as the glass surface became contaminated. Barton later noticed that of two forms of dichloroethane one decomposed much faster than the other. Moreover the results varied from day to day. He traced these effects to differences in the method of preparation and to an uncontrolled factor -- a leak in the apparatus which let in variable amounts of air. Small amounts of oxygen or chlorine, he found, had a spectacular effect on the rate of decomposition of 1,2 dichloroethane (CH2Cl-CH2Cl), but none at all on that of 1,1 dichloroethane (CHCl2-CH3) and he concluded that the reaction mechanisms must be different. He also found that in commercial 1,2 dichloroethane small quantities of an impurity, ethylene chlorohydrin (CH2Cl-CH2OH), acted as an inhibitor which he removed by treatment with aqueous potassium permanganate or chromic acid. Barton completed his PhD in 1942, having laid the foundations for some important aspects of his later chemical researches. 
About this time a medical examination revealed a cardiac weakness, and Barton was excused night-time fire-watch duties. The condition also precluded him from active service, and he remained at Imperial College working for two years in military intelligence developing secret inks for use on human skin behind enemy lines. On 20 December 1944 he married Jeanne Kate Wilkins ('b'. 1916/17), a clerk; they had one son. Barton then spent a year in chemical industry at Albright and Wilson in Birmingham. Here he was concerned with the synthesis of organo-phosphorus compounds. The work was routine but there was a good chemical library and his reading introduced him to the latest physical organic chemistry of E. D. Hughes and C. K. Ingold. Barton had become interested in the complex chemistry of the steroids as an undergraduate and he continued to pursue this subject in his spare time, preparing himself for the chance to investigate their reactions. 
In 1945 Barton returned to Imperial College as an assistant lecturer, but as there was no vacancy in organic chemistry he spent four years teaching inorganic and physical chemistry. This forced him to take a far more mathematical approach to chemistry than he had formerly adopted. He was encouraged by E. R. H. Jones to attempt a correlation between optical rotation and molecular structure by analysing the literature on the triterpenoids. These are complex, cyclic hydrocarbons of general formula C30H48 which occur in nature. Many show optical activity based on stereoisomerism, a property of the three-dimensional carbon atom explained by J. H. Van't Hoff in 1874. Barton showed that, using Van't Hoff's principle of optical superposition, molecular structures could be correlated with optical activity. His approach was empirical with no theoretical basis and he called it the method of molecular rotational differences. It was useful in the period from 1940 to 1960 and can still be applied today. Barton later extended it to other natural compounds such as the bile acids, hormones, and steroids. This work contributed to his later researches in conformational analysis where preferred three-dimensional shapes of organic molecules are correlated with their chemical reactivities and physical properties. 
In 1890 Hermann Sachse, an assistant at the Charlottenburg Institute in Germany, had pointed out that if the normal tetrahedral angle of 109 degree 28' of the quadrivalent carbon atom was retained in the cyclohexane ring (C6H12) two conformations free from angle strain could exist. This observation was ignored until 1918 when Ernst Mohr, professor of chemistry at Heidelberg, reintroduced the theory of strain-free carbon rings. Mohr suggested two arrangements for cyclohexane which he called 'boat' and 'chair' structures. He found that the chair conformation in which three carbon atoms are above the plane of the molecule while the other three are below it was more stable than the boat arrangement in which the two carbon atoms at each end of the ring are raised above the rest. This was confirmed in 1943 by the Norwegian physical chemist Odd Hassel using electron diffraction techniques, and reconfirmed by K. S. Pitzer using statistical mechanics. 
Thus when Barton entered the field of conformational analysis some important groundwork had already been done, but it was Barton who first showed that conformational analysis could be applied to polycyclic systems with powerful effect. He realized the importance of the shape of the cyclohexane molecule to his studies of the steroids and showed that understanding the conformations of such complex molecules was essential to any study of their chemical reactivities. In 1948, as an ICI research fellow, he began to study the stereochemistry of abietic acid (C20H30O2), a diterpene derivative which forms the chief constituent of rosin. When oxidized with nitric acid in the presence of a vanadium pentoxide catalyst a tri-carboxylic acid was obtained and using a mixture of organic chemistry and physical measurements Barton was able to determine the conformation of abietic acid. He also designed a set of molecular models that would accurately represent the geometry of the steroids and other complex molecules and allowed him to visualize the three-dimensional principles of conformational analysis. His application of these principles to the steroids enabled him to rationalize a large body of existing steroid chemistry which had proved incomprehensible using standard two-dimensional stereochemistry. 
The reputation which Barton gained by these researches led to an invitation to spend a year as a visiting lecturer and associate professor at Harvard in 1949. He was required to stand in for R. B. Woodward during a sabbatical year, but as Woodward continued his research at Harvard he and Barton worked together and became firm friends. Barton disagreed with Louis Feiser's theory about steric effects in the steroids to account for their unusual reactivities. Having already begun to develop the concept of conformational analysis he analysed the observations in terms of the preferred conformation of the molecule. Heated discussions followed but Barton maintained his ideas which he announced in a short paper on 'The conformation of the steroid nucleus', published in the Swiss journal 'Experientia' in 1950. In this paper Barton explained that 'conformation' referred to different spatial arrangements in molecular structures which allowed bonded atoms to remain combined without strain. He showed that the conformation of a complex molecule exerts an even greater influence on its chemical reactivity than the chemical groups it contains. Barton was in a unique position to do this, having acquired an excellent knowledge of steroid and terpinoid chemistry, while at the same time teaching and researching in the field of gas-phase chemical kinetics. He realized that there should be a relation between rates of reaction and the preferred conformations of the reacting molecules. The rates of reactivity of the same chemically active group in different isomers of steroids could be predicted and even calculated from differences in spatial orientation. Conformational analysis was soon being applied to all types of compounds. The recognition that important differences in reactivity may come from small differences in spatial structures involving the same chemical groups introduced a new three-dimensional view of molecular structures that was widely utilized by practical organic chemists. Conformational analysis revolutionized organic chemistry and in recognition of his work Barton received many awards including the first Roger Adams award of the American Chemical Society, the Davy medal of the Royal Society and in 1969 the Nobel prize, shared with Odd Hassel. 
Strain-free conformations can be found in five-membered rings and above, but in cyclic molecules containing 7 to 12 carbon atoms there are usually several conformations of similar energy. Since the 1960s experimental techniques such as X-ray and electron diffraction analyses and infra-red, nuclear magnetic resonance, and microwave spectroscopies have been augmented by molecular mechanics, a computational method by which the total strain energies of various conformations can be calculated. The structure with the lowest energy is always found to be the most stable. By such calculations unstable conformations, difficult to study experimentally, can be examined and the quality of molecular mechanics calculations has become very high. However, Barton was always less interested in the quantitative aspects of conformational analysis than in applying its principles to experimental problems. 
On his return to Britain, Barton was appointed reader and later, in 1953, professor of organic chemistry at Birkbeck College, London. Here he continued his research on conformational analysis by applying its principles to stereochemical problems in triterpenoid molecules. Lanosterol (C29H40O) was synthesized jointly by Barton and Woodward and Barton was able to correct the proposed structure for cycloartenol using his conformational principles. Both were later recognized as key compounds in biosynthesis. While at Birkbeck, Barton developed a synthesis of usnic acid, a main constituent of lichens. This involved free-radical coupling of phenols and led to a general theory of the biosynthesis of alkaloids through phenol coupling. He pursued this theory through classic laboratory syntheses and by isolating plant substances from plants fed with solutions containing radioactive atoms for labelling purposes. He also proposed the metabolic pathway by which morphine and other alkaloids are made in the poppy. In 1954 Barton was elected FRS and in the following year he was invited to become regius professor of chemistry at the University of Glasgow. 
At Glasgow, Barton collaborated with Monteath Robertson, a leading X-ray crystallographer, attacking a variety of structural problems involving clerodin, limonin, and the sesquiterpene carophyllene on which Barton had begun work at Birkbeck. Barton's group used chemical degradation methods while Monteath studied the same compounds by crystallographic methods. At Glasgow, Barton also entered another field of research involving organic photochemistry. In particular he studied the effects of light on the molecular rearrangements of santonin. Arising from this work he published numerous papers on organic photochemistry in the early 1960s. During his vacations while at Glasgow, Barton returned to the United States to work at the Research Institute for Medicine and Chemistry in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Here he developed a photochemical procedure which became known as Barton's reaction. It brought together his interests in stereochemistry and photochemistry and was later used in the synthesis of the steroid hormone aldosterone. Barton was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1956, but his stay at Glasgow was ended abruptly in the following year when he was appointed professor of organic chemistry at Imperial College, London. Here he continued his work on organic syntheses and the development of new synthetic reactions for the next twenty years. 
One of Barton's most important advances came early in his tenure at Imperial College. In 1958 he became associated with the newly established Research Institute for Medicine and Chemistry at Cambridge, England. The first objective of this group was to devise a viable synthesis of aldosterone, the hormone which controls the electrolyte balance in the body. Known methods involved unacceptably high temperatures, but Barton suggested a solution based on his photochemical work. He proposed a process in which the photolysis of corticosterone (C21H23O4) would produce pure crystals of aldosterone acetate. The process revealed Barton's ingenuity in that he used light as the energy source, whereas most organic reactions used heat. It was also remarkable for the use of free radicals, but, most important, it provided a method for preparing the steroid aldosterone (C21H21O5) at a time when the world supply was only a few milligrams. The power of his new synthesis was demonstrated at a lecture when he produced a bottle containing 60 grams of the steroid. Following this success Barton concentrated on the discovery of new chemical reactions which would provide economical and more efficient methods for the manufacture of complex organic compounds. He made many contributions to natural product research. 
His first marriage was dissolved and Barton married his second wife, Christiane Cognet, in 1969. In the following year he was appointed Hofmann professor of organic chemistry and in 1972 he was awarded the royal medal of the Royal Society. In the same year he was knighted and also received the French Legion d'honneur (chevalier 1972; officer 1985). He was president of the Royal Society of Chemistry in 1973-4. Continuing his study of the applications of radical chemistry Barton developed a theory called phenolic oxidative coupling by which he could explain how complex structures such as morphine could be synthesized inside plants. In 1975 he invented a deoxygenation process to increase the biological activity of certain antibiotics by removing secondary hydroxyl radicals. In the experimental development of this process Barton was assisted by S. W. McCombie and the resulting process became known as the Barton-McCombie reaction. 
For some years Barton had been associated with the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique and in 1978, at sixty, he retired from Imperial College, having the previous year become director of the Institut de Chimie des Substances Naturelles, at Gif-sur-Yvette, France. The main reason for this move was his desire to avoid compulsory retirement at sixty-five. He spent eight years at Gif-sur-Yvette and settled easily into French life. His second wife, who was French, was naturally pleased to return to her native country. During this very creative period Barton worked on the invention of new reactions involving radicals which began a whole new approach to organic synthesis. It was in this field that he began to attack his last great scientific challenge, the oxidation of saturated hydrocarbons. His aim was to convert petroleum products into feedstocks for the fine chemicals industry. Drawing on his encyclopaedic knowledge of natural reactions and his imagination of primordial conditions on earth, he invented the successful Gif oxidation, using a combination of air, iron powder, hydrogen sulphide, vinegar, and a little pyridine. In 1980 he was awarded the Copley medal of the Royal Society. In 1983 he introduced radical reagents called Barton esters. He also made important contributions to fluorination, vitamin D chemistry, and the penicillins. In each case Barton made a major contribution which would have been the high point for most other organic chemists. 
Once more faced with the prospect of unwanted retirement in 1985 he looked for a new chance to continue his work on the discovery of new chemical reactions. He accepted an invitation to become distinguished professor of chemistry at Texas A and M University, USA, where he worked on novel reactions involving the oxidation of hydrocarbons. In 1992 his second wife died and a year later he married Judith Von-Leuenberger Cobb. He continued to travel the world as he had done for many years, attending international conferences, lecturing and acting as a consultant in industry and universities. In 1995 he became Dow professor of chemical invention, a post he held until his death at College Station, Texas A and M University, on 16 March 1998. He was survived by his third wife. 
Derek Barton's personality was complex. The public persona he presented in scientific meetings was austere. With his scientific rigour he was prone to ask the most probing questions after a lecture and many of his scientific colleagues, finding it hard to live up to his demanding standards, were in awe of him. To those who knew him well, however, he revealed a sense of fun and a wealth of anecdotes. He also showed a surprisingly catholic range of interests including music and literature. Above all, he was intensely proud of the worldwide extent of his former colleagues with whom he maintained contact and always wished to help. Barton dominated organic chemistry for fifty years, changing the subject by his prodigious knowledge, vision, and insight. He produced a vast corpus of original work, even surpassing his personal target to publish a thousand papers before the age of eighty. During his long career he trained more than 300 students and post-doctoral fellows, many of whom went on to hold important chairs of chemistry. 


@@@@@


doc= 69508


Severn, Merlyn (1897-1973), photographer, was born at 18 Cheyne Row, Chelsea, London, on 8 August 1897, the daughter of Sir (Henry) Paul Harvey, civil servant and compiler of reference books, and his wife, Ethel Frances, 'nee' Persse (1873-1966). Adopting the name Merlyn Severn, she left an autobiographical account of her photographic career, 'Double Exposure' (1956), that deliberately omitted all personal details; she constructed an impression of a life that was designed to authenticate her identity as a photographer and an artist. We are invited to judge her only by her work, her attitudes, her career, and her self-perception. Most remarkable is the diversity of her photographic record, which reflects her extraordinary respect for humanity, animals, and nature. She was a pioneering photojournalist in many fields, but especially in dance photography. 
In January 1936, after a brief and unsuccessful career as a sculptor, Severn left Cheltenham to settle in London. She taught herself photography and, with the help of the aesthetic theorist Arnold Haskell, was given the freedom to photograph the dancers of Michel Fokine's Blum Company opening their season at the Alhambra Theatre in June 1936. Later that year she published 'Ballet in Action', the first serious study of choreography and dancing ever produced in Britain. Severn, labelled by Haskell as the first photographic critic of the ballet, not only contributed to the elevation of ballet in Britain as an art form and produced a valuable record of its history but also developed innovative approaches to dance photography. The success of 'Ballet in Action' was followed by her equally successful one-person show at the Batsford Gallery in North Audley Street from 9 to 16 July 1937. Six of her photographs from the 'Ballet in Action' series were accepted by the London Salon of Photography in 1937. 
Severn was not only the first to photograph ballet 'in performance', starting the trend of action dance photographs, but also contributed numerous photographs of ballets and valuable technical photographic advice. Her technical judgement and her ability to capture the suggestion of movement in her photographs were revolutionary in dance photography; all previous photography of dance in Britain remained limited to poses. Severn's technical and stylistic skills enabled her to photograph dancers successfully during the performance, something previously thought impossible due to the difficulties of lighting. 
Severn had planned to travel as a freelancer to Java in the East Indies to photograph Javanese dancers but was prevented from doing so because of war. During the Second World War she worked for the WAAF in 'special duties', or radar, and later spent a long internment on Guernsey under German occupation. After the war she returned to photographing the ballet, but this time she encountered many bureaucratic difficulties and faced increasing sensitivities towards copyright issues. She published her second book, 'Sadler's Wells Ballet at Covent Garden', in March 1946. 
Severn was employed by 'Picture Post' from 1945 to 1947 as a full-time staff photographer and continued to freelance for the magazine for the following nine years. Her work exemplifies the diverse contexts in which photography was used in journalism between 1930 and 1960, as well as the artistic techniques and developments of the medium. Her representation of the art of photography and self-presentation reveal her resistance to the prevailing stereotypes of the time. While 'Picture Post' employed many freelance women journalists and photographers, Severn was the only one to be a salaried full-time employee. The extensive freedom that she experienced as a woman photojournalist set her apart from many other women working in the field. She was unique in her individuality and resistance to conformity, and often fought against being assigned stories that were thought fit for women to cover. She not only managed to avoid such stereotypical reportage but also often refused stories that she felt had no photographic potential. Her full-time status enabled her to participate in the 'Picture Post' tradition of allowing its photojournalists to suggest stories of their own -- a custom of which she took full advantage. On average she seems to have contributed four to five stories per year. 
Severn's work at 'Picture Post' eventually led her to cover a series of successful stories in the Belgian Congo and Ruanda-Urundi. In Africa she worked as a freelancer for 'Picture Post', received a commission from the South African Tourist Corporation to photograph lions, and collaborated with Hugh Tracey on a book, 'African Dances of the Witwatersrand Gold Mines', published by the African Music Society. Her touristic account, 'Congo Pilgrim' (1952), and her autobiography, 'Double Exposure', leave records of her personal and artistic development during her seven years in Africa. Her recollections of that continent reveal her intense fascination with the ways in which her subjects, whether human or animal, expressed themselves and her genuine desire to understand the meanings attached to their methods of expression. She was strikingly perceptive and sympathetic to the situation of the colonized African. In Africa she found a world in which dance and culture were intimately connected -- a relationship she found absent in the dance that she photographed in England. She found also an atmosphere within which she could freely work and a culture with which she felt comfortable. She returned to dance photography and became absorbed in the signification of dance in African culture. 
Severn's photographic aims set her apart from the prevailing trends of photojournalism and appear more compatible with those of the artist. Her individuality as a photojournalist manifested itself in her approach to photography -- one based on an apolitical stance and a reliance on intuition and 'unconsciousness' in order to capture a sense of naturalism in her work. Her perspective on photography, her artistic approaches, and her reliance on inspiration, instinct, and empathy for her subjects remained constant throughout her life. Such an identity as a photographer surfaces through her distinctive narrative photography and the very visual language that she developed in her writing. 
Severn's photographic and literary legacy reveals her transference in different media of artistic and personal expressions -- first through sculpture, then through the camera, and ultimately through words. She had a need to understand the subject that she photographed; her sustained interest in dance was fundamental to her life and photographic career, and her sensitivity to the cultural role of dance is apparent in both her writings and her photographs. She understood European ballet as an aesthetic and impersonal style of dance, one which offered great potential for photographic experimentation. Therefore she chose to detach herself from the dancers, deeming their own personalities irrelevant to their performance roles, and appreciated ballet purely for its aesthetic and theatrical qualities. In Africa she found dance and life united. She understood African dance as 'an authentic example of that cosmic reality which makes men dance together for the joy of dancing and for the proof of living' (Severn, 'Double Exposure', 180). She affirmed her commitment to Africa by going to live in Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia, about 1956. After returning to Britain she lived at Plantation Close, Birch Road, Aller Park, Newton Abbot, Devon, and died at the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, on 12 November 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 69509


Hicks, David Nightingale (1929-1998), interior designer and author, was born on 25 March 1929 at The Hamlet, Little Coggeshall, Essex, the second son of Herbert Hicks (1863-1941), stockbroker, and his wife, Iris Elsie Platten, a former actress. After a happy early childhood he became a pupil at Charterhouse School, but did not enjoy the experience, leaving on the advice of his housemaster before he was due to take the school certificate. He decided on a career in art and design, so enrolled at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London before undertaking his national service in the Royal Army Educational Corps, where he taught art for two years from 1949 to 1951. Afterwards he returned to the Central School, then travelled for a year around Europe before taking up a six-month job with the advertising firm J. Walter Thompson in 1954. 
Hicks married Lady Pamela Carmen Louise Mountbatten ('b'. 1929), the daughter of Earl Mountbatten of Burma and Lady Edwina Mountbatten, on 13 January 1960 at Romsey Abbey. The couple had two daughters, Edwina and India, and one son, Ashley, during their thirty-eight-year marriage. His father-in-law and mother-in-law had been influential themselves in the world of interior design during the 1930s, combining European modernism with transatlantic glamour in their London residence. 
Hicks embarked on his glittering career as an interior designer in 1954 when his mother moved from Essex into a new house in South Eaton Place, Belgravia, London, and invited her son to redesign the interior. Photographs of the makeover were published in the leading lifestyle magazine 'House and Garden' during that year. The combination of strong colours such as scarlet, black, and cerulean blue in the library, the accent on crisp outline, and the detailed table-top arrangements or 'tablescapes', all characterize Hicks's design work. The article attracted the attention of Mrs Rex Benson, former wife of the publisher Conde Nast, and the pair worked together on some modest commissions during the early 1950s. 
In 1956 Hicks entered a business partnership with the antique dealer Tom Parr. They opened their own shop, Hicks and Parr, located on Lowndes Street off Belgrave Square, London, in 1958, and Hicks's unique style began to make an impact. In 1959 the partnership ended and Parr went on to run the decorating firm of Colefax and Fowler while Hicks opened his own shop, David Hicks Ltd, on Lowndes Street in 1959. From this base he ran his retail and decorating business, undertaking commissions for London flats and country houses owned by aristocratic patrons. The show-window displays, which changed weekly, presented objects from around the world in uncompromising arrangements and attracted much notoriety among his upper-class client base. 
During the early 1960s Hicks contributed to the renaissance in British culture at a time when British pop groups, fashion designers, photographers, and models dominated the international scene. He was featured in 'David Bailey's Box of Pin-Ups' in 1965 as one of the young style gurus based in 'swinging London'. His first marital home, in Britwell Salome in Oxfordshire, which dated back to 1728, underwent the Hicks treatment. This began with a classical re-creation of eighteenth-century interiors, but he soon branched out into more adventurous colour combinations and furniture arrangements. It included combinations of pink, orange, and aubergine or contrasting green, lurid yellow, and scarlet. The library had matt black walls, and white ceiling and woodwork, with the books bound in crimson, scarlet, and vermilion. These interiors were featured in his second book, 'David Hicks on Living -- with Taste', published in 1968. Hicks wrote eight books on various aspects of interior design between 1966 and 1987. All were lavishly illustrated and featured his own schemes, with information on how to achieve a similar effect. They also included Hicks's strong opinions on design, for example: 'I dislike brightly coloured front doors -- they are more stylish painted white, black or other dark colours. I hate wrought iron. I loathe colour used on modern buildings -- it should be inside. I do not like conventional standard lamps -- I prefer functional floorstanding reading lights. Function is just as important as aesthetics... Function dictates design. (Hicks, 'Living with Design', 252-3)' In 1969 Hicks designed his most prestigious interior to date, that of the Q4 nightclub on the 'Queen Elizabeth II' ocean liner. This featured walls covered with grey flannel, offset by silver borders and bright red screens to be drawn across the windows at night. Other commissions, in London, included the Raffles nightclub in Chelsea and beauty salons for Helena Rubenstein Ltd. The growth in Hicks's reputation led to the foundation of David Hicks Marketing Ltd in 1970, with branch offices opening in Switzerland, France, Belgium, Germany, Pakistan, and Australia. He expanded into furniture design, textiles, ceramic tiles, and clothing, employing a wide range of designers worldwide. He designed clothing and fashion accessories for the Association of Japanese Manufacturers from 1977 and womenswear collections from 1982. One of his trademarks was his use of bold, geometrically patterned carpets and textiles -- particularly influential in American interior decoration. The leading post-war interior decorator Billy Baldwin proclaimed that Hicks had 'revolutionised the floors of the world with his small-patterned and striped carpeting' (M. J. Pool, ed., '20th Century Decorating, Architecture and Gardens', New York, 1980, 10). 
Hicks continued to design for the aristocracy as well as undertaking official state commissions in the 1970s and 1980s. The connections made through his marriage to Lady Pamela Mountbatten plus his suave good looks enhanced his career. Clients included Princess Anne, the prince of Wales, President Nkrumah of Ghana, and the sultan of Oman. He also received commissions to decorate the library of the British embassy in Washington and offices for Aeroflot. His interest in architectural design grew, and in his late fifties he designed a Palladian villa in Portugal for himself and his family. 
David Hicks's contribution to the world of design was honoured in 1970 with a Design Council award. In 1977 he followed in the footsteps of his grandfather and father by becoming a master of the Worshipful Company of Salters. David Hicks died at his home, The Grove, Brightwell Baldwin, Oxfordshire, on 29 March 1998. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 69511


Gilbey, Alfred Newman (1901-1998), Roman Catholic priest, was born at Mark Hall, Latton, Harlow, Essex, on 13 July 1901, the fifth son and youngest among the seven children of Newman Gilbey and his Spanish wife, Maria Victorina de Ysasi. His paternal grandfather had founded a wine business and it is from the family associated with the Gilbeys in that enterprise that Alfred derived his second name. He was educated at the Jesuit Beaumont College, near Windsor (1914-20), and Trinity College, Cambridge (1920-24), where he read history. Having decided to become a priest, he was sent to the Beda College in Rome (1925-9) and was ordained on 15 August 1929 at Mark Hall 'on his own patrimony', an arrangement then possible in the Roman Catholic church, whereby a priest could look for pastoral work in what diocese he chose, but no diocese had responsibility for his upkeep. In fact he was personal secretary to Bishop Arthur Doubleday of Brentwood from 1929 to 1932, before being appointed as chaplain to Catholic undergraduates at the University of Cambridge. This post, which has no official standing so far as the university is concerned, had been created by the Catholic bishops of England and Wales in 1895, the arrangement being special to Oxford and Cambridge. However the lack of endowment or any adequate funding for the chaplaincy meant that only a priest with a private income could be appointed. During all his years at Cambridge, Gilbey received no salary and paid most of the chaplaincy's running costs out of his own pocket. 
In 1932 Gilbey thus began a period of pastoral work for which his gifts were particularly well suited. The warmth and vitality of his personality, inherited from his Spanish mother, gave a unique character to his hospitality. Lightly carried erudition marked his devotion to the history of Cambridge, its university and colleges. His sense of humour, wit, and elegance completed a personality which made its mark in Cambridge during the thirty-three academic years and one term when he was in residence. The sight of Gilbey in the streets of Cambridge, attired in frock coat and broad-brimmed ecclesiastical hat, remains a memory of that period. All this served the ministry of the priesthood, to which he gave his wholehearted service. He was remarkably successful in extending the chaplaincy's influence beyond the small group of Catholic students; although he never proselytized, he received as chaplain 170 members of the university into full communion with the Catholic church. 
When students returned to Cambridge in large numbers after the Second World War, Gilbey resumed the tradition of an open house at the chaplaincy, and integrated into his flock students from state schools funded by grants from local authorities. However the material existence of Fisher House, the chaplaincy's buildings in Guildhall Street (formerly the Black Swan), was threatened from 1948 onwards by successive plans to develop the city centre. Gilbey led a long-drawn-out campaign to highlight the importance of Fisher House for the Catholic body in England; it was not until 1964 that the house and its curtilage were definitely left out of the Lion Yard scheme, which destroyed Petty Cury, the oldest street in Cambridge. Without Gilbey's persistence and influence Fisher House would probably also have vanished, to the great detriment of the chaplaincy's work. 
Women students were not technically full members of the University of Cambridge until 1948; a separate chaplaincy for Catholic women students had been created which from 1937 operated at Lady Margaret House, whereas at Oxford the two chaplaincies had merged in 1941. Gilbey was no misogynist and had many women friends but, although he had the gifts to make an excellent chaplain to a mixed body of students, he preferred to maintain unchanged the arrangements that he had found when he became chaplain. Already in 1949 there had been requests among students for a mixed chaplaincy at Fisher House. By the 1960s opposition to the Cambridge situation was becoming more vocal and the board which represented the Catholic hierarchy in its relation to the Oxford and Cambridge chaplaincies received objections to the continuing segregation at Cambridge, both from Catholic senior members of the university and from students, the latter led to a considerable extent by young priests and graduate students from St Edmund's House. As a result Gilbey, who had announced his intention of retiring in the summer of 1966, brought the date forward to December 1965. It was seen as regrettable by many that someone who had done so much for the chaplaincy was not allowed to complete his term of office. The manner of his departure from Cambridge left a legacy of division to the small Catholic community. This was exacerbated by the way Fisher House was stripped of the furniture and memorabilia, which Gilbey had collected. It exemplified the damage done to many Catholic churches at the time through ill-considered attempts to implement the Second Vatican Council's decisions. Gilbey suffered keenly from what had happened, but he was exemplary in charity, treating those who opposed his policy with unfailing courtesy and consideration. 
Gilbey went to live in London at the Travellers' Club, where he began a second apostolate as long and, in its own way, as effective as his first. He became the unofficial chaplain to former members of his Cambridge flock, their wives, children, and grandchildren. Cardinal Heenan had obtained permission from Rome for him to continue saying the Tridentine mass and, at a time of liturgical upheaval, he helped many to remain within the Catholic church. He also continued to instruct numerous would-be converts. His instructions were recorded by a friend and published as 'We Believe, by a Priest' (1983), a book which enjoyed unexpectedly wide success. At a time when there was considerable confusion in catechetical programmes, Gilbey reaffirmed that to be a Catholic implies acceptance of the teaching authority of the church and illustrated that teaching with clarity and the resources of a well-stocked mind, including extensive quotations from the documents of the Second Vatican Council. He also distinguished between essential teaching and the vagaries of ecclesiastical policy in the application of the council, thus enabling many traditionally minded Catholics to remain within the church and to avoid the schism of Archbishop Lefebvre. 
As the years passed, Gilbey became more and more of a cult figure for those who were fascinated by the manners and diction of a bygone age, and by his critique of contemporary society. The centre of his life continued to be the exercise of his priesthood. He celebrated mass daily at the Brompton Oratory, twice a month for his wider flock. At the Travellers' Club he had obtained the use of a small room at the top of the building for his private oratory, where he was able to reserve the blessed sacrament. There he would spend much time in prayer and sometimes say mass. There were many telephone calls for Mgr Gilbey, and the club porter, tired of walking from his lodge to the oratory, asked that there should be a telephone extension. The telephone was concealed under the altar, so that those who were invited to share Gilbey's orisons were sometimes surprised to see him dive behind the altar frontal in response to the telephone bell. 
'There is always time for the sacraments' was a favourite phrase of Gilbey's (Watkins, 76, 82), and he continued this ministry almost to the end of his life, grateful for having exercised for so long 'the sublime and aweful gift of the priesthood' ('Fisher House Newsletter', 1979, 15). Because of failing health, he moved from the club to the Poor Sisters of Nazareth, Hammersmith Road, Brook Green, a few days before his death, which occurred on 26 March 1998 at Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham. He was buried on 6 April in the courtyard of Fisher House at Cambridge. 
In 1950 Gilbey was made a prelate of honour, in 1964 a protonotary apostolic, and in 1981 an honorary canon of Brentwood Cathedral. He had been a chaplain of the order of Malta since 1947, and in 1982 was promoted to grand cross conventual chaplain 'ad honorem'. 


@@@@@


doc= 69516


Dionisotti, Carlo Roberto Emilio (1908-1998), Italian scholar, was born on 9 June 1908 in Turin, the son of Eugenio Dionisotti (1866-1955), a Turinese graduate in law, and his wife, Carla, 'nee' Cattaneo (1886-1973), a Swiss national born and bred in Italy. Dionisotti felt a particular bond of affection with Italian-speaking Switzerland. His paternal grandfather, Carlo Dionisotti (1824-1899), a magistrate and a historian, born in the nearby town of Vercelli, had studied and lived in Turin. Dionisotti, who was his namesake, was to mention his work with respect and affection; he also wrote a preface (1972) to a reprint of one of his grandfather's historical books, 'La Vallesesia ed il comune di Romagnano-Sesia' (1871). 
Dionisotti's early education was peripatetic owing to family moves during the First World War. He received his secondary education at the Istituto Sociale, Turin, a school run by the Jesuits, to whom he always remained grateful, notwithstanding his non-religious inclinations, for the good grounding in Latin he received. He read arts ('lettere') at the University of Turin, where he graduated in 1929, and he taught Latin, history, and Italian in secondary schools in Vercelli, Turin, and, from 1941, Rome. In 1942 he married Maria Luisa (Marisa) Pinna-Pintor (who belonged to a family among whose members were a famous scholar and librarian, Fortunato Pintor, with whom Dionisotti became professionally linked when he worked for the 'Dizionario biografico degli italiani'). They had three daughters. 
In 1937 Dionisotti had obtained the 'libera docenza' (the Italian equivalent to the German academic title of 'Privatdozent'); in 1941-3, as well as teaching at the Liceo Virgilio in Rome, he worked at the Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana; in 1943 he was posted to the Istituto di Studi Germanici, and in 1944, after the liberation of Rome, he became an 'assistant' to Natalino Sapegno, who held the chair of Italian literature in Rome. In the same period he was active in journalism for the resistance with the Giustizia e Liberta movement and the Partito d'Azione. He was associated with progressive cultural initiatives including those of the Einaudi publishing firm, in which he co-operated with Cesare Pavese. An important collection of his early political writings was later published as 'Scritti sul fascismo e sulla resistenza' (2008). 
In 1947 Dionisotti was offered a post as lecturer in Italian at the University of Oxford. He had three referees: Roberto Weiss, professor of Italian at University College, London, James Wardrop, assistant keeper at the Victoria and Albert Museum, who had known him for about ten years, and Ferdinando Neri, dean of the faculty of letters at Turin in 1939-41 and co-supervisor with Vittorio Cian of his 1929 thesis in Turin on Bembo's 'Rime'. Another letter of recommendation was sent by the eminent philosopher Benedetto Croce to the Oxford professor of Italian, Alessandro Passerin d'Entreves. In 1949 Dionisotti was elected to the chair of Italian at Bedford College, University of London, which he held until 1970. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1972. After his retirement he accepted frequent invitations to lecture and participate in seminars and conferences in Italy, where he was widely admired and offered numerous honours and prizes. He was a member of the Accademia delle Scienze di Torino, of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, and of the Arcadia of Rome. He was awarded the premio Viareggio in 1989, and he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Calabria in 1994. He regularly returned every year to the large family home at Romagnano Sesia, Novara, the village where he was eventually buried. 
Dionisotti is widely considered the greatest historian of Italian literature in the twentieth century. The tradition in which he takes his place is that of the 'historical school' that developed at the end of the nineteenth century, particularly at the University of Turin, through an emphasis on erudite and philological studies, based on positivist assumptions opposed both to rhetorical bellettristic formalism and to the neo-idealist philosophy of Benedetto Croce. Dionisotti had great respect for Croce's erudition and the rich historical sense that made his works so instructive and lasting, but disapproved of the facile adoption by his followers of ready-made theoretical formulas at the expense of the concrete investigation of historical facts reliably established through competent use of palaeography, the history of printing, rules of literary and metrical conventions, and all the other disciplines that Croce's followers belittled as 'pseudo-sciences', even though they were the indispensable foundations and specialized tools of a serious study of literature. He was also sceptical of modern labels and trends such as 'structuralism', 'deconstruction', and all the fashionable attempts to obliterate the distinction between fact and fiction, reliable historical accounts and invented narratives, and, in a more general perspective, between what is true and what is false. 
It was at the very time, in the late 1960s, when French structuralism and post-structuralism became dominant ideologies, and a dramatic reshaping took place in prevailing assumptions, linked to the students' movement and the events of 1968, that the perspective summed up in the title of Dionisotti's best-known book, 'Geografia e storia della letteratura italiana' (1967), appeared particularly relevant. 
Dionisotti had originally acquired his reputation among specialists as one of the most formidable experts on Italian sixteenth-century literature on the strength of his early work on Bembo, but the book that gave him popularity among the wider educated public in Italy was the felicitously titled collection of essays on the 'geography and history of Italian literature', published by Einaudi. The title comes from his 1949 inaugural lecture at Bedford College, London, published in 'Italian Studies' (1951). This book contributed to making Dionisotti almost a symbol of the great Italians who through their chosen exile reached conclusions they might not have obtained at home. It was this view from afar and from outside that allowed Dionisotti to formulate his insights with exceptional clarity, incisiveness, and persuasiveness. The nine memorable essays included in the book had been published separately between 1946 and 1966. The second, which gives the book its title, questions the 'linea unitaria', the single, consistent thread of development traditionally imposed on Italian literature, at least since Francesco de Sanctis's splendid 'Storia della letteratura italiana' (1870), and later elaborated on the basis of nationalist and fascist assumptions. Dionisotti's work stressed instead the fragmentation, the conflicts that characterized the history of Italian culture. Being a Venetian or a Neapolitan, a Milanese or a Sicilian was a crucial defining factor that should not be seen as subordinate to the overarching feature of being Italian. If anything it was the regional, or even the civic characterization that gave real substance to an otherwise too vague national label. The third essay, 'Chierici e laici' (1960), presented a strikingly enlightening outline, such as had never been attempted before, of the history of Italian literature from the viewpoint of the distinction between clergy and laity, with a prevalence of the clerics until the end of the eighteenth century and the establishment of lay education after the French Revolution. The image of Italian literature conveyed by nineteenth- and twentieth-century historiography largely ignores the centrality of the church for Italian men of letters. 
Dionisotti published many other important works, including 'Gli umanisti e il volgare fra quattro e cinquecento' (1968), which brilliantly illuminated the importance of the newly developed interest in Greek, with its variety of literary dialects, for the discussions of the Italian 'questione della lingua'; the essays on Machiavelli (1980); on Italian writers between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries ('Appunti sui moderni', 1988); and between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries ('Ricordi della scuola italiana', 1998, prepared by Dionisotti and published after his death). 
Dionisotti died on 22 February 1998 at his home at 44 West Heath Drive, Golders Green, of chronic obstructive airways disease. He was survived by his wife, Marisa, and their three daughters, Anna Carlotta, a classicist who taught at King's College, London; Paola, a well-known actor; and Eugenia, a librarian. The resonance of his work has kept growing after his death and numerous memoirs and commemorative volumes have appeared. Particularly important is a systematic collection of his works, planned in five volumes, edited by Tania Basile, Vincenzo Fera, and Susanna Villari, 'Scritti di storia della letteratura italiana', of which the first appeared in 2008 and the second in 2009. 


@@@@@


doc= 69519


Ellis, Roger Henry (1910-1998), archivist, was born on 9 June 1910 at Garsdale, Mansfield Woodhouse, Nottinghamshire, eldest of the four children of Francis Henry Ellis (1882-1953), managing director and chairman of the Sherwood Colliery Company, and his wife, Sybil Mary (1881/1882-1969), daughter of Adrian Roger Chicken of Nottingham. From Sedbergh School (1923-9) he went to King's College, Cambridge (1929-33), where he took firsts in both parts of the classical tripos and was awarded an Augustus Austen Leigh studentship. After a brief spell of research on Greek vase painting, and in default of any vacancies in a gallery or museum, he joined the staff of the Public Record Office on 1 January 1934. He soon absorbed the scholarly traditions of the office and became a disciple of Hilary Jenkinson, the most dynamic of the assistant keepers and a major influence on his subsequent professional career. His interest in seals and in conservation arose at this time. 
On 20 November 1939 Ellis married Audrey Honor (1912-1993), only daughter of Herbert Arthur Baker of London and Tilford, Surrey. They had two daughters. War interrupted his career: he enlisted as a private in 1939 and rose to captain in the 5th fusiliers. In May 1944 he was assigned to the monuments, fine arts, and archives sub-commission of the Allied Control Commission, where Jenkinson was archives adviser. From May to November 1944 he visited and reported on Italian archives in the wake of the allied advance, incidentally developing an enduring love of Italy. In November he was transferred to the German sector and promoted major. 
Ellis returned to the Public Record Office in 1945, and was soon involved in the post-war expansion of archival work, notably the establishment of an intermediate repository for non-current records, for which he appropriated the term 'limbo'. He was one of the first lecturers (1947-57) on the diploma course in archive administration at University College, London, and also taught document repair at the London School of Printing. In technical matters he was a pioneer, stressing that the first duty of the archivist was to preserve records, and only secondarily to make them available for study. He formulated five principles of archive repair which have remained basic despite changes in materials and techniques. He was later chairman of the British Standards Institution committee that drafted BS 5454, 'Recommendations for the Storage and Exhibition of Archival Documents' (1977). His close involvement with the British Records Association also dated from this period; he was the founder editor (1947-57) of its journal 'Archives'. 
In 1957 Ellis became the first full-time secretary of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, established in 1869 to report on non-governmental records. During his fifteen years as secretary he transformed its role and widened the scope of its activities and influence, laying a solid foundation for subsequent developments. His first priorities were to move the commission out of the Public Record Office into separate offices in Chancery Lane and to secure a revised and extended royal warrant. Its publications were both pruned and expanded. The expensive calendars were gradually discontinued but new series were inaugurated: the papers of nineteenth-century prime ministers and joint publications with local record-publishing societies. The revised warrant ensured the permanence of the National Register of Archives, whose importance as a tool for historical research had become clear by 1957. During his secretaryship its scope and use increased greatly, and a first step was taken to computerize its indexes. 
Ellis had for some time been concerned about the probable loss of the working papers of British scientists. A joint committee of the commission and the Royal Society (1966) resulted in a published guide, 'The Manuscript Papers of British Scientists, 1600-1940', and the establishment of the Contemporary Scientific Archives Centre in Oxford, though slow progress meant that both postdated his secretaryship. 
The commission's centenary exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery in 1969 allowed Ellis to combine a succinct and entertaining history with a wide selection of documents illustrated by appropriate portraits and artefacts, drawing on his own interests and knowledge. 
Ellis retired in 1972 but soon returned to the Public Record Office to catalogue medieval seals. Between 1978 and 1986 three illustrated volumes of a seal catalogue were published. After his wife's death in 1993 he began cataloguing the Fuller collection of seals in the University of London Library, and was still engaged in this at his death. Retirement afforded him time for travel and his many other interests. He diffidently published two slim volumes of poetry, 'Ode on St Crispin's Day' (1979) and 'Walking Backwards' (1986). 
Ellis was a distinctive figure, tall, debonair, with expressive eyebrows and no time for pomposity. His precision of mind was matched by his elegant handwriting and literary style. He came across as an amused and tolerant observer of men -- and of himself. His visual sense was strong; as well as the fine arts, he derived pleasure from fine printing and binding, the pattern of poetry on a page, the bounty of the garden in autumn. He lovingly tended his collections of furniture, silver, paintings, books, and the family archives in his beautiful Hampstead house. A long-time member of the Athenaeum and fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, he epitomized the connoisseur. Strong beliefs and high standards informed everything he did. His writings, mostly in professional journals, give an inadequate idea of the wise and quiet influence he exerted in the development of archive services after the war. He died at home at 7 Straffan Lodge, 1 Belsize Grove, London, on 19 March 1998 of heart failure and was cremated at Golders Green on 26 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 69524


Curran, Sir Samuel Crowe (1912-1998), physicist and university administrator, was born in Ballymena, co. Antrim, on 23 May 1912, the second of four sons of John Curran (1885-1959), a steelworks foreman, and his wife, Sarah Owens, 'nee' Crowe (1886-1968). His mother had gone to her ancestral home a few weeks before his birth so that he could be born in Northern Ireland. Soon afterwards she returned with him to her husband and family in Wishaw, Lanarkshire, where Sam spent the remainder of his childhood and youth. He was essentially, in both speech and outlook, a west of Scotland man. 
In 1929, after attending Wishaw high school, Curran entered Glasgow University, where he gained first class honours in mathematics and natural philosophy. He joined the physics department as a PhD research student in 1934, proposing to work on the diffraction of beta rays of radium. He found that he had to modify and reconstruct Geiger counters which had long lain idle, and he showed how versatile Geiger counters were when associated with a good pulse amplifier. It was in this field that he later made a major impact. After completing his Glasgow thesis, 'Diffraction of beta rays by thin films', in 1937, he moved to St John's College, Cambridge, to study for a further PhD. At the Cavendish Laboratory (where there was a new 1 million volt particle accelerator) he introduced his improved Geiger counters, and also explored new methods of proportional counting. One of his assistants, studying for her PhD in physics, was his future wife, Joan Strothers [
On 1 September 1939 Curran's and Strothers's supervisor, Philip Dee, took his team to spend a month at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough. Two days later war with Germany was declared. They never returned to the Cavendish; instead, they moved to Exeter, where Curran and Strothers joined a small team developing the proximity fuse, based on transport-receive miniature radio. This was later an important weapon in destroying enemy planes, and was largely responsible for the destruction of over ninety per cent of the V1 flying bombs launched against southern England in 1944. From Exeter Curran and Strothers -- who married on 7 December 1940 -- moved to join Dee, Bernard Lovell, Alan Hodgkin, Herbert Skinner, Bill Burcham, and others at the Telecommunications Research Establishment at Leeson House, Langton Matravers, in the development of centimetre radar for installation in aircraft. Curran had worked on pulse amplifiers before the war and with the development of a spark plug modulator devised by him, he was soon handling 50 kilowatts of pulse power at repetition rates of over 2000 per second. Curran (with Hodgkin and Burcham) was responsible for the detailed contacts with firms manufacturing the radar system. Soon all aircraft were being fitted with it. It was used in night fighters; it enabled bombers to carry out precision targeting; and it became a vital factor in enhancing the ability of planes to protect merchant shipping from U-boat attack, and thus played a large part in winning the battle of the Atlantic. Meanwhile Joan Curran, as part of the countermeasures group in an adjoining laboratory, was cutting up strips of tinfoil and developing the idea which led to operation Window, the scattering of clouds of these strips as a way of misleading enemy radar. From 1942, Bomber Command regularly employed this deception in order to provide the equivalent of radar smoke screens. Perhaps its greatest success came on D-day, 6 June 1944, when clouds of foil dropped by bombers of 617 squadron simulated an invasion force of ships heading towards the Pas de Calais, and persuaded the Germans to concentrate vital forces there rather than in Normandy. 
Early in 1944 Curran, accompanied by his wife, was transferred to the University of California, Berkeley, to work under the direction of Ernest Lawrence on the separation of isotopes of uranium as an important part of the Manhattan project (the development of the atomic bomb). While there, in his spare time, Curran invented the scintillation counter for the detection and counting of radiation sources. This was later used in almost every scientific laboratory in the world, though Curran made no monetary gain from it. It was during their stay at Berkeley that the Currans' eldest child and only daughter, Sheena, was born, severely mentally handicapped. They also had three sons, each of whom went on to complete a PhD. 
After the war, Curran joined the staff of Glasgow University, where Philip Dee was now professor of natural philosophy. During this period he invented a proportional counter to measure a number of different radiations. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1953. In March 1955 he was invited to join Sir William Penney at the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment, Aldermaston, to help develop a hydrogen bomb for Britain, a project completed by 1957. In all, Curran spent four and a half very successful years at Aldermaston, and represented the UK Atomic Energy Authority in highly technical visits to Berkeley, Livermore, Los Angeles, Oak Ridge, and other major US and European centres. 
In 1959 Curran was invited to become principal of the prestigious Royal College of Science and Technology (RCST) in Glasgow, and to steer it through to university status. He readily accepted. He was keen to continue and expand the college's tradition of useful learning, and in the process to create a completely new kind of university. He pointed out to Sir Keith Murray (chairman of the University Grants Committee) that in 1960 the RCST was producing more than ten per cent of all the graduates with university-level technology qualifications in the United Kingdom, and more graduates in technology than all four Scottish universities put together. In the spring of 1961 Murray informed Curran that his committee had reached the unanimous conclusion that they should recommend to government that the RCST should merge with the Scottish College of Commerce to become a university. In March 1962 a statement was made to this effect in the House of Commons, and Murray agreed to Curran's suggestion that the new university should be named Strathclyde, after the ancient Scottish kingdom. Thus the University of Strathclyde, with Curran as its first principal and vice-chancellor, the first new university in Scotland for 381 years and the first technological university in Britain, came into being. Lord Todd of Trumpington, a distinguished scientist and Nobel laureate, and himself a native of Glasgow, was appointed chancellor. 
In order to maintain a suitable balance, Curran resolved that the ratio of science and technology students to arts and business students should be maintained at two to one. He blamed much of the industrial and manufacturing decay in the UK on the failure of governments and universities to recognize the importance of technological education at the highest level. He was adamant about the role that his university should play: it would be, as John Anderson, the founder of the college, had envisaged some 170 years previously, 'a place of useful learning'. Curran also insisted that it should be located, as the Royal College had been, in the heart of industrial Glasgow. Expansion on a massive scale was necessary. By the time Curran retired in 1980, more than twenty major buildings, including accommodation for 1220 students out of a total student population of 6700, had been erected on about 24 acres of the city centre. Student playing fields covering about 270 acres were laid out a few miles from the city, and a staff recreational centre of 50 acres was established, including Ross Priory, a magnificent house on the banks of Loch Lomond. Its walled garden was named in Joan Curran's honour and a summer house was later erected in her memory. 
Remembering his wartime days, Curran set in train co-operation with industry at a time when it was not fashionable for universities to do so. He encouraged departments to appoint visiting professors from industry and he appointed top industrialists (as well as academics and students) to the university court. With the help of Anthony Wedgwood Benn, the energy minister, he built, in 1966, a Centre for Industrial Innovation, a forerunner of science parks, where academics and industrialists could co-operate in fruitful research. He encouraged members of staff to accept consultancies in industry, and he also encouraged departments to appoint promising members of staff to personal professorships. Only later did such things become commonplace. 
Curran could also be outward-looking. With the increasing interest in teaching and research in the nuclear field, he chaired a committee of the Scottish universities which persuaded the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research to provide a 100 kW reactor (later upgraded to 300 kW) at the national engineering laboratory, East Kilbride, together with associated staff, buildings, equipment, and running costs for the first five years. This facility was available to all the Scottish universities (and later Queen's University of Belfast was also included). In 1966 he established a close academic link between Strathclyde and the technical University of Lodz, Poland. This was at a time when Poland was part of the Soviet bloc and communication between the people of Poland and of the UK was difficult. The initiative was enormously successful, leading to a two-way exchange of students and staff, to shared degrees, and to close and lasting friendships. Curran was appointed commander of the order of Polonia Restituta by the Polish government in 1976. 
Two things especially angered Curran: the very low salaries paid to scientists by comparison with businessmen, and the failure to recognize how science and technology had helped to win the Second World War. As he pointed out, there were no scientists in the parades to mark the fiftieth anniversaries of VE-day and VJ-day, yet it was the discoveries and developments by scientists and engineers -- radar, the proximity fuse, operation Window, and the atomic and hydrogen bombs, to mention only a few -- that made victory possible. 
Curran served on innumerable government, public, and private bodies influencing science policy throughout the country, chaired the advisory committee on medical research (1962-75), and was chief scientific adviser to the secretary of state for Scotland (1967-77). He was knighted in 1970. He received many honorary degrees -- including, on his retirement, the first fellowship of the university that he had founded. Joan Curran also received an honorary doctorate of laws from the university in her own right, in 1987. The Curran building, housing various departments of the University of Strathclyde, was named after them. Curran's main recreations were clock making (he had a number of patents) and golf. He was very proud of having published an article on 'The physics of the golf swing' in 'Business Scotland'. 
After the birth of their daughter Sheena, the Currans threw themselves into work for the disabled, and continued to do so until their deaths. In 1954 they helped to organize the public meeting which led to the foundation of the Scottish Association of Parents of Handicapped Children (later the Scottish Society for the Mentally Handicapped, and later still ENABLE), which by the time of their deaths had more than 5000 members and over seventy branches across Scotland. Curran served as president of the organization from 1954 until 1991. In 1964 the Glasgow branch named its office and leisure facilities Curran House in his honour. 
Sam Curran died of cardiorespiratory arrest at the Nuffield McAlpine Hospital, Glasgow, on 25 February 1998, a few days after a prostate operation. His wife Joan died in Glasgow of cancer on 10 February 1999. They were both cremated at Daldowie crematorium, Glasgow, and were survived by their daughter and three sons. 


