@@@@@


doc= 69525


Methley, Richard (1450/51-1527/8), Carthusian monk and mystical writer, is recorded in a manuscript annotation with the surname Furth; presumably he took the name of his birthplace, a village near Leeds, on his entry into religion, as was customary. According to his own account he entered the Mount Grace Charterhouse 'c'.1476, following the death of an invalid anchoress to whom he had privately given a large sum in alms, while openly giving only as little as the others who were with him at the time. When the anchoress's servant disclosed the extent of his alms-giving, some of his companions praised him, while others criticized his altruism. The anchoress died a few days later, and Methley followed her into the solitary life as a Carthusian. He served at one point as vicar of Mount Grace, as also did his confrere Thurstan Watson, to whom he dedicated his Latin translation of the anonymous fourteenth-century mystical treatise 'The Cloud of Unknowing'. An autograph letter addressed to Henry, tenth Baron Clifford (BL, Add. MS 48965, no. 10), dealing with monastic business affairs, would date from his time as vicar. 
Methley's surviving works comprise a set of short treatises dealing with various aspects of the contemplative life, and Latin translations of the 'Cloud' and of the Middle English version of Marguerite Porete's 'Mirror of Simple Souls'. The unique copies of all of these works survive in three manuscripts. The latter half of the 'Experimentum veritatis' and the English 'Letter to Hugh Hermit, of solitary life nowadays' occur among a collection of letters and papers dated 1533-6 in TNA: PRO, SP I/239. Three autobiographical spiritual treatises, the 'Scola amoris languidi' (dated by internal references to August 1481), the 'Dormitorium dilecti dilecti' (written in 1485, when the author gives his age as thirty-four) and the 'Refectorium salutis', which records graces and experiences from 6 October to the Saturday before the third Sunday of Advent (15 December), 1487, survive in Cambridge, Trinity College, MS O.2.56. In these works Methley defends the hermitic life, discusses the discernment of the truth or falsehood of such experiences as visions, voices, and prophecies, and relates his own emotional, sensory mystical graces, including ecstatic visions of Christ and the saints, and gifts of loving languor and heavenly song similar to those described in the works of Richard Rolle. Methley also refers in these works to at least four other treatises that are not known to survive. 
Methley's translations of 'The Cloud of Unknowing' and 'The Mirror of Simple Souls' survive in Cambridge, Pembroke College, MS 221. The colophon of the 'Cloud' dates its completion to the second day after the feast of St Lawrence (12 August) 1491. Both of these works appear to have been translated because Methley misidentified their authors as Carthusians: he comments in one annotation to the 'Cloud' that its author's reference to hermitic vocation proves that he was a member of the order; and a later annotation to the 'Mirror' identifies it as the work of Jan van Ruusbroec (or Ruysbroeck), who is further mistakenly identified as prior of the Charterhouse of Paris. Both these translations, along with Methley's own 'Scola amoris languidi', are provided with full sets of explanatory annotations. Methley is also known from a series of marginal annotations in the sole surviving manuscript of the 'Book of Margery Kempe' (a manuscript that belonged to Mount Grace) comparing Margery's spiritual gifts with those of Methley and his confrere John Norton, whose unedited mystical writings survive in Lincoln Cathedral Chapter Library, MS A.6.8. 
Methley died, no doubt still at Mount Grace, during the year preceding 3 May 1528, when his name was entered among the obits recorded at the Carthusian general chapter. 


@@@@@


doc= 69528


Lestor, Joan, Baroness Lestor of Eccles (1927-1998), politician, was born on 13 November 1927 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, the daughter of Charles Lestor, journalist, actor, and political activist, and his wife, Esther, a textile worker who had been a shop steward in the Garment Workers' Union in east London. At the time of her birth her father was working for the union bulletin of the International Workers of the World (the 'Wobblies'). The family moved to the UK when she was five, and her father became a leading member of the Socialist Party of Great Britain. 
Lestor attended Blaenafon Secondary School, Monmouthshire, and William Morris Secondary School, Walthamstow, before training as a teacher at Goldsmiths' College, London (where she was awarded a diploma in sociology). Her experience in the education system of meeting people with different views made her challenge the Marxism of her family, and at twenty-four she found an ideological home in the Labour Party. She became a primary school teacher in Walthamstow, and on 5 January 1952 married John McGregor ('b'. 1927/8), book salesman, son of John McGregor, railway driver. There were no children of the marriage, which was dissolved shortly afterwards. 
In 1958 Lestor began ten years of service on Wandsworth council, where she began her life work of developing pre-school facilities for children, in the provision of which Britain lagged behind other developed countries. In 1962 she was elected to the London county council and the executive committee of the London Labour Party. Meanwhile she had left primary school teaching in order to run her own day nursery school in south London. In 1964 she fought her first parliamentary election, for West Lewisham, almost taking the constituency from the Conservatives. In the following year she was adopted as Labour candidate for Eton and Slough, which she won in 1966, holding the seat until Labour's disastrous election defeat of 1983. 
As a frequent speaker at the party conference and a representative of the young, progressive side of the party, Lestor was a natural choice for office, and in October 1969 Harold Wilson appointed her under-secretary at the Department of Education and Science, where she remained until the government's defeat in June 1970. After Labour's return in February 1974 she was made under-secretary at the Foreign Office, with responsibility for Africa, a position that she held for fifteen months with praise from career diplomats for her 'enthusiasm, interest and easy informality' on foreign visits ('Castle Diaries', 403), but in June 1975 she was removed from the post; the decision shocked her senior colleague Barbara Castle, who thought that she had been 'a breath of fresh air in that airless institution' (ibid., 416). It was widely suspected (including by Lestor herself) that foreign secretary James Callaghan had lobbied for her removal because she did not fit in with his conservative view of world affairs, a claim that he denied. She was moved back to education, a post from which she resigned in February 1976 over cuts in the education budget, remarking in her resignation letter that 'investment in education is as important as investment in industry' ('The Guardian'). 
Her dramatic presence and authentic left-wing conscience made Lestor a 'darling of the party' and a national executive committee (NEC) member from 1967 to 1982 (chairman, 1977-8). Like others of similar views her fortunes were linked with those of the crown prince of the left, Tony Benn. She was part of Benn's 'alternative cabinet' of advisers until the end of the 1970s, but abstained in the deputy leadership contest of 1981, which was the litmus test of commitment for party activists. The result was the loss of her NEC seat; she regained it in 1987, serving on the committee thereafter for another ten years. In Slough her concern for racial equality helped to establish a firm Labour base among Asian voters. She was a vice-president of the anti-apartheid movement, at one time an editor of the anti-fascist magazine 'Searchlight', and consistently campaigned against racism. 
In her four years out of parliament from 1983 Lestor worked for the World Development Movement, and was able to carry forward her campaign for the rights of children when she was sponsored by several trade unions to set up a unit to look at child abuse, including sexual abuse, a subject that was not receiving the official attention that it merited. She was also ahead of her time in her focus on teenage pregnancy and poor nutritional standards in young children. She returned to the House of Commons in 1987, as MP for Eccles, and was a shadow spokesman on such issues as children, young offenders, the family, and overseas aid. She retired from the shadow cabinet in 1996 because of ill health. Her last contribution, in 1997, was in a debate on child poverty. She left the Commons at the 1997 general election and was ennobled as Baroness Lestor of Eccles later in that year. 
Lestor's red hair and strapping physique meant that her physical presence as much as her forthright views impressed themselves upon her listeners. Following the dissolution of her marriage to John McGregor she did not marry again, but adopted two children, David in 1967 and Susan in 1969, thus pioneering the adoption of children by single women. She cited 'playing with children' when asked to name a hobby ('WWW'). She died at the Trinity Hospice, Clapham, London, on 27 March 1998, of motor neurone disease. She was survived by her two adopted children. 


@@@@@


doc= 69539


Jones, Sir John Lewis (1923-1998), intelligence officer, was born on 17 February 1923 at 8 Quality Row, Shotton Colliery, Easington, co. Durham, the son of Isaac Jones, a coalminer, and his wife, Isabel Raine. He was educated at Nelson grammar school in Cumberland and in 1940 went to Christ's College, Cambridge on a scholarship. During the Second World War he served in the Royal Artillery (1942-6). He returned to Cambridge to complete his studies, taking a first in part two of the historical tripos and a certificate in education. In 1947 he joined the Sudan government service as a teacher, transferring in 1951 to the ministry of education where he became the establishment officer. In 1948 he married Daphne Redman (died 1988), whose father also served in Sudan; they had no children. 
In 1955 Jones returned to Britain and accepted an offer to join the military intelligence department (MI5), serving first in Hong Kong and then Singapore (1959-61). After returning to London, he carried out the first feasibility study to computerize MI5's records. He then moved to the overseas branch, which was responsible for supervising the work of MI5 agents abroad: although it was the internal Security Service, MI5 also had responsibility for security in the British empire. In 1968 Jones was seconded to the Ministry of Defence as director of the moribund British services security organization in Germany. He revitalized it, and was appointed CMG in 1972. 
When he returned to Britain, Jones was for a short time director of the overseas branch before becoming head of F branch, which dealt with counter-subversion, and later the operations branch. A rising star, he was appointed deputy director-general of MI5 in 1976, and in 1981 the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, made him director-general. He had not come up in the traditional way through the more prestigious K branch (responsible for countering Soviet espionage), and Peter Wright described him 'as an F branch man through and through, and his appointment perfectly illustrated the decisive shift in MI5's centre of gravity' ('The Guardian', 12 March 1998), away from concern with the external security threat, and towards the 'enemy within'. 
Jones was director-general of MI5 during perhaps the most controversial and politically motivated period of its history. Encouraged by Thatcher, the agency targeted groups it considered a subversive threat to national security. These included coalminers, left-wing trade unionists, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, and the National Council for Civil Liberties. Resources were diverted to countering subversion from what Jones called 'the far and wide left'. Peter Wright resented this move because it deflected attention from his own obsession, the Soviet penetration of MI5. 
Shortly after Jones became director-general the prime minister learned that Anthony Blunt, keeper of the queen's pictures, had confessed fifteen years earlier to being a Soviet spy. On that occasion the matter had been covered up to save the queen and the security establishment from embarrassment. Jones advised the prime minister that she should not name Blunt, on the grounds it might dissuade other spies from confessing in return for immunity. Thatcher rejected this advice and publicly unmasked Blunt on the floor of the House of Commons. Jones had also to deal with the highly embarrassing case of Michael Bettaney, the middle-ranking MI5 officer who tried to offer his services to the KGB. Moscow Centre, which feared a set-up, did not respond to Bettaney's overtures, and treated his original approaches to the KGB in London with great suspicion. Bettaney tried again, but the KGB double agent Oleg Gordievsky eventually exposed his treachery. The subsequent security commission report was critical of MI5 for failing to spot the potential troublemaker in its ranks, particularly when it became known that Bettaney was a heavy drinker. Jones was not personally criticized, but the case led to a demand for reforms in both vetting procedures and management. Jones, who had been created KCB in 1983, resigned in 1985. He subsequently served as chairman of civil service selection boards. He lived in Boston, Lincolnshire, where he took a considerable interest in local issues and was a member of the Boston golf club. He was an intensely private man, and only his closest friends knew of his real job. In his later years he developed emphysema, which contributed to his death in Pilgrim Hospital, Fishtoft, Boston, on 9 March 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 69540


Kahn, Franz Daniel (1926-1998), astrophysicist and mathematician, was born on 13 May 1926 in Nuremberg, Germany, the only son and the younger child of Siegfried Kahn (1894-1967), a company director, and his wife, Grete, 'nee' Mann (1896-1980). His parents were German Jews; his father was a successful manufacturer of children's toys. In 1938 the family moved to England, where his father, with Jewish colleagues, had already set up a branch of their firm (Trix Ltd, manufacturers of toy trains). Kahn was educated at St Paul's School from 1940 to 1944, during its evacuation to Crowthorne. He won a form prize for English after he had been in England for less than two years, and in 1944 secured an open scholarship to Queen's College, Oxford. After graduating with first-class honours in mathematics in 1947 he continued at Oxford with research under Sydney Chapman, then moved in 1948 to Balliol College as a Skynner senior student. His DPhil thesis was a study of the expulsion of corpuscular streams in solar flares. He was awarded the degrees of MA and DPhil in 1950. 
Kahn was appointed assistant lecturer in mathematics at the University of Manchester in 1949 and remained in Manchester for the rest of his life. On 22 March 1951 he married Carla Vivienne Copeland (1928/9-1981), a schoolteacher and the daughter of Benjamin Copeland, a textile merchant. It was a happy marriage, and they had two sons and two daughters. In the same year as Kahn's marriage, a new astronomy department was formed at Manchester, under Zdenek Kopal, complementing the development of radio astronomy at Jodrell Bank under Bernard Lovell. Kahn joined the new department in 1952 as a Turner and Newall fellow, and was appointed in succession lecturer (1955), senior lecturer (1958), reader (1962), and professor (1966). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1993 and retired in the same year as professor emeritus. He continued active in research until his death. 
Kahn's DPhil dissertation on solar streams marked the beginning of his seminal theoretical work on astrophysical gas dynamics. His classic paper 'The acceleration of interstellar clouds', published in the 'Bulletin of the Astronomical Institute of the Netherlands' in 1954, analysing the effect of radiation from hot stars on interstellar gas, was written during a year in Leiden, where he collaborated with Jan Oort, Henk van der Hulst, Lyman Spitzer, and Bengt Stromgren. Photoionization by ultraviolet light from hot stars occurs in narrow zones; Kahn introduced the widely used classification of these ionization fronts into four types, according to their velocities of propagation. Many papers on related subjects followed; a frequently quoted paper (published in 'Astronomy and Astrophysics' in 1976) was on the temperature and cooling rate of supernova remnants. On the larger scale of the dynamics of whole galaxies, Kahn suggested that the collective effects of many supernova explosions may be to drive hot gas away from the disc of a spiral galaxy, creating a 'galactic fountain': this was the subject of an introductory lecture to a symposium of the International Astronomical Union (IAU), subsequently published with its proceedings in 1991. Other especially notable research topics were the formation of massive stars by accretion within dusty molecular clouds, the electrodynamics of pulsar magnetospheres, and the effect of intergalactic gas on the dynamics of the local group of galaxies. 
In 1975 Franz and Carla Kahn wrote an important historical paper, published in 'Nature' that year, on the correspondence between Einstein and de Sitter, which they found in the archives of the Leiden observatory during a sabbatical year. In a series of letters, dated 1916-18, Einstein asked de Sitter to make his relativity theory more widely known; in England de Sitter later published papers in the 'Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society', which attracted the attention of A. S. Eddington. The letters included discussion of cosmical repulsion during a period when Einstein was introducing the so-called cosmical constant. 
Kahn was an inspiration to all astrophysicists, contributing at least as much by his quiet and thoughtful remarks at discussion meetings as in his formal papers. He was a council member of the Royal Astronomical Society (1967-70) and an editor of the 'Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society' (1993-8). He was president of the IAU's commission on interstellar matter (1970-73), and the IAU named an asteroid, Kahnia, after him. He also served on committees of the Science and Engineering Research Council, chairing the theory panel (1976-9), the panel for allocation of telescope time (1979-81), and the astronomy II committee (1981-4). Following the death of his wife, Carla, in 1981 he developed a warm friendship with Junis Davis, but did not remarry. He died suddenly of a heart attack in Bourne End, Buckinghamshire, on 8 February 1998 and was buried in the south Manchester Jewish cemetery. He was survived by his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 69541


Hollis, (James) Martin (1938-1998), philosopher, was born on 14 March 1938 in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London, the son of (Hugh) Marcus Noel [Mark] Hollis, an advertising agent and later a member of the Foreign Office, and his wife Ruth Margaret, 'nee' Colthurst. (Maurice) Christopher Hollis (1902-1977), author and politician, and Sir Roger Henry Hollis (1905-1973), director-general of MI5, were his uncles. He won a scholarship to Winchester College, and did his national service in the Royal Artillery before going up to New College, Oxford, on a classics scholarship. At Oxford he read philosophy, politics, and economics, and was inspired by the teaching of A. J. Ayer, Wykeham professor of logic and a fellow of New College. He graduated with a second-class degree in 1961. After spending two years in the United States on a Harkness fellowship, studying sociology at Harvard University (where he first came across W. V. O. Quine and John Rawls, two philosophers who greatly influenced his work) and the University of California at Berkeley, he joined the Foreign Office, having come top in the entrance examination. Although still working at the Foreign Office until 1966, he found the life of a civil servant unstimulating, and was also a college lecturer in philosophy at New College from 1964 to 1965, and at Balliol College, Oxford, from 1965 to 1967. On 18 September 1965 he married Patricia Lesley ('b'. 1941), a historian and later a Labour politician, daughter of (Harry) Lesley George Wells, a civil servant. She was leader of Norwich city council from 1983 to 1988, and was created Baroness Hollis of Heigham in 1990. They had two sons, Simon ('b'. 1969) and Matthew ('b'. 1971). 
In 1967 Martin and Patricia Hollis were both appointed to lectureships at the new University of East Anglia in Norwich, and he remained there for the rest of his career: he was promoted to senior lecturer in 1972, and in 1981 became professor of philosophy. He also served as dean of the school of economic and social studies from 1983 to 1986, and while pro-vice-chancellor (1992-5) he had to administer the change from the traditional three-term academic year to a two-semester system on the American model. A brilliant lecturer, he held visiting lectureships and professorships in universities in North America and Germany, and taught at the philosophy summer school near Guangzhou, in China. He loved philosophical debate, and founded the East Anglia Philosophy Triangle, which held regular informal meetings in Norwich, Cambridge, and Colchester. 
Hollis's main field of interest was the philosophy of social science, and central to his thought was a concern with the nature of rationality. He sought to broaden the notion of instrumental rationality, prevalent in economics, to include not just the means chosen but the ends sought. This enriched notion of 'expressive rationality' embraced moral as well as intellectual virtues while remaining compatible with economics. He saw this approach as counter-acting the individualism of economic theory and as accommodating values of social co-operation and mutual trust. Also, by including goals and values within the framework of reason, he hoped that this notion of rationality would help to oppose any form of epistemological or cultural relativism. Much of his published work in philosophy consisted of explorations of the nature of rational choice in various academic disciplines, including anthropology, politics, economics, and history. 'Rational Economic Man: a Philosophical Critique of Neo-Classical Economics' (1975, written with Edward J. Nell), was followed by 'Models of Man: Philosophical Thoughts on Social Action' (1977), in which he dealt with the philosophy of sociology, and 'The Cunning of Reason' (1988). With Steve Smith he examined the philosophy of international relations in 'Explaining and Understanding International Relations' (1990). In his last book, 'Trust within Reason', published posthumously in 1998, he looked at moral and political philosophy. He also wrote two widely used textbooks, 'An Invitation to Philosophy' (1985) and 'The Philosophy of Social Science: an Introduction' (1994). He edited several collections of essays, including 'Philosophy and Economic Theory' (1979) with Frank Hahn; 'Rationality and Relativism' (1982) with Steven Lukes; and 'Reason in Action: Essays in the Philosophy of Social Science' (1996); and wrote over ninety articles and reviews. A member of the editorial boards of 'Cambridge Studies in Philosophy' from 1978 and the 'Journal of Applied Philosophy' from 1984, he edited the Anglo-German philosophical journal 'Ratio' from 1980 to 1987. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1990, and served on the council and as chairman of the philosophy section. 
A JP in Norwich for ten years, Hollis also helped his wife in her political career on Norwich city council. He was a very strong chess player, often using chess to illustrate his philosophical points, and he also enjoyed playing bridge. For many years he set brain-teasers for the 'New Scientist', some of which were published as 'Tantalisers' (1970). During the final months of his life, when he was suffering from a brain tumour and was confined to a wheelchair, he continued to take part in meetings and seminars. He died on 27 February 1998 at his home, 30 Park Lane, Norwich, and was survived by his wife and their two sons. The first of a series of Martin Hollis memorial lectures at the University of East Anglia was delivered on 5 May 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 69542


Nuthall, Betty May (1911-1983), tennis player, was born at Sutherland House, Kingston, Surrey, on 23 May 1911, the daughter of Stuart Nuthall, a club proprietor, and his wife, Mary Madge James. Her parents were both keen tennis players and taught her to regard the game 'as one of the most important... as well as 'the' jolliest, in the world'. Coached by her father, she was 'never allowed to knock a ball about just for the sake of doing so', but had always to improve (Nuthall, 13-14). The intensive training produced results: she developed into a 'fine aggressive player' and won the British junior singles championships three times in succession ('The Times', 10 Nov 1983). She became a familiar figure in British tennis from the age of nine, and spectators queued early for her Wimbledon debut in 1927, when she defeated the German Cilly Aussem. She went on to beat the reigning American champion, Anna (Molla) Mallory, before losing to Helen Jacobs in the quarter-finals. In 1927 she also became, at sixteen, the joint youngest finalist in the history of the US ladies' singles championship, when she was beaten 6-1, 6-4 by Helen Wills Moody. For this match she served underarm, as she was then accustomed to do, but she soon afterwards made the change to overarm. She also reached the final of the ladies' doubles at Forest Hill that year, and became the youngest player to represent Britain in the Wightman cup, when she defeated Helen Jacobs in her first match. In all she made eight Wightman cup appearances between 1927 and 1939. 
When she was still only seventeen, Nuthall went into print with a textbook for the beginner, 'Learning Lawn Tennis' (1928), to which her mother wrote a preface. But she proved unable to sustain the remarkable momentum built up in 1927. Her only major title in the next two years was the mixed doubles at the US championships in 1929. As a result she was bypassed for the Wightman cup team in 1930. She marked her omission by becoming the first British player to win the US ladies' singles championship, defeating the top seed, Anna McCune Harper, in the final 6-1, 6-4. Nuthall also won the ladies' doubles title with Sarah Palfrey. She enjoyed another remarkable year abroad in 1931, when she won the ladies' doubles and the mixed doubles at both the American and French championships. She also reached the final of the ladies' singles in France. The defence of her US singles title at Forest Hill ended in a semi-final defeat by her Wightman cup team-mate and occasional doubles partner Eileen Bennett Whitingstall. 
In 1932 Nuthall retained the mixed doubles at the French championship, with Fred Perry, and the following year she secured her third and final ladies' doubles title in the US championship. In 1933 she also reached the semi-final of the ladies' singles at Forest Hill, impressing onlookers by pushing Helen Wills Moody to three sets, 2-6, 6-3, 6-2. In five of the seven years during which she was at her peak (1927-33) Nuthall was ranked in the world's top ten. 
Nuthall was a good tactical player, equipped with 'aggressive forcing strokes' and an especially powerful forehand ('The Times', 10 Nov 1983). She played at speed and hit hard, with good judgement of line and length. Ultimately, though, she lacked the strategic awareness of opponents' strengths and weaknesses that is the mark of enduring champions. Despite her success abroad, in particular at Forest Hill, Nuthall never advanced to the final stages at Wimbledon. There was special disappointment in 1931, when she was defeated in straight sets in the quarter-final by Helen Jacobs. Nuthall later married Franklin C. Shoemaker and made her home in the United States. She died in New York on 8 November 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 69544


Glennie, George (1818-1886), golfer, was born in Glasgow. Trained as a civil engineer, he became manager of the Monkland Canal Company, Montrose, and was then sent to England to help run the London operation of the General Iron Foundry Ltd. Already a prominent and successful member of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club at St Andrews, he was elected in October 1853 to the Royal Blackheath Golf Club, the English society that claims to have its origins in the playing of golf on Blackheath in the reign of King James VI and I. 
At Blackheath Glennie swiftly established himself as among the 'cracks' of the club. He won the first of eight Blackheath scratch medals in 1854, served as captain of the club in 1862 and 1863, and as honorary secretary and treasurer from 1868 until his death in 1886. Under his benign guidance the influence of Blackheath golf and golfers was felt throughout the game, spreading to the nascent North Devon Golf Club at Westward Ho! (where from 1865 to 1867 he won the first three scratch medals), to the Liverpool club at Hoylake, and elsewhere. During the period of Glennie's stewardship, almost no club of any significance was formed south of the Scottish border that did not owe something to the influence and enthusiasm of the Blackheath club. Much was due to Glennie's own considerable personal qualities: H. S. C. Everard wrote that 'At Blackheath, at St Andrews and Westward Ho!, wherever he played he commanded admiration no less for the excellence of his play than for the qualities which rendered him such a charming partner or opponent... His play was characterized by extraordinary precision rather than commanding power. (Everard, 209)' Another contemporary, McPherson, said of Glennie that 'He played every stroke as if it were the stroke of the match. Exactness was, therefore, with him second nature; he could not afford to foozle... No keener golfer ever lived, no finer gentleman ever walked' (Behrend, Lewis, and Mackie, 140). 
Glennie had continued to make regular visits to Scotland from his London base, and in 1855 won the royal (autumn) medal of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club with a record score of 88 strokes; a score not beaten for another twenty-six years. He had already won the silver cross, the principal spring prize of the Royal and Ancient, in 1851. But perhaps his greatest achievement at St Andrews was on behalf of the Blackheath club, when, in July 1857, he and Captain J. C. Stewart of Fasnacloich and the 72nd highlanders cruised to victory in the great (inter-club) golf tournament, defeating their hosts from the Royal and Ancient in the final. As a result, Blackheath was declared 'the champion Club of the World'. In his native Scotland Glennie also won important competitions at Prestwick (of which he was captain in 1876) and at the Royal Burgess club in Edinburgh. As a player he was unorthodox but highly effective, falling forward onto the ball and hitting his iron shots with a distinct left-to-right break on pitching: by the standards of the day, his putting was also unusual, addressing the ball smoothly in the centre of the stance (rather than essaying the very wristy stroke off the right foot then fashionable). 
Blackheath were anxious to honour their long-standing secretary and champion, and in 1881 two medals were cast in Glennie's name, one to be competed for by their own members and the other to be presented (in secret from Glennie himself) to the Royal and Ancient Golf Club. The George Glennie medal remains among the most prestigious of all of the trophies of the game's governing body, awarded to the individual with the two best scratch scores combined from the spring and autumn meetings of the Royal and Ancient. Glennie had himself received the ultimate golfing accolade, captaincy of the Royal and Ancient, in 1884. 
Following an operation on a cancerous tumour of the neck, Glennie died, unmarried, at his home, 3 St Germans Place, Blackheath, Kent, on 26 March 1886, and was buried at Shooter's Hill cemetery on 31 March. The members of the Royal Blackheath Golf Club subscribed to a memorial stone over his grave. One of the greatest and most influential figures of Victorian golf, Glennie was among a handful of individuals responsible for the spread of the ancient Scottish game throughout the British Isles and thence to the rest of the world. 'None was ever imbued with a more whole-hearted devotion to the game; none ever more earnestly, if unobtrusively, upheld the integrity of its interests and traditions' (Everard, 209). 


@@@@@


doc= 69546


Lowe, Douglas Gordon Arthur (1902-1981), athlete, was born on 7 August 1902 at 314 Lower Broughton Road, Broughton, Salford, the son of Arthur John Lowe, a wool merchant, and his wife, Emily Mary, 'nee' Read. After attending Manchester grammar school and Highgate School he went up to Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1921 where he read for the medieval and modern languages tripos; he gained a second in French in 1923 and a lower second in German in 1925. Lowe was a superb all-rounder who demonstrated his athleticism both at Highgate, where he won the public schools' half mile in 1920, and at Cambridge, where he won blues for athletics and football. He was honorary secretary and then president (1924-5) of Cambridge University athletic club. In appearance he was 'trim and dark, with sleek hair parted in the centre'. He had 'clean-cut features and a glittering smile that might have made him a matinee idol' (Lovesey, 68). 
Though he won the 880 yards for Cambridge against Oxford three years in succession (1922-4), Lowe failed to finish in the first three at the Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) championships in either 1922 or 1923. In 1924 he came a close second to Henry Stallard, and both men were selected to represent Britain in the Olympic games in Paris. But it was Stallard rather than Lowe who was considered the first-string runner, and in the final of the 800 metres he set a fast pace in an attempt to break the field. Stallard's tactic, however, played to Lowe's advantage, for as the former faded in the final straight, Lowe came through to take the Olympic gold medal in a British record time of 1 min. 52.4 sec. Stallard came fourth. Two days later Lowe narrowly missed out on a medal in the 1500 metres final, when Stallard won the bronze. 
Lowe was Olympic champion at the age of twenty-one and yet still had a point to prove. Press accounts of the Paris race praised him but were also 'heavy in sympathy for the luckless Stallard' (Lovesey, 71). And the Olympic champion, it was noted, had yet to win an AAA title. Lowe, a 'dignified, self-possessed man', waited for his moment to reply (ibid.). In 1925 he raced in America with the Oxford and Cambridge team and his next AAA championships came in 1926. A week before the championships he set a new world record of 1 min. 10.4 sec. for the 600 yards, an indication of his superb form. But barring his way to a title was the impressive Otto Peltzer, German champion at 400 and 1500 metres. It was the first time since the war that Germans had been invited to compete at the championships and in the 880 yards final the 27,000 spectators at Stamford Bridge saw a duel worthy of the occasion. Lowe was determined to make his mark and led at the halfway mark, which he reached in world record pace, 54.6 sec. Peltzer, though, proved the stronger and came from behind to win in 1 min. 51.6 sec. The German had broken Ted Meredith's world record of 1 min. 52.2 sec., as indeed had Lowe, who was unofficially credited with 1 min. 52.0 sec. 
Peltzer also ran in the 440 yards, where he showed impressive speed in coming second, and this persuaded Lowe to race at the shorter distance himself. At the AAA championships in 1927 he won both the 440 and 880 yards, and was in the Achilles club team that won the 440 yard relay. In 1928, an Olympic year, he repeated his 440 and 880 yard double. In two years he had won five AAA titles and he approached the defence of his Olympic 800 metres title in Amsterdam with justifiable confidence. In the weeks before the games, though, the world record was twice lowered, by Lloyd Hahn of the United States and Sera Martin of France respectively. Both men were in the world-class field for the final. Lowe drew the last of the cards for the start positions and got pole, his favourite. He led to the first bend and then took up second place, behind Hahn, ready to respond to any move from the field. Off the final bend he produced a devastating burst of speed to win in 1 min. 51.8 sec., a new Olympic record. It was a perfectly run tactical race and Lowe became the first man successfully to defend the Olympic 800 metres title. 
In August 1928 Lowe accepted an invitation to run in Berlin against Peltzer, who at the Olympics had been below par through injury. Lowe won a close contest in a British record time of 1 min. 51.2 sec. It was his last race before retirement and a fitting end to a magnificent career. Lowe had contributed to a golden age of British middle-distance running, when Britons won the Olympic 800 metres title four times in succession. 'He was the perfect Olympic champion, and the perfect artist on the track' (Killanin and Rodda, 52). 
After his running career was over Lowe made a significant contribution to the administration of athletics. He was honorary secretary of the AAA (1931-8), and in this capacity drafted, with Harold Abrahams, the constitution of the body that became, in 1937, the British Amateur Athletic Board. He thus helped to resolve the crisis over British representation on the International Amateur Athletic Federation, clarifying the distinction between teams representing Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the home nations. He also wrote on athletics, and with Arthur Porritt published 'Athletics' (1929), a training manual for track and field which included a history of the Olympic movement. In 1936 he published 'Track and Field Athletics' (reissued in 1961), an illustrated guide for the aspiring beginner. 
Lowe also pursued a distinguished career as a barrister and judge. In 1928 he was called to the bar at Inner Temple, of which he became a bencher in 1957, and in 1964 was made queen's counsel. He was chairman of Warwickshire quarter sessions (1965-71), recorder of Lincoln (1964-71), and a recorder of the crown court (1972-7). He was a chairman of the governors of Highgate School. In 1930 he married Karen, daughter of Surgeon Einar Thamsen; they had one son. Lowe died of heart disease on 29 March 1981 at his home, 26 Great Maytham Hall, Rolvenden, Cranbrook, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 69547


Calvert, Thomas Christopher (1903-1984), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 26 April 1903 at Burtersett, Wensleydale, Yorkshire, the oldest of the three sons of John Edward Calvert (1877-1946), quarryman, and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Fothergill (1878-1966). Both his parents were natives of the Yorkshire dales. He was educated at Hawes elementary school, but left at the age of twelve and began his working life in farm service at Colby Hall, Askrigg. A motorcycle accident prevented him from doing hard manual work. He then found a job at Hawes auction mart but left when a request for a wage increase from 18's'. to $1 a week was refused. He was already showing a fighting spirit. 
Calvert married Jenny Horn (died 1976), a daleswoman, in 1931. Their early married life coincided with a period of trade depression. Kit and his brother Robert kept cattle and sheep on rented land. Milk was produced for a cheese factory inaugurated by Edward Chapman in 1897 which was now suffering from poor trading conditions. When the milk producers were no longer being paid and the dairy faced closure, the newly established Milk Marketing Board offered milk contracts. When the upper-dale farmers were told that milk would no longer be used for local cheesemaking, however, Calvert called a meeting in Hawes town hall, in 1935, and the dalesmen formed their own company with a capital of $1085. Calvert, who had put $200 into the scheme, was appointed managing director. Over the next years, he used his vast knowledge of Wensleydale cheese production successfully to promote dales cheese. In 1953 he built a new creamery in Hawes, on a spacious site beside the road to Gayle. To his regret, it had by now become commercially expedient to exchange the cheese's traditional linen bandage for a polythene wrapping. He introduced the 'baby Wensleydale', a 1 lb cheese which the average household might buy weekly. About 50,000 such cheeses were sold in the first year; production rose to 250,000 per year by the 1960s. The Milk Marketing Board purchased Wensleydale Creamery for $500,000 in 1966 but persuaded Calvert to continue to run it. In 1967 he retired. 
Calvert had long collected second-hand books about the Yorkshire dales. In 1965 he gave the best of them, with an estimated value of almost $3000, to the Wensleydale county modern school. He then quietly set about restocking his empty shelves. For over twenty-five years, from 1951, Kit's single-room bookshop in the main street at Hawes was the talk of the town. It was a cal-oil (gossiping place) on market days. Some 5000 books, set haphazardly on floor-to-ceiling shelves, were available at 2's'. for a hardback, 1's'. for a less substantial work. If there was no one in attendance money was left in a box, in a chapel collecting plate, or, at one point, in a tin designed to hold Oxo cubes. For a time John Mason, a retired railwayman, looked after the bookshop, describing it on a framed card as 'The University of Hawes' and himself as 'bursar'. Mason died in 1975 at the age of ninety-two. Calvert said of his bookshop: 'If it makes my bacca [tobacco] money, and covers the cost of a drop or two of petrol, I'm satisfied.' 
Calvert was an authentic dalesman and full of character. He often reverted to local dialect. His grizzle-grey hair did not frequently have a comb drawn through it. He wore comfortable rather than fashionable clothes. He smoked black twist using a clay pipe, as had the farmers and lead-miners of old. A devout Christian, he was deacon and secretary of Hawes Congregational Chapel, and a preacher in the homely yet forceful dales manner. His translation of passages from the 'Bible' into the dialect of his native district included, from 'St John's gospel', chapter 21, the conversation between Jesus and his disciples, who had no luck when fishing: 'He called out: 'Lads, hey ye caught owt?' They shouted back: 'Nowt!' So he said: 'Kest yer net over t'reet side ev t'booat an' ye'll git a catch'' ('The Dalesman', May 1953, 89). 
Calvert transformed a tract of land near his home into a well-equipped children's playground. When, in February 1977, his services to dales life and the cheese industry were acknowledged by his appointment as MBE, and he received the medal at Buckingham Palace, he was accompanied by his daughter Florence and granddaughter Pauline. He died in Hawes on 4 January 1984. Four days later, on a Sunday, he was interred at the roadside cemetery on the Burtersett side of Hawes, the coffin having been transported on a cart pulled by Dolly, his favourite pony. The Wensleydale Creamery at Hawes continued to flourish, and was the subject of a management buy-out in 1992. A portrait of Calvert, languidly applying a match to his clay pipe, adorned every 500 gram packet of 'real Wensleydale' cheese. 


@@@@@


doc= 69549


Guttsman, William Leo (1920-1998), librarian and political sociologist, was born in Berlin on 23 August 1920, one of two children of Walter Johann Guttsmann (1880-1941), a native of Berlin, and his wife, Helene, who was born on 5 August 1887 in Strehlen, Silesia. Walter Guttsmann was a leading engineer in the prominent electronics firm AEG. Both parents were patriotic bourgeois Jews, laid off by the Nazis and imagining themselves to be safe until they were forcibly taken eastwards, to be murdered in 1941, probably at Auschwitz. Willi himself endured a period in Buchenwald on the occasion of the 'Kristallnacht' of 9-10 November 1938, before his parents managed to get him an emigration visa that enabled him to escape to England, with no money or relatives, in February 1939. As a nineteen-year-old he was given work picking potatoes on an isolated farm in Scotland, but when the war finally came he was classified as an enemy alien and deported to Australia. All this he endured quietly and with philosophical acceptance, but also with a tenacious resolve to survive his misfortunes. 
The bureaucratic authorities would not reclassify Guttsman but returned him to Britain. From that point his life gradually turned from disaster to eccentric success. He came back to be united with his beloved Valerie Lichtigova, whom he had first met in Scotland, where she, a refugee from Czechoslovakia, was employed as a dairymaid and given a sleeping berth above the cows. They married on 11 July 1942 and worked for the rest of the war with a group of young Jews, he on a farm and she cultivating a market garden near St Albans. In 1942 Guttsman began a part-time degree course at Birkbeck College, and in 1946 went on to study for an MSc (Econ) at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), an institution especially hospitable to refugees from fascist regimes, who included Karl Popper, Ilya Neustadt, and Claus Moser. In the early post-war years jobs in the social sciences in Britain were hard to come by; Guttsman, like Neustadt, found one at LSE as a library assistant, in fact as a lowly basement boy. He combined his duties as librarian with preparing, first, a thesis and, later, a book supervised by David Glass and other colleagues at LSE. The book, 'The British Political Elite' (1963), became the most frequently cited work on this topic, widely admired for its combination of learned history and exact statistical analysis -- a model of its kind. 
Then came Guttsman's great career opportunity: the opening of the new Robbins universities of the 1960s. Among the first five foundations was the University of East Anglia, where the vice-chancellor, Frank Thistlethwaite, envisaged a central library with open access. The chief architect was Denys Lasdun. Thistlethwaite sought a founding librarian and approached LSE; Guttsman was appointed, fitting the job specification as a competent acquisitions librarian and a devotee of the arts. From the outset he treated his job at Norwich as a vocation, a way of life. Not only did he continue to write books himself, including 'The German Social Democratic Party, 1875-1933' (1981) and ending with 'Art for the Workers' (1997), but he also quickly assembled a teaching collection, organized exhibitions, and impressed both colleagues and students, as well as Denys Lasdun, with his meticulous and exacting discipline in the running of a highly efficient modern library. 
Guttsman stayed at the University of East Anglia until he retired in 1985, as emeritus librarian. His wife was a psychiatric social worker, and they were both energetically and happily involved in the town and the university. Valerie Guttsman was lord mayor of Norwich in 1979-80 and was appointed OBE in 1991, for community service. Guttsman was proud of the achievements of his wife and of their daughter Janet, a journalist. He remained an eccentric individualist who never hid his socialist sympathies or his discriminating love for England. He very seldom spoke his mother tongue. He was modest but articulate, shy but determined. He was one among many Jewish continental refugees who contributed spectacularly to the cultural life of war-time and post-war Britain, its science, its drama, its art, its architecture, its music, and -- perhaps, above all -- its universities. Willi Guttsman died, of cancer, at his home, 9 Osborne Court, Lime Tree Road, Norwich, on 13 February 1998. He was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 69551


Lucas, Percy Belgrave (1915-1998), air force officer, politician, and golfer, was born on 2 September 1915 at The Lodge, Sandwich Bay, Worth, Kent, the son of Percy Montagu Lucas, the secretary of Prince's Golf Club, Sandwich, and his wife, Charlotte Gertrude, 'nee' Bone. Lucas acquired his nickname from enquiries by Highland light infantry soldiers billeted in Sandwich as to 'How's the wee laddie?' and learned his golfing skills from his father. It was said that, had he fallen out of bed at the clubhouse, he would have dropped on to the first tee. In 1944 he force-landed his damaged Spitfire on the Sandwich links. 
Lucas was educated at Stowe School, where he excelled at rugby, cricket, and golf (winning the English boys' championship in 1933), and at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he read economics and represented the university at golf. In 1936 he was a member of the Walker cup team which toured the USA. The following year he entered journalism as a sports writer for the 'Sunday Express', and in 1939 he volunteered for the RAF, being posted to 1 initial training wing at Cambridge on 16 January 1940. He was then sent to Canada in the first group of novice pilots to be taught to fly under the empire air training scheme, gaining his wings at 2 service flying training school, Ottawa, in February 1941 as a newly commissioned pilot officer. 
Posted back to the UK, Lucas was sent in May 1941 to 52 operational training unit, Debden, and from there to 66 squadron, based at Perranporth in Cornwall with Spitfire Is on convoy patrols. Wanting more action, he volunteered to serve in Burma; instead he was sent to Malta, as one of fifteen Spitfire pilots flown out there by Sunderland flying boat, where he arrived in February 1942. 
Malta was then at the nadir of its wartime misfortunes, short of supplies and constantly under air attack: its defending Hurricanes were outclassed and outnumbered. Only when Spitfires arrived, flown off the aircraft-carriers 'Eagle' and 'Wasp' by RAF pilots (including Lucas), did the tide turn; and it was in the counter-offensive which saved Malta from invasion that Lucas first showed his genius as a fighter leader. For a brief period in February 1942 he flew with a Hurricane squadron (185), then from the 27th with 249 squadron, which from March was re-equipped with Spitfire VCs. As a flight commander, then as commanding officer, he led the Takali wing (nos. 249 and 603 squadrons) in Malta's successful repulse of axis air attacks. In July he was awarded the DFC, then flown back to the UK. 
By now a squadron leader, Lucas was first posted to Fighter Command headquarters, then to the school of tactics, and on 18 April 1943 he took command of a Spitfire VI squadron, 616, at Ibsley. After three months he was appointed wing commander flying at Coltishall, where he led two Spitfire VB Squadrons, nos. 64 and 611. In January 1944 he was awarded the DSO and posted to air defence of Great Britain headquarters, where he was involved in planning tactical air support for operation Overlord, the allied invasion of Europe. 
But in September Lucas began a further tour of operations, on Mosquitos in the intruder role, commanding 613 squadron -- following a conversion course at 13 operational training unit and two months at 2 group support unit -- from December to the end of hostilities. For his leadership he was awarded a bar to his DSO and the Croix de Guerre with palm. 
In the wake of his brilliant wartime career Lucas decided to take on a new challenge -- politics -- and in June 1945 he was granted special leave to fight the West Fulham parliamentary seat. Though defeated in Labour's landslide victory, he became MP for Brentford and Chiswick five years later. 
After his leave for the general election Lucas was posted to 11 group, Fighter Command, then from 3 September to his release from service in January 1946 he commanded RAF Bentwaters. One of his frequent visitors there was the legless fighter ace Group Captain Douglas Bader; and on 18 May 1946 they became brothers-in-law when Lucas married Jill Addison ('b'. 1921), the sister of Bader's wife, Thelma. They had three sons: Christopher ('b'. 1947), who died before his fourth birthday, Jeremy ('b'. 1952), and David ('b'. 1955). 
In 1946 Lucas joined the Greyhound Racing Association (GRA) through his friendship with one of its founders, Brigadier-General A. C. Critchley, who had told him in 1942 that there would be a job for him after the war. He had worked at the GRA, unpaid, in his university vacations, and his post-war career there prospered: initially assistant to the administrative director, he became assistant managing director in the mid-1950s, then was appointed managing director in 1957 and elected chairman in 1965. After the war Lucas maintained his golfing prowess, captaining the Walker cup team in 1949, and he combined his GRA work with his parliamentary duties. In 1957 the prime minister, Harold Macmillan, offered him the post of under-secretary of state at the Air Ministry, but he declined, feeling that he could not maintain his family and educate two sons on a junior minister's salary. He decided not to stand for parliament again. 
In eight years as managing director of the GRA, followed by eleven as chairman until his retirement in 1976, Lucas was involved in many hard-fought boardroom battles. These he vividly described in his crisply written autobiography, 'Five up' (1978), the first of eight books he produced in his retirement. These comprised a biography of his famous brother-in-law ('Flying Colours: the Epic Story of Douglas Bader'), two golfing books, an account of the siege of Malta, and three titles in co-operation with the leading fighter pilot Air Vice-Marshal 'Johnnie' Johnson. 
Lucas was made CBE in 1981, a civil honour crowning his awards for bravery in the air. Of exceptional charm and charisma, he succeeded in all the roles he played: as golfer, journalist, fighter pilot, business executive, MP, and author. Lucas died at his home, Flat 2, 11 Onslow Square, Chelsea, on 21 March 1998. His widow, Jill, received more than 400 letters of condolence -- indicating the wide and affectionate esteem in which he was held. He was buried at St Clement's Church, Sandwich, on 27 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 69552


Massey, Daniel Raymond (1933-1998), actor, was born on 10 October 1933 at 21 Wilton Crescent, Westminster, the only son and elder child of the Canadian actor Raymond Hart Massey (1896-1983) and his actress wife, Gladys Allen (1907-1993), who acted under the name Adrianne Allen. His younger sister, Anna Massey (1937-2011), was also an actress. Given that his godfather was Noel Coward, everything conspired to lead Massey too towards a life in the theatre, and after Eton College and two years in the Scots Guards, he went up to King's College, Cambridge, and made his stage debut in the 1956 Footlights revue, 'Anything May', whose writers included Michael Frayn and Bamber Gascoigne. 
Tall, lean, aristocratic, and blessed with a resonant musical voice, Massey was untypical of the new school of regional working-class actors emerging in the late 1950s. But his debonair charm and transatlantic inheritance -- his father became a naturalized American in 1944 -- quickly enabled him to find work in both London and New York. He made his debut in both theatrical capitals in 1957, scoring a particular success as a gauche young American in a frothy West End comedy, 'The Happiest Millionaire'. But it was his performance as a Portobello Road Wedgwood dealer in a musical by Monty Norman and David Henneker, 'Make me an Offer', at the Theatre Royal, Stratford East, in 1959 that marked him out as an actor of exceptional grace and style. 
For much of the next decade Massey moved easily between classics, musicals, and comedies. He took up semi-permanent residence at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, appearing as Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal' (1962), Jack Absolute in 'The Rivals' (1966), and John Worthing in 'The Importance of being Earnest' (1968). But he also commuted to Broadway to play opposite Barbara Cook in a delightful American musical, 'She Loves Me', in 1963, and starred as the adoring husband in the West End version of Neil Simon's 'Barefoot in the Park' in 1965. He gave his most distinctive screen performance playing his own godfather in the ill-fated 1968 film about Gertrude Lawrence, 'Star!' Coward confided to his diaries: 'Daniel Massey was excellent as me... he was tactless enough to sing better than I do, but of 'course' without my special matchless charm!' ('Coward Diaries', 667). 
As if to prove that he was more than a graceful stylist, Massey deliberately widened his range over the next decade. In 1974 he memorably played Lytton Strachey, with gently fluting voice and lily-white hands suspended from his arms as if on wires, in Peter Luke's 'Bloomsbury' at the Phoenix Theatre. He went on to appear, less convincingly, as Othello at Nottingham Playhouse, but was a fine guilt-racked John Rosmer in a 1977 West End revival of Ibsen's 'Rosmersholm'. But it was through his work with the national companies that Massey both stretched his talent and showed himself to be a first-rate classical actor. He had a particular affinity with Shaw and appeared, to great effect, at the National Theatre in 'The Philanderer' (1979), as John Tanner in 'Man and Superman' (1981), and, in 1994, as General Burgoyne in 'The Devil's Disciple': this last was a perfect study of a man who adopts a pose of ironic languor to disguise his moral outrage at the loss of the American colonies. 
Massey also enjoyed a rich spell with the Royal Shakespeare Company in the 1980s. Both as the Duke in 'Measure for Measure' and as the politician-hero of Harley Granville-Barker's 'Waste' he suggested the pathos of the public idealist slowly awakening to the emptiness of his private life. But he was also at home in new plays. In 1979 he created the role of Robert, the deceived and deceiving husband, in Harold Pinter's 'Betrayal' at the National Theatre. In 1984 he played Nikolai, a wealthy Russian aristocrat and thwarted pioneer of talking pictures, in Stephen Poliakoff's 'Breaking the Silence' for the Royal Shakespeare Company. He also played the tortured hero, Ben, in the 1987 London premiere of Stephen Sondheim's musical 'Follies'. 
Massey's own life had its share of anguish. His parents divorced when he was six, and he later became bitterly estranged from his mother, whom he at one point compared to the Moors murderer Myra Hindley. He also married three times. His first marriage, on 30 September 1961, was to the actress Adrienne Corri, daughter of Louis Reccoboni, hotelier; the marriage ended in divorce in 1968. Massey had a son, Paul, by another relationship before marrying, on 12 December 1975, his co-star in 'Betrayal', Penelope Alice Wilton, daughter of Clifford William Wilton, company director. They had a daughter, Alice. The marriage ended in divorce in 1984. Massey's third marriage, on 21 June 1997, was to Penelope's younger sister, Linda Mary (Lindy) Wilton. In 1992 he was diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease, which for a time he successfully fought off with chemotherapy. Although the illness affected his career and gave his aquiline features a ravaged look, he gave one last magnificent stage performance in 1995, in both London and New York, as Wilhelm Furtwangler in Ronald Harwood's 'Taking Sides'. Classical music was one of Massey's private passions, and he made his audience understand both the conductor's belief in the transformative power of music and his residual guilt over his complicity with Nazi tyranny. It was both a magisterial performance and a reminder that Massey, having started out as an aristocratic charmer, later revealed a positive genius for playing damaged idealists. He died on 25 March 1998 at the Brompton Hospital, Chelsea, London, and was survived by his third wife, Lindy, his son Paul, and his daughter Alice. A memorial service was held on 16 June 1998 at St Paul's, Covent Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 69553


Maynard, (Vera) Joan (1921-1998), trade unionist and politician, was born on 5 July 1921 at Brooklands, Easingwold, Yorkshire, the daughter of Matthew Maynard, a small farmer trying to scratch a living from 17 acres of land, and his wife, Effie Eliza, 'nee' Wright. She was educated at a local village school in Ampleforth, leaving at the age of fourteen. In the late 1930s the family abandoned the struggle with the farm and moved to Thornton-le-Street, where they took over the post office and Joan did a postal round. She later recalled it as her first lesson in economics that she was paid less than the men for doing the same job. 
In 1945 Maynard and a handful of others met in Thirsk to found a Labour Party branch and challenge the hegemony of the local squire. She was elected secretary and electoral agent of the Thirsk and Malton branch, which grew from its tiny beginnings to become one of the biggest in the country. She was appointed a magistrate in 1950, in 1952 she stood successfully for the South Kilvington district council, and in 1956 she became a North Riding county councillor. She became Yorkshire county secretary of the National Union of Agricultural and Allied Workers (subsequently the Agricultural and Allied Workers Trade Group of the Transport and General Workers' Union) in 1956. It was a post she held for twenty-two years, including a period as national vice-president from 1966 to 1972, a position in which she is said to have so irritated the leadership of the union that, unable to stop her being repeatedly elected, they simply abolished the post. 
Maynard took a seat on the Labour Party's national executive in 1972 after a conference speech calling for the nationalization of land, and in 1974 successfully stood for the parliamentary seat of Sheffield Brightside, thus becoming one of the few working-class women ever to be elected to parliament. In her maiden speech she declared her pride at being 'the only sponsored Member for farm workers... I speak for one of the lowest-paid groups' ('Hansard 5C', vol. 880, 6 Nov 1974, col. 1135). Within hours of taking her seat she was lobbying ministers for a bill to secure tenure for farmworkers, to end the tied-cottage system which caused misery for many rural workers and their families who would lose their homes if they lost their jobs. She got 180 MPs to sign an early day motion on the issue and spoke about it at the first meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party that she attended. Within two years the 'Rent (Agriculture) Act' was law. 
Maynard always spoke for the crusading spirit of the Labour Party, which made her more popular with the membership than with most of her parliamentary colleagues. She espoused a wide range of left-wing causes, being in favour of Britain's withdrawal from Northern Ireland and an extension of public ownership; and against nuclear weapons, the Common Market, the Falklands War, and Labour's 'tinkering with capitalism'. She was at odds with the Labour leadership in the turbulent 1970s and early 1980s, when she stood for traditional Labour values against those who called themselves modernizers but whom she saw as betrayers of the working class. Nevertheless her membership of the select committee on agriculture for twelve years from 1975 saw her forming an unlikely alliance with the Conservative Sir Richard Body to oppose the excesses of factory farming. She also found unexpected allies in her opposition to the common agricultural policy and the fight to save her beloved Hambleton Hills from electricity pylons. 
Maynard became chair of the Campaign Group of MPs, formed to represent the left in 1981 following Tony Benn's failure to be elected deputy leader of the Labour Party, but the tide had already turned against them and Maynard lost her seat on the national executive committee in the following year. She regained her position on the national executive committee in 1983 but the left was no longer a powerful force, and the actions of Maynard and like-minded colleagues were now limited to such protests as a walkout in 1986 to cause the collapse of disciplinary hearings against members of the Marxist militant group. Her advancing age but continued championship of socialist causes acquired her the nickname 'Stalin's Grandmother' (her response to which was that Stalin's grandmother was probably a pillar of the Russian Orthodox church in Georgia, and therefore rather more conservative than herself). 
Despite Maynard's trenchant political views, she was known to be kind and gentle. She bore the burden of caring for her elderly parents until their deaths, then cared for her elder sister who developed Alzheimer's disease, then for an elder brother. She retired from the House of Commons and lost her seat on the national executive in 1987. She died at her home, Lansbury House, 76 Front Street, Sowerby, Thirsk, on 27 March 1998, of stomach cancer, and was buried at St Oswald's, Sowerby, on 3 April. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 69554


Monkman, Kenneth Mackay (1911-1998), book collector and restorer of Shandy Hall, Coxwold, was born on 17 April 1911 at 215 Warwick Road, Carlisle, the son of Wilfred Monkman (1879-1949), bank inspector, and his wife, Marion, 'nee' Mackay (1881-1962). The family soon moved to Harrogate, and Monkman always prided himself on being a north Yorkshireman. He was educated at Rydal School (now Rydal Penrhos), Colwyn Bay, north Wales, and read for a chemistry degree at the University of Leeds. As was later noted, he was 'not entirely engrossed by the course, during which he wrote the words for 'It's the Rhythm', a popular song set to music by Bill Williamson' ('The Times', 29 March 1998). This early distraction perhaps presages Monkman's discovery of a kindred spirit in Laurence Sterne (1713-1768), the English prose master of digressive paths. According to Nicolas Barker, writing in 'The Independent' (26 March 1998), it was the painter Francis Butterfield who first introduced Monkman to 'Tristram Shandy', soon after Monkman left university without his degree. 
Digressing again, he spent his working life in journalism, at the outset with Yorkshire newspapers and later, from 1942 to 1971, as a copywriter for the overseas service of the BBC. Whether this was vocation or avocation is difficult to assess, but from his first days in London to the end of his life he was dominated by his 'delicious and purposeful obsession' ('The Times', 29 March 1998). His fellow antiquarian W. G. Day described how Monkman 'chose to work weekends... so that he could take time off in lieu during the week... trawling the bookshops of London... searching for books by and about Sterne' ('Shandean', 10, 1998, 10). While Laurence Sterne was always admired in Europe and America, his reputation in England in this period was typified by F. R. Leavis's footnote, summarizing his work as 'irresponsible (and nasty) trifling' (Leavis, 2, n.2). Monkman swam against the tide in his admiration of Sterne, but brought many others to follow in his wake. On 31 July 1945, at Westminster register office, he married Vita Duncombe Mann, with whom he had a son, Francis, in 1949 (named, perhaps, in honour of the person who introduced him to Sterne's writings); the couple later separated and eventually divorced in 1965. 
Monkman's extensive library -- along with an equally large collection of other eighteenth-century authors, journals, pamphlets, broadsides, and newspapers -- came to fill his London house to capacity. It was to find a permanent home at Shandy Hall, Sterne's residence in Coxwold, Yorkshire, between 1760 and 1768. Monkman first visited the hall in 1963, finding it to be a derelict building, much without improvement since Sterne's residency. Monkman now dedicated himself to its restoration, accompanied by his partner, Julia Gladys Ernestine Bearder ('b'. 1931), whom he married at Kensington register office on 5 February 1965. Together they created not only a repository for the collection, but also 'the most beautiful of... literary places of pilgrimage' ('The Independent', 26 March 1998). Enlisting the worldwide support of Sterne enthusiasts, Monkman established the Laurence Sterne Trust in 1967 and raised funds for the restoration effort, undeterred by the judgement of the Ministry of Works that the project was quixotic. With the perseverance that marked his activity as a collector and bibliographer he completed the restoration three years later, and the Monkmans, their two sons, and the incomparable collection relocated to Shandy Hall. 
One of the first to profit from the collection was Melvyn New, editor of the Florida edition of the works of Sterne, who spent the summer of 1971 in close consultation with Monkman and his multiple copies of each of the nine volumes of 'Tristram Shandy' (1759-67). When the edition appeared in 1978 Monkman supplied the detailed bibliographical descriptions in appendix 5. His earlier essay on editions of 'Tristram' ('The Library', 25, 1970, 11-39) was an invaluable contribution, as was his first foray into attribution, an essay in 1971 (Cash and Stedmond, 'Winged Skull', 112-23), arguing that an article signed 'Hamlet', published in a York newspaper in 1747, was Sterne's; it has been accepted into Sterne's canon by the Florida editors. 
Monkman published further bibliographical work on Dublin editions of 'Tristram Shandy' in 1979 and on Sterne's sermons in 1993. Ten years earlier he made a notable addition to Sterne's biography: the discovery and publication of an annotated text of the lost portion of the manuscript of the 'Memoir', written by Sterne for his daughter Lydia. It was not until 1989, however, that his scholarly efforts toward amplifying the Sterne canon found an outlet. In that year, with Monkman's encouragement, Peter de Voogd established the annual journal 'The Shandean', dedicated to scholarship on Sterne. For Monkman this very attractive publication became the forum in which finally to reveal the extent of his holdings, for having collected broadsides, pamphlets, and newspapers for forty years, he was determined to find Sterne's pen in many places. In particular, following the cue of Lewis Perry Curtis, who had written in 1929 on Sterne's possible political writings in the 1740s, Monkman was convinced he could augment Curtis's study. In a series of essays beginning in 1989 with a fifty-six page piece in 'The Shandean', volume 1, 'More of Sterne's politicks 1741-1742' -- followed by 'Sterne and the '45' (1990) and 'Sterne's farewell to politics' (1991) -- he made his case for some fifty additions to the canon. 
Monkman remained a prolific contributor to 'The Shandean', with essays divided between attributions and the first publication of newly discovered letters in his possession. The 1998 volume, which contains Day's commemorative comments, includes the last two pieces written by Monkman. The first, 'The skull', is a fascinating account (concluded by Day) of his search for Sterne's buried skeleton in London and its removal to Coxwold's St Michael's Church, directly across the road from Shandy Hall, for reburial in June 1969. The second, an essay that shows Monkman at his best, is 'Shandean race horses', a wonderful account of the 'race horses in the 1760's named after Sterne's characters' ('The Shandean', 10, 1998, 21-7). One can be positive that so hobby-horsical an enterprise gave him the greatest of pleasures. 
Regrettably Monkman's attributions have not been widely accepted by the scholarly community. The Florida editors of the 'Miscellanies' (2014), where his findings have their logical place, put the problem as diplomatically as possible: 'One of the painful aspects of organizing this edition was the need to reject almost all the attributions of Kenneth Monkman, a dedicated Sternean to whom all eighteenth-century scholars owe much. Up to his death, Kenneth supported the Florida edition, despite his wariness toward scholars in general, American scholars in particular. (Sterne, 9.xi-xii)' They also add the hope that with new discoveries, especially of lost copies of the 'York Gazetteer', Monkman's attributions can definitively be vindicated. 
Kenneth and Julia Monkman's restoration of Shandy Hall created one of the most delightful authorial shrines in England. Although Coxwold is not easily accessible it became a necessary stop for Sterne scholars and eighteenth-century aficionados during the Monkmans' residence for nearly thirty years. The hall's honorary curator from 1970, and a true enthusiast, Monkman could wax equally eloquent about a variant comma or Sterne's influence on James Joyce. Disputes between host and visitor, as could happen often, were soothed by a walk in the hall's gardens, which were beautifully restored by Julia. Kenneth Monkman resided at Shandy Hall until his death, from congestive cardiac failure, on 22 March 1998 at Friarage Hospital, Northallerton. Fittingly, he was buried at the foot of Sterne's grave, in St Michael's churchyard, Coxwold. He was survived by Julia, who served as curator until her retirement in 2004. Shandy Hall remains the home of Monkman's collection and the location for exhibitions, talks, and education projects run by the Laurence Sterne Trust. 


@@@@@


doc= 69557


Patterson, Colin (1933-1998), vertebrate palaeontologist, was born on 13 October 1933 at Hammersmith, London, the only child of Maurice William Patterson (1908-1991), bank manager, and Norah Joan ('nee' Elliott) (1907-1984), secretary. He spent his childhood in Sheen but his early London education was disrupted by wartime evacuation to attend Hill Place boarding-school, Stow on the Wold, in 1942. He returned to London in 1947 and entered Tonbridge School, Kent. He left in 1952 for national service in the Royal Engineers. At Imperial College, London (1954-7), he gained first-class honours in zoology and was awarded the Forbes medal. His undergraduate notebooks demonstrate the clarity of expression, attention to detail, and competence in scientific drawing which typify all his later work. 
In 1951 Patterson met Rachel Caridwen Richards ('b'. 1932), artist and elder daughter of Ceri Giraldus Richards (1903-1971) and Frances Clayton (1901-1985), both of whom were well-known artists. They married on 9 April 1955 and had two daughters, Sarah ('b'. 1959) and Jane ('b'. 1963). Patterson was appointed assistant lecturer in biology at Guy's Hospital medical school in 1957, and at the same time began work on his PhD research under the supervision of K. A. Kermack at University College, London. His research concerned the anatomy and evolution of fossil acanthopterygians (spiny-rayed fishes related to modern-day perch, plaice, and mackerel) found in the English Chalk, a deposit laid down in seas about 95 million years ago. These fishes had previously been studied by A. S. Woodward in the late nineteenth century, but new techniques using acetic acid had recently been developed to dissolve the enclosing rock, leaving a fossil skeleton that could be studied in as minute detail as its modern counterpart. Patterson therefore became equally expert in the comparative anatomy of the skeleton of modern as well as fossil fishes. He gained his PhD from London University in 1961. 
In July 1962 Patterson was appointed senior scientific officer in the department of palaeontology at the Natural History Museum (then called British Museum (Natural History) -- a name that he continued to use until his official retirement in October 1993), where he became successor to E. I. White as researcher, and responsible for the national collection of fossil fishes. Throughout his life he continued to describe the anatomy of fossil fishes comparing them to their modern relatives. In 1975 he published 'A review of Mesozoic acanthopterygian fishes, with special reference to those of the English Chalk', a lengthy paper concerning the evolution of the braincase of actinopterygian fishes. This work, like his earlier thesis, was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London' and drew on his deep understanding of comparative anatomy; it has become the authoritative work to which other ichthyologists constantly refer. 
In 1967 Patterson read the work of Willi Hennig, a German entomologist, who proposed a new method of biological systematics (the science of discovering genealogical relationships between organisms) later known as cladistics. To Patterson this was a revelation. He wrote many papers developing further the theory and methodology, and through his lucid prose and lecturing style he was one of the most influential proponents making cladistics the current systematic paradigm. In 'Morphological characters and homology' ('Problems of Phylogenetic Reconstruction', ed. K. A. Joysey, 1982) he gave an insightful history into the recognition of biological homology and offered a modern formulation in which he argued that homology is a theory derived from observation. For Patterson empirical study of specimens led to the formulation of theory. 
Patterson always kept up to date in his research interests, and when molecular biology began to produce amino acid and nucleotide sequences he quickly integrated these into his systematic work and clarified the relationship between morphological and molecular homology, editing in 1987 'Molecules and Morphology in Evolution: Conflict or Compromise?'. 
As an undergraduate Patterson had attended lectures on evolution given by the entomologist O. W. Richards FRS. This remained a lifelong interest. In 1978 he published an eloquent account -- 'Evolution' -- and with his characteristic candour pointed out the weaknesses as well as the strengths of the theory. He delivered the typescript of the second edition three days before his death. 
The merit of Patterson's researches was recognized in rapid promotion to principal scientific officer in 1969, and then through individual merit promotion to senior principal scientific officer in 1974. He was elected to the Royal Society of London in March 1993. Throughout his career he was awarded many honours and awards including foreign honorary memberships of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology, the Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists, and the Willi Hennig Society. He received the scientific medal of the Zoological Society of London (1972), the Romer/Simpson medal of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology (1997) and, posthumously, the gold medal of the Linnean Society, which he had served as council member (1970-73, 1979-85), vice-president (1980-82), zoological editor (1978-81), and editorial secretary (1982-5). 
Patterson was tall, imposing, and gentle, measured in speech with a remarkable memory and socially diverse circle of friends. Recollections of his character as well as his influence on colleagues were given in a special issue of 'The Linnean' in 2000. For all but the first few years of his marriage Patterson lived in Barnes, London. He died on 9 March 1998 at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital after suffering a heart attack while bicycling to the Natural History Museum; he was cremated at Mortlake cemetery ten days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 69558


Weaver, Gertrude Baillie- (1855-1926), writer and feminist, was born on 8 June 1855 at 5 Upper Lansdowne Terrace, Kensington, the sixth daughter of John Thomson Renton, stockbroker, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Leishman. Having been privately educated in Germany, Paris, and London she married, on 18 July 1882, Henry Arthur Colmore Dunn, barrister; he died in the 1890s and on 2 January 1901 Gertrude married another barrister, Harold Baillie-Weaver (1860-1926), who was the son of Henry Edward Weaver, superintendent of the Telegraph Company, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Alcock. He was a supporter of feminism and, like his wife, a humanitarian, theosophist, and campaigner for animals. 
Having adopted the name Gertrude Colmore, Gertrude's reputation as a writer has rested upon two suffrage works reissued in the 1980s. Her novel 'Suffragette Sally' (1911) was reissued in 1984 under the title 'The Suffragettes: a Story of Three Women' and her hagiographic account 'The Life of Emily Davison', originally written as an extended obituary after Emily Wilding Davison died in 1913, attempting to gain publicity for the suffrage cause by grabbing the reins of the king's horse at the Derby, was reissued in 1988 as 'The Life and Death of Emily Wilding Davison'. However, Gertrude's output was much broader, including poetry, short stories, pamphlets, and a number of melodramatic novels dealing with social, political, and animal questions. Her early novels had covered social themes from a feminist perspective; 'Conspiracy of Silence', for example, tackles the hypocritical hiding of hereditary madness. 
Gertrude's use of melodramatic narratives and devices is most strikingly found in three of her novels that deal directly with the suffering of animals: 'The Angel and the Outcast' (1907), 'Priests of Progress' (1908), and 'A Brother of the Shadow' (1926). These are melodramatic narratives based on contests of moral authority. In 'The Angel and the Outcast' Gertrude explores the nature/nurture debate in the context of the morally contaminating Deptford slaughterhouses. So forceful was her anti-vivisection message in 'Priests of Progress' (1908) that it was condemned by physiologists, who discussed how to mount a 'counter-attack' (Research Defence Society, minutes, 8 Feb 1908, Wellcome L., SA/RDS C1). Her last book, 'A Brother of the Shadow' (1926), developed such themes. The villain, a professor of physiology, exercises power over men, women, and animals, using hypnotic and devilish powers to coerce them to self-destruction. Gertrude's suffrage and animal campaigning fiction drew on her contemporary political activity and the humanitarian milieu in which she lived. From 1910 she sat on the management committee of the pioneering Battersea Hospital, an anti-vivisection establishment for the local poor, which forbade experiments on animals and patients alike. 
Following Gertrude's marriage to Baillie-Weaver, a member of the Humanitarian League that was founded in 1891 by Henry Salt and campaigned for human and animal rights, they worked together on political, social, and animal questions. Baillie-Weaver was also a member of the Men's League for Women's Suffrage; he spoke regularly on their behalf and participated in the men's league contingent in the suffrage procession in June 1910. Gertrude supported the militant suffrage organization the Women's Freedom League, which published a collection of her campaigning suffrage stories entitled 'Mr Jones and the Governess' [1913]. In 1914 she probably joined the United Suffragists, a new suffrage society for men and women that campaigned throughout the war on women's suffrage. 
Harold and Gertrude shared common interests in the welfare of animals and in theosophy, which attracted many with progressive views. They joined the fashionable central London branch of the Theosophical Society in 1906. Harold was general secretary of the society in England from 1916 to 1921; he was active in their anti-vivisection group, the Starry Cross, and, as chairman of the European Theosophical Federation, was described by theosophist colleagues as 'a tower of calm and peaceful strength' ('International Theosophical Year Book', 187). 
Gertrude wrote pamphlets for the Theosophical Society on progressive ideals in education and against cruelty to animals. Harold also took a keen interest in educational matters, chairing the Theosophical Educational Trust, which ran the theosophist school St Christopher's, in Letchworth. Subsequently he was active in the New Education Fellowship, an international organization of educators interested in the new ideals of progressive education, and he chaired and organized European conferences in Calais and Montreux in the 1920s. Gertrude and Harold's empathy with, and practical help for, animals was exemplified by their membership of the National Canine Defence League. Harold chaired the 1910 annual general meeting and, to loud and prolonged cheers, he supported the sentiments of the guest speaker, Women's Freedom League president Charlotte Despard, declaring 'the sooner you get women's suffrage, the sooner will you succeed in emancipating dogs from cruelty' (National Canine Defence League, 'Annual Report', 1910, 27). With Ernest Bell of the Humanitarian League he wrote a pamphlet, 'Horses in Warfare' (1912), exposing the plight of horses in the South African War and calling for the extension of the Geneva convention to include them. 
After their marriage Gertrude and Harold moved to Newport, near Saffron Walden, Essex, where Gertrude was local secretary both of the National Canine Defence League branch and of the animal welfare group Our Dumb Friends' League (later Blue Cross). As supporters of the Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society they also campaigned for the humane slaughter of animals. In the 1920s they moved to Wimbledon, Surrey, with the intention of acting as guardians to Krishnamurti, hailed by the theosophists as a new messiah. After a long struggle with stomach cancer Harold died at their Wimbledon home, Eastward Ho, North View, The Common, on 18 March 1926. Gertrude survived him by only eight months, dying of heart failure at 6 Hunter Road, Wimbledon, on 26 November. She was cremated at Golders Green. 
The Baillie-Weavers were typical of many humanitarians of their time -- active in a range of progressive political causes underpinned by theosophical principles affecting both animals and people. Hartwell's statue 'Protecting the Defenceless', dedicated to them for their pioneering work in founding the National Council for Animals' Welfare Work, stands in the St John's Lodge public gardens of Regent's Park in London as a reminder of their important activity. 


@@@@@


doc= 69562


Poplar councillors (act. 1919-1922) were the thirty Labour members of the borough council of Poplar, in east London, imprisoned in September 1921 for their protest against the inequitable distribution of local taxation across the capital. Their actions coined the term 'Poplarism', denoting the use of local government power to relieve poverty in a deprived area, defying, if necessary, parliament and central government. 
The solidly working-class area of Poplar had long generated idiosyncratic forms of local socialism. It displayed a fragmented industrial structure, making it difficult to address the problem of local poverty through trade union action. Casual labour was endemic in the principal local industry, the docks, while female labour -- hard to unionize -- was prevalent across the borough. The area suffered from a long-term unemployment problem which would become chronic as local industries contracted in the post-war recession. Working-class politics consequently focused less on conventional wage bargaining than on questions of poverty and social exclusion; by extension Poplar's socialism was less 'masculine' than labour politics elsewhere, concerned with the family economy and the shortcomings of a local environment characterized by slum housing and inadequate open space and public facilities. Activists looked to municipal institutions -- the borough council and the poor law guardians' board -- to tackle social disadvantage. 
The possibility of pursuing local socialism through municipal agencies was enhanced by the enfranchisement of almost all adult men and many women in 1918, which trebled the local electorate in Poplar. The borough council in November 1919 contained thirty-nine Labour members out of forty-two, including the twenty-five men and five women who would later be jailed. These thirty were drawn almost entirely from working-class backgrounds, the only unambiguously middle-class member being (Arabella) Susan Lawrence (1871-1947), daughter of a solicitor. By 1919 the group's 'de facto' leader, the socialist, Christian, pacifist agitator George Lansbury (1859-1940), made his living as a journalist, while his son Edgar Lansbury (1887-1935) ['see below'] ran the family timber business. Some others born into the manual working class had recently escaped it: James Horatio Jones (1861-1946), the son of a Portsmouth shipwright, had founded his own boat-building business, while Alfred Partridge (1864-1940), the son of a blacksmith, was himself a blacksmith at Old Ford. Thomas Edwin Kelly (1872-1941), whose mother was a Hastings barmaid, worked as a grocer in Poplar. Henry William Sloman (1874-1956) was a clerk and John Scurr (1876-1932) a freelance journalist, while Joseph Thomas O'Callaghan (1878/9-1926), formerly a stevedore, became an assistant relieving officer in the poor law administration when dock employment contracted in 1921. 
But most of the male Poplar councillors still worked in manual trades: the railwayman Albert Baker (1879-1956) spoke thirty years later of the strain of a working day which began at 6.00 a.m. and ended on the completion of a council meeting at midnight ('East London Advertiser', 12 Sept 1952). The core of the Labour group worked in blue-collar jobs, including the dockers David Morgan Adams (1875-1942) ['see below'] and Walter Henry Green (1870-1957); the railwaymen Joseph Henry Banks (1871-1938) and Josiah Russell (1882-1943), and the carman Samuel March (1861-1935) ['see below']; the postman Thomas John Goodway (1870-1947) and the post office overseer Albert Victor Farr (1872-1941); the hospital porter Benjamin Fleming (1879-1965); the paintworker George Joseph Cressall (1880-1951); the shoemaker James Joseph Heales (1873-1955); the engineer's fitter Robert John Hopwood (1877-1964) and the engineer's toolmaker John Edward Oakes (1876-1961); the dock foreman Charles Petherick (1883-1965) and the lead works foreman James John Rugless (1872-1926); the boilerman Charles Edwin Sumner (1867-1925); and the municipal labourer Christopher Edward Williams (1885-1966). The 1919 local elections meant that 'for the first time ever, Poplar's council now looked like its electorate' (Booth, 7). 
Several of the councillors had been involved in early Independent Labour politics in the East End. George Cressall and his wife, Nellie Cressall (1882-1973) ['see below'], helped form the Limehouse Independent Labour Party, while Banks and Williams were active in the Poplar Labour Representation Committee. Goodway, Kelly, George Lansbury, and John Scurr were Independent Labour Party activists, while Jennie Mackay, 
('nee' Salmoni 1872-1955)
, belonged to the Social Democratic Federation. This direct political engagement was, though, only one aspect of a widespread involvement in voluntary social and trade union activity, deploying this diverse collectivism against the area's deprivation. Of the twenty-five male councillors at least fifteen were union members, ten of them officials. Hopwood would serve as branch secretary in the engineers' union for forty-two years. Sumner was also a national organizer for the municipal workers' union and had 'filled every office, from vestryman to mayor, from Poor Law guardian to County Councillor' ('Daily Herald', 9 Dec 1925). 
This kind of local community activism provided an outlet for women, particularly when the local economy was shackled by the enforced inactivity of many male workers -- during the 1911 and 1912 dock strikes, for example, or during the First World War. Julia Scurr (1871-1927) ['see below'] and Nellie Cressall were involved in child welfare work during the strikes, and pensions and food control during the war. Such activity reinforced resentment of the exclusion of women -- and particularly working-class women -- from much conventional political activity: all four of the working-class women imprisoned in 1921 were active in Sylvia Pankhurst's socialist-leaning East London Federation of Suffragettes, including Minnie Lansbury (1889-1922) ['see below'], a schoolteacher, and Jennie Mackay, another suffrage activist, who had been drawn to socialism by George Lansbury's 'wonderful speeches', participating in a women's march against unemployment led by Lansbury in 1905 ('Daily Worker', 2 Oct 1953). 
The Poplar councillors saw municipal action as an extension of the fight against deprivation that many of them had pursued through voluntary activism, more potent because of the council's tax-raising and statutory powers. In May 1920 Poplar introduced a $4 weekly minimum wage for its employees, doubling the pay of many of them. It similarly sought to improve the area's limited facilities. In January 1920 a council housing scheme was started in Millwall, followed by cottage estates on the Isle of Dogs. The councillors also knew that such interventionism threatened to push the local tax system to breaking point, given the limited taxable capacity of London's poorest areas: Poplar was forced to levy a rate of $1.14 in the pound to raise $950,000, while Westminster could raise almost $4 million from a rate of 56 pence in the pound. In March 1921 the Poplar councillors protested against a system which failed to equalize this burden, by resolving not to raise its share of the costs of London's central bodies -- the London county council, the Metropolitan Police, the London Fire Brigade and the Metropolitan Asylums Board. The rate supporting these bodies' services 'was' equalized, and nobody considered the services dispensable; the councillors argued simply that withholding them offered the only feasible form of protest. 
Concerned for their own income, the metropolitan authorities obtained a mandamus writ against Poplar in June 1921. The writ was upheld on appeal in early August, the councillors being given until the end of August to submit to the order of the court. The council's refusal to comply constituted contempt of court, and all understood that by their defiance they risked imprisonment. The rounding-up of the councillors from 1 September 1921 turned into political theatre. The arrest of the five women was advertised in advance in the local press, attracting a crowd of 10,000, while George Lansbury telephoned the sheriff to arrange his own arrest. Sumner attended the Trades Union Congress before becoming the last to be arrested on 8 September. The men were imprisoned in Brixton, the women in Holloway. 
Legislation of 1914 stipulated that contempt of court prisoners should be treated in the same way as those imprisoned for debt, allowing them to wear their own clothes, and write more letters and receive more frequent visits than regular prisoners. It was nevertheless a chastening experience for those unfamiliar with it. O'Callaghan and John Scurr were transferred to the prison hospital soon after arrival at Brixton, and the health of Kelly, Sloman, Sumner, and Williams also caused concern. George Lansbury later claimed that the deaths of Minnie Lansbury, Rugless, O'Callaghan, Julia Scurr, and Sumner were hastened by prison conditions (Branson, 102): all died within six years of release, in their fifties or younger. The Holloway authorities noted, though, that leaving aside the pregnant Nellie Cressall the women councillors gained weight in prison, Lawrence putting on fifteen pounds in a fortnight (J. Hopwood, Medical Officer, Holloway, to the governor, 24 Sept 1921, TNA: PRO, HO 45/11233). For all their misgivings about prison food they stuck to their pre-arrest decision not to go on hunger strike, as the authorities acknowledged with relief. 
The threat of prison having failed to deter the protest, few in power were so committed to the existing local taxation system as to contemplate the councillors' indefinite detention, let alone the possibility of deaths in prison: the official solicitor moved speedily to apply for the pregnant Nellie Cressall's early release when her health deteriorated after a fortnight in jail. Prolonging the stalemate increased the risk of other authorities emulating Poplar, and with other poor boroughs threatening similar action, Alfred Mond, the minister of health, recommended a compromise by which the councillors apologized for their contempt of court and were enabled to spread payment of the unpaid London-wide precepts over two years, with legislation being prepared to increase equalization of both council and poor rates, and to provide a statutory machinery to deal with defaulting councils in future. An affidavit from the councillors, stressing that 'they were anxious to disavow any intention of contumacy', was duly presented to the King's Bench Division. They were released on 12 October 1921. 
Following their release a new settlement for the distribution of the cost of maintaining those receiving outdoor poor relief -- essentially those of the unemployed with no entitlement to unemployment benefit -- provided spectacular lasting gains for Poplar. In the three years down to 1921 annual payments to the Poplar guardians under the common poor fund had averaged $48,000 p.a.; in the three years from 1922 they averaged just over $500,000. This windfall was the basis for the councillors' claims of victory and, by extension, for their belief that direct action had brought results that constitutionalism could never have achieved. 
The Poplar guardians, again Labour-controlled and including Adams, Baker, Banks, Fleming, Edgar and George Lansbury, Partridge, Julia Scurr, and Sumner of the imprisoned councillors, next turned to liberalizing the poor relief system. Their uninhibited intention was to undermine the deterrence built into the system. The 1921 legislation transferring the cost of outdoor relief to the equalized common poor fund had empowered the minister to set maximum relief levels, in order to limit the extent to which high unemployment areas could mulct the wealthy boroughs. The Poplar guardians nonetheless knowingly set a relief scale exceeding the levels prescribed by Mond in January 1922. 
Baker saw this coup as the real achievement of Poplarism: 'in the end the Poplar Councillors killed the old Poor Law spirit and no one would want it back' ('East London Advertiser', 12 Sept 1952). Mass unemployment would turn the old deterrent poor law into a welfare safety net in the 1920s, destroying the safeguards designed to limit expenditure; the measures taken by Poplar and some other Labour guardian boards accelerated that process. Central government responded by setting about constructing new means of curbing by law such discretionary social expenditure. Legislation passed by the Conservative government in 1926 and 1927 allowed central government to replace a defaulting guardian board by Whitehall nominees and to disqualify members of any local authority acting beyond its powers from holding public office for five years. The Poplar triumph was therefore double-edged. The achievement of a substantial redistribution of wealth within London had been realized at the cost of tightening Whitehall's control over similar local initiatives across Britain. The new powers would be used against those seeking to emulate Poplar in the early 1930s, before the relief system was effectively nationalized in 1934. 
The Poplar protest added 'Poplarism' to the dictionary and the councillors to Labour's pantheon. Some, such as Farr, Green, and Heales, served only one term on the council and retreated into relative obscurity thereafter. Fleming, who left the council in 1931, was to be found living in a 'tastily furnished 'pre-fab' home' in 1952. Others, though, became East End luminaries. 
Among these were two notable East End political partnerships. Minnie Lansbury (1889-1922) was born at 32 Grey Eagle Street, Spitalfields, London, on 9 February 1889, the daughter of Isaac Glassman, boot finisher and later a coal merchant, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Goodkindt. Her parents were Jewish migrants from Poland. She became a schoolteacher, employed by London county council, and married, at Poplar register office on 9 April 1914, Edgar Isaac Lansbury. She worked for Sylvia Pankhurst's East London Federation of Suffragettes, of which her husband became treasurer, and served with Julia Scurr on the Poplar war pensions committee, who helped widows and those wounded in the war to make claims, and also oversaw the welfare of children in the borough orphaned by the war. She was an alderman of Poplar from 1919 until her death. Minnie and Edgar Lansbury joined the Communist Party after its formation in 1920. She died from pneumonia following influenza, at her home, 6 Wellington Road, Bow, London, on 1 January 1922 and was buried in the Jewish cemetery, East Ham. 
Minnie Lansbury was survived by her husband, Edgar Isaac Lansbury (1887-1935), who was born at 105 St Stephen's Road, Bow, on 24 February 1887, the son of George Lansbury (1859-1940), politician, and his wife, Elisabeth Jane, 'nee' Brine (died 1933). The birth control campaigner Dorothy Thurtle was his younger sister. In 1906 he was appointed to a clerkship in the civil service, after open competition, but in 1910 joined the family timber business. In 1912 he was elected to the Poplar council -- joining his father -- and remained a member until 1925. From 1922 to 1925 he was also chairman on the Poplar board of guardians during the disputes with the Ministry of Health over the scale of poor relief. He was mayor of Poplar in 1924-5 as a member of the Communist Party. He married, second, on 11 September 1924, the actress Moyna Macgill (1895-1975), who was born Charlotte Lilian McIldowie, the daughter of William McIldowie, a Belfast solicitor; she was the divorced wife of the actor Reginald Denham. They had a daughter, the actress Dame Angela Lansbury ('b'. 1925), and twin sons, both later producers in theatre and television, Edgar George Lansbury ('b'. 1930) and (William) Bruce Lansbury ('b'. 1930). Edgar Lansbury died at his home, 7 Weymouth Avenue, Mill Hill, Middlesex, on 28 May 1935, predeceasing his father, who was by then leader of the Labour Party, and whose biography, 'George Lansbury, My Father', he had published in 1934. 
The other significant partnership was that of John Scurr, MP for Stepney Mile End from 1923, and his wife, Julia Scurr (1871-1927), who was born on 17 February 1871 in Limehouse, the daughter of John Sullivan, a warehouseman originally from co. Cork, and Martha Elizabeth Rapp of Bethnal Green. She was brought up in the East End. On 4 August 1900 at the church of Our Lady and St Frederick, Limehouse, she married John Scurr, with whom she had a daughter and two sons. She campaigned to improve conditions for working women in the East End of London, and served on the Poplar board of guardians from 1907. She was an organizer of the demonstration of working women, protesting against unemployment, of whom representatives met the prime minister, Balfour, in November 1905. She was a member of the deputation of Sylvia Pankhurst's East End Federation of Suffragettes who met Asquith, the prime minister, in June 1914. She joined the United Suffragists, founded in 1914, becoming a vice-president. A pacifist during the First World War, she served on the wartime food control committee. From 1919 to 1925 she was a Poplar councillor, and was mayor of Poplar in 1923-4. From 1925 to 1926 she was a member of London county council. She died at her home, 15 Woodstock Road, Poplar, London, on 10 April 1927. 
In addition to George Lansbury, Susan Lawrence, and John Scurr, two more of the councillors became Labour MPs. Samuel March (1861-1935) was born in Dagenham, Essex, on 20 February 1861, the son of James March, farm labourer, and his wife, Kezia, 'nee' Perry. He attended Ford's free school in Dagenham, then became a baker. Aged nineteen he moved to Poplar, where he became a carman, his occupation at time of his marriage, at the parish church, Poplar, on 25 December 1882, to Sarah Jane (1860/61-1906), daughter of William Weston, wharfinger. Following her death, he married, second, in Portsmouth on 28 December 1907, Jane Ann Hart (1866/7-1952), a widow, daughter of John Barrington Davis, master tailor. He had been an official of the Shepherd Friendly Society since 1882 and a member of the London Co-operative Society from 1906. He joined the London Carmen's Union in 1889, became his branch chairman, and in 1896 was general secretary of the union, which in 1912 became the National Union of Vehicle Workers. He was first elected to Poplar council in 1903 and remained a councillor in 1927, and served as mayor in 1920-21. He was a member of London county council, representing South Poplar from 1919 to 1925, and was the first Labour JP in the East End. In 1922 he was elected Labour MP for Poplar South, holding the seat until his retirement in 1931. He died at his home, 177 Caulfield Street, East Ham, Essex, on 10 August 1935. 
March was succeeded in the Poplar South parliamentary seat by David Morgan Adams (1875-1942), who was born David William Morgan Adams at 142 St Leonard's Road, Bromley, Poplar, London, on 23 February 1875, the son of David Morgan Adams, ship steward, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Dent. He was employed as a seaman at the time of his marriage, at St Martin's, Poplar, on 23 September 1900, to Ada (1868/9-1941), daughter of William John Dougall, lighterman; the couple had at least four sons and one daughter. He became a dock labourer, employed by the Port of London Authority, and was elected to the Poplar board of guardians in 1912 and Poplar borough council in 1918. From 1920 he was an official of the Transport and General Workers' Union. He was councillor for Poplar South on London county council from 1930 to 1937. In 1931 he was elected MP for Poplar South, on the retirement of Samuel March, and held the seat until his death. He was mayor of Poplar in 1934-5. Following the death of his first wife he married, second, in 1941 Winifred Maggie Gafga (1902-1998). He died at his home, 47 Courtland Avenue, Ilford, Essex, on 18 May 1942. 
The longest-lived of the councillors, and the last survivor of them, Nellie Frances Cressall (1882-1973), was born at 14 Park Road, Willesden, Middlesex, on 23 November 1882, the elder daughter in the family of two daughters and two sons of John George Wilson, carpenter, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Jennings. Aged eighteen she was employed with her widowed mother in ironing and laundry. On 17 January 1904, at Stepney parish church, she married George Joseph Cressall (1880-1951), a general labourer, son of Thomas Cressall, cooper, with whom she had eight children. She joined the Independent Labour Party in 1907 and became a suffragette, being arrested six times for suffrage activity ('East London Advertiser', 17 April 1959). She helped to organize the feeding of local children during the 1912 dock strike, and during the First World War served on the local food control committee. A Poplar councillor from 1919 to 1965, she was mayor in 1943. She enjoyed an Indian summer of activism in the 1950s, when her 'wonderful gift of flaming passionate speech' endeared her to Labour Party conferences. Herbert Morrison, who had anathematized the councillors for their militancy in 1921, addressed her affectionately as 'my old Dutch' ('News Chronicle', 3 Oct 1951). Attending meetings of the international moral rearmament movement in Switzerland even in her late seventies, she formed a link between George Lansbury's Christian pacifism and the later anti-nuclear activism of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament: she characterized herself in 1969 as 'a lifelong Christian Socialist' ('East London Advertiser', 22 Jan 1969). Her forty-six years on Poplar council coincided exactly with the period of unbroken Labour control from 1919 to the council's abolition. She retired from public life as Poplar borough council passed into history. She died in St Andrew's Hospital, Bromley, Poplar, on 31 October 1973. 
The east London area still boasts memorials to individual councillors -- the clock erected in Bow Road in memory of Minnie Lansbury, the children's home Dave Adams House in Bow, the Lansbury Lawrence Primary School in Poplar. John Scurr was commemorated by a primary school in Stepney Green and a community centre and a council estate in Limehouse. By the 1970s the housing stock of the London borough of Tower Hamlets, into which Poplar was absorbed in 1965, also included Cressall House, Jones House, Rugless House, Sam March House, and Susan Lawrence House (Tower Hamlets Borough Council, 'Yearbook', 1972-3, 74-90). A commemorative mural was painted in Hale Street, Poplar, at the height of the poll tax protests of 1990. 


@@@@@


doc= 69564


Poplar councillors (act. 1919-1922) were the thirty Labour members of the borough council of Poplar, in east London, imprisoned in September 1921 for their protest against the inequitable distribution of local taxation across the capital. Their actions coined the term 'Poplarism', denoting the use of local government power to relieve poverty in a deprived area, defying, if necessary, parliament and central government. 
The solidly working-class area of Poplar had long generated idiosyncratic forms of local socialism. It displayed a fragmented industrial structure, making it difficult to address the problem of local poverty through trade union action. Casual labour was endemic in the principal local industry, the docks, while female labour -- hard to unionize -- was prevalent across the borough. The area suffered from a long-term unemployment problem which would become chronic as local industries contracted in the post-war recession. Working-class politics consequently focused less on conventional wage bargaining than on questions of poverty and social exclusion; by extension Poplar's socialism was less 'masculine' than labour politics elsewhere, concerned with the family economy and the shortcomings of a local environment characterized by slum housing and inadequate open space and public facilities. Activists looked to municipal institutions -- the borough council and the poor law guardians' board -- to tackle social disadvantage. 
The possibility of pursuing local socialism through municipal agencies was enhanced by the enfranchisement of almost all adult men and many women in 1918, which trebled the local electorate in Poplar. The borough council in November 1919 contained thirty-nine Labour members out of forty-two, including the twenty-five men and five women who would later be jailed. These thirty were drawn almost entirely from working-class backgrounds, the only unambiguously middle-class member being (Arabella) Susan Lawrence (1871-1947), daughter of a solicitor. By 1919 the group's 'de facto' leader, the socialist, Christian, pacifist agitator George Lansbury (1859-1940), made his living as a journalist, while his son Edgar Lansbury (1887-1935) ['see below'] ran the family timber business. Some others born into the manual working class had recently escaped it: James Horatio Jones (1861-1946), the son of a Portsmouth shipwright, had founded his own boat-building business, while Alfred Partridge (1864-1940), the son of a blacksmith, was himself a blacksmith at Old Ford. Thomas Edwin Kelly (1872-1941), whose mother was a Hastings barmaid, worked as a grocer in Poplar. Henry William Sloman (1874-1956) was a clerk and John Scurr (1876-1932) a freelance journalist, while Joseph Thomas O'Callaghan (1878/9-1926), formerly a stevedore, became an assistant relieving officer in the poor law administration when dock employment contracted in 1921. 
But most of the male Poplar councillors still worked in manual trades: the railwayman Albert Baker (1879-1956) spoke thirty years later of the strain of a working day which began at 6.00 a.m. and ended on the completion of a council meeting at midnight ('East London Advertiser', 12 Sept 1952). The core of the Labour group worked in blue-collar jobs, including the dockers David Morgan Adams (1875-1942) ['see below'] and Walter Henry Green (1870-1957); the railwaymen Joseph Henry Banks (1871-1938) and Josiah Russell (1882-1943), and the carman Samuel March (1861-1935) ['see below']; the postman Thomas John Goodway (1870-1947) and the post office overseer Albert Victor Farr (1872-1941); the hospital porter Benjamin Fleming (1879-1965); the paintworker George Joseph Cressall (1880-1951); the shoemaker James Joseph Heales (1873-1955); the engineer's fitter Robert John Hopwood (1877-1964) and the engineer's toolmaker John Edward Oakes (1876-1961); the dock foreman Charles Petherick (1883-1965) and the lead works foreman James John Rugless (1872-1926); the boilerman Charles Edwin Sumner (1867-1925); and the municipal labourer Christopher Edward Williams (1885-1966). The 1919 local elections meant that 'for the first time ever, Poplar's council now looked like its electorate' (Booth, 7). 
Several of the councillors had been involved in early Independent Labour politics in the East End. George Cressall and his wife, Nellie Cressall (1882-1973) ['see below'], helped form the Limehouse Independent Labour Party, while Banks and Williams were active in the Poplar Labour Representation Committee. Goodway, Kelly, George Lansbury, and John Scurr were Independent Labour Party activists, while Jennie Mackay, 
('nee' Salmoni 1872-1955)
, belonged to the Social Democratic Federation. This direct political engagement was, though, only one aspect of a widespread involvement in voluntary social and trade union activity, deploying this diverse collectivism against the area's deprivation. Of the twenty-five male councillors at least fifteen were union members, ten of them officials. Hopwood would serve as branch secretary in the engineers' union for forty-two years. Sumner was also a national organizer for the municipal workers' union and had 'filled every office, from vestryman to mayor, from Poor Law guardian to County Councillor' ('Daily Herald', 9 Dec 1925). 
This kind of local community activism provided an outlet for women, particularly when the local economy was shackled by the enforced inactivity of many male workers -- during the 1911 and 1912 dock strikes, for example, or during the First World War. Julia Scurr (1871-1927) ['see below'] and Nellie Cressall were involved in child welfare work during the strikes, and pensions and food control during the war. Such activity reinforced resentment of the exclusion of women -- and particularly working-class women -- from much conventional political activity: all four of the working-class women imprisoned in 1921 were active in Sylvia Pankhurst's socialist-leaning East London Federation of Suffragettes, including Minnie Lansbury (1889-1922) ['see below'], a schoolteacher, and Jennie Mackay, another suffrage activist, who had been drawn to socialism by George Lansbury's 'wonderful speeches', participating in a women's march against unemployment led by Lansbury in 1905 ('Daily Worker', 2 Oct 1953). 
The Poplar councillors saw municipal action as an extension of the fight against deprivation that many of them had pursued through voluntary activism, more potent because of the council's tax-raising and statutory powers. In May 1920 Poplar introduced a $4 weekly minimum wage for its employees, doubling the pay of many of them. It similarly sought to improve the area's limited facilities. In January 1920 a council housing scheme was started in Millwall, followed by cottage estates on the Isle of Dogs. The councillors also knew that such interventionism threatened to push the local tax system to breaking point, given the limited taxable capacity of London's poorest areas: Poplar was forced to levy a rate of $1.14 in the pound to raise $950,000, while Westminster could raise almost $4 million from a rate of 56 pence in the pound. In March 1921 the Poplar councillors protested against a system which failed to equalize this burden, by resolving not to raise its share of the costs of London's central bodies -- the London county council, the Metropolitan Police, the London Fire Brigade and the Metropolitan Asylums Board. The rate supporting these bodies' services 'was' equalized, and nobody considered the services dispensable; the councillors argued simply that withholding them offered the only feasible form of protest. 
Concerned for their own income, the metropolitan authorities obtained a mandamus writ against Poplar in June 1921. The writ was upheld on appeal in early August, the councillors being given until the end of August to submit to the order of the court. The council's refusal to comply constituted contempt of court, and all understood that by their defiance they risked imprisonment. The rounding-up of the councillors from 1 September 1921 turned into political theatre. The arrest of the five women was advertised in advance in the local press, attracting a crowd of 10,000, while George Lansbury telephoned the sheriff to arrange his own arrest. Sumner attended the Trades Union Congress before becoming the last to be arrested on 8 September. The men were imprisoned in Brixton, the women in Holloway. 
Legislation of 1914 stipulated that contempt of court prisoners should be treated in the same way as those imprisoned for debt, allowing them to wear their own clothes, and write more letters and receive more frequent visits than regular prisoners. It was nevertheless a chastening experience for those unfamiliar with it. O'Callaghan and John Scurr were transferred to the prison hospital soon after arrival at Brixton, and the health of Kelly, Sloman, Sumner, and Williams also caused concern. George Lansbury later claimed that the deaths of Minnie Lansbury, Rugless, O'Callaghan, Julia Scurr, and Sumner were hastened by prison conditions (Branson, 102): all died within six years of release, in their fifties or younger. The Holloway authorities noted, though, that leaving aside the pregnant Nellie Cressall the women councillors gained weight in prison, Lawrence putting on fifteen pounds in a fortnight (J. Hopwood, Medical Officer, Holloway, to the governor, 24 Sept 1921, TNA: PRO, HO 45/11233). For all their misgivings about prison food they stuck to their pre-arrest decision not to go on hunger strike, as the authorities acknowledged with relief. 
The threat of prison having failed to deter the protest, few in power were so committed to the existing local taxation system as to contemplate the councillors' indefinite detention, let alone the possibility of deaths in prison: the official solicitor moved speedily to apply for the pregnant Nellie Cressall's early release when her health deteriorated after a fortnight in jail. Prolonging the stalemate increased the risk of other authorities emulating Poplar, and with other poor boroughs threatening similar action, Alfred Mond, the minister of health, recommended a compromise by which the councillors apologized for their contempt of court and were enabled to spread payment of the unpaid London-wide precepts over two years, with legislation being prepared to increase equalization of both council and poor rates, and to provide a statutory machinery to deal with defaulting councils in future. An affidavit from the councillors, stressing that 'they were anxious to disavow any intention of contumacy', was duly presented to the King's Bench Division. They were released on 12 October 1921. 
Following their release a new settlement for the distribution of the cost of maintaining those receiving outdoor poor relief -- essentially those of the unemployed with no entitlement to unemployment benefit -- provided spectacular lasting gains for Poplar. In the three years down to 1921 annual payments to the Poplar guardians under the common poor fund had averaged $48,000 p.a.; in the three years from 1922 they averaged just over $500,000. This windfall was the basis for the councillors' claims of victory and, by extension, for their belief that direct action had brought results that constitutionalism could never have achieved. 
The Poplar guardians, again Labour-controlled and including Adams, Baker, Banks, Fleming, Edgar and George Lansbury, Partridge, Julia Scurr, and Sumner of the imprisoned councillors, next turned to liberalizing the poor relief system. Their uninhibited intention was to undermine the deterrence built into the system. The 1921 legislation transferring the cost of outdoor relief to the equalized common poor fund had empowered the minister to set maximum relief levels, in order to limit the extent to which high unemployment areas could mulct the wealthy boroughs. The Poplar guardians nonetheless knowingly set a relief scale exceeding the levels prescribed by Mond in January 1922. 
Baker saw this coup as the real achievement of Poplarism: 'in the end the Poplar Councillors killed the old Poor Law spirit and no one would want it back' ('East London Advertiser', 12 Sept 1952). Mass unemployment would turn the old deterrent poor law into a welfare safety net in the 1920s, destroying the safeguards designed to limit expenditure; the measures taken by Poplar and some other Labour guardian boards accelerated that process. Central government responded by setting about constructing new means of curbing by law such discretionary social expenditure. Legislation passed by the Conservative government in 1926 and 1927 allowed central government to replace a defaulting guardian board by Whitehall nominees and to disqualify members of any local authority acting beyond its powers from holding public office for five years. The Poplar triumph was therefore double-edged. The achievement of a substantial redistribution of wealth within London had been realized at the cost of tightening Whitehall's control over similar local initiatives across Britain. The new powers would be used against those seeking to emulate Poplar in the early 1930s, before the relief system was effectively nationalized in 1934. 
The Poplar protest added 'Poplarism' to the dictionary and the councillors to Labour's pantheon. Some, such as Farr, Green, and Heales, served only one term on the council and retreated into relative obscurity thereafter. Fleming, who left the council in 1931, was to be found living in a 'tastily furnished 'pre-fab' home' in 1952. Others, though, became East End luminaries. 
Among these were two notable East End political partnerships. Minnie Lansbury (1889-1922) was born at 32 Grey Eagle Street, Spitalfields, London, on 9 February 1889, the daughter of Isaac Glassman, boot finisher and later a coal merchant, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Goodkindt. Her parents were Jewish migrants from Poland. She became a schoolteacher, employed by London county council, and married, at Poplar register office on 9 April 1914, Edgar Isaac Lansbury. She worked for Sylvia Pankhurst's East London Federation of Suffragettes, of which her husband became treasurer, and served with Julia Scurr on the Poplar war pensions committee, who helped widows and those wounded in the war to make claims, and also oversaw the welfare of children in the borough orphaned by the war. She was an alderman of Poplar from 1919 until her death. Minnie and Edgar Lansbury joined the Communist Party after its formation in 1920. She died from pneumonia following influenza, at her home, 6 Wellington Road, Bow, London, on 1 January 1922 and was buried in the Jewish cemetery, East Ham. 
Minnie Lansbury was survived by her husband, Edgar Isaac Lansbury (1887-1935), who was born at 105 St Stephen's Road, Bow, on 24 February 1887, the son of George Lansbury (1859-1940), politician, and his wife, Elisabeth Jane, 'nee' Brine (died 1933). The birth control campaigner Dorothy Thurtle was his younger sister. In 1906 he was appointed to a clerkship in the civil service, after open competition, but in 1910 joined the family timber business. In 1912 he was elected to the Poplar council -- joining his father -- and remained a member until 1925. From 1922 to 1925 he was also chairman on the Poplar board of guardians during the disputes with the Ministry of Health over the scale of poor relief. He was mayor of Poplar in 1924-5 as a member of the Communist Party. He married, second, on 11 September 1924, the actress Moyna Macgill (1895-1975), who was born Charlotte Lilian McIldowie, the daughter of William McIldowie, a Belfast solicitor; she was the divorced wife of the actor Reginald Denham. They had a daughter, the actress Dame Angela Lansbury ('b'. 1925), and twin sons, both later producers in theatre and television, Edgar George Lansbury ('b'. 1930) and (William) Bruce Lansbury ('b'. 1930). Edgar Lansbury died at his home, 7 Weymouth Avenue, Mill Hill, Middlesex, on 28 May 1935, predeceasing his father, who was by then leader of the Labour Party, and whose biography, 'George Lansbury, My Father', he had published in 1934. 
The other significant partnership was that of John Scurr, MP for Stepney Mile End from 1923, and his wife, Julia Scurr (1871-1927), who was born on 17 February 1871 in Limehouse, the daughter of John Sullivan, a warehouseman originally from co. Cork, and Martha Elizabeth Rapp of Bethnal Green. She was brought up in the East End. On 4 August 1900 at the church of Our Lady and St Frederick, Limehouse, she married John Scurr, with whom she had a daughter and two sons. She campaigned to improve conditions for working women in the East End of London, and served on the Poplar board of guardians from 1907. She was an organizer of the demonstration of working women, protesting against unemployment, of whom representatives met the prime minister, Balfour, in November 1905. She was a member of the deputation of Sylvia Pankhurst's East End Federation of Suffragettes who met Asquith, the prime minister, in June 1914. She joined the United Suffragists, founded in 1914, becoming a vice-president. A pacifist during the First World War, she served on the wartime food control committee. From 1919 to 1925 she was a Poplar councillor, and was mayor of Poplar in 1923-4. From 1925 to 1926 she was a member of London county council. She died at her home, 15 Woodstock Road, Poplar, London, on 10 April 1927. 
In addition to George Lansbury, Susan Lawrence, and John Scurr, two more of the councillors became Labour MPs. Samuel March (1861-1935) was born in Dagenham, Essex, on 20 February 1861, the son of James March, farm labourer, and his wife, Kezia, 'nee' Perry. He attended Ford's free school in Dagenham, then became a baker. Aged nineteen he moved to Poplar, where he became a carman, his occupation at time of his marriage, at the parish church, Poplar, on 25 December 1882, to Sarah Jane (1860/61-1906), daughter of William Weston, wharfinger. Following her death, he married, second, in Portsmouth on 28 December 1907, Jane Ann Hart (1866/7-1952), a widow, daughter of John Barrington Davis, master tailor. He had been an official of the Shepherd Friendly Society since 1882 and a member of the London Co-operative Society from 1906. He joined the London Carmen's Union in 1889, became his branch chairman, and in 1896 was general secretary of the union, which in 1912 became the National Union of Vehicle Workers. He was first elected to Poplar council in 1903 and remained a councillor in 1927, and served as mayor in 1920-21. He was a member of London county council, representing South Poplar from 1919 to 1925, and was the first Labour JP in the East End. In 1922 he was elected Labour MP for Poplar South, holding the seat until his retirement in 1931. He died at his home, 177 Caulfield Street, East Ham, Essex, on 10 August 1935. 
March was succeeded in the Poplar South parliamentary seat by David Morgan Adams (1875-1942), who was born David William Morgan Adams at 142 St Leonard's Road, Bromley, Poplar, London, on 23 February 1875, the son of David Morgan Adams, ship steward, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Dent. He was employed as a seaman at the time of his marriage, at St Martin's, Poplar, on 23 September 1900, to Ada (1868/9-1941), daughter of William John Dougall, lighterman; the couple had at least four sons and one daughter. He became a dock labourer, employed by the Port of London Authority, and was elected to the Poplar board of guardians in 1912 and Poplar borough council in 1918. From 1920 he was an official of the Transport and General Workers' Union. He was councillor for Poplar South on London county council from 1930 to 1937. In 1931 he was elected MP for Poplar South, on the retirement of Samuel March, and held the seat until his death. He was mayor of Poplar in 1934-5. Following the death of his first wife he married, second, in 1941 Winifred Maggie Gafga (1902-1998). He died at his home, 47 Courtland Avenue, Ilford, Essex, on 18 May 1942. 
The longest-lived of the councillors, and the last survivor of them, Nellie Frances Cressall (1882-1973), was born at 14 Park Road, Willesden, Middlesex, on 23 November 1882, the elder daughter in the family of two daughters and two sons of John George Wilson, carpenter, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Jennings. Aged eighteen she was employed with her widowed mother in ironing and laundry. On 17 January 1904, at Stepney parish church, she married George Joseph Cressall (1880-1951), a general labourer, son of Thomas Cressall, cooper, with whom she had eight children. She joined the Independent Labour Party in 1907 and became a suffragette, being arrested six times for suffrage activity ('East London Advertiser', 17 April 1959). She helped to organize the feeding of local children during the 1912 dock strike, and during the First World War served on the local food control committee. A Poplar councillor from 1919 to 1965, she was mayor in 1943. She enjoyed an Indian summer of activism in the 1950s, when her 'wonderful gift of flaming passionate speech' endeared her to Labour Party conferences. Herbert Morrison, who had anathematized the councillors for their militancy in 1921, addressed her affectionately as 'my old Dutch' ('News Chronicle', 3 Oct 1951). Attending meetings of the international moral rearmament movement in Switzerland even in her late seventies, she formed a link between George Lansbury's Christian pacifism and the later anti-nuclear activism of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament: she characterized herself in 1969 as 'a lifelong Christian Socialist' ('East London Advertiser', 22 Jan 1969). Her forty-six years on Poplar council coincided exactly with the period of unbroken Labour control from 1919 to the council's abolition. She retired from public life as Poplar borough council passed into history. She died in St Andrew's Hospital, Bromley, Poplar, on 31 October 1973. 
The east London area still boasts memorials to individual councillors -- the clock erected in Bow Road in memory of Minnie Lansbury, the children's home Dave Adams House in Bow, the Lansbury Lawrence Primary School in Poplar. John Scurr was commemorated by a primary school in Stepney Green and a community centre and a council estate in Limehouse. By the 1970s the housing stock of the London borough of Tower Hamlets, into which Poplar was absorbed in 1965, also included Cressall House, Jones House, Rugless House, Sam March House, and Susan Lawrence House (Tower Hamlets Borough Council, 'Yearbook', 1972-3, 74-90). A commemorative mural was painted in Hale Street, Poplar, at the height of the poll tax protests of 1990. 


@@@@@


doc= 69565


Tealby, Mary (1801/2-1865), animal welfare organizer, was born in Huntingdon, the daughter of Edward Bates ('b'. 1783/4), druggist. She had a brother, Edward Bates ('b'. 1803/4), curate of Kelmarsh, Northamptonshire. Little is known of her early life. By 1841 she was living in Hull, having married Robert Chapman Tealby (1801/2-1862), partner in a firm of timber merchants in the city. 
In the autumn of 1860 Mary Tealby established what later became known as the Battersea Dogs' Home. Already an active supporter of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, she was living in Victoria Road, Holloway, London, with her father and brother. The 'Islington Gazette' reported on 6 October 1860 her view, having found so many starving dogs in that district alone, that 'the aggregate amount of suffering amongst those faithful creatures throughout London must be very dreadful indeed'. Concerned with the fate of dogs dying 'of lingering starvation' in the streets ('An Appeal', 6) she established secure premises in St James's Road, Holloway, where dogs could be exercised and lost dogs retrieved by their owners. As the rules made clear the home was to be neither a permanent home for 'old, worn out favourites' nor a hospital, but a 'temporary refuge to which humane persons may send 'only' those lost dogs so constantly seen 'in the streets'' ('Annual Report', 1865, 7). 
The first meeting of the committee running the home was held on 27 November 1860 at the premises of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals in Pall Mall, with the Revd Edward Bates as honorary secretary and Mary Tealby in the chair. Tealby, widowed in 1862, was not a wealthy woman and much of the committee's early work focused on essential fund-raising. She was also active in visiting the premises regularly, and by 1861 had become a life governor of the home. The last meeting she attended was in December 1864. 
Mary Tealby died on 3 October 1865 in Biggleswade, Bedfordshire, from cancer and exhaustion, aged sixty-three. She and her brother were buried in the same grave in the churchyard of St Andrew's, Biggleswade. The dogs' home committee recorded their loss, declaring Mary Tealby to be a 'kind-hearted and generous lady' ('Annual Report', 1865, 4). For many years to come the reports of the dogs' home -- subsequently moved to Battersea -- were dedicated to her as 'the foundress and unwearied benefactress' (ibid., 1893). 


@@@@@


doc= 69566


Jackson, Arthur (c.1593-1666), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Little Waldingfield, Suffolk. His father, John Jackson, a Spanish merchant, died when he was young, and his mother afterwards married Sir Thomas Crooke and died in Ireland. Jackson's uncle and guardian, Joseph Jackson, sent him to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1614 and proceeded MA in 1617 (incorporated at Oxford in the same year). He married in 1619 Mary, the eldest daughter of Thomas Bownest of Stonebury, Hertfordshire. 
Ordained on 27 December 1620, Jackson was chosen not long after by the inhabitants of St Michael, Wood Street, London, first as lecturer and subsequently as pastor. He was also chosen by the Clothworkers' Company, of which both his father and his uncle had been members, as its minister, preaching on every quarter-day in the company's chapel, commonly known as Lamb's Chapel, where he sometimes used a 'turn-up table' (presumably a folding table) for the celebration of the communion. Laud apparently remonstrated with him, saying, rather revealingly, that 'I know not what you young Divines think, but for my part I know no other place of residence that God hath on earth, but the High Altar' (Jackson). True to his puritan belief in the sanctification of the Lord's day, he also refused to read the 'Book of Sports', which permitted parishioners to engage in lawful recreations and sports after attending Sunday church services. However, as Jackson was a quiet and peaceable man, Laud took no action against him. 
In 1640, when the new ecclesiastical canons were issued, Jackson was opposed to the 'et cetera' oath which was suspected by the puritans as a mask for future innovations such as recognition of the pope and which, he wrote on 10 July, 'if God be with me, I hope I shall never take' (Birch, 2.286-7). On 6 August he and a group of London puritan clergymen met at Nag's Head tavern about a petition against it. In 1644 Jackson was appointed a commissioner for the ordination of ministers, and in the following two years he took part in the London ministers' campaign for a strong presbyterian church government, and was one of the leading signatories in their petitions both to the houses of parliament and to the common council of the City. He was also chosen president of Sion College, London, in 1646. He was an active participant in the London Provincial Assembly after its formation in 1647, and twice served as its moderator. In 1648 and 1649 Jackson was one of the signatories of three London ministers' declarations against toleration, the army, and the army's plan to put the king on trial -- 'A Testimony' (1648), 'A Serious and Faithful Representation' (1649), and 'A Vindication' (1649). Implicated in what was known as Love's plot in 1651, he was imprisoned with others for seventeen weeks in the Tower. 
Jackson was a studious scholar and conscientious minister. The maintenance at St Michael, Wood Street, was small, and he was heard to say that he spent $2000 out of his own estate during the years of his ministry there. Having moved in late 1649 to the parish of St Faith's under St Paul's, he continued his pastoral work there until 1662. His publications consist of four volumes of 'annotations' on the 'Old Testament' from the book of 'Genesis' to the book of 'Isaiah'. He took pride in pointing out that when he 'first undertook this work' there had not been 'any piece of this kind extant in English, saving only the Geneva marginall Notes' ('Annotations upon the Five Books', 1658, preface). In early 1660 Jackson was again appointed a commissioner for the approbation of ministers. When in May Charles II entered the City, he waited at the head of the London clergy in St Paul's Churchyard to present a 'Bible' to the king. In 1661 he was one of the commissioners on the presbyterian side in the Savoy conference, but does not appear to have taken an active part in it. Ejected in 1662 from St Faith's under St Paul's, he retired first to Hadley, Middlesex, and afterwards to Edmonton. It was reported, however, that he was living at Whitefriars and preaching at conventicles between 1663 and 1665. 
Jackson died at Edmonton on 5 August 1666 and was buried on 7 August at St Michael, Wood Street. He was survived by his wife, two sons (Joseph and John), and two daughters (Elizabeth Hoare and Martha Jackson). 
His son John Jackson (c.1621-1693), ejected minister, was also educated at Cambridge University, matriculating in 1638 at St Catharine's College, graduating BA in 1643 and proceeding MA in 1646 from Queens' College; he was made a fellow of Queens' in 1644. Ejected from Cambridge in 1650 for his refusal to take the engagement, he went to London where in 1653 he married Anne, daughter of Lawrence Brinley, a London merchant and lay presbyterian. In 1654, presented by the protector, he became rector of St Benet Paul's Wharf. He was suspended in early 1662 for refusing reading the 'Book of Common Prayer', and was kept out of the parish church by force. He was also ejected from Moulsey, Surrey, but after the ejection seems to have continued living at Moulsey, where he completed his 'Index Biblicus' in 1668. Afterwards he preached at Brentford, Middlesex, in 1672 and 1689. He published a memoir of his father in the 1682 edition of Arthur Jackson's 'Annotations upon the Whole Book of Isaiah'. He died in 1693, either at Edmonton or at Tottenham Cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 69573


Rodney, Donald Gladstone (1961-1998), artist, was born on 18 May 1961 at Hallam Hospital, West Bromwich, Staffordshire, the youngest child of Harold George Rodney (died 'c'.1995), labourer, and his wife, Iris Imogene, 'nee' Jackson. His parents were first-generation immigrants from Jamaica. Brought up in Smethwick, he completed a foundation course at Bournville School of Art, Birmingham, before studying for his degree in fine art at Trent Polytechnic, Nottingham (1981-5). There he met Keith Piper, a black artist one year his senior, and through him Eddie Chambers, art critic and curator. Until that point he had specialized in wax-flower paintings, but under the influence of Piper and Chambers his subject matter changed to slavery, violence, and the black experience: 'I suddenly became aware of what I wanted to say and who I wanted to say it to. I no longer had to use the language given to me by western art traditions' ('The Guardian', 11 March 1998). In 1982-3 his collages and paintings were on display in 'The Pan-Afrikan Connection' exhibition at Trent Polytechnic in Nottingham, the King Street Gallery in Bristol, and the Africa Centre in London. This was the BLK art group's first touring exhibition, curated by Chambers. He also exhibited in 'The BLK Art Group' show in 1983-4, which was the group's second touring exhibition held at the Herbert Art Gallery in Coventry, Battersea Arts Centre in London, and again at the Africa Centre. 
When Rodney left Trent Polytechnic to study for his MA degree at the Slade School of Fine Art (1985-7), he continued to create images that focused on black history. In 1986 he held a solo exhibition, 'The Atrocity Exhibition and Other Empire Stories', at the Black Art Gallery, London, and in the same year his work was also on display in the 'Young, Black and Here' exhibition at the People's Gallery, London. Both these galleries were funded by the Greater London council when it was promoting black arts and anti-racism in London. 
In the mid-1980s Rodney stopped making collages and paintings. His work went through several changes, and he experimented with different materials and new forms of presentation. In 1987 he collaborated with Isaac Julien in making the film 'The Devil's Feast'. This was a homoerotic film that looked at black identity and food. In the same year Rodney participated in many exhibitions. He exhibited his work 'E=mc2' (a metaphor for the workings of twentieth-century capitalism) in 'Depicting History for Today' at the Mappin Art Gallery in Sheffield. He was also in the group show with Keith Piper entitled 'Piper and Rodney: Adventures Close to Home' at the Pentonville Gallery in London. In 1990 he made 'Black Men Public Enemy' (Arts Council of England) from light boxes and duratran prints. The work was meant to contribute to debates about painting and multimedia in art history; its subject matter was the violence inflicted on black people. 
From birth Rodney suffered from sickle-cell anaemia and in the mid-1980s spent long periods in hospital. He started to produce work about the illness that acted as a metaphor about the social order, economics, and other political concerns. In 1990 he was invited to participate in the 'TSWA Four Cities Project', a temporary public arts exhibition organized in Plymouth, Glasgow, Newcastle upon Tyne, and Berwick upon Tweed. He worked at The Battery in Mount Edgcumbe Country Park, Plymouth, and produced a work that pumped fake blood around the coat of arms belonging to Sir John Hawkins, the Elizabethan buccaneer and slave trader. In 1994 this work was shown in 'Truth Dare, Double Dare' at the Ikon Gallery in Birmingham, a collaborative exhibition with the artist Rose Finn-Kelcey. Rodney's last exhibition before his death was '9 Night in Eldorado' at the South London Gallery in October 1997. In this exhibition was a small piece of work made of skin taken from his body during one of his numerous operations. The work was a tiny house entitled 'My Mother, my Father, my Sister and my Brother', also known as 'In the House of my Father' (Tate). Rodney himself was unable to attend the exhibition, and his place was taken by an 'autonomous' wheelchair, modified by the school of computing at the University of Plymouth to perform a repeated sequence of circles, spirals, and figures of eight. 
Rodney -- described by one obituarist as 'one of the most outstanding British artists of his generation' ('The Guardian', 11 March 1998) -- died of sickle-cell anaemia and pulmonary emboli at King's College Hospital, Denmark Hill, London, on 4 March 1998; he was survived by his partner since the mid-1980s, Diane Symons. After his death she and a group of friends brought to completion his last project, 'Autoicon', an internet- and CD-ROM-based work designed to enable users to engage in simulated dialogue (derived from interviews with Rodney), and to affect an auto-generative montage-machine which creates images in the spirit of Rodney's own art. 


@@@@@


doc= 69576


Shepherd, Charles William Haimes (1917-1998), naval officer, was born on 10 December 1917 at 23 Richmond Street, Plymouth, Devon, the son of William Henry Haimes Shepherd, labourer in the naval dockyard, and his wife, Florence Ethel Hayter. He was a pupil at the Public Central School, Plymouth, and entered the Royal Navy in 1933 as an engineering artificer apprentice at HMS 'Fisgard', the naval school at Torpoint. On passing out top of his class he went to sea in the engine room of HMS 'Repulse'. 
Shepherd saw action at the second battle of Narvik on 13 April 1940 while temporarily assigned to HMS 'Hero'. Commissioned a sub-lieutenant (E) in July 1940, he studied at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and qualified as an advanced engineer soon after his marriage to the 22-year-old Myra Betty Joan Major (1917/18-1988) on 9 November 1940. They had a son. Lieutenant Shepherd served in the battleship HMS 'Royal Sovereign' (1941-4) and the cruiser HMS 'Gambia' (1944-5) before joining the staff of the commander-in-chief, Pacific, in Sydney, Australia. 
To his initial dismay, Shepherd was designated a project officer with research and development, guided weapons, at Farnborough in 1946. This determined the subsequent course of his career, apart from one last tour at sea as a lieutenant-commander with the 3rd training flotilla (1949-51). He learned much about solid fuel technology while working on the Sea Slug surface-to-air missile and, raised to commander (1952), was trials liaison officer on HMS 'Girdle Ness', the ship adapted to test it. Although an effective weapon, the Sea Slug came into service four years late in 1961, being so much larger than first planned that only eight purpose-built destroyers ever carried it. This experience left Shepherd with decided views about what to avoid when managing a weapons programme. 
Promoted captain on 31 December 1960, Shepherd completed the senior officers' war course (1961-2) and became deputy director of naval intelligence (technical) at the Admiralty. Information exchange projects took him to the USA to study how the American navy was developing a new nuclear submarine armed with ballistic missiles (a craft known as the SSBN: submarine submersible ballistic nuclear). Consequently he well appreciated the implications of the unexpected upheaval in British nuclear defence policy which occurred in December 1962. Hitherto Britain's nuclear deterrent had depended for its delivery on the V-bombers of the Royal Air Force. The Macmillan government, on abandoning Blue Streak (the proposed British medium-range missile), had arranged in 1960 to purchase Skybolt air-to-surface missiles from the USA to convey British nuclear warheads. Now, however, the USA was cancelling Skybolt, and the alternative -- hastily secured by Macmillan via the Nassau agreement -- was Polaris, a submarine-launched missile. Rather to its own consternation, the Royal Navy was required to procure SSBNs and assume full nuclear capability by 1968. 
Shepherd accompanied the Begg-Zuckerman mission to Washington in January 1963 for the first round of Polaris planning talks. Then on 6 February he joined the technical directorate of the new Polaris executive as the deputy director, weapons (Polaris). This meant that he was working under the chief Polaris executive (Rear-Admiral Hugh (Rufus) Mackenzie) and the technical director, Polaris (Rowland Baker), and alongside the deputy director, naval construction (S. J. Palmer). While Palmer designed the submarines, Shepherd took responsibility for procuring, installing, proving, and servicing the Polaris weapon system (and torpedoes for self-defence). This was a challenging task, for, though the missiles would come from the USA, the warheads and re-entry system were to be made in Britain: technical integration had to be perfect. The navy, moreover, did not have experience of nuclear weapons, so a whole new training scheme was needed. 
In his quest for suitable staff Captain Shepherd drew a large proportion of naval missile engineers and ordnance specialists into the technical directorate (Polaris) based at Bath -- often to the chagrin of other divisions of the Admiralty. 'Turf wars' were inevitably a feature of the project; Shepherd fought them with zeal, asserting his claims against those of the director-general, weapons, and the Polaris project office attached to the Ministry of Aviation. A blunt-speaking man, not worried about making enemies, he compared these episodes to fisticuffs in the schoolyard and despised the 'great British compromise'. Whenever the five-year timetable 'Longcast 63' showed signs of slipping, his ire would descend on the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment, the Royal Ordnance Factory, Burghfield, and the civil contractors (Vickers, Cammell Laird, GEC, and the British Aircraft Corporation). The secret of punctual completion lay in keeping divergencies from the American system to a minimum. Shepherd prided himself on the suppression of 'WIBBIs': 'Wouldn't it be better if...?' 
For seven years the deputy director, weapons (Polaris), took no leave. He often worked from 7.30 a.m. to 10 p.m. seven days a week and expected staff to follow his example, though bluff humour marginally tempered his regime. Shepherd saw this 'crackpot' dedication rewarded when the first British SSBN, HMS 'Resolution', test-fired an A3 Polaris missile off Florida at 11.15 hours on 15 February 1968 (as scheduled five years earlier). It amused him to grumble that the launch was fifteen thousandths of a second late; everyone else extolled a singular achievement: Polaris had been delivered on time and within budget. 'Resolution' began operational patrols on 15 June 1968. 
Shepherd, appointed CBE, led the technical directorate (Polaris) from 1968 to 1971 with the new title of director project teams (submarines) and deputy assistant controller, Polaris. He dealt with the commissioning of the fourth SSBN, HMS 'Revenge', and drew up the refit procedures for 'Resolution', 'Repulse', and 'Renown'. His rank advanced to rear-admiral in 1970, before he assumed command of Britain's nuclear forces as the deputy controller of the navy, Polaris (1971-3). Thickset, bald, and bespectacled, he retired in 1974 and returned to Plymouth, where he lived at 5 Underhill Road, Stoke. Yachting and watching rugby were his hobbies. 
Charles Shepherd, a key figure in the most successful British peacetime weapon procurement project of the century, died of a stroke on 24 February 1998 at Underhill House residential home, 12 Underhill Road, Stoke, Plymouth, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 69577


Lane, A. (fl. 1695-1700), grammarian, is known only through the evidence provided by the two grammars he has left us. He styles himself MA on the title-page of 'A Rational and Speedy Method of Attaining to the Latin Tongue' (1695), but no record survives of his attendance at university. From Lane's prefatory epistle dedicated to Sir Richard Reynell, lord chief justice of Ireland, we learn that Lane had been encouraged to use his linguistic ideas to teach Latin to Reynell's eight-year-old son. As a result of the son's progress, 'several Persons of Quality thought fit (on your Lordship's Recommendation) to put their Children under the same conduct' ('A Rational and Speedy Method', sig. A2'r'). By 1700, according to the title of his 'A Key to the Art of Letters' (1700), he was 'A. Lane, M.A, late Master of the Free School of 'Leominster' in 'Herefordshire', now Teacher of a private School at 'Mile-end-green' near 'Stepney''. 
Lane's two books show that he was familiar with logic and grammatical theories ranging from Priscian to Port-Royal, but his contribution to knowledge lies in the original adaptation of his material; 'Method' has, in addition to a Latin grammar, the first 'universal' grammar in English, 'containing such Precepts as are common to all Languages' (title-page). His philosophy was continued into the 'Key' since the rules 'are the same in all Languages how different soever they be' (preface, x). 


@@@@@


doc= 69578


Cawdrey, Robert (b. 1537/8?, d. in or after 1604), Church of England clergyman and lexicographer, was born in 1537 or 1538; his parentage is unknown. Although four of his five sons are recorded as having studied at Cambridge -- Anthony, Thomas, and Zachary (father of Zachary Cawdrey) as sizars at Christ's College, Daniel Cawdrey at Sidney Sussex College -- and he was vigorously to deny the charge of 'Want of Learning' (Strype, 131-3), Robert himself received no university education. From 'c'.1563 to 1571, however, he 'taught the Grammer Schoole at Okeham', Rutland (R. Cawdrey, 'Table Alphabeticall', 1604, 'Epistle'). Having been ordained deacon in 1565 and priest in 1570, he was presented to the living of South Luffenham, Rutland, by Lord Burghley and instituted as rector on 22 October 1571. 
An uncompromising puritan, Cawdrey fell foul of the church authorities from at least 1576 (in which year he was said to be aged thirty-eight), when he was presented for not reading either injunctions or homilies in church, to September 1586, when he argued from the pulpit for the equality of Christian ministers, maintaining that lords spiritual should not lord it over their brethren, and fiercely attacked the 'Book of Common Prayer', 'a Vile book' and 'Fy upon it' (Strype, 134). This led to a short period in ward and what Strype was to describe (at some length) as 'a tedious suit' (ibid., 147); it ended in the Star Chamber in June 1591, when the right of ecclesiastical courts to proceed upon ecclesiastical law, even in matters touched by statute law, was established, and the legality of sentences of deprivation of benefice (1585), and degradation from the priesthood (1590), confirmed. Throughout this time Cawdrey's patron Burghley, 'who had a Compassion for the Man, having a Wife and eight Children' (ibid., 132) and who was regularly petitioned by him, stood by him, intervening both directly and through the attorney of the court of wards. However, Cawdrey, having for four and a half years stubbornly refused to accept the legality of the decisions of the ecclesiastical courts, also spurned repeated attempts at conciliation by Burghley, Bishop Aylmer, and Archbishop Whitgift (including offers of a pension and even reinstatement). 
After his ejection Cawdrey continued to express his puritan beliefs in 'A Treasurie or Storehouse of Similies' (1600), a revised edition (1601) of his 'Short and Fruitful Treatise of the Profit and Necessity of Catechisms' (1580), and (probably) 'A Godlie Forme of Householde Government' 'gathered by R.C' (1598). He is best known for 'A table alphabeticall, conteyning and teaching the true writing, and understanding of hard usuall English wordes, borrowed from the Hebrew, Greek, Latine, or French etc with the interpretation thereof by plaine English words, gathered for the benefit & helpe of ladies, gentlewomen, or any other unskilfull persons, whereby they may the more easilie and better understand many hard English wordes, which they shall heare or read in scriptures, sermons, or elsewhere, and also be made able to use the same aptly themselves' (1604). It was the first monolingual English dictionary ever published. This work, containing 2543 lemmas, 'long ago for the most part', Cawdrey explains, 'was gathered by me, but lately augmented by my sonne Thomas', a schoolmaster in London ('Table Alphabeticall', 'Epistle'), and it was Thomas who revised the second edition in 1609 (3009 lemmas). However, subsequent editions, dated 1613 and 1617 (3086 and 3264 lemmas), do not name the reviser -- though they do remove the reference to women as their prime 'unskilfull' target. 
Cawdrey's 'Table' is heavily derivative, taking over 90 per cent of the 1368 lemmas contained in the similarly named 'table' of hard English words which concludes Edmund Coote's 'Englishe Schole-Maister' (1596), and also drawing on Thomas Thomas's Latin-English dictionary, Rastell's law dictionary, and at least three other specialist glossaries. The 1617 edition incorporates material (and part of its expanded title) from John Bullokar's 'English Expositor' (1616). Cawdrey's 'Table' was, in its 1613 edition, a major source for Bullokar, and it was used also by Henry Cockeram. Thomas Cawdrey died in Grantham in 1640. Robert himself is last heard of in Coventry in June 1604. Perhaps significantly, his personal epistle dedicatory is omitted from editions of the 'Table' after 1609. 


@@@@@


doc= 69579


Cooper, Christopher (1655?-1698), schoolmaster and Church of England clergyman, was according to Dobson, probably born in 1655 as he 'would be about 20 when he took his BA' (Dobson, 1.281). Cooper's birthplace is unknown, but it could well have been Buntingford in north Hertfordshire, where on the basis of the dedication of his 'Grammatica' to Seth Ward, the bishop of Salisbury, it is thought that he was a charity boy of the local poorhouse. As a young man he evidently caught the attention of the Buntingford-born bishop, for it was Ward who enabled Cooper to go up to Cambridge: Cooper matriculated and was admitted to Corpus Christi College in 1672. He received his BA degree in 1676, proceeded MA in 1680, and was incorporated at Oxford in 1694. On 21 May 1676 he was ordained deacon in London. In view of his later career, it is likely that he was the Cooper who preached a sermon at St Michael's, Bishop's Stortford, on 11 March 1684. By the time his 'Grammatica' was published in 1685, Cooper had already become headmaster of Bishop's Stortford grammar school in east Hertfordshire, and on 11 March 1686 he became vicar of St Michael's in the same town. 
Cooper was responsible for two published grammars: the 'Grammatica linguae Anglicanae' (1685) and 'The English Teacher' (1687). The second, a translation of two parts of the first, has little grammar, but a great deal on pronunciation: it is for this work that Cooper is hailed by Dobson as the greatest of the seventeenth-century phoneticians, on the basis of the completeness and accuracy of his systematic analysis of a southern dialect of English, which Cooper sees as being the most acceptable as a standard. Dobson attributes Cooper's lack of scholarly fame to the fact that he neither was innovatory, nor tried to discover universal principles, the vogue of the time. Instead he devoted himself to 'the practical task of teaching English pronunciation, spelling and grammar' (Dobson, 1.280). Although Cooper's phonetic system reflects the typical seventeenth-century desire for symmetry and is therefore flawed to modern eyes, he was sufficiently precise in his aim to provide the 'vim et rationem' ('force and account') of letters, in emulation of the linguist John Wallis, to recognize that the short variants of the close tense vowels were closer to e and o than to i and u (Cooper, 'Grammatica', sig. A5'r'). Similarly he provides evidence for the survival of an (ou) diphthong, at least in his own speech, longer than has been previously thought. This is not just a reflection of spelling, for, according to Dobson, Cooper 'holds that we should not attempt to follow the etymon if it leads us to prefer a spelling which represents the pronunciation less well than an existing alternative would do' (Dobson, 1.284). Cooper's vowel system is clearly dependent on Wallis's previous work, but takes into account both the modifications of intervening phoneticians and well-observed differences in his own speech. Cooper remained living at Bishop's Stortford until his death there in 1698. 


@@@@@


doc= 69580


Fenning, Daniel (1714/15-1767), grammarian and textbook writer, is of unknown parentage. On 3 July 1735 he married Mary Mott (died 1780) at Great Cornard in Suffolk, and the couple lived at nearby Bures, where Fenning was licensed to teach on 25 October 1740. There were twelve children, of whom seven were born at Bures. About 1747 or 1748 the family moved to Whitechapel, London. Fenning seems to have given up schoolmastering to work for the Royal Exchange Assurance Company, to the governors and directors of which he dedicated 'The Young Algebraist's Companion' (1750), the earliest of his textbooks that can be dated with any certainty. 
Altogether Fenning wrote or contributed to some fourteen books on various subjects, including algebra, arithmetic, and geography. He is best remembered for his textbooks on the English language. He began to compile 'The Universal Spelling Book, or, A New and Easy Guide to the English Language' (1756) as early as 1739, while still teaching at Bures, though it was not published for nearly twenty years. It contained a short grammar, as did 'The Royal Dictionary, or, A Treasury of the English Language' (1761), dedicated to George III and published by his 'authority'. These two brief grammars are not identical, and different again is the fuller grammar prefixed to 'The New and Complete Spelling Dictionary and Sure Guide to the English Language' (1767). The grammar in 'The Royal English Dictionary' is, however, identical with three grammars published later in the 1760s, whose authors seem to have copied Fenning. 
Fenning's major linguistic work, 'A New Grammar of the English Language' (1771), which was published posthumously, refers to the grammars of both Priestley and Lowth, indicating that he kept abreast of recent studies. He followed the tradition of the time in avoiding a too rigid imposition of Latin structure on English, and he continued to revise and refine his ideas about the English language throughout his life. In his own day Fenning was probably best-known for his 'Universal Spelling Book'. It was reprinted in about 100 editions up to 1860, and was used extensively in America. Many of Fenning's other textbooks also continued to be printed and revised well into the nineteenth century. He died of consumption aged fifty-two at Great Garden Street, Whitechapel, and was buried on 31 August 1767 at St Mary's Church, Whitechapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 69581


MacDonnell, Katherine, duchess of Buckingham and marchioness of Antrim (1603?-1649), noblewoman, was the only daughter of Francis Manners, sixth earl of Rutland (1578-1632), the leading noble of the midlands and a prominent courtier, and his wife, Frances Knyvet (died 1605), the daughter and heir of a rich Wiltshire gentleman. Her mother died shortly after she was born and her father then remarried and had two sons, who both died young. Thus Katherine was sole heir both to her mother's fortune and to extensive, unentailed portions of the Manners estates in Northamptonshire and Yorkshire, together with estates in Buckinghamshire and Leicestershire and the barony of Ros. Her wealth and good looks made her particularly attractive to James VI and I's young favourite George Villiers, marquess (and later first duke) of Buckingham (1592-1628), and the young couple fell passionately in love. On 16 May 1620, at the tender age of seventeen, Katherine married Buckingham (having first renounced her Catholicism) and over the course of the next nine years they had five children, of whom three survived infancy: George Villiers, later second duke of Buckingham (1628-1687), Lord Francis Villiers (1629-1648), and Lady Mary Villiers (1622-1685). Katherine and her children quickly became great favourites of the king. Following Buckingham's assassination in 1628 she inherited, together with her sons, an enormous fortune, which included Buckingham's London mansions -- Wallingford House, Walsingham House, and York House -- together with nineteen more modest properties on the Strand and a mansion in Chelsea; in addition she received an annual income of roughly $4550 from the Irish customs and a state pension of $6000. She reverted to Catholicism and remained a devout Catholic for the rest of her life; she later noted that she 'would pour out my life in defence of [Catholicism]... nothing can frighten me from my faith' (O'Ferrall and O'Connell, 2.757). An intimate of the papal agent George Con (who addressed her as 'fond Kate'), she was instrumental in converting 'women of quality' (including Endymion Porter's wife and Lady Newport) to Catholicism. 
Next to Henrietta Maria the duchess of Buckingham, as one of Charles I's favourites, was probably the most important and influential woman at the Caroline court and, together with her daughter Mary, her sister-in-law Susan Feilding, Lady Denbigh, and the Catholic countess of Roxburghe, she held a position of honour in the queen's household. Thanks to her Villiers connections she was related to the earls of Desmond, Arundel, Suffolk, Northampton, Nithsdale, Pembroke, and Hamilton (who replaced her husband as the royal favourite). Loyalty to the late duke's memory also brought the support of numerous old Buckingham clients, including Endymion Porter, Sir Robert Pye, Sir Edward Conway, and Secretary Windebank. The second marriage of Katherine's daughter Lady Mary to James Stewart ['see 'Stuart, James], fourth duke of Lennox (and, after 1641, of Richmond), in the summer of 1637, secured the patronage of Charles's closest blood relative and one of his most intimate friends. However, Katherine's most important and influential patron was William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury. 
With Buckingham's death Katherine had become the most eligible widow at court, and in April 1635 she married Randal MacDonnell, Lord Dunluce (1609-1683), heir to the first earl of Antrim. The duchess was forced to pay a high price for marrying a Catholic from Ireland several years her junior. Every measure was taken to ensure that Dunluce, who was obviously regarded by many at court as something of a gold digger, should have no jurisdiction over her children's inheritance. In addition her contemporaries snubbed her. According to Laud her friends were all 'ill-satisfied with her marriage' ('Works', 7.137), which had lost her much ground 'with the king himself as well as all others of quality' (ibid., 135). However, within a relatively short period of time the court, led by the king, became reconciled to the match and the duchess was restored to her former position of favour. She continued to use her former title. 
During the early years of their marriage (during which time Katherine miscarried at least twice) the couple lived at York House, but in an effort to cut down on expenditure they moved to Ireland in 1638 and made Dunluce Castle their primary residence. The outbreak of the Irish rising in October 1641 disrupted their peaceful existence and the duchess immediately left Ireland and joined Charles I's court in York. During the 1640s she divided her time between the royalist court in England, Ireland, and Flanders and she repeatedly importuned the king and other leading figures, such as the dukes of Hamilton and Ormond, on her husband's behalf, and in 1645 helped to secure him his marquessate. From October 1647 she remained in Ireland, administering her husband's privateering business and involving herself in confederate politics, including Antrim's abortive rising against Ormond in October 1648. In August 1649 she received permission to join her son and the exiled royal court in France but lack of funds forced her to remain in Waterford. Her health took a dramatic turn for the worse in late October. Shortly afterwards, in November 1649, she died, perhaps from the plague that was raging through Ireland, and was buried outside the walls of Waterford. A monument was erected in Westminster Abbey. Her extensive English estates and properties all passed to her son George, second duke of Buckingham. 
Of Katherine's personality little is known though Clarendon described her as a woman of 'very great wit and spirit' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.509). An examination of her household accounts between 1629 and 1634, which she carefully annotated in her rather childish hand, suggests that she was pampered and extravagant yet fastidious, resilient and an extremely shrewd businesswoman. Extant letters confirm this and illustrate her loyalty and devotion to -- and her passion for -- her husbands. In Antrim's case she was his closest confidante and adviser, acting as his deputy, secretary, and watchdog. 


@@@@@


doc= 69582


MacDonnell, Rose, marchioness of Antrim (1631-1695), noblewoman, was the daughter of Sir Henry O'Neill (died 1638), from one of the pro-English cadet branches of the O'Neills of Clandeboye, and Martha Stafford (died 1678), daughter of the English administrator and governor of Ulster Sir Francis Stafford. On her father's side she was related to local native Irish families, including Sir Arthur Magennis, later Viscount Iveagh, and the MacDonnells of Antrim. Rose had three brothers and one sister but since her siblings were declared insane she inherited, on her father's death in 1638, his estates of Edenduffcarrick (also known as Shane's Castle) in the barony of Toome, co. Antrim. Though the details are obscure Rose spent some time at the Caroline court, and in 1642 she accompanied the eleven-year-old Princess Mary to Holland after her marriage to William II of Orange. As a protestant Rose appears to have spent most of the civil wars of the 1640s on her estates in co. Antrim, which were spoiled by the Scottish soldiers garrisoned on them. Despite this the property allegedly brought in an annual rental of $1600, even during the 1650s. 
In 1653 Rose married, as his second wife, the Catholic statesman Randal MacDonnell, marquess of Antrim (1609-1683), whose vast patrimony had been confiscated. Despite this Antrim enjoyed favour with the Cromwellians and in 1655-6 Rose was allotted 26,664 Irish acres of good quality land 'with convenient accommodation' in Connaught. There is no evidence to suggest that she ever left Ulster and she appears to have lived at her husband's seat at Dunluce. After the Restoration she lobbied vigorously for the return of her husband's estates and mortgaged chunks of her own property in an attempt to help him pay off his vast debts. Between 1665, when Antrim was restored to his patrimony, and his death on 3 February 1683, the couple divided their time between their various properties in east Ulster and involved themselves primarily in local affairs. In January 1690 one society gossip reported that a Monsieur Schomberg had married Rose. Presumably Rose met Frederick Herman Schomberg, duke of Schomberg (1615-1690), commander and chief of the Williamite forces in Ireland, during the late summer of 1689, when his troops were garrisoned in east Ulster. An extant order from Schomberg, dated August 1689, required 'all officers, soldiers and all others... not to molest Lady Antrim or any of her tenants... either in their persons or estates' (Glenarm Castle MSS). Their alleged union proved short-lived since Schomberg perished at the battle of the Boyne six months later. No doubt Rose also used her earlier contacts with the house of Orange to ensure that her relatives, including her brother-in-law Alexander MacDonnell, third earl of Antrim, suffered as little as possible as a result of the Williamite confiscations after 1689. Rose died, childless, on 27 April 1695 and her estate passed to John O'Neill, her first cousin, who had intermarried with a cadet branch of the MacDonnells. She was buried in the church of St Nicholas, Carrickfergus, beside her parents and her grandfather. 


@@@@@


doc= 69583


Dickenson, William (1584/5-1642/3), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Thomas Dickenson, cook at Eton College. He was educated at the college, then matriculated on 15 April 1603, aged eighteen, from St Alban Hall, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1606. He moved to Merton and proceeded MA in 1612 and BD in 1619, having become chaplain to the earl of Pembroke, chancellor of the university. That year he preached at the midsummer assizes at Reading. The sermon was a highly political one on the nature of royal authority, perhaps prompted by the recent death of Bishop Overall, whose extreme views on divine right it espoused. In transparent allusions to current political debate Dickenson managed to compliment personalities -- notably Bacon -- at that time in royal favour, while attacking others -- the Howards, Coke -- who were in disgrace. Its publication, as 'The King's Right' (1619), followed rapidly: the impression is that this was part of a positioning exercise on behalf of his patron. 
Soon afterwards, and perhaps as a reward, Dickenson was presented to the two contiguous and lucrative parishes of Appleton and Besselsleigh, close to Oxford on the Berkshire side of the Thames. There was another claimant to Appleton, Thomas Drope, chaplain of Magdalen College and well known locally. The archbishop's court ruled in Dickenson's favour, but he was never accepted by his parishioners. One reason may have been that it was 1625 before he received from the moderately Calvinistic Bishop Davenant his licence to preach. In an explicit effort to influence his parishioners individually he dedicated to them a catechism, 'Milk for Babes' (1628). The work was decidedly Arminian in tone and its impact seems to have been disappointing, for he took over the small local manor of Tinteyn and began to concentrate on farming. In or before 1624 Dickenson had married Marie, daughter of Edmund Culpeper, probably a Berkshire clergyman; they had four sons and two daughters, the eldest of whom was Edmund ('bap'. February 1625). 
In 1642 Dickenson, like all adult males, was expected to sign the protestation, a parliamentary loyalty oath. His answer was evasive, showing that he maintained his earlier royalist opinions. The manors of Appleton and Besselsleigh had been acquired during the 1630s by William Lenthall, now speaker of the Commons. As the civil war began with campaigning in the midlands, it became clear that the Thames-side parishes around Oxford would be vulnerable to a royalist advance and Dickenson may have seemed a threat. In October 1642, representatives from both his parishes were received at the bar of the House of Commons with a petition against him; he was declared a delinquent and deprived. The serjeant-at-arms was directed to take him into custody, but there is no evidence that he did so. Dickenson had ceased to keep his parish registers in April 1641 and was unwell when he made his will on 7 November. He was dead by the time James Marten replaced him as rector of Besselsleigh in 1643. His will, which was proved on 28 September 1650, left property both in Appleton and around Marlow. His eldest son, Edmund, became a fashionable physician after the Restoration; Marie Dickenson continued farming at Tinteyn until her death in 1685. 


@@@@@


doc= 69586


Harvey, Stephen (1655-1707), lawyer and poet, was born on 20 October 1655 at Walthamstow, the son of Stephen Harvey (1622-1688), of East Beechworth, a barrister of the Middle Temple, and his wife, Dorothy (1631-1694), daughter of William Conyers, of Walthamstow, sergeant-at-law. He had two younger sisters, Dorothy and Elizabeth. After attending Merchant Taylors' School, 1668-71, he matriculated as Merchant Taylor fellow and Sir Thomas White scholar at St John's College, Oxford, on 27 June 1671, was admitted to the Middle Temple on 12 February 1673, and was called to the bar on 21 May 1680. He married his cousin Anne, daughter of John Harvey, of St Mary-at-Hill, on 15 August 1693. They had seven children: John, admitted to the Middle Temple on 17 May 1709, Elizabeth, Stephen, born at East Beechworth on 14 February 1700, Ann, Dorothy, Frances, Martin, and William. 
Harvey made three contributions as a verse translator to the publishing ventures of Jacob Tonson. His translation of Juvenal's notorious ninth satire appeared in 'The Satires of Decimus Junius Juvenalis, Translated... by Mr. Dryden and Several other Eminent Hands' (1693 [i.e. 1692]). His translation of 'The Passion of Byblis' from the ninth book of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', which borrows some phrases from John Oldham's translation of the same episode, and of 'Jupiter and Europa' from the fourth book, both appeared in 'The Annual Miscellany: for the Year 1694' (1694). All three poems treat of an unusual sexual situation without prurience, and Harvey shows himself to be a fluent versifier whose competence occasionally rises to excellence. 
Harvey's friendship with John, Baron Somers, led to his being appointed steward of the royal manor of Reigate when it was granted to Somers on his becoming lord chancellor in 1697, and the following year he became MP for the borough of Reigate, holding both positions until his death. Harvey acted as deputy steward or steward for other manors, including John Evelyn's Surrey estates, where he is recorded as serving as steward in September 1701. In May 1706 he was appointed a puisne justice of the Anglesey circuit, and on 25 October that year he became a master of the bench of the Middle Temple. Harvey died on 24 May 1707. 


@@@@@


doc= 69587


Lewis, William Lillington (bap. 1743, d. 1772), translator, was baptized on 16 August 1743 at the church of St Michael, Gloucester, the son of William Lillington Lewis and his wife, Elizabeth. He matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, on 18 November 1760, graduated BA in 1764, and became a fellow and received an MA in 1767. 
In his short life Lewis produced a single work: the first complete translation into English of P. Papinius Statius's late first-century epic the 'Thebaid' (2 vols., 1767): 'I had long considered it as the most illustrious Work of 'Roman' Antiquity after the 'Aeneid', and consequently was concerned, that it had never appeared in an 'English' Dress.... With more Ambition therefore than Prudence, I begun it soon after I entered at the University, at the Age of eighteen, and must confess, that my chief Merit consists in having had the Patience to go through with it at a Time of Life, which is too often squandered away in a Circle of Follies and Amusements. (Lewis, preface, 1.xxi)' Various parts of the 'Thebaid' had been translated before, and Lewis draws especially on Alexander Pope's version of the first book (1712) and Walter Harte's of the sixth (1727). In style of translation he is a follower of Pope, but, unlike him, Lewis is a zealous partisan of Statius, defending the Roman poet's art even when it may offend English Augustan taste. Statius's representation of cruel and monstrous behaviour on the battlefield exceeds the 'tolerable' in Pope's view, as when ''Tydeus' in the very Pangs of Death is represented as knawing the Head of his Enemy' at the end of 'Thebaid', book 8 (Pope, note on 'Iliad', book 22, line 437); but Lewis marshals an array of arguments to defend his author. 
Lewis's work, which is among the best eighteenth-century translations, ably captures the sublimity, eeriness, and violence of the original. Statius's style is highly allusive, with constant reference to his epic predecessors, especially Homer, Virgil (his acknowledged master), and Lucan. To represent this allusive quality in English, Lewis draws on Pope's 'Iliad', Dryden's 'Aeneid', and Rowe's 'Pharsalia', among other works. His practice is to signal an allusion in Statius by adapting the language and expressions that his English predecessors used for the very passage to which Statius alludes. For instance, in book 3 Venus tries to prevent Mars, her erstwhile lover, from inciting the Argives to begin hostilities against Thebes. Lewis notes that 'This Speech of 'Venus' is written in the Spirit of 'Dido's' to 'Aeneas'; and in many Places not only the Sentiment, but even the Diction is similar' (Lewis, 1.102); he translates: '
Go then; thy Flight no longer I detain; 

Go; bathe in kindred Blood the Theban Plain. 
(ibid., book 3, lines 393-4)' Dido speaks thus in Dryden's 'Aeneid': '
But go; thy flight no longer I detain; 

Go seek thy promis'd Kingdom through the Main. 
(Dryden, 'Aeneid', book 4, lines 548-9)' Although Lewis makes the allusion to the 'Aeneid' more explicit than does Statius, his use of Dryden admirably reproduces the allusive texture of Roman epic. Lewis died in 1772. 


@@@@@


doc= 69588


Cromwell, Henry (1659-1728), translator and poet, was born on 15 January 1659 at Clifton, Bedfordshire, the second son and third child of Thomas Cromwell (1609-1660), a first cousin of Oliver Cromwell, the lord protector, and Elizabeth Dixie ('b'. 1627?). It is probable that he was educated at home. 
Cromwell owned lands in Beesby, 9 miles south-east of Louth, Lincolnshire, where he sometimes passed the summer months. The rest of the year he spent principally in London, visiting coffee houses, attending the theatre, and playing ombre and piquet in fashionable salons. He also translated Latin poets and wrote his own verse. He contributed a number of amorous songs, and a rendering of Martial (i.67), to Charles Gildon's 'Miscellany Poems upon Several Occasions' (1692), and versions of half a dozen of Ovid's 'Amores' (i.7, 8, 10, 15) to 'Examen poeticum' (1693), the last of which, 'Of the Immortality of the Muses', was 'Inscrib'd to Mr. 'Dryden'' (p. 282). The volume also contains translations of 'Amores', iii.2 and 3; a manuscript copy of the latter is to be found in the West papers (BL, Add. MS 34744), where it accompanies an interpretation of 'Amores', i.5, in the same hand. And 'To his Mistress' and 'The Dream', renderings of 'Amores', ii.16 and iii.5, were published in Bernard Lintot's collection 'Miscellaneous Poems and Translations' (1712), the volume which further contains 'The Rape of the Locke', the first edition of that poem. Cromwell is also known to have translated Voiture. His published works, both the translations and original lyrics, reveal a competent, if slightly mechanical, facility for versification. 
Womanizing was the other great love of Cromwell's life. Courteously old-fashioned in manner, he was none the less a fashion plate, wearing nosegays, favouring a high, full-bottomed wig, and walking with a mincing step or dancing gait. To an unprepossessing appearance (a long, thin countenance and a sallow complexion: 'a Satyr in his Face', in Wycherley's view) were added 'creeping advances, clinging embraces', as the playwright put it to Pope (14 June 1709, 'Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 1.65), and by Cromwell's own account a thoroughly raffish demeanour: one of his favourite anecdotes recalled his competing with Dryden for the favours of a Drury Lane prostitute. This and suchlike lubricious tales he rehearsed for a younger circle of friends, including Alexander Pope, whom he had met probably through Wycherley, possibly as early as 1705, and a group which comprised Nicholas Rowe, Eustace Budgell, William Fortescue, and John Gay, to whom he was introduced for the first time in the autumn of 1710, on his return from Lincolnshire. (Shortly afterwards, Cromwell was responsible for introducing Gay to Pope.) 
For a brief period Cromwell and Pope corresponded on matters literary and carnal. In addition to replies in prose which allowed the young poet to demonstrate, and to apply, his self-education in the ancients, Pope composed verse letters animated by a deal of characterful detail: from 'An Epistle to Henry Cromwell, Esq.' (1707), for example, we learn that the recipient was somewhat deaf, was particular in his snuff-taking and penmanship, and kept company with the unheralded poetasters Brocas and Fouler, and the gamester Pentlow. In 'Mr Popes Welcome from Greece' (1720), moreover, John Gay imagines 'honest, hatless 'Cromwell', with red breeches' (1. 136), the source of Johnson's exiguous character of the roue in his life of Pope. Cromwell further commented on Pope's translation of Statius, and his is probably the hand which supplies a marginal commentary of approving and monitory Latin exclamations, and the occasional note drawing attention to departures from Ovid's model, to the autograph of Pope's rendering of 'Sapho to Phaon' ('c'.1707; published 1712). The annotations show Cromwell to be a scrupulous critic attentive to the nicest points of grammar. That a scurrilous epigram alluding to him appears on the verso of the Ovid manuscript exemplifies the cooling of his friendship with Pope, probably but not certainly to be attributed to Cromwell's increasing association with John Dennis, of whom he was to become a long-term friend and admirer, but who was one of Pope's most persistent literary enemies. Cromwell and Pope remained casual friends after 1711, but ceased to correspond. 
From about 1717 Cromwell appears to have curtailed his metropolitan socializing; throughout his life Epsom was a favourite resort. In 1726, however, he returned to public attention when Edmund Curll, another of Pope's long-standing literary adversaries, published the poet's youthful, unguarded correspondence with Cromwell, embarrassing letters he had obtained from Elizabeth Thomas. Thomas was (and has continued to be) referred to in print as Cromwell's mistress -- when she is not remembered as 'Curll's Corinna', Pope's scatological revenge on her in 'The Dunciad Variorum' (1729), II.66 -- but eighteenth-century senses of the term have been apt to mislead: a literary-minded gentlewoman living with her widowed mother and grandmother in impoverished but respectable circumstances, Thomas had been a friend of Cromwell, but nothing more intimate, perhaps since 1700. He paid court to her, shared Pope's writings with her after 1708, and introduced her to the poet, who esteemed her as a free-spirited literary friend. Thomas pestered Cromwell to be allowed to keep the letters he had shown her, and which she continued to hold, regarding them as relics, or prizes, of her acquaintance with the poet, in which request he eventually acquiesced. He forgot the affair as they drifted apart after 1717; he was reminded of the autographs, and his part in their dissemination, only when he learned that Thomas, indigent after the deaths of her mother and fiance, had sold the letters to Curll, who published them in a two-volume collection, 'Miscellanea' (1726), together with a handful of his uncollected verses. If Pope replied to the two mortified letters Cromwell appears to have addressed to him (but which are known only from the poet's published correspondence), the dispatches have not survived. 
It is probable that Pope and Cromwell had no further contact. For a short time, at the beginning of Pope's literary career, the friendship and exacting criticism of Cromwell, a man nearly thirty years his senior, whose other pursuits earned him a reputation as a ''louche boulevardier'' (Nokes, 53), fulfilled an important need; later, already alienated by Cromwell's association with Dennis, Pope dropped him as his confidence in his abilities, and his fame, grew. Cromwell died on 29 June 1728 and was buried in London at St Clement Danes, on the Strand, as he had requested in his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 69589


Addison, John (fl. 1735-1736), translator, evidently received a good education, though nothing is known about his family or his life other than the fact that he published in London two books of translation from the classics. The first, 'The works of Anacreon translated into English verse, with notes explanatory and poetical, to which are added the odes, fragments, and epigrams of Sappho, with the original Greek plac'd opposite to the translation' (1735), was advertised in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' without the translator's name, but with the comment that it included 'the Heads of Anacreon and Sapho curiously engrav'd'. Addison lists the contents in both Greek and English; he also gives a 'Life of Anacreon' and a 'Life of Sappho', both in English. The engraving of Sappho is described as 'taken from a Busto in the Possession of the Earl of Pembroke at Wilton House'. 
In his preface Addison reviews several earlier English versions of Anacreon's poems, but, while praising those of Cowley and Pilkington, he concludes: 'I know of none that can so properly be call'd a Translation as those which Mr. Stanley publish'd, whose Writings are an Honour to his Country'. Addison himself translates into couplets and heavily annotates every page. Ode 11, titled 'On Himself', is a typical example of his verse: '
I'm often by the Women told, 

Alas! Anacreon, thou growst old: 

Here, in this glass thyself survey, 

Fall'n is thy Hair, quite fall'n away! 

No Ringlets wanton o'er thy Brow, 

It's all a Field of Baldness now. 




But whether still soft-curls my Hair, 

Or, flying hence, has left me bare, 

I know not; this indeed I know, 

If, as they tell me, old I grow, 

It's time to snatch short Joys from Fate, 

And haste to live ere it's too late. 
(p. 49)' Near the end of the following century A. H. Bullen comments in his introduction to an edition of 'Anacreon': 'In the eighteenth century, the translations of John Addison, Thomas Fawkes, etc. were highly esteemed, but it must be confessed that they are dull, uninspired, mechanical performances' ('Anacreon', xiii-xiv). From Sappho, Addison gives the odes 'An Hymn to Venus' and 'On a young maid whom she lov'd', in addition to fragments and epigrams. 
Addison next published 'The works of Petronius Arbiter in prose and verse, translated from the original Latin,... to which are prefix'd the life of Petronius, done from the Latin, and a character of his writings by Monsieur St. Evremont' (1736). This work is heavily annotated in English, and it includes 'A key to the principal characters'. Justifying his interest in Petronius, Addison states in a preface: 'There is no Part of Nature, no Profession, which Petronius does not admirably paint; He is a Poet, an Orator, and a Philosopher, at his Pleasure.' A title-page illustration, from an engraving by Gerard Vandergucht (1698-1777), depicts a writer about to record the story of Rome's fall, as a satyr points toward the flames engulfing the distant city. This is accompanied by the following epigraph: '
When gay Petronius, to correct the Age, 

Gave way of old to his Satirick Rage, 

With just Resentment fir'd, he meant to shew 

How far Licentiousness at last might go: 

Blushing we read the loose, the flagrant Tale, 

And loath the Vice thus shewn without a Veil. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 69590


Scot, William (c.1558-1642), Church of Scotland minister and historian, was the son of Robert Scot (died 'c'.1605) from Mylndeane, Fife. He graduated MA from the University of St Andrews in 1586. By 1593 he was minister of Kennoway, Fife, and two years later he first attended the general assembly. The assembly of March 1596 appointed him a visitor in Dumfriesshire and in May Scot delivered a 'notable exhortation' to the synod of Fife concerning the general assembly's invocation to renew the covenant with God (Calderwood, 5.433). In February 1597 he was one of two ministers from Cupar presbytery chosen to meet representatives of the other presbyteries of Fife concerning questions from the king about ecclesiastical authority. In the autumn of 1600 he attended a conference of delegates from the synods with the king, at which the first Jacobean bishops were appointed, in the absence of the contingent from Fife. Having given him further commissions of visitation in 1600 and 1602, in the latter year the general assembly also appointed him 'to wait upon' the Catholic earl of Huntly to instruct him and his family (ibid., 6.166). 
In 1604 Scot became minister of Cupar and became prominent in opposition to the king's episcopal policy. In April 1605, moderating the synod of Fife, he 'taught powerfullie against the corruptions' in the kirk (Calderwood, 6.276). Later that year he petitioned the king in favour of ministers imprisoned for holding an illegal general assembly at Aberdeen. In the summer of 1606 Scot and seven others, including Andrew and James Melville, were summoned to court. In July, after subscribing a written protest at the Scottish parliament against the restitution of bishops, the eight went south. Discussions at Hampton Court focused on the Aberdeen assembly of 1605 and Scot is recorded as having 'declairit his judgement solidlie in few wordis' ('Autobiography and Diary of... Melvill', 660). In common with his colleagues he was warded with a bishop, in his case that of Peterborough. He remained in London until May 1607, and in the meantime various English nobles tried to engage him as their chaplain. Allowed to go home because his wife, Janet Smyth, was ill, he was then confined to his parish, although in the interim he had been appointed by the crown as 'constant moderator' of Cupar presbytery, an innovation to which he was opposed. 
During 1608 and 1609 Scot corresponded with James Melville, his 'loving and deere Father' in exile in England (Calderwood, 6.785). In spite of his confinement he attended the general assembly in 1608 and a conference at Falkland in 1609 designed to resolve ecclesiastical disputes. In July 1614 his confinement was lifted, yet he did not return to the synod of Fife until 1622 in protest at its being presided over by the archbishop of St Andrews. In Edinburgh at the time of parliament in June 1617 he was one of fifty-five ministers to subscribe a declaration in favour of ecclesiastical independence. An attempt to have him appointed minister of Edinburgh was blocked by the crown because of his opposition to its ecclesiastical policy, which had led to the assumption that he had been the author of David Calderwood's 'Perth Assemblie', asserting the illegality of the general assembly of 1618. 
Scot spent the rest of his life out of the political spotlight. In 1620 he erected the spire of Cupar parish church which is an enduring monument to his ministry there, as is the fine silver communion plate, commissioned in the same year and in regular use at the end of the twentieth century. In 1622 he published in the Netherlands 'The Course of Conformitie', a dialogue concerning the decayed state of the kirk. Three years later David Dalgleish became his assistant and went on to marry his daughter, Barbara. In his declining years Scot wrote 'Apologetical narration of the state and government of the Kirk of Scotland since the Reformation', which concentrated on the period between 1590 and 1633, recounting events from an anti-episcopalian and anti-Erastian standpoint. It was not published until 1846, although Calderwood used the manuscript. Scot died on 20 May 1642 aged about eighty-four and was buried beside the church he had served for over forty years. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 69592


Roberts, R. (c.1728-1788), translator and sermon writer, was the daughter of William Roberts, of Bristol, earlier possessor of the manor of Abergavenny, Monmouthshire. William Hayward Roberts, a kinsman, was made a freeman of the city of Gloucester on 21 March 1761 and is described as 'clerk, son of Ric. esq. decd.' (Ripley, 131). His description of the family genealogy for three hundred years can be found on a marble tablet in Abergavenny church. She had at least one sister and two brothers: William, the author of 'Thoughts upon Creation' (1782) and 'Poetical Attempts' (1784), and Richard (1729?-1823), high-master of St Paul's School, London, from 1769 to 1814. 
Miss Roberts's earliest known work, titled 'Select Moral Tales', a translation of four tales from Jean Francois Marmontel's 'Contes moraux', was published in Gloucester in 1763. William Hayward Roberts's being a freeman of the city suggests that she spent most of her life there. Although very little is known of her life, it is also probable she was of, or on the fringe of, Hannah More's circle. Mary and Margaret Roberts, daughters of her brother William, were close friends of More. Mary, at the cost of severe burns on her hands, had saved More's life when her clothing caught on fire. Margaret was More's literary executor, and their brother William was the writer and compiler of the four-volume edition of 'Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence... of Hannah More' (1834). Both Mary and Margaret were remembered in More's will (Hopkins, 250, 252). Miss Roberts was obviously strongly religious, for her next publication was 'Sermons Written by a Lady, the Translatress of Four Select Tales from Marmontel' (1770). The book is less a collection of sermons than a conduct book of the conventional kind. As Miss Roberts stated, the 'Sermons' were the result of a facetious remark by a clergyman to the effect that he would preach any sermon that she wrote. The critic for the 'Critical Review' referred to the anecdote about the clergyman and wrote in agreement: 'We must confess, we see no reason why ladies should not be oftener employed in writing sermons' ('Critical Review', 30, 1770, 59-63). The critic for the 'Monthly Review' also invoked the clergyman anecdote justifying the writing of sermons by women, but concluded: 'The candid will remember, that this is the work of a woman, and will not be very severe in their criticism' ('Monthly Review', 43, 1770, 79). The 'Sermons' were republished as 'Seven Rational Sermons' in Philadelphia in 1777. On the heels of the 'Sermons' Miss Roberts published an abridged translation of the abbe Claude-Francois-Xavier Millot's 'Elemens de l'histoire de France' ('Elements of the History of France', 1771), which she hoped would be used by schoolgirls. 'Elements of the History of England', translated from Millot's French by Frances Brooke, appeared in the same year, raising the possibility that the two translators knew one another, or at least were aware of each other's work in progress. The reviewer of Miss Roberts's translation wrote: 'We must... admit his [Millot's] 'Elements of the History of France' to be an useful abridgement of the subject, and at the same time acknowledge that the translator has done justice to the work.' He also agreed that 'this abridgement is more proper than any other to be put into the hands of young ladies at school'. 
Miss Roberts's next venture, published in 1774, was another translation, that of Mme Francoise de Graffigny's 'Lettres d'une peruvienne' (2 vols., 1747) to which Miss Roberts added a third volume containing nine letters. Her religious bent ensured that the heroine of the novel, an Indian princess, converted to Christianity. The reviewer concluded that there would never be a better translation of the novel. Another of her works was advertised in the 'Daily Advertiser' of 7 August 1775: 'This day, the triumph of truth; or memoirs of M. De La Villette, translated from the French, Published by T. Cadell'. It was 'undertaken at the request of the late Dr Hawkesworth, who revised and corrected the translation'. Dedicated to the duchess of Devonshire, it was considered to be 'A proper book for boarding schools' (private information). Five years later, in 1779, Miss Roberts published 'Malcolm', a blank-verse tragedy which never saw the stage. Her last known work was 'Albert, Edward, and Laura, and the Hermit of Priestland; Three Legendary Tales' (1783), for which Hannah More's 'Sir Eldred of the Bower' was probably the model. The reviewer for the 'Monthly Review' was courteous but unimpressed, writing: 'We are sorry that justice will not permit us to speak in such terms of approbation as we could wish', adding that the 'Tales' 'are composed of the usual ingredients -- love and murder' ('Monthly Review', 69 [Oct. 1783], 342). Miss Roberts died on 14 January 1788. 


@@@@@


doc= 69597


(Philip) Antony Corri (1784?-1832), music teacher, singer, and composer, was a son of Domenico Corri and was born in Edinburgh. He made his name in London during the early part of the nineteenth century as a composer of songs and piano pieces and a teacher of lady amateurs. It was entirely natural therefore that he should produce duets for piano or piano and harp and a piano tutor, 'L'anima di musica' (1810), one of the most comprehensive of the time. The latter was reissued in 1822, and a popular abridged version, 'Original System of Preluding', appeared about 1812 and was itself reprinted on several occasions. His other piano works include a sonata, with violin accompaniment, entitled 'La morte di Dussek' (1812). Corri is also well known as a principal figure (along with Johann Baptist Cramer, William Dance, William Ayrton, and Charles Neate) in the founding of London's Philharmonic Society in 1813, at which time he was resident at 9 Portman Place, Paddington. His high standing within the society, as a singer as well as a composer, came to an abrupt end in December 1816 when, having 'made off with someone's wife' (Ehrlich), he was expelled in disgrace. He was also director of the Professional Concert at this time. He then emigrated to the USA, appearing in New York and Philadelphia and arriving in Baltimore towards the end of 1817. He was baptized there as Arthur Clifton on 31 December 1817 and married Alphonsa Elizabeth Ringgold the next day. Positions as organist and choirmaster at diverse churches (the First Presbyterian Church, 1818-23, and the First Independent Church, 1823-31) were complemented by teaching, performance, and theatre productions. He published compositions in Baltimore, including songs, pieces for piano, and a ballad opera (with Italianate elements), 'The Enterprise, or, Love and Pleasure' (1822). He appears to have charmed his way back onto the Philharmonic platform under his own name at some point, but died in Baltimore on 19 February 1832. 



@@@@@


doc= 69598


Montague Philip Corri (c.1784-1849), music publisher and composer, was born in Edinburgh, another son of Domenico Corri and possibly the twin brother of Philip Antony Corri. He initially chose painting and fencing (at which he became expert by the age of ten under the guidance of Domenico Angelo) over music and, perhaps as a reaction against family pressure, spent a period at sea. Music appealed to him a great deal more when he was about eighteen, and he mainly taught himself despite a few lessons from his father, Peter Winter, and Daniel Steibelt. In 1804 he took over his father's business which operated in association with various other traders until a new firm called Corri & Co. broke away. This published 'The Library Newspaper & Musical Journal' in 1806, while based at 13 Oxendon Street, and about 1807 was located for a short time in Little Newport Street. The music dealership became bankrupt in 1811. Montague's instrumental career was also curtailed as the result of an accident which left one of his fingers dislocated. This may, however, have been to his long-term advantage, as he became a successful composer and arranger for the theatre and military bands, famous for the speed at which he could work under pressure. His work included music for plays and pantomimes at the Surrey, Astley's, and Cobourg theatres and the English Opera House (1812-14), written in collaboration with John Braham, Charles Edward Horn, and others. After a season as chorus master at the English Opera House (1816-17) he was employed for a short time by his uncle Natale Corri as manager of the Pantheon in Edinburgh. From then on he appears to have led a fairly itinerant lifestyle, living and working (in the theatre and as a fencing instructor) in Manchester, Liverpool, and Newcastle. He continued to compose songs and keyboard pieces, including numerous arrangements for piano solo and duet, and published a singing treatise ('c'.1830), a piano tutor (1835?), and, perhaps most interestingly, 'A Complete Course of Instructions on... Arranging Music' (1835?). The story that Montague was shipwrecked during a voyage from Shields to London, losing everything, attributed to Brown and Stratton by 'New Grove', was first recorded by Sainsbury. He died in London on 19 September 1849. He was the father of William Charles Cunningham Corri (1834/5-1893), a song composer who was the father of Charles Montague Corri (1861-1941), an opera conductor at the Old Vic Theatre, London; Clarence Collingwood Corri (1863-1918), a composer principally of songs and operettas; and William Corri ('b'. 'c'.1865, died after 1905), also a song composer. 



@@@@@


doc= 69599


Haydn Corri (1785-1860), pianist, organist, and composer, was born in Edinburgh, a son of Domenico Corri. He presumably received keyboard lessons from his father from an early age. He established himself as an instrumentalist and travelled from London to Ireland in 1811 and in 1819-20 as an accompanist to Italian opera singers performing at the Crow Street Theatre in Dublin. He married the soprano Ann Adams (Adami) (1800-1867) in London on 15 July 1814, and they both settled in Dublin in 1821. She was employed as a singer at the new Theatre Royal, Hawkins Street, and he became an important figure in the musical life of Dublin. A popular keyboard and singing teacher (his 'The Delivery of Vocal Music Simplified' appeared in 1826), he became organist and choirmaster of St Mary's, the pro-cathedral in Marlborough Street, in 1827, and retained the post until 1848. His compositions include sacred works for performance there, along with the staple fare of songs and arrangements. An adaptation of Cherubini's mass in A (originally composed in 1825 for the coronation of Charles X of France), for organ or piano with an added fourth voice part, was published about 1855. Haydn Corri died in Dublin on 12 February 1860. He was the father of two musicians: Patrick Anthony Corri (1820-1876), a singer, conductor, and composer and the father of the baritone Haydn Woulds Corri (1845-1876); and Henry Corri (1822-1888), a bass and conductor and the father of Ghita Auber Corri (1869/70-1937), a song composer and singer in the Carl Rosa Opera Company who married the playwright Richard Neville Lynn in 1899. 



@@@@@


doc= 69601


Frances Corri (b. 1791/2, d. 1861), singer, was born in Edinburgh, one of the daughters of Natale and Camilla Corri. After singing lessons from her father she went to London for instruction from John Braham and Angelica Catalani. Frances embarked on a continental tour (1815-16) with Catalani, and her powerful singing style, along with impeccable intonation, was said to resemble closely that of the Italian soprano. Back in London, her King's Theatre debut (17 January 1818), as the Countess in Mozart's 'Le nozze di Figaro', was a great success. Further engagements there and with the Philharmonic Society followed until she, along with her father and sisters, left for the continent in 1821. From Munich she travelled to Italy, where she settled and married the singer Giuseppe Paltoni (died 1856). She gave performances in Milan at La Scala (1828-9) and toured widely and successfully, visiting Spain, Germany, and Russia. A performance of Bellini's 'Norma' at Alessandria (1835) featured her last known appearance. She later resided with her family at Chorlton upon Medlock, Lancashire, where she was described as a 'professor of singing' (census, 1851). Frances Corri-Paltoni died aged 69 on 13 July 1861 at 16 Peel Terrace, Stretford, Lancashire. 
Among Natale's and Camilla's other daughters, little is known of the soprano Angelina Corri. Rosalie Corri (1803- 'c'.1860), also a soprano, was taught by Rovedino; she sang alongside Frances in London at the King's Theatre and performed in Irish premieres of Mozart operas in Dublin under the direction of Haydn Corri in 1819. She continued to perform in London, where she married William Geeson in 1825, and also appeared in Milan at the Teatro Re (1823). A charity concert was staged for the sisters in London in 1823, a year after their father's death ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 69602


Corri family (per. c.1770-1860), musicians, were of Italian descent but settled in Britain, Ireland, and the USA and were particularly influential as music teachers and writers of teaching material. 
The senior member was 


@@@@@


doc= 69605


Howell, Denis Herbert, Baron Howell (1923-1998), politician, was born on 4 September 1923 at 115 Guildford Street, Birmingham -- a back-to-back house -- the middle of the three children of Herbert Howell (died 1961), an engineer's fitter, and his wife, Bertha Amelia Watkins. Political awareness came early: his first memory was of sitting on his father's knee at a general strike meeting in 1926. So too did his devotion to football, and to Aston Villa Football Club in particular. He left Handsworth grammar school, in Birmingham, at fifteen and started work as an office boy. Rejected for military service, he served as a firewatcher and in the Home Guard throughout the Second World War, and began refereeing football matches for the Birmingham Sunday League in 1942. In 1951 he graduated as a linesman in the Football League, and was a Football Association referee from 1956 until 1966. 
Howell was active from an early age in the Clerical and Administrative Workers' Union -- he was president, from 1971 to 1989, of its expanded successor, the Association of Professional, Executive, Clerical and Computer Staff (APEX) -- and in 1942 he joined the Labour Party. He was elected to Birmingham city council at twenty-three, and four years later, in 1950, was elected to the important post of secretary of the Labour group. This experience was his training ground as one of the most effective operators in British politics of his generation. He contested the unwinnable King's Norton parliamentary seat in 1951, won Birmingham All Saints in 1955, and lost it by twenty votes in 1959. On 20 August 1955 he married Brenda Marjorie Willson ('b'. 1928/9), with whom he had three sons and a daughter. He found great pleasure and support in his family: 'I find the fellowship and affection of the family to be an indispensable part of my public life' (Howell, 85). Out of parliament, and with characteristic resilience, he founded his own public relations company and became a founding member of the Campaign for Democratic Socialism, the Gaitskellite organization formed to counter the left-wing unilateralists in the Labour Party. The connections he formed at this time helped to get him the Labour nomination for the 1961 by-election at Birmingham Small Heath, which he held for the next thirty-one years. He thus had a power-base in the party; Harold Wilson, from a different political stable, could never ignore Howell. 
On Labour's victory in 1964 Harold Wilson appointed Howell the country's first minister for sport, as a parliamentary under-secretary at the Department of Education, but did not want to give him a budget because 'the country's broke' (Howell, 142). Howell, no respecter of persons and the least deferential of men, reminded the prime minister that Britain was to host the 1966 world cup and would need funds. Howell got his budget -- and his prestige was mightily, if irrationally, enhanced by England's winning the tournament. Howell -- sometimes a bully and cajoler, always active -- became one of Whitehall's most effective ministers. In the teeth of civil service opposition he set up the Sports Council. He appointed an important enquiry, under Sir Norman Chester, of Nuffield College, Oxford, into Association Football (1966-8). A committed opponent of apartheid, especially in sport, he shamed the MCC into cancelling their 1968-9 tour of South Africa on account of the racial problems surrounding the Worcestershire and England cricketer Basil D'Oliveira, which marked the beginning of the long sporting boycott of South Africa. He was a tower of strength in creating the conditions for the Commonwealth games in Edinburgh in 1970. In 1969 he was moved from the Department of Education to be minister of state at the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, but carried his portfolio as minister of sport with him, 'the first man in history to take a Ministry with him when he moves' (ibid., 199). 
Howell sat on the opposition front benches between 1970 and 1974, and was inevitably reappointed minister for sport when Labour returned to office in 1974. Shortly after the election an IRA car bomb was planted at his Birmingham home; his wife and youngest son narrowly escaped death or injury. Sport now came under the Department of the Environment. Here he gained a reputation as a different kind of rain-maker. In the notoriously dry summer of 1976 James Callaghan appointed him minister for drought. The legend quickly grew up that just as he appealed for restraint in the use of water it began to rain, and continued to do so for most of a month. In fact the rains did not arrive for ten days, beginning in Yorkshire just as Howell ceremonially turned on an emergency standpipe. 
Back in opposition Howell energetically opposed Margaret Thatcher's ban on British athletes competing at the Moscow Olympic games in 1980, following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He raised funds to send a British team, bolstered Dennis Follows, the wavering chairman of the British Olympic Association, and forcefully expressed the view that the Olympic games were beyond politics. The military forces of the west were unable to interpose themselves between the USSR and Afghanistan; Howell and his supporters would not accept that 'our freedoms must be defended by Olympic sport' (Howell, 293). The depleted British team won twenty-one medals; Howell was awarded the Olympic order silver medal by the International Olympic Committee Congress. 
Denis Howell retired from the House of Commons in 1992, after two major heart operations and the tragic death in a car crash of his youngest son, David, in 1986. He took a life peerage as, inevitably, Baron Howell, of Aston Manor in the city of Birmingham. His last great campaign was an unsuccessful attempt to bring the 1992 Olympics to the city to which he always owed his greatest allegiance. He published his autobiography in 1990, under the apt title 'Made in Birmingham'. Lord Howell collapsed after making a speech at a dinner in support of Cancer Research at Birmingham, and died from heart disease in Solihull Hospital on 19 April 1998. His public funeral took place on 24 April at St Paul's Church, Birmingham, where many tributes were paid to the man known in his own city as Mr Brum. 


@@@@@


doc= 69606


Selvon, Samuel Dickson (1923-1994), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 20 May 1923 at 42-44 Mount Moriah Road, San Fernando, Trinidad, West Indies, the sixth of seven children of Bertwyn Fraser Selvon (1889-1951), cocoa merchant, and his wife, Daisy Irene Dickson ('c'.1887-1951). Bertwyn was of Madrasi Indian stock. Daisy Irene was of mixed race, the fourth of six children born to a Scotsman, George Van Buren Dickson, and Keasoo (later Laura), a woman of Indian origin. Selvon spent his childhood in a middle-class family home at 42-44 Mount Moriah Road in San Fernando close to the canelands (worked by descendants of Indians) and oilfields (worked by descendants of Africans), the two mainstays of the island's economy. His early schooling was at Miss Douglin's primary school, in Mount Moriah Road, and at the Vistabella Canadian Mission primary school, San Fernando. He completed his primary education at the San Fernando Canadian Mission school in 1937 and entered Naparima College, where he wrote impressive English compositions, but left in 1938, without taking the school certificate examination. In 1939 he enlisted in the Trinidad Royal Naval Reserve and became a wireless operator. 
From 1945 to 1950 Selvon worked in Port of Spain and lived on its outskirts in Barataria. He edited the 'Sunday Guardian''s literary magazine, and wrote regular columns of a social and philosophical nature in the 'Evening News' under the pseudonyms Ack-Ack, Denmar Cosel, Michael Wentworth, Esses, and the Big Buffer. Similar material appeared in the near-autobiographical 'An Island is a World' (1955) and the collection 'Foreday Morning: Selected Prose, 1946-1986' (1989). 
The tall, handsome, light-skinned young man married Draupadi Persaud (1915-1972) from Essequibo, British Guiana, on 2 August 1947 at Susumachar Presbyterian Church in San Fernando. They lived in Barataria up to 1950 when Selvon led the post-war movement of West Indian writers that made London the West Indian literary capital for most of the fifties, sixties, and seventies. Draupadi joined him in London in 1951 and their only child, Shelley Sarojini, was born there on 4 February 1952. The couple divorced in 1962. 
On 6 January 1963 Selvon married a Eurasian woman, Althea Nesta Daroux (born in Bhopal, India, in 1931), prototype of the girl immortalized in one of his finest short stories, 'My Girl and the City' and the family's breadwinner for many years. They had three children: Michael Dickson, Leslie Gordon, and Debra Jane. On 14 March 1978, after twenty-eight years in England, Selvon migrated to Canada, where his wife had relatives. The family settled in Calgary, Alberta. Selvon was held in high regard by those interested in West Indian literature and he still had many friends in Britain, but a growing dissatisfaction with life in the mother country prompted him to leave, never to return. 
Selvon's familiarity with people of all classes and ethnicities fostered his notion of the Trinidadian person as 'a creature born of all the peoples in the world' (Selvon, 'An Island is a World', 1955, 257): all ethnic groups are projected in his writings and they are seen primarily as people in the complex process of becoming creole or 'of the island'. Some of his stories, however, notably 'Cane is Bitter' and the novels 'A Brighter Sun' (1951), 'Turn Again Tiger' (1958), and 'The Plains of Caroni' (1972), give face and voice to Indians who form half the population of Trinidad but were regarded until recently as a minority needing to prove their allegiance to Trinidad. Outstanding among these works is 'A Brighter Sun', set during the war years and introducing Tiger, a peasant at war with himself as he seeks knowledge, experience, and identity. The novel also addresses the political issue of African-Indian relations. 
The travails and the ebullient spirit of the first wave of West Indian migrants to London are depicted with humour and pathos in 'The Housing Lark' (1965), in some of the stories in 'Ways of Sunlight' (1957), and in Selvon's most celebrated novel, 'The Lonely Londoners' (1956), which is the first of three books with a central character called Moses. In these works he used dialect for both narration and dialogue; and narrative structure and tone openly proclaim the symbiotic relationship between popular and literary, folktale and fiction, oral and scribal, that makes Selvon an original, the country's calypsonian in prose. 
Although Selvon wrote poems and plays, it was his short stories and novels that restored a sense of self-worth to the descendants of enslaved Africans and indentured Indians, reflecting them in fiction as main characters and full human beings. He released dialect from its stereotyping as comic or pathetic, and united West Indian writing and orality, enabling writing to own up to the West Indian tone of voice and thus shake off its imitative character. The popular creator of characters like Tiger and Moses was generous but never far from poverty, was outwardly happy-go-lucky but often morose and introspective. 
Selvon held a fellowship in creative writing at Dundee University in 1975-7; he became the first writer-in-residence at the University of the West Indies in 1982; and he took up writer-in-residence appointments at the universities of Victoria, Winnipeg, Alberta, and Calgary, where incidentally he had worked for a while as a janitor on first arriving in Canada. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Warwick University (1989). He was also awarded the honorary degree of DLitt by the University of the West Indies in 1985 and, for achievement in literature, the country bestowed upon him two of its highest awards in 1969 and 1994. 
A lifelong smoker not averse to the bottle, Selvon returned to Trinidad in late 1993. He died of respiratory failure due to extensive bronchopneumonia and chronic lung disease on 16 April 1994 at Piarco international airport, Trinidad. After cremation at St James crematorium, Trinidad, on 19 April his ashes were interred in the University of the West Indies cemetery, St Augustine, Trinidad. 


@@@@@


doc= 69609


Salkey, (Felix) Andrew Alexander (1928-1995), writer and broadcaster, was born on 30 January 1928 in Colon, Panama, the eldest son of Andrew Alexander Salkey (1895-1967), a worker in the canal zone, and his wife, Linda Gloria Marshall (1895-1967). His parents were both from Jamaica, and at two he was sent back there to his grandmother, later to be joined by his mother and a younger brother: he was not to see his father again for thirty years. The living popular traditions of the island instilled in him a strong affection for Caribbean folklore. He was educated at St George's and Munro colleges, and had his first poems published in the island newspaper, the 'Daily Gleaner'. In 1952 he emigrated to England, where he was to read for a BA and MA in English at University College, London. To survive financially he took on a succession of odd jobs which brought him in contact with West Indians from various walks of life, and their living conditions drew him to Marxism and protest against colonialism. He joined the League of Coloured Peoples, and the Movement for Colonial Freedom. 
On 22 February 1958 Salkey married Patricia June Verden ('b'. 1935), a teacher. In that year he also began secondary schoolteaching. However, he had discovered his talent for radio work while still in Jamaica, contributing to the BBC programme 'Caribbean Voices' from 1948. He soon left teaching to become a full-time freelance broadcaster, continuing to write and present material for the Caribbean, but also working for the Pacific, African, and General Overseas services of the BBC. He also made it his especial business to make contact with Caribbean writers. Quietly persuasive, with a gift for friendship and an encyclopaedic memory for people, Salkey with his wife Pat made their Bayswater flat a meeting point for immigrant authors and artists in London. Through his personal contacts with publishers, in particular Andre Deutsch and Faber and Faber, he worked to get new West Indian writers published, and was responsible for persuading Faber to accept the work of the visionary Guyanese author Wilson Harris. He edited a series of anthologies, of which the most influential were 'West Indian Stories' (1960), 'Stories from the Caribbean' (1965), and a volume of poetry, 'Breaklight' (1971). These collections showed remarkable insight in identifying the shape of an evolving Caribbean literary movement. 
In 1966 the Barbadian poet and critic Edward Brathwaite was studying in England, and looked for a way to co-ordinate the creative arts of the Caribbean. He turned to Salkey and to John La Rose, a Trinidadian poet and publisher, with them launching the Caribbean Artists Movement (CAM), which remained active in Britain until 1972. Through its conferences, meetings, and publications, CAM helped create a cultural base for the Caribbean arts, and for black British writers generally. Salkey's interests continued to be international. His radical sympathies gave him great hopes of the revolution in Cuba, and his visit there in 1967-8 formed the basis for his travelogue 'Havana Journal' (1971). He later edited 'Writing in Cuba since the Revolution' (1977). After attending the seminal Caribbean Writers and Artists Conference at the founding of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana in 1970, he recorded his experiences in 'Georgetown Journal' (1972). He had strong sympathies with Chile, and annually wrote the poems on the country's freedom cause which won him the 1979 Casa de las Americas prize, and were collected in 'In the Hills where her Dreams Live' (1981). 
Salkey's creative works included 'A Quality of Violence' (1959), an account, partly drawing on his knowledge of Haiti, his mother's birthplace, of cultists in rural Jamaica at the time of the great drought of 1900. 'Escape to an Autumn Pavement' (1960) began a series of picaresque novels, 'The Late Emancipation of Jerry Stover' (1968), 'The Adventures of Catullus Kelly' (1969), and 'Come Home, Malcolm Heartland' (1976). These novels, set in England and the Caribbean, each focused on a young, deracinated black man seeking a meaningful identity in an increasingly bizarre and corrupt post-colonial world. The morally ambiguous careers of these anti-heroes may link them to the Caribbean folklore trickster figure Anancy the spiderman, who appears in character in Salkey's political parables, collected in 'Anancy's Score' (1973), 'One' (1985), and 'Anancy, Traveller' (1992). Salkey also published four volumes of poetry, including the painstakingly researched historical epic of his homeland, 'Jamaica' (1973), awarded the Thomas Helmore poetry prize. His children's story 'Hurricane' (1964) won a Deutscher Kinderbuchpreis, and was the first of eight books for children. These featured young heroes as resourceful as the protagonists of his adult fiction were futile, facing, in the early stories, natural disasters and, in the later, political unrest. 
A versatile and always professional writer, Salkey won literary honours which, in addition to those recorded above, included a Guggenheim award (1960) and the Sri Chinmoy award (1977). But he will be remembered in particular for his generosity of spirit and his tireless advocacy of the Caribbean arts. In a shifting world he kept his independent voice, remaining freelance as a broadcaster, and while most of his life an emigrant, staying a Jamaican citizen. In 1976 he left for the United States to become professor of creative writing at Hampshire College, Amherst, Massachusetts. He largely lived there until his death from a heart attack on 28 April 1995 at his home, 826 West Street, Amherst; he was survived by his wife and two sons. He was buried on 11 May in Paddington new cemetery, Mill Hill, London. A posthumous collection of his shorter pieces, 'In the Border Country', was published in 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 69617


Hosain, Attia Shahid (1913-1998), writer and broadcaster, was born on 20 October 1913 in Lucknow in United Provinces in northern India, one of five children of Shahid Hosain Kidwai. She belonged to one of the feudal landowning families, the 'talukdars', which in the twentieth century produced many prominent and distinguished men. Her father had studied at Christ's College, Cambridge, and the inns of court, and was a friend of Motilal Nehru, the father of Jawaharlal Nehru, and well known in political circles. Her mother came from a family of scholars and poets and was the founder of an institution for women's education and welfare that was still in existence at the end of the century. Attia Hosain was only eleven years old when her father died, and her mother took over all responsibility for the estate and for her children, bringing them all up strictly according to Muslim tradition. She had English governesses and attended La Martiniere School for Girls in Lucknow, but when she returned home had private tuition in Urdu and Persian and read the 'Koran'. Hosain went on to the Isabella Thoburn College at the University of Lucknow, then the foremost college for women in India, and in 1933 became the first woman from a 'talukdari' family to graduate. Nevertheless, she envied her brother who had been sent to Cambridge to study, met his friends when they returned, and was influenced by their left-wing politics and socialist and communist leanings. She attended the first Progressive Writers' Conference and could be called a fellow traveller. Although Hosain did not join the Communist Party, she remained an ardent socialist all her life. 
Hosain married her cousin, Ali Bahadur Habibullah, the son of the vice-chancellor of the University of Lucknow, who was prominent in the nationalist politics of the time, and was herself swept up in the agitation for independence from British rule. Her early writing appeared in 'The Pioneer', then edited by Desmond Young, and also in 'The Statesman', the leading English newspaper in Calcutta. She was in England when India became independent in 1947, along with her husband, who was doing war repatriation work; he returned to India (and predeceased her), but she chose to remain in England with her two small children and began to earn her own living by broadcasting and presenting a women's programme on the Eastern Service of the BBC. 
In 1953 Chatto and Windus published a collection of Hosain's short stories, 'Phoenix Fled', which John Connell described as 'little vignettes, precise, loving and exquisitely true in spirit and in fact'. The 'Times Literary Supplement' noted her unusual distinction and charm. In 1961 she published her only novel, 'Sunlight on a Broken Column', a portrait of her native city of Lucknow and of its feudal society's struggle to change, or else to retain, its beliefs and structure during the independence movement of the twentieth century. Of this society she wrote that 'They loved the city to which they belonged, and they lived and behaved as if the city belonged to them' (Hosain, 35). 
Both books are marked by a rich and graceful English prose that reflects the ornate and formal traditions of Urdu and Persian literature, by their interpretation of feudalism that was Attia Hosain's background and that she considered noble and protective at best and cruel and unjust at worst, and by her ability to create characters who were aristocrats and born of privilege as well as those who served them and lived in grinding poverty. They are prose representations of busy Mughal miniatures with all their vivid detail of a way of life that lasted many centuries in India. The books enjoyed a resurgence of interest when Virago brought out new editions in 1988. 
Attia Hosain's 'oeuvre' is small because she was her own harshest critic and destroyed much of what she wrote. She also had a vivid, exuberant personality that enjoyed society -- she counted among her many friends Cecil Day Lewis and Compton MacKenzie -- and in London her Chelsea flat was open to friends and admirers from around the world. In 1961 she acted on the West End stage with Gladys Cooper in Peter Mayne's play 'The Bird of Time'. Even towards the end of her life she found it difficult to refuse to receive a guest or decline an invitation. Her last public appearance, shortly before her death, was at Nehru House in London for the launch of a volume of short stories by Indian women writers living abroad; it was published as a tribute to her. 
Attia Hosain died on 23 January 1998 in the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, Chelsea, London; she was survived by her son Waris Hussein, a theatre and film director, and a daughter, Shama Habibullah, a film-maker. Attia Hosain was remembered by all who knew her for her wit, her elegance, her cosmopolitanism (she had declared 'I am a universalist-humanist'), her fierce championing of causes dear to her, and her legendary beauty that even when she was in her eighties could take one's breath away. 


@@@@@


doc= 69621


Davis, Fred (1913-1998), billiards and snooker player, was born on 14 August 1913 at The Moor, Newbold, Whittington, Derbyshire, the youngest of the six children of Fred Davis, innkeeper, and his wife, Ann Eliza Clark. He learned to play snooker on a miniature table at home, and then in the billiard hall in Chesterfield owned by his parents. His ability was overshadowed by that of his eldest brother, Joseph (Joe) Davis, who won his first world championship in 1928. Fred Davis won his first major title the following year, at the age of sixteen, when he became world junior professional billiards champion (a title he held on two further occasions). Joe was critical of his younger brother: Fred, he believed, did not take the game seriously enough, and smiled too much in practice and in competition. But Joe recognized Fred's inherent skill: 'Fred was the greatest technician in the profession', he said. 'His cue action and stance was near perfect and when in form he never batted an eyelid or moved his head or body so much as a millimetre... if he had a flaw in his make up it was a tendency to be temperamental, at times giving the impression he could not care less. (Davis, 176)' But, as Fred's opponents often testified, this easy manner and ever present smile concealed a steely determination to succeed: the (unrelated) snooker player Steve Davis remarked that 'He'd be smiling while kicking you in the teeth. He'd smile when concentrating on his shot' ('The Independent'). 
Fred Davis arrived on the billiards scene just as the sport was losing its popularity, and did not compete again until 1937, when he reappeared as a snooker player at the world professional snooker championships; he lost 17-14 in the first round to Bill Withers. His performance was undermined by his myopia, which made it difficult for him to focus on the balls for any length of time; the condition was later remedied with the use of a revolutionary pair of swivel-lensed spectacles. His playing improved immediately, and in the world championships of 1940 he lost to his brother Joe in the final by only one frame. On 15 July 1940 Davis married Sheila Goodacre ('b'. 1913/14); they had two daughters. During the Second World War Davis served in the army with the 3rd airborne division. 
After the war Joe went into semi-retirement; although Fred no longer had to compete directly with his brother, Joe's status as the undefeated world champion continued to cast a shadow over Fred's achievements. Fred Davis won the first of his eight world championship titles in 1948 by beating Walter Donaldson 84-61. He won again in the following year, and in every year between 1951 and 1956. The world championships were dropped after 1957, when only four players entered the competition. Television saw no future in snooker as a televised sport. The championships were revived in 1964, and from 1969 took the form of a knock-out tournament: Fred Davis, in his late fifties, continued to compete strongly with the best of the new generation of players and reached the semi-finals in 1969, 1974, and 1978. During this last match Joe Davis was taken ill; he died a few weeks later. Despite heart attacks in 1974 and 1977, Fred Davis continued on the professional circuit, and in 1980 he won the world billiards title, which he defended successfully later that year. He published 'Snooker' (1977) and 'Talking Snooker' (1979), which both had second editions. He retired from professional competition in 1992; at seventy-eight he was probably the oldest active professional sportsman in the world. He died in the Denbigh Infirmary, Denbigh, on 16 April 1998. His wife predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 69623


Freney, James (d. 1788), highwayman and burglar, was born in Inistiogue, co. Kilkenny, the son of John Freney, a servant and bailiff, and Alice Phelon, a servant. He was educated privately. He married some time after 1742, and using his wife's dowry he set up a public house in Waterford city. When this failed he took to highway robbery and housebreaking in Kilkenny and adjoining counties. Southern Kilkenny was one of the most lawless areas in eighteenth-century Ireland, and Freney took up with the survivors of a previous criminal group, the Kellymount Gang. Nicknamed Captain Freney, his criminal career lasted from 1745 to 1749, its length possibly due to a certain amount of protection from some of the gentry of Kilkenny with whom he remained on good terms. His crimes and pursuit were reported in the Dublin press, and he was proclaimed an outlaw in June 1747, with a reward of $100 for his capture. A further reward was offered at the Kilkenny assizes in July 1748. He was eventually captured and sentenced to be hanged at the Wexford assizes in August 1749 for breaking and entering the house of Thomas Palliser in Portobello, co. Wexford, in 1747. The sentence was not carried out as Freney turned king's evidence and testified against most of his associates in return for his freedom. 
Freney's fame is due to his autobiography, 'The Life and Adventures of James Freney, Written by Himself', which was first published in Dublin in 1754 with a list of subscribers including the earl of Carrick and Richard Baldwin, the provost of Trinity College, Dublin. It is a somewhat fictionalized account, adding some episodes of heroism and chivalry to otherwise technical descriptions of housebreaking and disposal of stolen goods, and it later achieved enormous popularity in chapbook form. In 1766 Freney was appointed a tidewaiter in New Ross, co. Wexford, and he held this position until his death in 1788. 


@@@@@


doc= 69624


Marson, Una Maud Victoria (1905-1965), writer and feminist, was born on 6 February 1905 at Sharon Mission House, Sharon village, near Santa Cruz, St Elizabeth, Jamaica, the youngest of the six children of Solomon Isaac Marson (1858-1915), Baptist minister, and his wife, Ada Marson (died 1930). Solomon Marson was a respected and charismatic preacher. He remained the minister at the Sharon Mission House until his death in 1915, when the family was forced to move to Kingston. Una Marson planned, but never wrote, her autobiography, using the title 'Autobiography of a brown girl', but there is evidence that she was very attached to her father and profoundly affected by his death. There is little information available about her relations with her mother. 
From 1915 to 1922, with the help of a Free Foundationers scholarship, Una Marson attended Hampton high school, a fee-paying boarding-school in Malvern, Jamaica, modelled closely on the English public-school system. Of her time at this school, Marson writes nostalgically in a poem, 'To Hampton': '
How oft in dreams I live those days again, 

Chasing a hockey ball with might and main, 

Or sit and list without a thought of fear 

To dearest Mona reading great Shakespeare. 
(Marson, 'Tropic Reveries', 70)' Her biographer, however, has suggested that this idealized view of Hampton is qualified by comments made in Marson's unpublished papers which attest to the snobbery and racism endemic in a colonial school, whose intake was predominantly white and privileged and where the 'dark-skinned scholarship girl', Una, was snubbed (Jarrett-Macaulay, 19). Marson gained the Oxford and Cambridge Board's lower certificate (letters) in 1921, pursued commercial skills, and left Hampton in 1922 with satisfactory but unexceptional academic qualifications. 
Una Marson's first job, with the Salvation Army in Kingston, allowed her to make use of her secretarial skills and to develop her commitment to, and interest in, helping the large numbers of Jamaica's unemployed and socially disadvantaged. After a year with the Salvation Army, Marson took a job with the newly established YMCA, and it was not until 1926, when she was made assistant editor of the socio-political monthly journal 'Jamaica Critic', that Marson was able to develop her writing talent. In 1928 she started the magazine 'The Cosmopolitan', becoming the first Jamaican woman to edit her own publication. Thereafter Marson consolidated her interest in Jamaican culture and her commitment to promoting women's rights in an impressive variety of ways and in diverse contexts. 
In June 1932 Marson's play 'At What a Price' was staged in Jamaica and with the profits generated from it she travelled to England in July 1932. In London she became involved with the League of Coloured Peoples and in November 1933 'At What a Price' was performed by an all-league cast and was hailed as the first play by 'coloured colonials' to be staged in London. In 1935 she was the first, and only, black representative to take part in the First International Women's Conference, held in Turkey. In 1935 Marson took up a post at the League of Nations headquarters in Geneva where, in 1936, she acted as Haile Selassie's secretary in his negotiations with the League of Nations. On her return to Jamaica in 1936 she founded the Readers and Writers Club and the Kingston Dramatic Club, and two of her plays, 'London Calling' and 'Pocomania', were performed; the latter was extremely successful and was hailed as indicating the future trajectory of a truly Jamaican theatre. In March 1941, appointed as full-time programme assistant on the BBC Empire Service, Marson compered and co-ordinated a series of programmes, 'Calling the West Indies', which continued until her return to Jamaica in 1945. In 1960 she was briefly (and secretively) married to Peter Staples, a dentist. There were no children, and they separated in 1961. 
Marson's commitment as a feminist and nationalist activist in Britain, the West Indies, and further afield has earned her a considerable reputation as a pioneering figure in Jamaican cultural history and, increasingly, in accounts of black British history. Una Marson refused to accept the limits and constraints of her time which relegated her, as a black woman, to the margins of cultural activity. She published four collections of poetry: 'Tropic Reveries' (1930), 'Heights and Depths' (1931), 'The Moth and the Star' (1937), and 'Towards the Stars' (1945). Though uneven in quality, these works attest to Marson's defiance, vitality, and restless energy. 
While many of Marson's poems reveal her indebtedness to canonical English poets, her work experiments with poetic voices and themes which both challenge and subvert canonical notions of the poetic. In 'Black is Fancy' she asserts her poetic agenda with disarming clarity and panache: '
I used to feel ugly 

I was so ugly 

Because I am black, 

But now I am glad I am black, 

There is something about me 

That has a dash in it 

Especially when I put on 

My bandana. 
(Marson, 'Moth and Star', 75)' Marson wrote many deeply ambivalent poems of love in which she explored the pleasures -- and pain -- of living as a single woman. She died on 6 May 1965 in Kingston, Jamaica, after suffering a heart attack, and was buried at St Andrew's Church in Kingston on 10 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 69625


Feiritear, Piaras (d. 1652), soldier and poet, belonged to an Anglo-Norman family, originally le Fereter, which since the thirteenth century had held estates on the Dingle peninsula in co. Kerry. The family lived unobtrusively until the troubled Tudor and Stuart period; then, some of its members were the subjects of royal pardons in 1574, 1601, and 1602. In 1626 an Edmund Ferriter was the subject of an inquisition. Piaras was this Edmund's son and was known in Irish as Piaras mac Eamainn. He had a son, Major Dominic. Little more is known of his near kin. 
Before the confederate wars Feiritear was on good terms with others of his social class in the region, irrespective of affiliation. When war threatened it was assumed that he would defend the established order. The governor of co. Kerry therefore helped him to equip a force, but Feiritear joined the Catholic confederation in the siege and capture of Tralee and Castlemaine. Taking charge of these positions, he held the peninsula for the confederation throughout the war. After 1649 confederates and royalists were gradually defeated by the forces of parliament. On 22 June 1652 Lord Muskerry, commander-in-chief in Munster, capitulated and surrendered Ross Castle in Killarney. All that remained was 'to clear' the county of Kerry 'of such of the Irish Rebels as have not submitted, and come in with Lord Muskerry' (Gilbert, 340). Feiritear was now isolated. He surrendered on the promise of immunity, but within days was arrested on the orders of Lieutenant-Colonel Nelson, and was later hanged at Sheep's Mount, Killarney, co. Kerry. The details of these last events are uncertain. Following Ua Duinnin, the year of his death is generally given as 1653, the year in which Ua Duinnin erroneously believed that Ross Castle was surrendered. He had no reason to suppose that Piaras was held for long in captivity. The available evidence suggests that he was promptly enough executed, in 1652. 
In oral tradition Feiritear became a folk hero who protected his people against iniquitous rent, cunningly eluded his pursuers, and had a gift for extempore verse. He had indeed been a poet, though scarcely more than ten poems can now with certainty be ascribed to him. They survive mainly in late manuscripts (principally in the collections of the Royal Irish Academy, St Patrick's College, Maynooth, and the National Library of Ireland), and there are some unresolved textual difficulties. His 'tuireamh', or formal elegy, on Sir Muiris Mac Gearailt is most widely represented in manuscript, being admired by scribes for its rhetorical vigour, but modern taste prefers his personal poetry, his love-poem for Meg Russell, for instance, or his expression of deep affection for Risteard Husae. His eminence as a poet, and as a generous patron of literature and music, is acclaimed in contemporary records, and undoubtedly much has been lost. Yet, although the quantity of his extant poetry is slight, its quality has secured an honoured place for Piaras Feiritear in the Irish literary canon. 


@@@@@


doc= 69626


Hepburn, Margaret (bap. 1726, d. in or after 1758), shopkeeper, was baptized on 4 September 1726 at St Giles, Edinburgh, the second daughter of the four children of John Hepburn (died 1771), minister of Old Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh, and of Margaret Fenton, daughter of Thomas Fenton, merchant and bailie of Edinburgh. In company with her business partner, Lilias Christie, Margaret sold and hired funeral provisions of all kinds before this kind of supply became part of the undertaker's business. The term of undertaker did not come into use in Scotland until the second half of the eighteenth century. What is particularly interesting about Margaret Hepburn is that, although her father came from a professional background, through her mother she was part of a well-established family network of Edinburgh burgesses, all of whom were operating in similar businesses. Her mother's two sisters, Emelia and Isobel, married merchants; Isobel's husband, Paul Husband, was a well-known wholesale supplier of funeral provisions to other shopkeepers and their daughter Emelia married Thomas Elder, a well-known wine merchant, who could also supply wine for funerals. The wives in this family network were involved in the businesses, personally receipting customers' bills. The fact that Margaret Hepburn's grandmother was Emelia Christie suggests that Margaret and her business partner were related, probably as cousins. The two women not only supplied plum cake and biscuit but also had to provide mourning draperies for the house and the church, and to contact a 'master household', who made all the practical arrangements on the day of the funeral. Margaret's bills show that items such as sugar-tongs, glasses, and sconces for the candles were hired and that the customer had to pay for any glasses that were broken. 
The fact that Margaret's father was a minister probably helped the two women to gain contacts. These personal contacts were vital in the business world of eighteenth-century Scotland, where word of mouth was more important in building up a clientele than reliance on advertising. Margaret Hepburn, with Lilias Christie, supplied clients both in the burgh community and in the country, including landed families. Surviving bills show that she was in business from 1749 to 1758 but she may well have been in business before and after these dates. The 1749 bill was due by the countess of Roxburghe, who would have been unlikely to employ someone who had only recently set up in business. By 1758 Margaret (who never married) appears to have been trading on her own, her business partner having died. Margaret Hepburn did not leave a will and the date of her death is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 69627


Learmonth, Christian (bap. 1718, d. 1762), milliner and shopkeeper, was baptized at Bo'ness, Linlithgowshire, on 21 October 1718, the daughter of John Learmonth, schoolmaster and postmaster at Bo'ness, and of his first wife, Christian Livingston (died in or before 1726), third daughter of Alexander Livingston of Parkhall, near Falkirk, Stirlingshire. She had a sister and four brothers, and three stepsisters from her father's second marriage, with Ann Crawford. 
Christian lived in a house in Carrubber's Close, Edinburgh, on the north side of the High Street, which she bought in 1754. Her shop was in Lyon Close, further up the High Street, also on the north side. She was already in business by 1745, when another milliner, May McCrabie, first came to know her, and she was still actively engaged in business at the time of her death. As she had had no funding from her father she probably had difficulties in keeping the business afloat but she was given $200 to help her to carry on her business by her lodger, Lady Charlotte Gordon, one of the twelve children of the second duke of Gordon. In her will, dated 20 May 1756, Christian left all her movable goods to Lady Charlotte but this was contested, after Christian's death, by her two stepsisters, Ann and Jean, who were also milliners, and a dispute ensued. In the following court case one of the witnesses, Mary (or May) McCrabie, a milliner, stated that she had heard Christian say that any of her money that was free, and thus not required to pay off debts, would be left to Lady Charlotte. Christian requested that her linen and clothes should be given to one of her stepsisters. During the court case evidence of Christian's personal and business circumstances was given by Mary McCrabie and another milliner, Ann (or Annie) Wardrope. Ann, the daughter of William Wardrope, a surgeon in Edinburgh, had been apprenticed to Christian Learmonth when she was eleven years old, Christian having found one of her own stepsisters unsatisfactory as an apprentice. Ann was later allowed to put $30 into the business and to become a partner 'in Company', and she kept the proceeds of work done for her own customers. Lady Charlotte Gordon allowed Ann to carry on business after Christian's death. 
Christian Learmonth died on 12 August 1762 in Carrubber's Close, Edinburgh, in her forty-fourth year. Lady Charlotte Gordon was made her executor. Christian had requested that her cousin Alexander Learmonth should make all the necessary arrangements for her funeral. Her shop goods were rouped (auctioned) and there is therefore a detailed inventory of these in the court papers, the details of which are of interest from the point of view of both eighteenth-century shopkeeping and the fashions of the period. Like other eighteenth-century Scottish milliners Christian and her partner made up bespoke accessories, such as caps and handkerchiefs, in the shop; details of the fabrics used are usually given in bills. The inventory of the shop can be compared with that of the milliner in the English context, such as Elizabeth Brown (or Browne) in Norwich, who had a similar business, for which a similar inventory and valuation survives. Christian's customers came from the families of town merchants and craftsmen as well as those of the landed gentry. Her total inventory, with the debts due to her, was valued at $5472 12's'. 5died sterling. 


@@@@@


doc= 69629


Giuseppe Giordani (fl. 1745-1767), librettist, and his wife, Antonia (died 1764), a singer, who formed a travelling opera company in Naples in the 1740s. The company included Tommaso, his brother Francesco, a dancer, and his sisters Nicolina and Marina, both singers. The company played in Ancona and Pesaro in 1745 before moving north to Graz in 1747, Frankfurt and Salzburg in 1750, Amsterdam in 1752, and Paris in 1753, and reached London by the end of 1753. There they performed the comic opera 'Gli amanti gelosi', with Giuseppe's libretto, on 17 December 1753 at Covent Garden Theatre. A great success, it was followed by three other comic operas during the winter season. The company performed at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket in 1755 in Giuseppe's new comic opera 'L'albergatrice', for which Francesco created the dances, and on 12 January 1754 put on 'La comediante fatta cantatrice', with music by Tommaso, at Covent Garden. Nothing more is heard of the family until 1764, when they were invited to Dublin to perform at the Smock Alley theatre. Despite the death of Antonia in Capel Street, Dublin, in October, they opened the season on 24 November 1764 with a new version of 'Gli amanti gelosi', with new dances created by Francesco and an overture and three airs composed by Tommaso (the rest of the music was by Galuppi). The cast included Nicolina and Marina. Francesco also contributed the dances for Thomas Arne's 'Artaxerxes', first performed in Dublin at Smock Alley in February 1765. The family remained in Dublin, performing at the Crow Street theatre until 1767. 


@@@@@


doc= 69632


Nicolina Giordani (fl. 1753-1774) won fame in her role as La Spiletta in 'Gli amanti gelosi', first performed at Covent Garden on 17 December 1753, and from then on she took the name Signora Spiletta. In 1764 she accompanied her family to Dublin, where she was very popular, repeating her success in 'Gli amanti gelosi' at the Smock Alley theatre. She was in London in the 1770s, singing at the King's Theatre, Haymarket, in 1774, and had a reputation as an excellent comic actress. Horace Walpole wrote that 'besides being pretty' she 'has more vivacity and variety of humour than ever existed in any creature' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 35.160). 


@@@@@


doc= 69633


Giordani, Tommaso (c.1733-1806), composer, was born probably in or near Naples, Italy, the son of 
Tommaso composed the music for several comic operas at the Smock Alley theatre between 1765 and 1767, including 'Don Fulminone' (1765), 'The Maid of the Mill' to Isaac Bickerstaff's libretto (1765), and 'Love in Disguise' (1766). 'Phyllis at Court', his first 'opera seria', had its first performance on 25 February 1767 at the Crow Street theatre. Giordani remained in Dublin until 1768, when he moved to London following charges of plagiarism, although he returned to Dublin to conduct the 1769 season at the Rotunda. 
Giordani settled in London and became closely involved with the King's Theatre, Haymarket, where he directed operas and musical entertainments and composed three new operas: the comic operas 'Il padre e il figlio rivali' (1770) and 'Il bacio' (1782), and 'Il re pastore' (1778), an 'opera seria'. He also composed songs for Richard Brinsley Sheridan's 'The Critic', first performed at Drury Lane on 29 October 1779, and wrote popular songs for the concerts at the Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens, many of which he published. He was also a prolific composer of instrumental music, especially for the keyboard; his works included a set of quintets for harpsichord and string quartet (1771), six keyboard concertos, op. 14 (1776), and his very popular overture to 'The Elopement', a pantomime performed at Drury Lane in 1767, which was published in parts about 1770. 
Tommaso Giordani returned to Dublin in the summer of 1783 for the season at the Rotunda. With the countertenor Michael Leoni he then created the English Opera House at the Little Theatre in Capel Street in December 1783, opening on 18 December with 'Gibraltar' and 'The Haunted Castle'. They intended to put on operas with librettos by Irish writers and music by Giordani, but although the season included seven new works, including his burlesque opera 'Orfeo et Euridice' and the musical entertainments 'The Enchantress' and 'The Dying Indian', the venture was a financial disaster, and they were declared bankrupt in July 1784. 
In 1784 Giordani married one of the daughters of Tate Wilkinson (1739-1803), the actor and theatre manager, and he remained in Dublin as composer at Smock Alley for the 1784-5 season and as music director at the Crow Street theatre in 1788. He continued to write for the stage, his compositions including music for the pantomime 'The Island of Saints', put on at Smock Alley in 1785. His last opera, 'The Cottage Festival', was performed at Crow Street in 1796. Giordani was also a teacher, and his pupils included John Field (1782-1837) and Thomas Cooke (1782-1848). Field's debut as a pianist was in one of the 'spiritual concerts' organized by Giordani at the Rotunda in March 1792. Giordani was president of the Irish Music Fund from 1794. 
Tommaso Giordani died in February 1806 at his home, 201 Great Britain Street, Dublin. The exact date of his death is unknown, but it is recorded that on 24 February the Irish Music Fund made a payment of 5 guineas for his funeral. 
Giordani's sister 


@@@@@


doc= 69634


George Augustus Kollmann (1789-1845), who succeeded his father as organist of the Royal German Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 69635


Johanna Sophia Kollmann (1786-1849) and 


@@@@@


doc= 69638


Meyer, Philip James (1737-1820), musician, was born in Strasbourg, Alsace, France, and studied for the ministry at the protestant college there, singing in the church choir and playing the organ. After he discovered an old German harp and learned to play it, he left the college about 1757 and went to Paris, where he had lessons from Christian Hochbrucker, nephew of Jacob Hochbrucker, usually regarded as the inventor of the single-action pedal harp: Christian Hochbrucker, later 'maitre de harpe' to Queen Marie-Antoinette, was the first composer to publish music for the pedal harp. The pedal harp gradually replaced the old 'hook harp', on which semitones were produced by hooks turned with the left hand during performance. The addition of pedals to turn the hooks left both hands free. Meyer's first solo performance was for the Concert Spirituel in Paris in 1761, and he performed there until 1764, often playing his own works. He later studied German music with Johann Gottfried Muthel, a composer and organist, who had had lessons from Johann Sebastian Bach shortly before Bach's death. In 1763 he published one of the earliest tutors for the harp, 'Essai sur la vraie maniere de jouer de la harpe', for beginners and amateurs, and this was followed by 'Nouvelle methode pour apprendre a jouer de la harpe' (1774). In these he gave instructions for playing both the hook harp and the pedal harp. Meyer was married in Strasbourg in 1768, and had two sons, both harpists. 
Meyer first visited London in 1772, and is thought to have been the first person to play the pedal harp in England. For the next few years he divided his time between London, Strasbourg, and Paris, which had become the centre of the harp industry, especially after the arrival of Marie-Antoinette, already an accomplished player, in 1770. He turned his hand to opera with 'Damete et Zulmis' (1780) and, probably, 'Apollon et Daphne' (1782) (although this was possibly written by the Bohemian composer Anton Mayer), both failures when performed at the Paris Opera, and his 'Venus et Adonis' (1782) was withdrawn without being performed. The playwright Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais asked him to compose a score for his new edition of Voltaire's libretto of 'Samson', originally written for Jean-Philippe Rameau in 1734, but Meyer's version was rejected by the Academie Royale de Musique in 1783. 
Meyer settled permanently in London in 1784 and devoted the rest of his life to teaching the harp, which had become very fashionable (especially among young ladies), and composing. His earliest compositions, including six divertimenti for harp and violin (1767) and two sets of six sonatas for solo harp (1768 and 1770), were published in Paris. In London, his published works included sonatas for harp and strings, duets for harp and keyboard and for two harps, and a 'Collection of Hymns and Psalms' (1815) for harp and piano, dedicated to Princess Charlotte. He also arranged many songs for the harp. Meyer died in London on 17 January 1820. 

Philip James Meyer (1770-1849), musician, the elder son of Philip James Meyer, was born in Paris and moved to London with his family in 1784. Regarded as an excellent performer, with a sensitivity compared to that of Anne-Marie Krumpholz, he accompanied the leading singers of the day, including Gertrude Elizabeth Mara (1749-1833). A popular work was the arrangement for harp and piano by Thomas Greatorex (1758-1831) of the glee 'O strike the harp', first performed by Meyer and Greatorex on 27 April 1798 at the King's Theatre Room. Meyer also accompanied ballets, including 'Les follies d'Espagne' at the King's Theatre on 15 June 1789, played in concerts at Covent Garden and Drury Lane and at private parties, and played for the Covent Garden oratorios in 1791 and for the Drury Lane oratorios in 1791-2. He also composed for the harp. He was appointed harpist to Queen Charlotte. Meyer wrote an unpublished biography of his father, which he sent to John Sainsbury in 1823 when he was compiling his 'Dictionary of Musicians' (1824). He died at Pentonville, London, on 18 October 1849. 

(Frederic-)Charles Meyer (1780-1840), musician, the younger son of Philip James Meyer, was born in Strasbourg. Although he is recorded as having performed on the harp at Covent Garden and the Pantheon in 1791-2, and for the ballet 'La foire de Smyrne' at the Haymarket Theatre on 14 April 1792, and he played in the Drury Lane oratorios in 1794, he was primarily a teacher and composer. He composed sonatas for the harp, and also published 'Divertimento Delia', 'Il pensieroso', 'Introduction and Solo', and 'Fantasia and Solo', and his harp tutor, 'A New Treatise on the Art of Playing upon the Double Movement Harp', appeared about 1825. Meyer was one of the performers of 'A New Bardic Overture' for six harps at the King's Theatre on 25 April 1816. He died in 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 69639


Meyer, Philip James (1737-1820), musician, was born in Strasbourg, Alsace, France, and studied for the ministry at the protestant college there, singing in the church choir and playing the organ. After he discovered an old German harp and learned to play it, he left the college about 1757 and went to Paris, where he had lessons from Christian Hochbrucker, nephew of Jacob Hochbrucker, usually regarded as the inventor of the single-action pedal harp: Christian Hochbrucker, later 'maitre de harpe' to Queen Marie-Antoinette, was the first composer to publish music for the pedal harp. The pedal harp gradually replaced the old 'hook harp', on which semitones were produced by hooks turned with the left hand during performance. The addition of pedals to turn the hooks left both hands free. Meyer's first solo performance was for the Concert Spirituel in Paris in 1761, and he performed there until 1764, often playing his own works. He later studied German music with Johann Gottfried Muthel, a composer and organist, who had had lessons from Johann Sebastian Bach shortly before Bach's death. In 1763 he published one of the earliest tutors for the harp, 'Essai sur la vraie maniere de jouer de la harpe', for beginners and amateurs, and this was followed by 'Nouvelle methode pour apprendre a jouer de la harpe' (1774). In these he gave instructions for playing both the hook harp and the pedal harp. Meyer was married in Strasbourg in 1768, and had two sons, both harpists. 
Meyer first visited London in 1772, and is thought to have been the first person to play the pedal harp in England. For the next few years he divided his time between London, Strasbourg, and Paris, which had become the centre of the harp industry, especially after the arrival of Marie-Antoinette, already an accomplished player, in 1770. He turned his hand to opera with 'Damete et Zulmis' (1780) and, probably, 'Apollon et Daphne' (1782) (although this was possibly written by the Bohemian composer Anton Mayer), both failures when performed at the Paris Opera, and his 'Venus et Adonis' (1782) was withdrawn without being performed. The playwright Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais asked him to compose a score for his new edition of Voltaire's libretto of 'Samson', originally written for Jean-Philippe Rameau in 1734, but Meyer's version was rejected by the Academie Royale de Musique in 1783. 
Meyer settled permanently in London in 1784 and devoted the rest of his life to teaching the harp, which had become very fashionable (especially among young ladies), and composing. His earliest compositions, including six divertimenti for harp and violin (1767) and two sets of six sonatas for solo harp (1768 and 1770), were published in Paris. In London, his published works included sonatas for harp and strings, duets for harp and keyboard and for two harps, and a 'Collection of Hymns and Psalms' (1815) for harp and piano, dedicated to Princess Charlotte. He also arranged many songs for the harp. Meyer died in London on 17 January 1820. 

Philip James Meyer (1770-1849), musician, the elder son of Philip James Meyer, was born in Paris and moved to London with his family in 1784. Regarded as an excellent performer, with a sensitivity compared to that of Anne-Marie Krumpholz, he accompanied the leading singers of the day, including Gertrude Elizabeth Mara (1749-1833). A popular work was the arrangement for harp and piano by Thomas Greatorex (1758-1831) of the glee 'O strike the harp', first performed by Meyer and Greatorex on 27 April 1798 at the King's Theatre Room. Meyer also accompanied ballets, including 'Les follies d'Espagne' at the King's Theatre on 15 June 1789, played in concerts at Covent Garden and Drury Lane and at private parties, and played for the Covent Garden oratorios in 1791 and for the Drury Lane oratorios in 1791-2. He also composed for the harp. He was appointed harpist to Queen Charlotte. Meyer wrote an unpublished biography of his father, which he sent to John Sainsbury in 1823 when he was compiling his 'Dictionary of Musicians' (1824). He died at Pentonville, London, on 18 October 1849. 

(Frederic-)Charles Meyer (1780-1840), musician, the younger son of Philip James Meyer, was born in Strasbourg. Although he is recorded as having performed on the harp at Covent Garden and the Pantheon in 1791-2, and for the ballet 'La foire de Smyrne' at the Haymarket Theatre on 14 April 1792, and he played in the Drury Lane oratorios in 1794, he was primarily a teacher and composer. He composed sonatas for the harp, and also published 'Divertimento Delia', 'Il pensieroso', 'Introduction and Solo', and 'Fantasia and Solo', and his harp tutor, 'A New Treatise on the Art of Playing upon the Double Movement Harp', appeared about 1825. Meyer was one of the performers of 'A New Bardic Overture' for six harps at the King's Theatre on 25 April 1816. He died in 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 69640


Isaac Pring (1777-1799), organist and singer, who was born in Kensington Gravel Pits, London, to the north-east of Kensington Gardens, to which the family had moved in the early 1770s. At St Paul's (1784-93) he was notable for his remarkably fine treble voice. Isaac may be identified with the 'Master Pring' who deputized successfully for Mrs Clendining at Covent Garden in 1793 ('Public Advertiser', 21 March) singing Galatea's 'As when the dove' from Handel's 'Acis'. Besides participating in other London concerts he performed at Oxford in 1793. He moved there in 1794, becoming assistant to Philip Hayes, organist at New College. On Hayes's death in 1797 Pring succeeded him at New College, matriculating there on 1 March 1799. He appears to have taken his BMus later that year (Abdy Williams, 97), but it is not listed in the university records, nor is his exercise preserved in the Bodleian Library. He composed anthems and chants, two of the latter being printed in the collection of Bennett and Marshall (1829). At Oxford he became a friend of William Crotch, successor to Hayes as professor of music. He died from consumption and was buried in the cloister at New College, Oxford, on 23 September 1799. 


@@@@@


doc= 69641


Pring, Jacob Cubitt (bap. 1770, d. 1799), composer and organist, was baptized at St Mary's, Lewisham, on 3 November 1770, the eldest son of Martha Cubitt (died in or after 1796) and Jacob Pring (died in or before 1795). He and two of his brothers all trained as choristers at St Paul's Cathedral, have been credited with taking music degrees at Oxford, and pursued musical careers. The 'Master Pring' who sang in concerts at Drury Lane in 1786 was almost certainly Jacob. Appointed organist jointly with Elizabeth Goadby at St Botolph, Aldersgate, in January 1786, he became sole organist in 1790. On 16 December of the latter year he married Mary Shuckburgh, a widow. 
Pring is listed as 'Composer, organ, tenor clarion' (Doane, 52), and his participation in oratorios at Drury Lane, in Handel concerts at Westminster Abbey, and in performances at the Academy of Ancient Music is noted. He was a founder member of the music club Concentores Sodales (1798-1847), devoted to the encouragement and performance of English music. His most substantial publication, 'Eight Anthems as Performed at St Paul's Cathedral' (1791), presents well-crafted, contrapuntally motivated works in an idiom reminiscent of the early Georgian era. Pring also produced glees, 'at once graceful, pleasing and brilliant' (Baptie, 81), vocal canons, solo songs, and some polished keyboard music for amateurs requiring limited technical facility in a backward-looking early classical style. Pring was elected in 1793 to the Royal Society of Musicians, in whose annual benefit concerts he played as a violinist, and later became a governor. On 27 June 1797 he matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, and he took his BMus the next day with his anthem 'Let God arise'. He died at his home in Low Layton, Essex, before 10 July 1799, the date on which his employers at St Botolph, Aldersgate, learned of his death; he was survived by his wife. 
Jacob Cubitt Pring was soon followed to the grave by his youngest brother 


The three Pring brothers were once described as 'amiable', but Joseph proved also to be astute and resolute. In 1811 he became aware of a scheme devised by the chapter at Bangor to divert for other purposes funds (the tithes of Llandinam) that had by an act of parliament of 1685 hitherto been used partly for the benefit of the cathedral choir and organist. A protracted dispute arose which was eventually resolved by the lord chancellor with a compromise ruling that delivered at least a partial victory for Pring and his choristers. Pring published a full account of the affair in 'Papers, documents, law proceedings... respecting the maintenance of the choir of the cathedral church of Bangor' (1819). He died on 13 February 1842 at Bangor, and was buried at Bangor Cathedral. He was succeeded in his post at Bangor by one of his sons, James S. Pring. Another son, Joseph Charles Pring (1799/1800-1876), maintained the family's Oxford connections, becoming chaplain of New College and vicar of Headington. 


@@@@@


doc= 69642


Joseph Pring (1773-1842), organist and composer, was baptized on 27 December 1775 at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, aged two and a half years. After his training at St Paul's he sang as a tenor in the same range of London concerts as his brother Jacob. Though appointed organist at Bangor Cathedral in April 1793, he was not formally elected until 1810. He matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 21 January 1808, and accumulated the degrees of BMus and DMus at Oxford on 27 January. Pring's major publication, 'Twenty Anthems...' (1805), attracted a large number of subscribers. Critical opinion, however, has been divided: one commentator claims, 'There is much excellent music in these compositions, the boldness of many of the subjects being strongly reminiscent of Boyce' (Bumpus, 438), while another finds the music 'agreeably mellifluous but not very memorable' (Watkins Shaw, 'Church music', 719). 


@@@@@


doc= 69643


Rawlings, Thomas (c.1703-1767), musician and music copyist, was born 'about the year 1703' according to information supplied by his grandson to John Sainsbury for his 'Dictionary of Musicians' of 1824. It has been suggested that he may have been the son of the instrument maker and seller Mickepher Rawlings (or Rawlins), although no son named Thomas has been traced. He may, instead, have been the Thomas Rawlins, son of John and Martha Rawlins, who was baptized on 17 October 1703 at St Andrew's, Holborn, London. 
According to his grandson, Rawlings was a 'scholar of the celebrated Dr [John Christopher] Pepusch', to whom he referred on at least one occasion as 'my Mastr' (Hunt. L., Stowe MS 87, p. 91), and it is likely that he was formally apprenticed to that renowned composer, antiquary, and teacher of music. Rawlings was employed by James Brydges, first duke of Chandos, from Michaelmas 1719 to some time in 1721 as a second violinist in an ensemble directed by Pepusch; his quarterly salary was $7 10's'. He continued to work with his teacher in the 1720s at John Rich's theatre in Lincoln's Inn Fields, where Pepusch was music director. Rawlings was a member of the band there by 5 November 1724 and appeared on the theatre's free list in succeeding years, on 19 November 1728 with both his sister and his wife, Elizabeth. No details are known of his wife's background, nor of the date or place of their marriage. In August 1737 he wrote that 'All my little family has been ill' (Rawlings to J. Harris, 13 Aug 1737, Hants. RO, 9M73/G557/1), implying that he had at least two children. These presumably included William, born to Thomas and Elizabeth Rawlins and baptized on 26 August 1732 at St Edmund King and Martyr in Lombard Street, and Ann, who as a married woman was left a bequest of $20 by her godmother, her father's patroness Anne Temple ('nee' Halsey), Lady Cobham. The birth of another son named William to Thomas and Elizabeth Rawlins, baptized on 24 November 1738 at St Michael Cornhill, may indicate that the elder William had died. Birth records have not been traced for Thomas Rawlings's son Robert ['see below'], who became a professional musician. 
In the 1720s Thomas Rawlings apparently formed a connection with the composer George Frideric Handel, whom he may previously have encountered at Cannons; according to his grandson, he 'performed at almost all Handel's oratorios, operas, &c.' (Rawlings, 2.339). Records of these ensembles are almost completely lacking, but he was listed as a violist in the orchestra for the Foundling Hospital performance of 'Messiah' in May 1754. By 1737 he had become music master to Handel's staunch supporter Lady Cobham, the wife of the distinguished general and politician Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham, and he was in August that year resident at the Cobham seat of Stowe, Buckinghamshire. In her will, dated 28 October 1759, Lady Cobham left 'to Mr Rawlins my old harpsicord that is at Stoke ['sic'] and all my Musick Books' (Hunt. L., Stowe Temple MS 16 (12)). Rawlings was also connected with another of Handel's patrons, William Freeman of Hamels, Hertfordshire, who died in 1750 leaving to 'Mr. Thomas Rawlins Musician all my musick' (Matthews, 'The organ'). 
Rawlings augmented his income as a performer and teacher by working as a music copyist. From correspondence with James Harris of Salisbury and his circle, it is clear that Rawlings was prepared to provide copies of Handel's music at a rate lower than that charged by the composer's principal copyist, John Christopher Smith the elder, and that he copied works from Lady Cobham's collection at Stowe and from material provided by Handel's librettist Charles Jennens. 
Rawlings moved to Rich's new theatre in Covent Garden in 1732, and on the one surviving list of theatre musicians dated 22 September 1760 his daily salary was noted as 3's'. 4died He received regular benefit nights at Covent Garden from 1738 to 1766. Rawlings was admitted to the king's musick on 17 January 1736, although he may have been serving as a deputy for some time before that, since payments to him can be traced from the previous year; his annual salary was $40. The mistaken assertion that Rawlings entered the Chapel Royal as a singer in 1737 may derive from the confusion of him with the singer and violinist Peter Randall. On 28 August 1739 Rawlings was one of the original subscribers, together with Handel and Pepusch, to the Fund for Decayed Musicians, later called the Royal Society of Musicians. 
According to William H. Husk in the first edition of 'Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians', Rawlings was appointed organist at Chelsea Hospital on 14 March 1753. In 1763 'Mortimer's Directory' listed him as a member of the king's band living in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury. He was replaced in that ensemble on 10 April 1767, and his son William was granted administration of his estate on 6 June 1767. At the time of his death, which occurred in London, Thomas Rawlings was a widower still living in the parish of St George, Bloomsbury. 
Thomas Rawlings's son 
By 1783 Robert Rawlings was playing in the orchestra at the King's Theatre in the Haymarket, and in 1784 he was presumably the 'Mr Rawlins' who played second violin in the orchestra for the Handel commemoration. He may also have been the Rawlings listed among the second violins at the King's Theatre and the Pantheon in 1791, and he certainly played for the oratorio season at Covent Garden Theatre in March of that year. In May 1792 he played the violin in the annual benefit concerts at St Paul's Cathedral for the Royal Society of Musicians. 
Doane's 'Directory' of 1794 listed Robert Rawlings as residing at 15 Paddington Street in the parish of Marylebone and as participating in the king's musick and the Professional Concerts. He continued to play at the benefit concerts for the Royal Society of Musicians at least until 1806. He was replaced in the king's musick on 3 October 1816 and died seven days later; his wife had died before him. The administration of his estate was granted to his son Thomas Augustus Rawlings on 14 January 1817. 


In the 1790s Rawlings published a number of instrumental works, including a set of three piano sonatas and a concerto for piano, flute, and strings, as well as a 'Cantata on the Death of the Late Unfortunate Marie Antoinette, Queen of France'. After 1800 he published mostly songs and smaller piano pieces. A detailed list of his works is given by Sainsbury. 
On 11 August 1821 Thomas Augustus Rawlings married Mary Hughes (1787/8-1848) at St Martin-in-the-Fields, and in 1839 he testified to the Royal Society of Musicians that he then had no children under the age of fourteen. He was one of the 100 significant British musicians who responded to Sainsbury's requests for their biographies in 1823, providing valuable information about his father and grandfather. Francois-Joseph Fetis, another music historian, reported meeting him in London in 1829. His career must have declined subsequently, as in 1838 he began receiving assistance from the Royal Society of Musicians. By the terms of his will, dated 24 November 1840, he left a house at 4 Exeter Row, Fulham, to his wife. He was then living at 20 Paul Street, Portman Market. His wife died at 31 Exeter Street, Lisson Grove, on 22 January 1848 aged sixty; the Royal Society of Musicians provided $8 19's'. for her funeral. Rawlings died of dropsy at the same address on 19 January 1849. His will was proved on 30 January 1849, and administration was granted to his executor Susanna Roberts, the widow of William Roberts. 
A James Henry Rawlins, who may have been a relation, was recommended for membership in the Royal Society of Musicians on 2 December 1781, his reference asserting that he had served a musical apprenticeship, played the violin, viola, and clarinet, was married, and was then twenty-four years of age. Presumably he was the James Henry Rawlins who had married Mary Mann at St George's, Hanover Square, on 10 December 1776. He was accepted into the society on 3 February 1782. Doane's 'Musical Directory' of 1794 lists him as a cellist living at 15 Paddington Street, which was also the address of Robert Rawlings, and credits him with membership in the queen's band and the orchestra for the Handel commemorations in Westminster Abbey (although he is not named as a cellist in Burney's list of participants in 1784). He took part in the benefit concerts for the Royal Society of Musicians in May 1794. 
On 7 December 1794 James Henry Rawlins petitioned the Royal Society of Musicians for assistance, stating that he was then the father of one son and five daughters. He continued to receive aid until his death in 1807, and on 6 September 1807 the society gave $8 for his funeral. His widow was given a monthly pension of $2 12's'. 6died until her death, and on 3 July 1819 the society granted $8 for her funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 69644


Robert Rawlings (1742-1816) followed in his father's footsteps. According to information supplied to Sainsbury by Robert's own son, he was born in London in 1742 and studied music with his father and with the 'old Italian' and 'very celebrated theorist' (Rawlings, 2.339) Barsanti (presumably the composer Francesco Barsanti). He may also have had an early appointment as organist of Chelsea College. At the age of seventeen he was appointed musical page to Prince Edward Augustus, duke of York, with whom he travelled on the continent until the latter's death in 1767. He returned to London, having already become a member of the Royal Society of Musicians on 1 May 1763. According to his son, he was personally appointed by George III as a violinist in the king's musick; the appointment took place on 5 January 1773. He was also, according to his son, appointed to Queen Charlotte's private band. About this time he married his wife, Jane, about whom no details are known beyond her name, revealed by the parish register at the baptism of their son Thomas Augustus Rawlings ['see below']. 


@@@@@


doc= 69645


Thomas Augustus Rawlings (1774-1849) was born on 18 November 1774 and baptized on 8 December 1774 at St George's, Bloomsbury, the son of Robert Rawlings and his wife, Jane. According to the information he supplied to John Sainsbury, he studied music with his father and for seven years, beginning at the age of thirteen, with the Austrian theorist Joseph Diettenhofer, who settled in London in 1780. As a young man he had some of his works performed at the Professional Concerts and met Franz Joseph Haydn on one of the aged composer's visits to London. By his own account, Thomas Augustus performed as a violinist and cellist for all the London concert organizations, including the opera and the Concerts of Ancient Music. He may also have been the Thomas 'Rawley' who was listed as a member of the king's musick in 1793. On 2 November 1800 his father recommended him for membership in the Royal Society of Musicians, attesting that he 'Plays on the Violin, Tenor & Violoncello & pianoforte' (Matthews, 'Royal Society', 120). He performed at the annual benefit concerts for the Royal Society of Musicians in St Paul's Cathedral in 1811 and 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 69647


Smart, George (1750/51?-1818?), musical instrument maker and music publisher, was possibly born in London. He attained proficiency on the violin, double bass, and clarinet. Evidently a gifted musician, he was possibly the Smart who appears on the records of Covent Garden as early as 22 September 1760 as a band member earning 3's'. 4died daily, although confusion regarding specific details has arisen and persisted owing to the number of musicians simply named Smart who appear in records from the second half of the eighteenth century. The subject of this article was employed from the early 1770s at James Bremner's music shop in New Bond Street before assisting William Napier, a viola player whose music shop was at 474 Strand. He set up his own business as a musical instrument maker and music seller and publisher at the corner of Conduit Street, near Savile Row, in 1773 or 1774. In December 1774 he relocated to the corner of Argyll Street, at 331 Oxford Street, where he remained 'until sometime during the early nineteenth century' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Smart published and edited collections of popular music, mainly songs and dances, and he is the only known maker of the 'sticcado-pastorale', a 'percussion idiophone made of glass' or 'crystallophone' (King): there is an example signed by Smart and dated about 1775. 
Meanwhile Smart continued to perform, appearing at Drury Lane as a clarinettist and violinist and on the double bass at the Handel memorial concerts in June 1784. Having been rejected by the Royal Society of Musicians in 1785, possibly because he practised a second profession or because 'he had reported four children when his wife was pregnant with a fifth' (Ehrlich, 29), Smart founded, along with Edward Miller, a rival friendly society which accepted provincial members. The New Musical Fund was set up on 16 April 1786. He served as a member of its court of assistants and as treasurer from 1794 to 1815. There were also performances in Johann Peter Salomon's concert series, the band of the King's Theatre, and the Concerts of Ancient Music. 
According to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', Smart also entered the brewery business with his son Henry, but without great success. His children with his wife Ann Embrey (died 1818) included at least three prominent musicians: George Thomas Smart (1776-1867), Henry Smart (1778-1823) ['see under 'Smart, Sir George Thomas], and 


@@@@@


doc= 69648


Charles Frederick Smart (b. c.1780). At least two of them appeared with their father, as 'Smart and Sons', in the band that played for Handel's 'Messiah' under Samuel Arnold and Francois Hippolyte Barthelemon at the Haymarket on 15 January 1798. Charles Frederick was a singer and a well-known double bass player in London orchestras and was living in his father's house at 331 Oxford Street in 1794. Some doubt surrounds the date and place of George Smart's death. Nicholas Temperley has suggested that Smart died about 1805, but another authority cites F. Cansick's 'A Collection of Curious and Interesting Epitaphs' (1869-72), which quoted Smart's memorial inscription at St James's Chapel, Hampstead Row, London, stating that he died, aged sixty-seven, in Edinburgh on 4 September 1818 (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Smart's wife died on 19 October 1818 and was buried beside him at St James's Chapel. The subscribers to the New Musical Fund paid for his memorial tablet there. 


@@@@@


doc= 69649


Valentine family (per. c.1685-1845), musicians, were central to musical life in Leicester for over a century, and many enjoyed wider careers. As many members of the family had the same forename, it can be difficult to distinguish biographical evidence conclusively. Thomas Follintine, 'a stranger' (Hartopp, 1884), perhaps from Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, where Thomas, son of Thomas Follentine, was baptized on 28 April 1667, probably moved to Leicester about 1670 and was granted freeman status as a town wait on 2 April 1684. His eldest sons, Thomas ('bap'. 1667?, died 1721) and Henry ('bap'. 1670?), were appointed waits in 1685. Henry was organist at St Martin's, Leicester, in 1701, and in 1703 was the first to become a freeman as a musician. He built the organ at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, in 1710, and later became a maltster. The younger Thomas's six surviving sons were all musicians, including David ('bap'. 1698), organist at Ludlow about 1730, and Mark ('bap'. 1701), appointed organist at St Martin's, Leicester, in 1745 at a salary of $10 10's'. per annum but sacked, following complaints, in 1748. 
The most adventurous of the younger Thomas's brothers seems to have been 


@@@@@


doc= 69650


Robert Valentine (bap. 1674), composer, baptized at St Martin's, Leicester, on 16 January 1674, the son of Thomas Follintine and his wife, Sarah (died 1684?). Further information about his life is mostly circumstantial. His education is unrecorded, and he did not become a town wait. By 1708 he was established in Rome, where his 'Sonate di flauto' op. 2 was published with a dedication to Sir Thomas Samwell, later MP for Coventry, who was in Italy on his grand tour. Between April 1708 and March 1710 he was employed as an oboist at the Ruspoli palace in Rome, and he may have moved to Naples in 1710, as his 'Twelve Sonatas' op. 3 (1710) is dedicated to John Fleetwood, the British consul there, and one of his concertos appears in a Naples manuscript of 1725. His 'Twelve Solos' op. 12 (1730) was dedicated to the duke dell' Oratino, a Neapolitan nobleman. He is supposed to have returned to England in 1731, when his complete works were published by John Walsh, but there are no mentions of concert appearances in the London newspapers, and details of his death are unknown. He composed many tuneful sonatas and concertos, mostly for the recorder or flute, which remained popular among amateur musicians. Manuscripts of his compositions can be found at the Naples conservatory, at Uppsala University and Rostock University, and in the Biblioteca Comunale, Assisi, the Herzog-August-Bibliothek, Wolfenbuttel, and the British Library. 



@@@@@


doc= 69651


John Valentine (bap. 1730, d. 1791), composer, was the grandson of the younger Thomas Valentine ('bap'. 1667?, died 1721) and thus Robert Valentine's great-nephew. He was baptized at St Margaret's, Leicester, on 7 June 1730, the son of John Valentine ('bap'. 1699, died in or before 1754) and his wife, Sarah (1693?-1763?). No record of his education exists, but he was probably apprenticed to his father, or an uncle, and he was made a freeman of Leicester on 16 April 1754. He married Tabitha Simpson ('b'. 1728) on 1 May 1755 at Aylestone, Leicestershire, and by 1759 he owned a music shop in New Bond Street, Leicester, which he later transferred to the Market Place by 1768, and then to Belgrave Gate by 1774. According to Kroeger he performed at concerts throughout the midlands from Matlock Bath to Market Harborough, primarily as a violinist, but he taught everything from the harpsichord to the french horn: in 1769 he advertised his fees -- 10's'. 6died entrance, and 15's'. a quarter -- in the 'Leicester and Nottingham Journal', together with a comprehensive selection of instruments and music for sale. He composed mostly music for amateurs, including three sets of marches and 'Eight easy symphonies... designed for & dedicated to, all junior performers and musical societies', op. 6. On 27 February 1762 his only theatrical piece, 'The Epithalamium in the Tragedy of Isabella, or, The Fatal Marriage', was performed in Leicester by Durravan's Company of Comedians, and on 5 May 1763, a day of thanksgiving following the treaty of Paris, his 'Ode to Peace' 'was performed in a grand chorus of voices and instruments' (Thompson, 113). His other compositions include 'Thirty Psalm Tunes' and a sycophantic 'Ode on the Birthday of the Marquis of Granby'. Some of his manuscript compositions are in the British Library. He died in Leicester on 10 September 1791 and was buried at St Margaret's, Leicester, on 12 September 1791. 
Three of his children became musicians, the most prominent being 


@@@@@


doc= 69654


Vincent, Richard (1697x1701?-1783), musician, was born probably in London and may have been the Richard Vincent baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 27 June 1697, the son of Richard and Elizabeth Vincent, although this conflicts with his age at death stated by the 'Gentleman's Magazine', which would suggest a birth date of 1700 or 1701. He was the first of a family of musicians active in London, mainly in the Covent Garden area, during the eighteenth century. Some confusion has arisen and persisted owing to the number of musicians referred to simply as Mr Vincent in contemporary records. By February 1720 he was a member of the opera band at the Academy of Music, playing the bassoon for an annual salary of $40. He had joined the king's musick by 1 April 1724. On 12 December 1737, at the church of St Benet Paul's Wharf, he married Elizabeth Bincks 
(sometimes Binks; 'c'.1708-1792?)
, a young actress who had made her debut at Lincoln's Inn Fields in 1729 and acted at the Covent Garden Theatre in the 1730s (she was probably the daughter of the Mrs Bincks who was a dresser at Covent Garden from 1735 to 1740). Billed as Mrs Vincent from January 1738, Elizabeth continued with her acting career in Dublin and at Covent Garden into the 1770s, by which time she was considered past her best. Her address for benefit tickets between 1750 and 1752 was the Cock and Turk's Head in Bedford Street. At least three of the couple's children joined the acting or musical professions. Richard Vincent was an original subscriber to the declaration of trust that established the Royal Society of Musicians in August 1739. His brother Thomas and his brother's sons Thomas and James ['see below'] were also subscribers at this time. Richard also performed on the harpsichord in a number of concerts and composed songs, and at some point he joined the Covent Garden orchestra as an oboist. He may have been the Mr Vincent paid 5's'. per night in 1767-8. Burney refers to him as being 'for more than thirty years the principal hautbois at Covent-garden' (Burney, 'Hist. mus.', 2.1011), and he was living in the Little Piazza, Covent Garden, in 1769. At the time of his death on 10 August 1783 at Tottenham Court Road, London, he was described as 'the oldest Musician belonging to Covent-garden playhouse and to Vauxhall-gardens, who enjoyed, till the last year of his life, a remarkable flow of spirits' ('GM'). This obituary notice makes no mention of a widow, although it is thought that his wife survived him. 
One of Vincent's sons, 
Another son (possibly the youngest) of Richard Vincent senior, 
The brother of Richard Vincent senior, 
The younger Thomas Vincent's brother 


@@@@@


doc= 69655


Richard Vincent (d. 1766), musician, lived in the Covent Garden area. Known primarily as a violinist and drummer, he became a member of the Royal Society of Musicians on 5 January 1752 and was leading the band at Vauxhall Gardens at the time of his marriage in 1755. On 25 August at St Paul's, Covent Garden, he married the singer and actress Isabella Burchell ['see 'Vincent, Isabella]. They had at least three daughters, according to the registers of St Paul's: Elizabeth (who possibly became the actress Mrs Ferguson), Sophia, and Penelope Louisa, the latter two dying in childhood. Vincent was living in King Street, Covent Garden, in 1763. He died in London on 28 August 1766 and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 31 August. His will, which places him in the parish of St Marylebone, was made on 25 August 1766 and left all of his estate, unspecified, to his widow, Isabella. 


@@@@@


doc= 69656


Charles Vincent (fl. 1777-1795), acted at the Drury Lane Theatre in 1777 and joined Tate Wilkinson's company at Wakefield in September of that year. However, by 1795 he was curate of St John's in Leeds and a schoolmaster. A Miss Vincent ('fl'. 1762-1771), probably a daughter of Richard and Elizabeth Vincent, made her debut at Covent Garden at the latter's benefit on 16 April 1762 and performed there during 1767-8. There was also Sarah, who is described as the illegitimate daughter of 'Richard Vincent, Sr' and whose baptism (30 April 1758) is recorded in the registers of St Paul's. A Richard Vincent, with a wife named Isabella and five children baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, in the 1740s, and whose will was proved on 2 August 1783, may have been related. 


@@@@@


doc= 69657


Wainwright family (per. c.1750-1825), musicians, were active in north-west England in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. It is difficult to identify individuals precisely as biographical evidence is often anecdotal, and contemporary accounts may only refer to 'Mr' or 'Miss' Wainwright. 



@@@@@


doc= 69658


Robert Wainwright (bap. 1748, d. 1782) was baptized at Manchester collegiate church on 17 September 1748, the first child of John Wainwright (died 1767/1768). He was elected chorister at Manchester collegiate church on 25 June 1759. After his father's death he was appointed organist, instructor of the choristers, and 'singing man' at Manchester collegiate church on 18 February 1768. He matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, on 18 April 1774, and received the degrees of BMus and DMus from the university on 29 April 1774. He married Mary Woodworth ('bap'. 1754, died 1778) at Manchester collegiate church on 12 January 1775, and on 1 March of the same year he was elected organist at St Peter's, Liverpool. According to Edward Miller, he applied for the post of organist at Halifax parish church in 1776, but the builder of the new organ, John Snetzler, thought he played too fast: 'Te tevil, te tevil, he run over te keys like von cat; he vill not give my piphes room to shpeak' (W. Shaw, 187). William Herschel, later the well-known astronomer, was appointed instead. Like his father, John, Robert Wainwright conducted performances of Handel's oratorios throughout north-west England. He is said to have sold the copyright of his own oratorio 'The Fall of Egypt' (now lost) for $1000, and his setting of Dryden's 'Ode on St Cecilia's Day' was performed at a Liverpool music festival. Some collections of his chamber music are still extant, but they are rarely performed today. He died in Liverpool on 15 July 1782. 



@@@@@


doc= 69659


William Wainwright (bap. 1736?, d. 1797), who is supposed to have been a son of John (died 1767/1768), although no baptismal record exists, and he could equally have been his brother, as a William, son of John and Mary Wainwright, was baptized at St Mary the Virgin, Stockport, on 9 May 1736. William Wainwright was an excellent double bass player, sang at Manchester collegiate church, and ran a music shop with William Sudlow at the sign of the Violin and Flutes in Hanging Ditch, Manchester, between about 1780 and 1795. He was buried at St Mary the Virgin, Stockport, on 5 July 1797, and the church records describe him as an organist. Richard Wainwright, baptized at St Mary's, Stockport, on 19 January 1729, was certainly a brother of John Wainwright. He was elected a singing man at Manchester collegiate church on 27 December 1753, and remained there until his death. He was buried at St Mary's, Stockport, on 2 January 1759. Some sources also mention a Samuel Wainwright, who may have been the S. Wainwright for whom a benefit concert was held at Stockport in 1757. Another benefit concert, for 'Miss Wainwright, Organist', was held in 1765 (G. Shaw, 142). She may have been the organist at St Mary's, Stockport, who according to the parish accounts of 1781 received 'her salary' of 10 guineas (churchwarden's accounts, St Mary's, Stockport, Ches. & Chester ALSS, 3435/8/4, vol. 2, p. 4). 


@@@@@


doc= 69660


Richard Wainwright (bap. 1757, d. 1825) was baptized at St Ann's, Manchester, on 8 July 1757, the third son of John Wainwright (died 1767/1768). He became a chorister at Manchester collegiate church on 6 January 1768, and probably became organist and instructor of the choristers at some time after 1775 when his brother Robert moved to Liverpool. There is no specific record of his appointment, and the collegiate records state that 'Dr Wainwright' was organist in the annual audit of 23 December 1776, but this is perhaps an error; Richard Wainwright was listed in the 1777 audit. In 1780 he composed music for a grand Christmas pantomime, 'The Lancashire Witches, or, Harlequin Everywhere', performed at the Theatre Royal, Manchester, and he later wrote a celebrated glee, 'Life's a Bumper', and 'A Collection of Hymns... for the Children of the Liverpool Blue Coat Hospital' (1812). He was also apparently a cellist at the Manchester Gentlemen's Concerts, and may have been both the Mr Wainwright who led many local performances of Handel's oratorios as first violinist, and the one who at the Liverpool and Manchester music festivals between 1784 and 1789 variously played in the orchestra, played the organ, and conducted. He reputedly eloped with Jane Marriott ('bap'. 1765, died 1794), a young lady from a boarding-school in Prestwich. They subsequently married at Manchester collegiate church on 5 November 1781, and their first child, John, was baptized on 25 March 1782 at St Peter's, Liverpool, where, on 4 September 1782, Richard again succeeded his brother Robert as organist. He resigned this post in October 1804, and moved to Preston where he became organist of the parish church, probably until 1810. He was never organist of St James's, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, contrary to some accounts. He was reinstated at St Peter's in 1812 and died at St Anne Street, Liverpool, on 20 August 1825. 
Other musical members of the family include 


@@@@@


doc= 69661


Evans, Janet (d. 1822x30?), revolutionary, was born into a comfortable London family. Her brother Alexander Galloway was a mathematical machine maker and an officer of the London Corresponding Society. Janet married his close political colleague Thomas Evans (b. 1763, d. in or before 1831), self-styled 'Citizen and Baker, but by profession an Artist' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. hist. c. 296), at some time before May 1794. The couple lived and worked as print colourers in Soho, but by 1796 had moved to 14 Plough Court, Fetter Lane. Here they hosted committee meetings of the Corresponding Society (of which Thomas was now secretary) and of an overlapping revolutionary circle. It was on Plough Court that revolutionary conspiracy in the capital hinged, until 18 April 1798 when Evans, Galloway, and others were arrested. Janet, pregnant and nursing her infant son, Thomas John, was herself detained without trial for a while. She bore stillborn twins soon after. 
Janet Evans campaigned vigorously not only for her husband's release but, with Sir Francis Burdett, against conditions and corruption in the prison's regime generally. She was at one point banned from visiting her husband for signalling messages to others imprisoned with him and for inciting a riot outside the gates. Initially she relied on subscriptions organized by Francis Place, but in October 1799 she received a sizeable legacy on the death of her father. This she used to establish Thomas as a patent brace and steel spring manufacturer, following his release in March 1801. 
Janet's family remained committed to ultra-radical politics. From 1801 the London revolutionary circle was closely associated with Thomas Spence, and Evans assumed its leadership when Spence died in 1814. Janet and her son, T. J. Evans, quickly became prominent figures within the group. In all likelihood she helped to shape her husband's opinions, for when the Spenceans split in 1819 the role of women among them was one of the issues contested. Janet was attacked as Thomas Evans's 'brandy fac'd Dulcina... 'As long as I the breeches wear, I will have all the pelf'' (Wedderburn). There is no corroborative evidence of her drinking heavily, which the contemporary term 'brandy-faced' implies, but she was clearly a strong personality: 'Mrs Evans is more furious than ever and bids open defiance', reported one informer after the Spenceans' failure to turn the Spa Fields meeting of December 1816 into a radical 'coup d'etat' (TNA: PRO, HO 42/158, 27 Jan 1817). These machinations led to the arrest of her husband and son. Janet wrote extensively to the press and government, demanding their release, while issuing Spencean propaganda from a shop she had begun to support herself. She also smuggled political material in and out of prison and was described by a spy as 'endeavouring to 'revive Spenceanism', and disseminate sedition and disafection ['sic']' (TNA: PRO, HO 42/172, 2 Dec 1817). 
However, the family's economic and political fortunes changed sharply in the wake of Thomas Evans's second detention; while Galloway was now a major London engineering employer, Evans's imprisonment caused his business to collapse. On his release the Evanses were politically marginalized. They ran a coffee shop and radical newsroom until, early in 1820, Galloway funded Evans junior's purchase of the 'Manchester Observer', and the family moved north. Evans senior began a printing business and they seemed settled, until T. J. Evans was prosecuted for libelling the army; he was gaoled and the newspaper had to be sold. In the summer of 1822 the family returned to London. Henceforward nothing is known of Janet, while Thomas disappeared from view after 1824 and had died by 1831. They may both have died by 1829-30, by which time letters between Place, Galloway, and T. J. Evans mention neither. The couple's own correspondence reveals a warm marriage of equals and confirms that Janet was more than merely supportive of revolutionary principles. For two decades she kept open house for political fellow travellers and their families. From 1798 to 1801, and again in 1817, Janet Evans helped to keep London ultra-radicalism afloat, but the full scope of her contribution to the revolutionary tradition in the capital can only be guessed. 


@@@@@


doc= 69663


Young family (per. c.1700-1799), musicians, included two London organists and two generations of professional female singers. In August 1758 Mrs Delany wrote: 'the race of Youngs are 'born' songsters and musicians' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 3.503). Anthony Young (bap. 1683, d. 1747) ['see under 'Young, William (d. 1662)] was a boy chorister at the Chapel Royal and became organist of St Clement Danes in 1707. He contributed songs to the 'Monthly Mask of Vocal Music' between 1705 and 1709 and published 'A Collection of New Songs' (1707) and 'Suits of Lessons for the Harpsicord or Spinnet' (1719). Charles Young (bap. 1686, d. 1758) ['see under 'Young, William], his brother, was a music teacher, organist of All Hallows Barking from August 1713; Charles's daughters were the singers Cecilia, Isabella, and Esther ['see below'] and his son Charles (died 1754), a senior clerk in the Treasury, was the father of a second generation of singers, Isabella, Elizabeth, and Mary ['see below']. After the younger Charles's death the education of the three girls was taken over by their aunt Cecilia and her husband, the composer Thomas Augustine Arne. The family later believed that Anthony Young, the father of the organists Anthony and Charles, was the composer of the tune of Britain's national anthem. 



@@@@@


doc= 69664


Willes, Christiana (bap. 1786, d. 1873), pioneer of round-arm bowling in cricket, was baptized at Headcorn, Kent, on 20 February 1786, the daughter of William Willes, landowner, and his wife, Sarah Snelling. In 1794 her father inherited the manor of Tonford, near Canterbury. The name Christina, by which she is known to cricketing posterity, is incorrect. 
Christina Willes's brother John Willes (1778-1852) was a Kent farmer and county cricketer. She has been credited with giving him the inspiration to develop the round-arm bowling style, in which the arm is raised to shoulder height before delivery of the ball -- the forerunner of modern, overarm bowling. Tom Walker of Hambledon Cricket Club in Hampshire had been the first to try this out, without success, about 1800. Christiana is reputed to have resorted to this technique when bowling at her brother in a barn on the family estate at Tonford because the voluminous, crinoline-supported skirts then in fashion ('c'.1807) prevented her from employing the usual, underarm bowling method. John Willes first bowled round-arm at Lord's in 1806; ten years later the MCC formally outlawed the practice, but Willes continued to use the style in county games and tried it once again at Lord's, famously, in a match between Kent and the MCC in 1822. He was no-balled for throwing -- becoming the first player to incur this penalty -- and reportedly rode out of Lord's 'in high dudgeon', vowing never to play the game again (Frindall, 14). The umpire reputedly acted under the influence of Lord Frederick Beauclerk, a formidable cricketing presence of the era and a decided opponent of the innovation. After holding trials in the previous year the MCC gave its approval to round-arm bowling in 1828; the change was formally written into a full revision of the game's rules in 1835. 
Christiana Willes had meanwhile married Lieutenant Richard Thomas Hodges RN ('b'. 1782/3) of Maidstone, at St Dunstan's, Canterbury, on 24 September 1810. Richard Hodges was probably the man of that name recorded as living in Romney Place, Maidstone, in electoral registers of 1832 and 1833; the absence of any members of the family from local burial registers thereafter suggests that they may have moved away from the area. A son, Edward Hodges, had been born at John Willes's home at Bellingham, Sutton Valence, on 11 February 1819, and followed in his uncle's footsteps by playing for Kent. Widowed by 1841, Christiana Hodges died at South View, Ealing, Middlesex, on 14 June 1873. 
It was Edward Hodges who, in 'Cricket' magazine of 28 March 1907, wrote of his mother's contribution to the development of the game: 'It was my mother's skill in 'throwing' the ball to him [John Willes] for practice in the barn at Tonford... He then trained a dog to fetch the ball, and there was a saying that Willes, his sister, and his dog could beat any eleven in England.' This version of the story -- which appears to be the earliest and omits any reference to crinoline skirts -- was repeated in Edward Hodges's obituary in 'Wisden' for the following year (he died at Southsea on 20 February 1907) and was taken up subsequently by the cricket historian Frederick Ashley-Cooper ('Highways and Byways', 1927, 50). Doubt has since been cast on the authenticity of the tale (for instance by Rowland Bowen in 'Cricket: a History', 1970, p. 180); the suggestion that John Willes took his cue from his sister could, it has been postulated, have had its origins in the playful ridicule of contemporaries. Others, including E. W. Swanton, have been happy to take it at face value. Whatever the truth, the story -- and the name of Christiana Willes -- has become a part of cricketing lore. Her name has been invoked by historians of women's cricket as that of the first of her sex to assist in the game's technical development, and was mentioned, inevitably, in coverage of the battles over the discriminatory admission policies of the MCC, which belatedly opened its doors to women members in 1999. 


@@@@@


doc= 69665


Bewick, Thomas, apprentices (act. 1777-1828), wood-engravers, were twenty-nine young men trained in the Beilby-Bewick workshop between 1777, when Thomas Bewick (1753-1828) joined Ralph Beilby (bap. 1743, d. 1817) ['see under 'Beilby family], and the time of Bewick's death in 1828. Eight of them were indentured during the twenty years of the partnership up to 1797, and twenty-one thereafter. Most of the information on the apprentices is to be found randomly in the workshop records, with some important supplementary material in Bewick's 'Memoir' and his surviving correspondence. Their wages, loans, deductions, and occasional treats are recorded in varying detail, and their initials appear with tantalizing sparseness and irregularity beside the entries for specific engravings on which they had worked. The terms of engagement were founded on the universally accepted seven years from the fourteenth birthday, though often adjusted by circumstance: some would come on trial before their fourteenth year, others whose promise was late in being recognized might be taken on as late as eighteen; two came from other masters to complete their time. Negotiations with parents or guardians were not always straightforward, because if a premium was required, it could be hard to find, and subscriptions had to be raised. The terms could vary a great deal. Those set for John Anderson in 1792 required his father to pay a 60 guinea fee and provide his board and lodging for the first three years, after which his son would be paid 5's'. a week for the remaining four years. Those who stayed on in the workshop after their apprenticeship was over would be likely to be paid on piece-work and could earn a guinea to $1 18's'. a week. 
Lawyers prepared the indentures, and the official 'binding' of the apprentice to master was often recorded as an occasion for celebration at an inn, with drink and music on the small-pipes. The apprentices came from varied walks of life: the occupations of their parents and guardians ran the gamut from a 'poor cottager', and a keelman, to a city lawyer, and an officer in a militia regiment. Their training would have been rigorous, covering all the skills of a general metal-engraving workshop, following the pattern of Bewick's own training under Beilby so vividly described in his 'Memoir' (pp. 39-41). No account has yet come to light that gives a precise idea of the daily training routines of the apprentices; but we do know from the survival of many wood blocks -- most of them bought by Julia Boyd and printed in her 'Bewick Gleanings' (1886) -- that copying Bewick's own finished engravings was a regular exercise for his pupils. 
Fourteen of them eventually specialized in wood-engraving and of these eleven came to prominence in the trade, all but two in London. Two others became distinguished engravers, of silver and of copper, and settled in their specialities on their own in the north. Eight of the group, Bewick's brother John Bewick, his son Robert Elliot Bewick ['see under 'Bewick family], Charlton Nesbit, Luke Clennell, William Harvey, John Jackson (1801-1848), Robert Johnson, and his cousin John Johnson ['see under 'Johnson, Robert], are noticed elsewhere; eight others in chronological order -- John Laws, John Anderson, Henry Hole, Mark Lambert, Edward Willis, Isaac Nicholson, Henry White, and William Temple -- are treated separately in what follows. 
















Of the remaining lesser figures, David Martin ('fl'. 1758-1781) and Abraham Hunter (1759-1808) were the earliest to join. Although Martin had been a fellow apprentice towards the end of Bewick's time, and contributed to the 'Select Fables' of 1784, he apparently had little aptitude for his work and moved to other things (letter, 11 May 1819). Hunter, who appears to have left the workshop by July 1780 after about three years, set up a rival business in Newcastle and there are indications that the later relationship with his masters was not an easy one (Bewick, letter, 30 Sept 1788). Others to follow Hunter were Johnson, another cousin of Robert Johnson and as a wood-engraver and draftsman a minor contributor to the 'History of British Birds' and the 'Poems of Goldsmith and Parnell'; Henry Barnes, indentured and in the workshop between 1791 and 1794; Charles Hickson, apprenticed in 1795, a ward of Sir John Lawson and an idle braggart who absconded in 1800; John Harrison (1785-1818), a nephew of Bewick, who after leaving the workshop in 1814 specialized as a writing engraver; George Armstrong, apprenticed for two years, 1804-6, before setting up as a partner in Armstrong and Walker, engravers in Newcastle who were later to train John Jackson; John Bewick (1790-1809), another Bewick nephew who died after four years as an apprentice wood-engraver; John Armstrong, apprenticed in 1813 and staying after his time until leaving for the London wood-engraving trade in 1825; Matthew Bewick (1801-1832), the third nephew in the workshop, who was apprenticed in 1817 and continued as a copperplate printer; Alexander Reid, son of a Leith bookseller, apprenticed in 1817-24, an irritation to his master with nothing known of his subsequent career; Thomas Young, apprenticed in 1818-25 and William Hardy, apprenticed in 1827-34, who remain obscure; and finally James Reevely, who joined the workshop in 1824, and as a competent wood-engraver became Robert Bewick's right-hand man. It should be noted that Ebeneezer Landells, who was later a prominent figure in the London trade, both as engraver and as first editor of 'Punch', had been intended for Bewick's workshop and is often incorrectly referred to as his pupil. Although payments for indenture papers and a sketchbook were recorded in 1822, it appears that, as Bewick and Landell's father could not agree terms, the boy went to Isaac Nicholson, who had by then established his own business in Newcastle. 


@@@@@


doc= 69670


Cottnam, Deborah (c.1727-1806), schoolmistress, was born probably at Canso, Nova Scotia, the only daughter of the four known children born to Edward How ('c'.1702-1750), merchant and JP, and his first wife, who died 'c'.1743. Deborah's father subsequently married Mary Magdalen Winniett on 9 July 1744 in Annapolis. Deborah spent her childhood in Canso, an isolated fishing community and garrison outpost located on the far north-eastern tip of peninsular Nova Scotia. Her father was a prominent citizen in the community, as its principal merchant, JP, and militia officer, and was also an influential interlocutor with French and Mi'kmaq interests throughout the region; his frequent travels and the family's strong Massachusetts ties -- the children may have been partly educated in the Boston area -- brought a certain rough ambience to the household. About 1742 Deborah married Ensign Samuel Cottnam (died 1780) of the 40th foot; their first child, Martha Grace, was eleven days old when Canso fell to the French in May 1744. The settlement was burnt and the garrison families were taken prisoner to the fortress at Louisbourg, Ile Royale (Cape Breton Island), from where they were soon discharged to Boston. 
Little is known about Mrs Cottnam's activities in the next three decades. Her husband, who was promoted captain, was present at the second fall of Louisbourg in 1758 and remained there until 1760, when he resigned his commission on grounds of ill health. From 1764 he worked as a merchant in Salem, Massachusetts, but in 1773 he and his family moved to Nova Scotia, where they lived probably in Windsor, with Martha Grace, who by that time had married Winckworth Tonge. Mrs Cottnam and her unmarried daughter Grissey Eliza returned to Salem where, by July 1774, they had opened a school for young ladies. The onset of war prompted them to move to Halifax, where their 'Female Academy' was once more in business by 1777. Their boarding- and day school educated the daughters of colonial officers and loyalist gentry; among its pupils were the daughters of Joseph Frederick Wallet DesBarres and of the Revd Dr Mather Byles. The curriculum centred on reading, writing, arithmetic, and French, but dancing and sewing were also taught. Under Grissey's supervision the girls were instructed in both practical and decorative needlework; their intellectual studies included topics such as 'Locke upon inate ideas' (Byles MSS, Rebecca Byles, 20 Feb 1784). It is clear that Mrs Cottnam provided her pupils with a stimulating intellectual education; Rebecca Byles, for one, was 'imploy'd in translating a very long Sermon... from French into English; & in reading 'Pamela' and Terences Plays in French; [also] in hearing Popes Homer' (ibid., 6 Jan 1779). Mrs Cottnam certainly seems to have earned both respect and admiration from her pupils. Her few surviving letters reveal a loquacious correspondent who was alive to the world around her, and her poems display a dignified verse style in the classical tradition of the time. Rebecca Byles contrasted her own experience with what she regarded as the poor education received by boys in the colonies, and concluded: 'Girls... have the best Education the place affords, and the accomplishment of their Minds is attended to as well as the adorning of their persons; in a few years I expect to see Women fill the most important Offices in Church and State. (ibid., 24 March 1784)' The Cottnam family finances were always precarious. Early property investments in Nova Scotia and Massachusetts were either sold for debt or lost to the vicissitudes of war. Following Samuel's death in 1780 Mrs Cottnam petitioned the Nova Scotia government for additional land, citing her late husband's 'avow'd [loyalist] principles & fix'd attachment to Government' (land MSS, 1785). She received 1000 acres, but in a remote location which she could neither settle on nor sell profitably. The unsupportive attitude of the Halifax establishment no doubt persuaded her to accept the invitation from some loyalist families in Saint John, New Brunswick, to open a school there in 1786. She and Grissey were happier in Saint John but their financial problems continued; Grissey regretted that her mother was 'reduced at her year to the dreadful necessity of earning a scanty subsistence... in keeping a school... with difficulty gaining a sufficiency to live with decency' (How MSS, vol. 474, 241). Their fortunes improved a little in 1793, following the death of Edward How's widow, whose annual $100 government pension was transferred to Mrs Cottnam. Mrs Cottnam had returned to Halifax by 1794 and her final years were spent quietly within the family circle at Windsor, where she died on 31 December 1806 and was buried in the Old Parish Burying-Ground. Her obituary in the 'New Brunswick Royal Gazette' (21 January 1807) noted that she had 'taught girls for forty years'; although the exact date of when she started teaching remains uncertain, it is clear that her career exemplified the best of the dame-school tradition in colonial America. 


@@@@@


doc= 69671


Cartwright, Dame Mary Lucy (1900-1998), mathematician, was born on 17 December 1900 at Church Cottage, Aynho, Northamptonshire, third child of William Digby Cartwright and his wife, Lucy Harriette Maud, 'nee' Bury. Her father acted as curate of Aynho for his incapacitated uncle, becoming rector in 1906. Her two older brothers were killed in the First World War leaving a younger sister, Jane, and brother, William Frederick Cartwright. It was out of the question for the rector's daughter to attend the village school, so at eleven Mary was sent first to Leamington high school and later to the Godolphin School, Salisbury. She thought of history as her best subject, but in her last year a gifted self-taught teacher, Miss Hancock, encouraged her into mathematics. She went up to St Hugh's College, Oxford, in 1919, at which time there were only some five women studying mathematics in the whole university. Her patchy schooling and the difficulty of getting into post-war lectures led to a second class in honour moderations. However, inspired by G. H. Hardy's famous extra-curricular classes, she became the first woman to last the course, being awarded a first-class degree in 1923. 
Not wanting to impose further on her family for finance, Cartwright taught first at the Alice Ottley School, Worcester (1923-4), and then at Wycombe Abbey School, Buckinghamshire (1924-7). Dissatisfied with her prospects, she returned to Oxford in 1928 to read for a DPhil under Hardy, receiving her doctorate for a thesis on zeros of integral functions of special types in 1930; here she first met J. E. Littlewood, who was her external DPhil examiner. 
Following Hardy's move to Cambridge, in 1930 Cartwright went to Girton as a Yarrow research fellow, rapidly becoming fellow and director of studies in mathematics in 1934; she held these positions until 1949. She became a university lecturer in 1935 and then reader in the theory of functions from 1959 until her retirement in 1968. The move to Cambridge heralded a period of great mathematical activity. Her work came strongly under the influence of Littlewood, who with Hardy dominated British pure mathematics of the period. Her first important result, in complex function theory, was a sharp estimate for the maximum modulus of analytic functions p-valent in the unit disc, a result still applied in signal processing. In a long series of papers over the next ten years, Cartwright continued to explore the subtleties of the theory of complex (especially integral or entire) functions; particularly their asymptotic behaviour. The essence of this work was contained in her one book, 'Integral Functions' (1956). 
In 1938 the Radio Research Board of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research appealed to the London Mathematical Society for help with certain equations occurring in radio work. Cartwright drew the memorandum to Littlewood's attention. Together they began a detailed investigation of a deceptively simple-looking non-linear second order differential equation introduced by the Dutch physicist Van der Pol in 1920 to describe the oscillation of radio waves, now a textbook example. Despite their lack of expertise on this subject, Cartwright and Littlewood soon found a rich variety of behaviour, some of it very bizarre. They found ranges of the parameter values with an infinite number of unstable periodic solutions and a highly complicated but stable region of non-periodic behaviour. Fifteen years later, this work inspired S. Smale to develop the horseshoe map, the driving mechanism of the mathematical theory of chaos, of which Cartwright and Littlewood's fine structures were in fact typical manifestations. 
Cartwright continued her work on differential equations and in 1949 held consultancies on US Navy mathematical research projects at Stanford and Princeton. In 1950 she resumed a collaboration with Sir Edward Collingwood, begun before the war, and culminating in the Collingwood-Cartwright theory of cluster sets. 
Meanwhile Cartwright was becoming more deeply involved in college life. From 1940 to 1944 she was commandant, Girton College Red Cross detachment, and she took on an increasing load of teaching. In 1948 she was pre-elected mistress of Girton, which office she held from 1949 until 1968, the longest tenure in the college's history. Here began a second distinguished career. Women had been admitted to full membership of the university in 1948 and Cartwright provided clear-headed yet unassuming leadership at a time of rapid change, skilfully steering the college to assume quietly its proper role in the routine running of the university. Shrewd and immensely hard-working, she gave long service on many committees including the Cambridge University women's appointments board and the education syndicate. From 1961 she was on the council of senate. She was president of the Cambridge Association of University Women from 1957 to 1960. Despite this heavy load she continued her lecturing and research, seemingly never harassed, always finding time for students' problems, and ably supervising a number of doctoral students. 
In all, Cartwright wrote over ninety articles published in mathematical journals, making important contributions to the theory of functions and differential equations. Her work with Littlewood was among the first to recognize the potential power of combining topological and analytical methods to study differential equations. Despite the technicality of most of her mathematical writing, she was also able to inspire a general audience, as demonstrated in her short monograph 'The Mathematical Mind' (1955). 
Cartwright inspired generations of young women. Her somewhat timid yet forbidding appearance, combined with her very considerable intellectual reputation, belied the warmth and sympathy beneath. In human affairs as in mathematics she had a gift for going straight to the heart of the matter. She was exceptionally well-informed on many subjects, among them painting and music. She had a wry sense of humour. 
Cartwright was elected to the Royal Society in 1947, the first woman mathematician to be accorded this honour, and was later the first woman to serve on its council. She was awarded a Cambridge ScD in 1949. She felt strongly about mathematical education, taking a keen interest in the Mathematical Association and serving as its president from 1951 to 1952. In 1956 she was a member of a Royal Society delegation that visited the Soviet Union as guests of the Academy of Sciences. A member of the London Mathematical Society from 1928, she held office at various times and was president from 1961 to 1963. She received awards, medals, and honorary degrees from universities and learned societies in Britain and several foreign countries. Her contributions led to the award of the Royal Society's Sylvester medal in 1964, the London Mathematical Society's De Morgan medal in 1968, and she was created DBE in 1969. 
Cartwright was resident in Girton from 1930 to 1968, retiring to live in a modest flat nearby. She was life fellow and emeritus reader at Girton from 1968 until her death. She enjoyed travelling and was visiting professor at Brown University (1968-9), then at Claremont Graduate School, California (1969-70); she also visited Case Western Reserve, the Polish Academy of Sciences, and the University of Wales (1970-71). She continued writing research papers until well after her retirement and was among the editors of Hardy's collected papers. In her last years she moved to Midfield Lodge Nursing Home, Cambridge Road, Oakington, where she died peacefully on 3 April 1998. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 69680


Mark Lambert (1781-1855), copper-engraver, was born at Fourstones, Hexham, Northumberland. Nothing is known of his background, and Bewick fails to mention him in his 'Memoir', but he and his son Mark William were to establish the most successful copper-engraving and printing business in Newcastle, to which the diffident Robert Bewick would have lost much trade in his later years. Lambert was probably apprenticed to Bewick in July 1797, although the records of him are curiously shorter on detail than in other cases: there is a cryptic entry 'Letter from Mark' of 8 April 1797, and he first appears on the wages for 19 June 1802 with 'Mark out of his time' on 14 July 1804, and a final payment on 1 September of that year (Beilby-Bewick workshop record). When independent, Lambert was primarily a writing engraver of great accomplishment, providing bill heads, trade cards, and bookplates on copper for local custom, along with ciphers and armorial work on silver; pictorial work was taken on by other hands such as the artist J. W. Carmichael, William Collard, and George F. Robinson, who worked with the firm for many years from 1841. Nearly all Lambert's work is signed and some of his own early bookplate vignettes have frequently been attributed to Bewick. He died on 28 September 1855. 


@@@@@


doc= 69681


John Laws (1765-1844), silver-engraver, was born at Heddon Laws near Heddon on the Wall, Northumberland, the son of a farming family. He was apprenticed to Beilby and Bewick between March 1782 and March 1789, beginning at about seventeen and leaving finally in June 1790 to work from his home at Heddon. In Bewick's 'Memoir' (p. 195) he is noticed as being brought up as a silver-engraver, specializing in ornamental and 'bright' engraving (faceted work which reflects light, executed with a lozenge graver), at which he was unrivalled in his time. He was greatly respected and did much for the Newcastle silversmiths, and various other craftsmen such as saddlers, gunsmiths, and clock- and watchmakers. A keen amateur naturalist and taxidermist, he took a year's break in America as a relief from the workbench and to improve his birds' nest and egg collection (Angus, 9). An important pattern book survives with his descendants, along with a ledger recording his work which shows that while his farm had latterly become his major preoccupation, he was working on silver within weeks of his death on 14 August 1844, aged seventy-nine. 


@@@@@


doc= 69682


William Temple (bap. 1798, d. 1837), wood-engraver, was baptized at All Saints, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 6 May 1798, the son of William Temple and his wife, Mary Gill. He was bound on 15 August 1812 and took to wood-engraving as readily as his fellow apprentice William Harvey. They were singled out by Bewick as being his principal assistants, along with his son Robert, in getting out the 'Fables of Aesop', for which Bewick prepared the drawings in great detail on the wood. Robert appears to have contributed the least to the enterprise; after Harvey left for London in September 1817 there were still some twenty or so blocks to be cut and these were probably the work of Temple. The tailpieces of a man negotiating a snowdrift on stilts, and the funeral cortege at Ovingham which ends the book, are Temple's work and both show a particularly delicate handling of the fine tracery of the branches in the winter trees. At the end of his time his father's death took him away to support the running of the family drapery business and wood-engraving lost a promising talent. 


@@@@@


doc= 69683


Henry White (1784-1851), wood-engraver, was the son of Jonathan White, hatter and sword cutler in London, who died not long after his bankruptcy. He came to the workshop on 15 September 1804 after serving the first four years of his time with James Lee in London. Lee's death prompted White's uncle and guardian, H. S. Speck, to seek another master for him, much to the natural irritation of Lee's widow to whom, after four years' experience, he had become very useful. He was of course immediately useful to Bewick. He was involved in some of the cuts for Thomson's 'The Seasons' (1805), for which Thurston had provided the drawings, and he engraved all the principal subjects and some tailpieces for Catnach and Davison's edition of 'The Poetical Works of Robert Burns' (Alnwick, 1808). He had a somewhat dry manner which compares poorly with the vigorous effects of Clennell, who also worked on 'The Seasons'. He left the workshop for London a few months after his time, in January 1808. Bewick remarked that in London 'he chiefly turned his attention, to the imitation of sketchy 'cross hatching' on Wood, from the inimitable pencil of Mr Cruickshanks, & perhaps some other artists in this same way' ('Memoir', 199-200). The work for which White is now specially remembered is to be found in Major's edition of Walton's 'Complete Angler' (1824), and in Yarrell's 'History of British Fishes' (1836): all of it mechanically excellent, but reproductive and reflecting nothing of what he might have absorbed from the example of Bewick. 


@@@@@


doc= 69684


Edward Willis (bap. 1784, d. 1842), wood-engraver, was the son of James Willis and his wife, Margaret Carr, of Swalwell, co. Durham, and was baptized at Whickham on 14 March 1784. He was a cousin of George Stephenson the railway engineer. Willis was apprenticed in August 1798 and ended his time on 17 August 1805, with Bewick recording in the work book 'never a cross word passed between us the whole seven years'. Willis remained in Newcastle and continued to engrave for the workshop, contributing some tailpieces to 'The Poetical Works of Robert Burns' (Alnwick, 1808), until his departure for a four-year stay in London in 1809. He returned to Newcastle in 1813, after the death of his wife, to continue working for Bewick over the next four years, contributing briefly to the 'Fables of Aesop' before finally returning to London in May 1817, where he died on 10 February 1842. Willis was Jackson's and Chatto's principal source for their list of attributions in the 'Treatise on Wood-Engraving' (1839). His work was not distinguished and tended to move away from the 'white line' of his master; Bewick remarked that while with him he was 'on a par with Charlton Nesbit, but did not equal the mechanical excellence Nesbit had attained to in London' ('Memoir', 199). His signature 'Willis' appears occasionally in a running hand. He was a slow and deliberate workman, and was described by F. W. Fairholt as 'a Chinese engraver, without an idea of doing aught but mechanically cut out lines drawn out on wood for him' ('Art Journal', 1866, 179-80). His exact work on Thomas Hood's pen-and-ink sketches for 'Whims and Oddities' bears this out. 


@@@@@


doc= 69685


Weiner, Joseph Sidney (1915-1982), human biologist and environmental physiologist, was born on 29 June 1915 at Nourse Mines in Johannesburg, Transvaal, South Africa, the second of the seven children of Robert Weiner (1885-1966), general dealer, and his wife Fanny (Chana), 'nee' Simon (1896-1978), Jewish immigrants from Lithuania. After attending the East Central School and the boys' high school (1927-31) at Pretoria he went to the University of Witwatersrand medical school, Johannesburg (1932-6), being awarded an MSc in physiology in 1937, in which year he moved to Great Britain. He married Marjorie Winifred Daw (1912-2003) in 1943; they had a daughter and a son. 
Weiner obtained the degree of PhD from the University of London in 1946, and was admitted LRCP and MRCS from St George's Hospital, London, in 1947; he was made DSc of Oxford University in 1971. He was successively demonstrator in the department of applied physiology in the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (1940-41); scientific member of the Medical Research Council (MRC) unit at Queen Square (1942-6); reader in physical anthropology at Oxford University (1945-63) and honorary deputy director of the MRC climate and working efficiency unit (1955-63); director of the MRC environmental physiology unit at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (1963-80); and professor of environmental physiology at London University (1965-80). 
Weiner came to public attention in November 1953 when he, K. P. Oakley, and W. E. Le Gros Clark announced the exposure of the Piltdown forgery ['see 'Piltdown Man]. Oakley's 1949 fluorine tests had suggested that the mandible and skull cap of the enigmatic Piltdown Man ('Eoanthropus dawsoni'), the English 'missing link' discovered in 1912, were of late Pleistocene age, and that all the fragments might belong to one individual. Weiner found it extraordinary that a composite 'man-ape' could have existed in England at this date, and was puzzled by the circumstances of the discovery. He began to investigate seriously the possibility that the so-called fossil was a fraud. Using modern chimpanzee teeth, he showed Le Gros Clark and Oakley how the molar teeth might have been deliberately filed and all the materials superficially stained. Oakley then confirmed that the Piltdown materials in the British Museum had indeed been artificially abraded and stained, and on repeating the fluorine test, found that the skull and jaw were of different dates (the jaw being that of a modern orang-utan). A battery of further tests, including X-ray crystallography, clinched the case. The story of the exposure and Weiner's investigation of the forger (whom he believed to be the discoverer, Charles Dawson) is told in his book 'The Piltdown Forgery' (1955; republished 1980). His removal of Piltdown Man from the palaeontological record decisively clarified the sequence of human evolution, largely in accord with the Darwinian hypotheses. 
Weiner was first and foremost an experimental physiologist; starting from his MSc thesis on the effects of heat on workers in the Rand mines in 1935-6, he specialized in the mechanism of sweating and human adaptation to environmental temperature variation. Approximately 100 of his 290-odd publications deal with aspects of human physiology, culminating in the authoritative 'Principles and Practices of Human Physiology' (with O. G. Edholm, 1981). He contributed extensively to applied physiology, carrying out defence research during the Second World War, assisting in the establishment of the science of ergonomics (he was a founder of the Ergonomics Research Society), and advising the coal and steel industries in Britain and the EEC. 
The post-war development of physical anthropology was transformed by Weiner's appointment to the Oxford readership in 1945. He soon assumed a leading role in the movement to establish human biology as a discipline studying human beings at the population level, integrating genetics, demography, ecology, physiology, experimental anatomy, and evolutionary theory. He was a founder, in 1958, of the Society for the Study of Human Biology, and later of the International Association of Human Biologists. Weiner and his colleagues G. A. Harrison, J. M. Tanner, and N. A. Barnicot co-authored the landmark textbook 'Human Biology: an Introduction to Human Evolution, Variation, and Growth' (1964). He served as president of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1963-4) and published about 120 anthropological papers, including studies of both fossil hominids and living populations. He summarized his understanding of human evolution and variation in 'Man's Natural History' (1971; also published in French, Spanish, German, and Italian). He led field expeditions in South and South-West Africa in 1958 and 1961 to investigate the affinities of the Khoi and San peoples; his work on the region is encapsulated in the last book to which he contributed, 'Peoples of Southern Africa and their Affinities' (with G. T. Nurse and T. Jenkins; 1985). He was largely responsible for the establishment and administration (as world convenor, 1962-74) of the human adaptability section of the International Biological Programme, on the basis of which thousands of research projects were undertaken worldwide; these were reported in his 'Human adaptability: a history and compendium of research in the international biological programme' (with K. J. Collins, 1977). It was said of him: 'Professor J. S. Weiner has pioneered the modern holistic approach to the study of man; more than anyone else he is responsible for the transformation of physical anthropology from a dry and dusty academic byway... to its present focal position in the human sciences. (Harrison, review, 504)' Weiner was noted for his tireless scientific activity, his power of distinguishing significant from trivial research, his ability to bring out the full potential of groups of researchers, and his generosity, especially to younger colleagues. A sympathy for scientific humanism took the place of religious belief for most of his life. Between 1941 and 1944 he was active in the Association of Scientific Workers, which aimed to improve the condition of scientific workers, and also with increasing the scientific input to the war effort. Like many intellectuals, he believed that only the Left could defeat Nazism and bring in a new era of science-based democracy. Constantly travelling, he particularly enjoyed literature, theatre, history, music, and gardening. Weiner died from lung cancer on 13 June 1982 at his home, 20 Harbord Road, Oxford. He was cremated at Oxford four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 69687


MacGregor, Sir Ian Kinloch (1912-1998), metallurgical engineer and industrialist, was born on 21 September 1912 at The Bungalow, Kinlochleven, Argyll, the third son of Daniel MacGregor, a works accountant, and his wife, Grace Alexanderina, 'nee' Fraser Maclean, a schoolteacher. His parents were leading lights in the United Free Church of Scotland, a strictly Calvinist denomination which emphasized the virtues of hard work and thrift, traits which remained with MacGregor throughout his life. Educated at George Watson's College, Edinburgh, and at Hillhead High School, Glasgow, MacGregor proceeded to Glasgow University to study metallurgical engineering. After the award of a first-class degree of outstanding quality, he then obtained a diploma, with distinction, from the Royal College of Science and Technology (now the University of Strathclyde). 
In the mid-1930s MacGregor was recruited to the armour department of Beardmores, the distinguished Clydeside engineering concern. The Beardmore forge had provided the power base for the red Clydesider David Kirkwood, and one of MacGregor's first tasks as a junior manager was to face down a strike of overhead crane operatives. Identified by Beardmores' chairman, Sir James Lithgow, as a high-flyer, at the outbreak of the Second World War MacGregor was recruited to the Ministry of Supply, where he began work on tank designs. He soon attracted the attention of Lord Beaverbrook, and in 1940 he was sent to North America, first to Canada and then to the USA, to procure armoured metal. He was then attached to the British military mission to advise on war production, and it was here that he became acquainted with the production methods and managerial styles characteristic of the American metal and engineering industries. MacGregor married a Welsh girl, Sybil Spencer (died 1996), in Washington in 1942. They had a son and daughter. 
At the end of the war MacGregor chose to remain in the USA. The election of a Labour government in Britain committed to a programme of nationalization was unattractive to him, while he had come to admire the way of life in the USA, with its class-free society. In 1956 the metallurgical company for which MacGregor worked took part in a merger to form American Metal Climax (later Amax). Appointed chief executive of the group in 1966 and chairman in 1969, MacGregor, increasingly concerned about the reliance of the American economy on oil, presided over a significant programme of diversification which transformed Amax into one of the world's leading mining corporations. By the middle of the 1970s the company was the third largest American coal producer. MacGregor also joined Lazard Brothers, investment bankers of Wall Street, and became chairman of the international chamber of commerce in Paris. 
By this time MacGregor had acquired a formidable reputation as an industrialist who was committed to managerial prerogatives in the face of labour unrest. He fought long and hard against recognition of the United Mineworkers of America and in so doing acquired considerable tactical experience in facing down strikes. His workaholic tendencies were legendary, as was his ability to fly almost continuously between America, Europe, and Australia in pursuit of his business affairs. He was richly rewarded by Amax: in 1975 his salary amounted to $150,000 and his shares in the company were worth nearly $2 million. Age did not diminish his energy: in his sixties he was quoted as saying, 'At my age, some men chase young girls. Some play golf. Some become vegetables. I work' ('The Independent', 15 April 1998). Thus, as retirement from Amax approached, it is not surprising that MacGregor was in search of a fresh challenge, and at the age of sixty-five he accepted the offer of the prime minister, James Callaghan, to become a non-executive director of British Leyland (BL), acting as deputy to Sir Michael Edwardes, the company chairman. 
Brought into public ownership in 1975 in the wake of bankruptcy, BL was afflicted by low productivity and an unenviable record of labour relations. A defining moment in MacGregor's career at BL was the dismissal of the communist shop steward, Derek (Red Robbo) Robinson from the company's Longbridge plant. MacGregor later claimed that it was he rather than the reluctant Edwardes who had initiated Robinson's sacking, although accounts differ. In any event, it was MacGregor's reputation for implacable hostility to militant trade unionism, together with his managerial capabilities, which resulted in his appointment as chairman of the British Steel Corporation (BSC) in May 1980. This position was in the gift of Sir Keith Joseph, the new secretary of state for industry in Margaret Thatcher's Conservative administration, and the announcement of Joseph's choice was received with incredulity in a House of Commons ignorant of both MacGregor's American experience and his Scottish origins. Additional controversy was caused by the terms of MacGregor's appointment -- a $1.8 million 'transfer fee' payable to Lazard Brothers to secure his services. Like BL, BSC was encumbered with outdated plant, low productivity, and severe financial problems. In the year of MacGregor's appointment, the corporation employed 166,000 workers to make 14 million tons of steel: losses amounted to $1.8 billion. MacGregor's immediate response was to drive through a programme of fundamental rationalization entailing substantial plant closures and redundancies. By 1983 production was almost at the level of 1980, but BSC was employing only 71,000 workers. Although losses amounted to $256 million, a revolution in productivity was underway. By the middle of the decade BSC was profitable, highly efficient by contemporary European standards, and 'en route' for privatization. 
MacGregor was proud of his achievements at BSC, all the more so since the vast majority of job losses were achieved by voluntary redundancies -- albeit at the cost of the desolation of numerous steelmaking communities. His next appointment, therefore, at the age of seventy-one, was greeted with dismay within the wider trade-union movement and the Labour Party. MacGregor himself reputedly wished to move to the coal industry as his next challenge in the restructuring of British industry, and, as far as the prime minister was concerned, he was the ideal candidate to take on the chairmanship of the National Coal Board (NCB). Here again was an industry which, in MacGregor's view, seemed to epitomize the 'British disease' -- well shielded from the market force of competition, subject to growing overcapacity in the face of changes in the energy market, and in the grip of militant trade unionism. The government had already announced a programme of pit closures which had produced an uncompromising response from Arthur Scargill, president of the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM). In the light of MacGregor's openly confessed aim to end the NCB's status as a 'social security enterprise', conflict was inevitable. 
The most bitter dispute in British industrial relations began in March 1984, when the NUM executive called a national strike in response to MacGregor's announcement of pit closures. The dispute lasted for a year and was marked by increasingly violent confrontations between striking miners and the police, as well as by a rising tide of social and economic distress within mining communities. MacGregor himself was repelled by the NUM's tactic of intimidation of working miners, and early in the dispute expressed the wish to the prime minister that he could have at his side 'some of my scruffy, sometimes ill-disciplined, sometimes loud mouthed American police... and some of the curious ways of the law to back them up' ('The Times', 14 April 1998). It was MacGregor's intransigence in refusing successive peace overtures which led to an increasing rift with the secretary of state for energy, Peter Walker. The latter began his own discussions with key NUM officials and overrode MacGregor in securing cabinet approval for a settlement with the pit deputies' union, the National Association of Colliery Overmen, Deputies and Shotfirers (NACODS), when strike action was threatened in the autumn of 1984. MacGregor was also criticized for his weak presentation of the NCB's case: in meeting journalists he was dour, impassive, and abrasive, habitually referring to his 'Department of Economic Warfare' and to the fact that, in war, 'a soldier has to shoot to kill. Unfortunately, I'm a soldier in that kind of war' ('The Guardian', 14 April 1998). Thatcher found him 'strangely lacking in guile... he had no experience of dealing with trade union leaders intent on using the process of negotiation to score political points, so time and again he and his colleagues were outmanoeuvred by Arthur Scargill and the NUM leadership' (Thatcher, 342). 
The coal strike ended in March 1985 with the complete rout of the NUM and the implementation of a selective pit-closure programme by the NCB. At the inception of the dispute, coal reserves were at a record high, and as it proceeded the NUM was unable to secure the support of other trade unions. Indeed, the union was fractured and fatally weakened as a result of the establishment of the rival Union of Democratic Mineworkers. Mick McGahey, the communist leader of the Scottish miners, even claimed after MacGregor's death that the end result of the dispute was 'to destroy trade unionism not only in mining, but in Britain' ('The Independent', 15 April 1998). For MacGregor, the prime minister had obtained 'the results she paid for; in fact, much more than she paid for' from his chairmanship of the NCB ('Daily Telegraph', 14 April 1998). His reward was a knighthood in 1986, but MacGregor felt snubbed on the appointment of his successor, the emollient Robert Haslam, who had also followed in his place when he left BSC. 
After his retirement from the NCB in 1986, MacGregor rejoined Lazards as a non-executive director. His name was canvassed in the press as an 'efficiency-enhancing' head of the National Health Service and also as a board member of British Gas, but nothing came of these campaigns on his behalf. He was, however, much in demand as a 'company doctor' and took on a number of company chairmanships, including that of Goldcrest Films and the troubled property group Mountleigh. At the age of seventy-eight he was particularly disappointed at his enforced retirement from the chairmanship of two American companies. 
Beyond his industrial interests, MacGregor was peripatetic, spending time in New York and commuting between his Bermuda home and his mansion on the shores of Loch Fyne. Reflecting his religious upbringing, his moralizing tendencies were confirmed by his chairmanship of Religion in American Life, an organization famous for its slogan, 'The family that prays together stays together'. On his repatriation to Britain, MacGregor lent his support to ORT -- the Organization for Rehabilitation through Training. This organization was Russian and Jewish in origin and devoted its charitable activities to technical training. For MacGregor, the importance of ORT lay in its inculcation of the work ethic among its clients. 
MacGregor was mentally tough and physically resilient. A hard-bitten career industrialist with vast experience of the American corporate sector, he came to epitomize the very essence of Thatcherism in the 1980s insofar as the main aims were to reinvigorate market forces and marginalize the trade-union movement. There can be no doubt that the 'cold bath' effects of Thatcherism, as implemented by MacGregor, had favourable effects on industrial productivity. In this respect, MacGregor was the ideal instrument, and it is no surprise that he was among the leading businessmen who publicly urged Conservative MPs to back Thatcher's continuation as leader. In addition to his knighthood, he was appointed chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1972. He died of heart failure in Musgrove Park Hospital, Taunton, Somerset, on 13 April 1998, and was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 69688


Mittelholzer, Edgar Austin (1909-1965), novelist and short-story writer, was born on 16 December 1909 in New Amsterdam, British Guiana, the second child of William Austin Mittelholzer (1865- 'c'.1960), commercial clerk, and his wife, Rosamond Mabel Leblanc (1889- 'c'.1960), a spinner. Of Swiss-German, French, British, and African blood, he was a 'swarthy' child, to the horror of his light-skinned, negrophobe father. Some relief from his repressive puritanical upbringing came when a church grant enabled him to enter Berbice high school in 1922. At eleven he began writing, inspired by a Buffalo Bill story, and at nineteen decided to become an author, and never swerved from this vocation. After leaving school in 1927 he took a succession of casual jobs so that he could ply editors in England and America with manuscripts, though with little success. In 1937 he privately published a series of local sketches, 'Creole Chips', and sold them from door to door. In 1941 he moved to Trinidad, where he served briefly (and unhappily) in the Trinidad Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, and married Roma Halfhide, a Trinidadian, in March 1942. 
In 1941 the London firm Eyre and Spottiswood had published Mittelholzer's novel 'Corentyne Thunder', an atmospheric evocation of West Indian peasant life based on childhood memories of visits to coastal Guiana. Although most copies were destroyed in an air raid, this encouraged him to move to England in 1948 with his wife and daughter Anna. Living in Bagshot, Surrey, he worked as copy-typist for the books department of the British Council, and contributed to, and briefly produced, the seminal BBC literary programme 'Caribbean Voices', generously encouraging younger writers. In 1950 the Hogarth Press published 'A Morning at the Office', Doubleday taking the American rights. A detailed evocation of Trinidad society within the five hours' traffic of an importing company, it established Mittelholzer's literary reputation. In 1951 Peter Nevill published 'Shadows Move among them', an eldritch fantasy of life in a jungle commune, and with a second Guianese novel, 'The Children of Kaywana' (1952), Mittelholzer entered a long-standing engagement with Secker and Warburg. 
Mittelholzer now felt able to live entirely by his pen. He visited Montreal on a Guggenheim fellowship in 1952-3, and Barbados in 1953-6. Over fifteen years he published twenty-two novels, besides 'A Swarthy Boy' (autobiography) and 'With a Carib Eye' (travel book). His novels were variously set in Guiana, Barbados, and England, and constantly experimented with new styles and forms. They reflect his passionate interest in the interaction of character, place, and weather; and in music, particularly Wagner. Rejecting Christianity, he adopted yoga and occultism, and was fascinated with psychic phenomena. This melded in his novels with a preoccupation with violence, mental abormality, and sexual perversion. Mittelholzer himself paradoxically combined a belief in absolute discipline with gentle kindness to individuals. He wrote out of passionate conviction and with meticulous concern for literary craft. However, his bizarre subjects and extreme right-wing politics, influenced by Clive Bell's 'Civilization' (1947), generated increasing friction with his publishers, and brought rejection by literary critics. He separated from Roma in 1956, and moved alone to Maida Vale, London. 
In 1959 Mittelholzer was granted a divorce, losing custody of his children Anna, Stephan, Griselda, and Hermann. In April 1960 he married the writer Jacqueline Pointer, and moved to Dippenhall, Farnham, Surrey. In 1961 he broke with Secker and Warburg over the subject of 'The Piling of Clouds' -- child rape and murder set in English suburbia -- and his bleak last novels reflect deepening financial difficulties and increasing isolation. He had twice earlier attempted suicide, and on 5 May 1965, he poured a gallon of petrol over himself and ignited it. He died at Farnham Hospital, Farnham, Surrey, on 6 May, leaving a two-year-old son, Leodgar Edward. 
Mittelholzer was the first British West Indian writer to live entirely by novel-writing. His most popular work -- the historical trilogy 'The Children of Kaywana' (1952), 'The Harrowing of Hubertus' (1954), and 'Kaywana Blood' (1958) -- reflected a personal interest in Guianese history originating with his Swiss ancestor, Constanz Mittelholzer, a Berbice plantation manager in 1760. It was carefully researched, and broke the taboo against writing of the Caribbean slave past. A prolific writer of great integrity, who breached the fortress of London publishing for Third World writers, he may be considered the 'father' of modern Caribbean writing in English. 


@@@@@


doc= 69689


Orton, Harold (1898-1975), dialectologist, was born on 23 October 1898 in the village of Byers Green, co. Durham, younger son of the village schoolmaster, Thomas Orton (died 1942), and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Blair. He attended King James I Grammar School, Bishop Auckland, and in 1916 went on to Hatfield College, University of Durham, from where he enlisted in the Durham light infantry. He served as a lieutenant from 1917 to 1919. Having been wounded twice on the same day in 1918 he was under threat of the amputation of his right arm, which he refused to allow. He made himself a left-handed writer and invariably offered his left hand to shake hands, as using the right arm caused great pain. 
After demobilization Orton studied at Merton College, Oxford, under Professor H. C. Wyld. Another of his tutors was Joseph Wright, editor of the 'English Dialect Dictionary'. He gained the degrees of BA in 1921, BLitt in 1923, and MA in 1924. He became lektor at Uppsala, Sweden, from 1924 to 1928. On 16 December 1925 he married (Dorothy) Joan (1902-1985), the youngest daughter of the Revd R. Burnham, rector of Trimley St Mary's, Suffolk; they had one daughter, Betty Jean. 
In 1928 Orton was appointed to lecture at King's College, Newcastle, then a college of the University of Durham. He published in 1933 'The Phonology of a South Durham Dialect', written following the tradition of Joseph Wright, outlining the historical development of local speech of his native village. At Newcastle he continued to develop his interest in collecting local speech and inaugurated a Northumbrian dialect survey. He used a portable disc-cutting machine to record local voices in homes and hostelries, and material from as early as 1935 survives, copied digitally to tape. 
In September 1939 Orton was appointed lecturer in charge of English language at Sheffield University but was very soon seconded as a wartime post to the British Council, where he was assistant education director, later acting education officer. After his return to Sheffield when the war ended he renewed a friendship with Professor Eugen Dieth of Zurich University, and the two began collaboration on a questionnaire to be used in a dialect survey. He was appointed to the chair of English language and medieval English literature at Leeds University in 1946, and he continued through several summer vacations with Dieth, preparing a series of versions of a 'Questionnaire for a Linguistic Atlas of England', which was published by the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society in 1951. 
An English dialect survey became Orton's life's work, and he combined teaching and research tirelessly to promote interest in dialectology. The whole staff of his department was newly appointed in 1946 and he collected around him a distinguished team of academics in the various fields of Old and Middle English literature, philology, phonetics, and Scandinavian, Celtic, and Germanic language studies. He resurrected 'Leeds Studies in English' publications in 1952 and was editor from 1952 until 1964. During his time at Leeds a school of English was formed by merging his own department and that of English literature. He served on many of the governing bodies of organizations promoting English studies. Orton was well remembered by students for his stimulating teaching. He promoted undergraduate and postgraduate dissertations by students on living local dialects. 
Orton was a great raconteur and his benevolent manner made him a popular companion over lunch in the senior common room. His highly successful attempts at describing individuals' linguistic backgrounds established his fame as a local Professor Higgins, the character in Shaw's 'Pygmalion'. He was an adept administrator and served with skill on senate and its committees during the complex post-war period of expansion of the university. He served for periods as dean of arts and as chairman of the board of arts. 
Money for research support was extremely scarce during those years and Orton was determined in his efforts to augment the university's financial support for the establishment and the running of the dialect survey. In addition to obtaining help from private individuals and foundations, he also persuaded the university to appoint qualified research assistants for field work which continued for over ten years. By the time the collection was complete there was material in phonetic script of answers to the more than 1300 questions of the 'Questionnaire' from a total of 313 localities. Mobile tape recorders became available about the time the collection began, and a recorded archive was made under his direction. He worked tirelessly at editing the twelve volumes of basic material, and the publication, 'Survey of English Dialects, 1962-72', was achieved at considerable sacrifice of family life and leisure time. The sheer volume of the editorial work he undertook gave rise to the phrase, famous among his collaborators, 'yawn and bash on'. He was unsparing of himself and encouraged those working with him to be the same. His personal energy and his absolute determination to see the 'Survey' completed made this massive research survey the sole major language project to be completed in those difficult post-war years. 
On retiring from his chair Orton became professor emeritus in 1964. An institute of dialect and folk life studies was founded at Leeds University, and there followed years working with scholars from Britain and abroad. He visited many American universities after his retirement, promoting dialect studies, and collaborated with Nathalia Wright at the University of Tennessee in the publication of 'A Word Geography of England' (1974). 'The Linguistic Atlas of England' was published after his death. 
Among honours bestowed on Orton were the degrees of honorary LittD in 1969 from the University of Durham and doctor of philosophy 'honoris causa' in 1970 from the University of Uppsala. He died on 7 March 1975 at Harrowby Crescent, Leeds, having continued to work until a few weeks earlier, when he suffered a stroke. At his funeral at Lawnswood, Leeds, on 12 March 1975 Stewart Sanderson, director of the institute, said friends who mourned Harold would still have a sense of gratitude at the privilege of having known him, which would far outweigh their sense of loss. 


@@@@@


doc= 69690


Ross, Alan Strode Campbell (1907-1980), linguist, was born on 1 February 1907, at 1 Woodlands, St Mary's, Brecon (where he spent his childhood), the elder son of Archibald Campbell Carne Ross (1873-1937), a land agent with other business interests, and his wife, Millicent Strode (1874-1971), 'nee' Cobham. His paternal grandfather, Charles Campbell Ross, entered the family bank in Penzance, became mayor of Penzance, and was returned member of parliament for St Ives in a by-election on 13 April 1881. He met financial disaster: everything, including his house, was sold, and he became secretary of the Whitechapel Art Gallery. 
A. S. C. Ross was educated at Malvern College and Christ College, Brecon, and went on in 1925 to Balliol College, Oxford. Having done conspicuously well at school in physics and been awarded a scholarship on the science side, he intended to devote himself to astronomy. At first he read mathematics, but he was placed in the second class in the first public examination in a subject in which, as he thought with great clarity, those who have distinguished careers get firsts. He switched to English language and literature, that being the Oxford honour school which in the 1920s enabled him to study the widest range of philological subjects centred on English and related languages. He had little taste for the study of literature, though he was very widely read in writings from those of the Anglo-Saxons onwards, with a special interest in nineteenth- and twentieth-century fiction. Having achieved first-class honours in 1929 he at once obtained a post as lecturer in the English department of the University of Leeds, where he stayed until the Second World War. On 11 July 1933 Ross married Elizabeth Stefanyja Olszewska (1907-1973), daughter of Maciej Bronislaw WacLaw Olszewski and Ada Ethel Briggs of Warsaw. She, herself a sensitive and learned scholar, especially of Old Icelandic and Middle English literatures, taught for several Oxford colleges. They had one son, Alan WacLaw Padmint Ross. 
The 1930s saw great developments in linguistics, and Ross's interests, founded on an excellent grasp of philology, especially of the Germanic languages centred on Old and Middle English and tracing Germanic phonology to Indo-European, were widened to include these new developments. He did not confine himself to Indo-European languages, of which he was acquainted with many, but had some knowledge of Finno-Ugrian languages and was always interested in non-European languages. He studied them mainly via grammars and dictionaries, and, though he gladly talked to speakers of many languages, he did not master modern foreign languages to express himself in them idiomatically and without accent. He read widely in them and used them mainly for comparative linguistic purposes. His important publications of this time included 'The Dream of the Rood' (1934), which he edited with B. Dickins, and which was the standard edition of this Anglo-Saxon poem for many years. He drew on his mathematical as well as his linguistic interests in 'The Numeral Signs of the Mohenjo-Daro Script' (1938). 
Like other linguists and mathematicians, Ross spent the Second World War at the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park, Buckinghamshire. In 1946 he was appointed to the department of English at Birmingham, and was soon appointed to a personal professorship in English language (1948-51). From 1951 to his retirement in 1974 he held the chair of linguistics created for him at Birmingham. 
The fundamental work of the Prague Linguistic Circle was eagerly assimilated by Ross from his time at Oxford onwards. In the thirties he had travelled widely in Europe, partly to study languages, and often to meet linguists and philologists, among them Karl Luick in Vienna. Ross's own most original work was on Old English. He was well aware of modern linguistic concepts: he wrote on the phoneme, advancing a mathematical definition. His work on the language of the Old English (Northumbrian) gloss to the Lindisfarne gospels and other northern texts ('Studies in the Accidence of the Lindisfarne Gospels', 1937) was based on the work of the great grammarians and especially phonologists of English, Luick, Eduard Sievers, and, specifically for Northumbrian, of Uno Lindelof of Helsinki. He was inclined to trace linguistic features back to earlier, often pre-Germanic stages, rather than regarding them as having arisen within Old English at a time of rapid linguistic change in Northumbria. Some of his philological and linguistic interests are reflected in the coverage of the journal he edited, 'English and Germanic Studies', renamed 'English Philological Studies' (1947-68). His own contributions in many journals range widely, and include statistical approaches to linguistic problems; he founded a series called 'Aldrediana' in which he (and others) advanced much of the detailed scholarship on Aldred, the scribe of the glosses to the Lindisfarne gospels and the Durham ritual. Fascinated by the lexical and phonological complexity of words, he wrote on 'ginger' and on the names of numerals. His greatest achievement is his organizing the facsimile edition of the Lindisfarne gospels (1956, 1960), on which he had first published while at Leeds. This was followed by a facsimile edition of the Durham ritual (1969). 
Ross enjoyed, however, many less bookish approaches to his subjects of interest: to prove a point in a geographical description of Scandinavia written about AD 900 in the Old English 'Orosius', he organized an expedition to demonstrate the facts. In the 1950s he taught, as a visiting professor, at Kingston, Jamaica, and developed an interest in Jamaican English. A little later he learnt Tahitian in Paris by conversing with native speakers, and used that knowledge in a book (with A. W. Moverley), 'The Pitcairnese Language' (1964). 
National fame came to Ross when he published a sociolinguistic study of present-day English, 'Linguistic class-indicators in present-day English' ('Neuphilologische Mitteilungen', 55, 1954, 20-56), popularized in various publications, most notably with Nancy Mitford in 'Noblesse Oblige: an Enquiry into the Identifiable Characteristics of the English Aristocracy' (1956). In all of these he attempted to distinguish upper-class linguistic usage, 'U', from that of the other classes, 'non-U'. The foundations for that work had been laid as an undergraduate amusement at Oxford. He knew that the linguistic study of social class 'marches with anthropology', yet his assertion that in English 'it is solely by its language that the upper class is marked off from the others' led him to some circularity: his own usage was always pivotal to what he regarded as U. He granted, however, that such class-distinguishers were not for all time, but changed from generation to generation. His listings are comprehensive, and though his analysis may be the result of impression rather than of establishing a corpus sufficient for his scientific purpose, no other of Ross's writings so well show his wit, a quality that made him delightfully amusing company. 
Alan S. C. Ross died of cancer on 23 September 1980 in St Barnabas's Hospice, Columbia Drive, Worthing, Sussex. He was buried in the Lodge Hill cemetery, Selly Oak, Birmingham, probably on 30 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 69691


Strang, Barbara Mary Hope, Lady Strang (1925-1982), English language scholar, born on 20 April 1925 at 18 Belvedere Road, Penge, London, was the only child of Frederick Albert Carr, of Wimbledon, and his wife, Amy Maud Wood. Her father was an engineer who suffered unemployment in the 1930s. She grew up in Shirley in Surrey, and was educated at Coloma Convent of the Ladies of Mary, Croydon, which early in the war was evacuated to Wales. She entered King's College, London, in 1942, and spent a year in Bristol until the college returned to the Strand. At King's she was introduced to the Anglican liturgy, which had a lasting influence. She obtained her BA degree in 1945, and then her MA in 1947 with an extended study of the historic Kentish dialects, under the direction of Professor C. L. Wrenn. 
Barbara Carr was assistant lecturer at Westfield College, University of London, from 1947 to 1950, and then lecturer at King's College, Newcastle (then part of the University of Durham), from 1950 to 1963. There she met Colin Strang ('b'. 1922), then a lecturer in philosophy, whom she married on 21 April 1955. He was the son of Sir William Strang, head of the Foreign Office, who had been created Baron Strang of Stonesfield in 1954, and on his death in 1978 Colin inherited the title as second Baron Strang. They had one child, a daughter, Caroline Jane ('b'. 1957). 
Strang's first major publication was 'Modern English Structure' (1962), which showed her 'unique integration of descriptive and historical approaches' (Nixon and Honey, xii). It rapidly became a standard work, and met its declared aim of being 'useful to elementary students without offending against the standards of professional linguists' (Strang, 'Modern English Structure', introduction) and communicating with 'students whose central interests lie elsewhere' (ibid.). Compared with older works it is less narrowly restricted to phonology and morphology, and does justice to new developments in the study of sentence patterns, the noun and verb phrase, 'kernel' structures, and transformations. It is based on copious examples of actual usage, insists on the primacy of speech, and brings out the role of language in everyday life. It effectively succeeds in its intention of cultivating 'humane, sensible and scholarly attitudes to language' (ibid., conclusion). 
In 1964 Strang was appointed professor of English language and general linguistics at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, the first chair of its kind in England, just as she was one of the first women to hold such a post. In her inaugural lecture, 'Metaphors and models', she noted that 'in linguistics the nineteenth century was dominantly concerned with the study of history, characteristically advanced by the study of metaphors', whereas 'the twentieth century has been dominantly concerned with the study of structure, increasingly advanced by means of models'. Her own scholarship combined these two approaches and, in a period marked by many new developments in linguistics, she and her department quickly gained an international reputation and attracted visitors from far afield. One of her closest associates was Professor Randolph Quirk, who had known her since they were students together. 
Strang next published 'A History of English' (1970), the fruit of twenty years' deep learning. This took account of the international spread of English and adopted the novel procedure of working back from contemporary English, with its advantage of being within the reader's experience, to the older periods of the language. Her later research topics included the linguistic analysis of such writers as Swift, Spenser, Shakespeare, and John Clare, and she was instrumental in forming the Tyneside Linguistic Survey. She contributed to, among other periodicals, 'Transactions of the Philological Society', 'Durham', 'Notes and Queries', 'English Studies Today', and 'Lingua'. 
Strang was also active in administration and was a member of the University Grants Committee (1947-50), and the Hong Kong university and polytechnic grants committee from 1981. Colleagues found her always helpful, and many students benefited from postgraduate funding privately supported by herself and her husband. Her recreations included horsemanship, which replaced her childhood liking for ballet. On 11 April 1982 she was suddenly struck down by a cerebral haemorrhage, and died the next day, aged fifty-six, at her home, Station House, Angerton, Morpeth. The funeral was at the West Road crematorium, Newcastle upon Tyne. Her husband and daughter survived her. 
Randolph Quirk, who knew her for thirty-five years, wrote of her that 'she combined a rare and precious set of qualities. Sparkling intellect and originality. Profound moral strength. Unshakable dedication to the most demanding standards of scholarship. Generosity. Loyalty. And sense of fun' (Nixon and Honey, foreword). 


@@@@@


doc= 69692


Strevens, Peter Derek (1922-1989), linguistic scholar and applied linguist, was born on 31 August 1922 in the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital, Norwich, the elder son and first of three children of William Strevens (1893-1982), master mariner of Trinity House, and his wife, Dorothy Lydia (1895-1983), daughter of John William Henry McCarthy of Ramsgate, Kent. 
Strevens was educated at Ackworth School, Pontefract, from 1936 to 1938 and served in the Friends' Ambulance Unit in the Second World War from 1940 to 1945. He then studied French with subsidiary German at University College, London (BA honours with upper second in 1948); this was followed by a Rhosten scholarship to research into Portuguese phonetics for a year. On 1 June 1946 he married Gwyneth Moore (1924-2002), daughter of Harold Moore, of Birmingham, at the Friends' meeting-house in Bull Street. Their son Jason was born in 1951 in Accra after Strevens began his career at the University College of the Gold Coast, as lecturer in phonetics from 1949 to 1956. He moved to Edinburgh University, where from 1957 to 1961 he was a major influence on the innovative postgraduate applied linguistics course being developed there. 
From 1961 to 1964 Strevens held the chair in contemporary English at the University of Leeds, and for the following ten years the first British chair with the designation 'applied linguistics' at the University of Essex, where he set up the second major postgraduate programme in this field. From 1966 to 1970 he was secretary of the International Association of Applied Linguistics, and from 1972 to 1975 the second chairman of the British Association for Applied Linguistics. Frustrated by the amount of committee work in British universities, he moved to the private sector, becoming director-general of the Bell Educational Trust in Cambridge (where he was a fellow of Wolfson College) from 1978 to 1988, and combined this with chairing the International Association of Teachers of English as a Foreign Language from 1983 to 1987. In 1988 he was distinguished visiting professor in the humanities at Eastern Michigan University, and at the time of his death was professor at the University of Illinois. 
Following Strevens's return to Britain from Africa, he played a key role in developing and defining the new discipline of applied linguistics across the world. The book he co-wrote with Edinburgh colleagues Angus McIntosh and Michael Halliday, 'The Linguistic Sciences and Language Teaching' (1964), was the most influential of its generation in defining a scientific, but by no means mechanistic, foundation for teaching foreign languages. In the 1960s boom in language interest, reflected both in the emergence of markets for English in the developing world and the concern for European languages as the European Common Market defined itself, this book became the centrepiece of reading lists at postgraduate level. The masters course at Essex was the first in applied linguistics in Britain, and for many years graduates from there and from his earlier base, Edinburgh, were the major British leaders in the field, both at home and overseas. At the same time he recognized that effective applied linguistics could not be tied to the burgeoning market for teachers of English as a foreign language: particularly in the period before leaving Essex, he collaborated with her majesty's inspectorate for schools and with other agencies in developing a research base for the teaching of modern languages in Britain. As his publications show, throughout his career he was a major leader in widening the scope of applied linguistic research beyond a concern solely for language teaching. 
Strevens published influential books on phonetics, the theory of language teaching, and teacher education, and was also concerned, through a series edited for Oxford University Press, to establish greater awareness of the history of language teaching. He collaborated in the development of Seaspeak (1984), international English for maritime communication, which was established as the international language of the sea. His 'Who's Who' recreations were travel and the sea, so that his extensive work for the British Council and other international bodies arose directly from his personal enthusiasms and interests. At the same time he was highly professional. When the post-oil-crisis demand for English in many parts of the world led to a market in which there was much scope for sharp practice and over-enthusiastic promotion of shoddy products, he constantly worked to ensure that systematic analysis, serious research, and a well-educated teaching force supported the expansion of English teaching. Thus his shift from university to private sector work made sense, for it enabled him to address the professional needs of the increasingly powerful private language schools, and to counter the risks of over-aggressive marketing in a field where maintenance of professional standards was essential. 
Above all else, though, Strevens charmed his colleagues and audiences. No one was better at facilitating rich professional contacts. He supported colleagues and students alike, and was constantly called upon in situations where personal relationships might be difficult to manage. When the long-standing organizer and founder of the International Association of Teachers of English as a Foreign Language, Dr W. R. Lee, had to be persuaded that change was needed in the association, Peter Strevens proved an ideal successor, incorporating his predecessor in the activities of the association while ensuring that it addressed the needs of new generations of teachers. His belief that all teachers and scholars needed personal support as well as academic criticism contributed to the affection he earned throughout the language-teaching professions. But he was not simply a promoter of great skill, for his lucid writing made many language teachers more aware of the principles they were unconsciously using. His clear and elegant manner of speaking, clarity of thinking, and outstanding committee skills ensured that social relations between diverse cultures, people of diverse levels of sophistication and education, and diverse linguistic groups would always be positive. An outstanding command of French, particularly, and a wide-ranging mind enabled him to cross boundaries within Europe as much as in the British Commonwealth where so many of his students had worked. He died suddenly of a heart condition in Tokyo, Japan, on 3 November 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 69693


Parkinson, Henry Thomas (1852-1924), Roman Catholic priest and social scientist, was born on 30 January 1852 at Cheadle, Staffordshire, the son of Henry Parkinson, a barber, and his wife, Isabella Millward. He went to Sedgley Park School, Staffordshire, in 1865 and then in 1868 to Douai in France, where he began his ecclesiastical studies, which he continued in 1873 at St Bernard's, Olton, the Birmingham diocesan seminary. In 1874 he proceeded to the English College, Rome, and was ordained priest on 26 May 1877, obtaining a doctorate in divinity at the Gregorian University. On completing his studies he returned to Olton as vice-rector and professor of philosophy. After ten years in this post, in 1887, he had his first and only taste of work in a parish, but it was at St Chad's Cathedral in Birmingham and it gave him an insight into the life of the poor in an industrial city. 
When, in 1889, St Mary's College, Oscott, ceased to be a school for lay boys and became exclusively a seminary for the training of future priests Parkinson became professor of philosophy and vice-rector to Bishop Ilsley. He was to spend the rest of his life at Oscott but these thirty-five years were to witness a remarkable development. Although his family background and education might be considered very traditional, if not parochial, he became increasingly aware of a wider context. In 1897 Oscott became a central seminary for the whole of the south of England and this prompted Parkinson to think at a national level. His aims were broadened and he set out not only to make the outside world known to his students but also to make the outside world aware of Oscott and the English Roman Catholic tradition. It was a time when the University of Birmingham was in its beginnings and his interest in the relationship of science to religion led him to make contacts not only with fellow religionists like Sir Bertram Windle but other leading lights including Sir Oliver Lodge. They not only visited Oscott but they considered the possibility of students of the college attending some of the courses at the university. 
In his own studies Parkinson never lost touch with the official views of Rome and he was always prepared to adapt to any change at the top level even to the extent of forsaking some of the ideas he had imbibed as a student when they fell out of favour in Rome. When the Central Seminary collapsed in 1907 and Oscott reverted to being mainly a diocesan seminary Parkinson did not lose his breadth of vision. Interest in social matters and the effects of the industrial revolution had been the concern of many Christians throughout the previous century but Parkinson was responsible for awakening the conscience of English Roman Catholics who were lagging behind their co-religionists on the continent in these matters. He gave a regular course of lectures at Oscott on social study and incorporated it into the ethics section of the philosophy course. He was particularly attentive to Pope Leo XIII's encyclical 'Rerum novarum' and he promoted the study of papal teaching on the condition of the working classes among the laity at parish level. When the Catholic Social Guild was founded in 1909 Parkinson became its first president and later he was patron when a Catholic labour college was founded at Oxford in 1921. This was to develop into the Catholic Workers' College and eventually Plater College. 

'A Primer of Social Science' was published in 1913; it proved to be popular and was reprinted several times after Parkinson's death. He was not only associated with international Catholic conferences and meetings abroad, in Belgium and France, but he addressed public meetings at home. In 1909-10 he spoke in Birmingham on behalf of the national committee for the prevention of destitution at a meeting chaired by Henry Russell Wakefield, later the Anglican bishop of Birmingham, and he corresponded and shared platforms in Leeds and London with Sydney and Beatrice Webb. He also wrote pamphlets concerning poor law reform. He continued to attend to his duties as professor of philosophy and rector of Oscott, publishing, in Bruges, two works in Latin: 'Definitiones philosophiae universae' (1894), a glossary of philosophical terms, and 'Refectio spiritualis' (1906), a two-volume collection of meditations. He had great musical gifts and personally took charge of the college music and liturgy. He was a member of the reviewing staff of 'The Tablet' and accepted an invitation from the Catholic University of America to contribute articles to the 'Catholic Encyclopedia'. 
Parkinson was able to get through an immense amount of work by reason of his strict daily timetable from which he rarely deviated. He had a strong sense of duty. Although he was not an original thinker, he was able to transmit the benefits of his experience and wide reading to his students and the growing number of laity who were taking an interest in social matters. He remained active up to the end. Parkinson was taken ill, removed to hospital, and operated on for peritonitis, but died on 22 June 1924 at Woodlea Nursing Home, Wylde Green, Birmingham. He was buried in the cemetery at Oscott College three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 69694


McCartney, Linda Louise, Lady McCartney (1941-1998), photographer and promoter of vegetarianism, was born on 24 September 1941 in Scarsdale, New York, USA, the second child and eldest daughter in the family of one son and three daughters of Lee Eastman, formerly Leopold Vail Epstein ('b'. 1910), lawyer, and his wife, Louise Sara (1911-1962), daughter of Max Dryfoos Lindner of Cleveland, Ohio. Both her parents were Jewish. Despite the widespread belief to the contrary, the family was not related to the Eastmans of Eastman Kodak. She was educated at Scarsdale high school, spending the summers in the family house at Cape Cod, where her parents entertained artists including Willem de Kooning, and musicians such as the bandleader Tommy Dorsey. After briefly attending the University of Arizona she studied photography at a local arts centre, and married John Melvyn (Mel) See (died 2000), a geologist, on 18 June 1962. There was one daughter, Heather, from this marriage. After her divorce in 1965, she moved back to New York and took a job as an editorial assistant with 'Town and Country' magazine. 
Linda Eastman's career as a photographer of rock and roll groups was launched in 1966, after she photographed the Rolling Stones at a press reception on a boat in New York harbour. At Fillmore East Auditorium, the New York rock venue, she photographed all the most famous bands and singers of the 1960s, including The Who, The Animals, Jim Morrison and The Doors, Frank Zappa and the Mothers of Invention, and the Grateful Dead, and particularly admired Jimi Hendrix. Her photographs were much sought after, and appeared in magazines such as 'Life' and 'Mademoiselle'. A selection of these photographs, 'Sixties: Portrait of an Era', was published in 1992. 
Linda Eastman met Paul McCartney ('b'. 1942), songwriter and member of The Beatles rock group, in 1967, and they were married on 12 March 1969: he adopted Heather and they had three further children, Mary, Stella, and James. The Beatles were breaking up at the time of their marriage, and the media and the fans accused her and John Lennon's wife, Yoko Ono, of being responsible for this. She helped Paul McCartney to start writing songs again, and the first song in his solo album 'McCartney' (1970) was 'The Lovely Linda'. She helped him to form a new band, Wings, in 1971, and although she had no musical training he persuaded her to join the band as keyboard player and singer, contributing to albums including 'Ram' (1971), 'Band on the Run' (1973), and 'Venus and Mars' (1975). The Wings' recording of 'Mull of Kintyre' became the then highest-selling single ever. The band toured regularly, including a thirteen-month world tour in 1975-6 which ended at Wembley Stadium. In 1977 she wrote and recorded her first solo song, 'Seaside Woman', and this served as the soundtrack for the animated film made by Oscar Brill which won the Golden Palm for Best Short at the Cannes Film Festival in 1980. Wings was disbanded in 1980. Paul McCartney, who continued to enjoy a successful solo career, was knighted in 1997. 
Linda McCartney became a vegetarian in the early 1970s, and wrote 'Home Cooking' (1989) to encourage people who wanted to cook without using meat. After this success -- over 400,000 copies were sold -- she continued to publish cookery books, including 'Linda McCartney's Home Cooking' (1994) and 'Linda's Kitchen' (1995). 'Linda McCartney on Tour' (1998) was published posthumously. She promoted the idea of cooking vegetarian food disguised as meat, advocating the use of textured vegetable protein, and went on to launch her own line of frozen vegetarian meals, Linda McCartney's Meatless Entrees, in 1991, with dishes including Beefless Burgers and Ploughman's Pie, extending her range to include Chili Non-Carne and Bavarian Goulash. In 1995 she opened a factory in Fakenham, Norfolk, with 500 employees, but although highly successful in Britain, Linda McCartney's Home Style Cooking did not succeed in the United States, where it was launched in 1994, partly because the meals were high in calories, and contained a large proportion of fat. She became a prominent animal rights campaigner, working with People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. 
Linda McCartney's photographs became known to a wider public in the 1980s, with several exhibitions, including one at the Royal Photographic Society in Bath in 1987, and her 'Sun Prints' were shown at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1988. She was diagnosed as suffering from breast cancer in 1995 and died on 17 April 1998 at the McCartneys' ranch near Tucson, Arizona. Four of her photographs, including 'The Beatles and Yoko Ono' (1969), are in the permanent collections of the National Portrait Gallery in London and the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC. 


@@@@@


doc= 69701


Patrick, James McIntosh (1907-1998), painter and etcher, was born on 4 February 1907 at 12 Muirfield Crescent, Dundee, the second son and youngest of four children of Andrew Graham Patrick (1864-1951), architect, and his wife, Helen Moncur McIntosh, 'nee' Anderson (1866-1953). He was educated at the Morgan Academy, Dundee (1912-24), where he began drawing seriously and experimenting with etching before going to Glasgow School of Art (1924-8). Owing to his precocity, he was admitted immediately into the second year of the four-year course, which he then followed with a year's postgraduate diploma study. He won many prizes at the college. These, coupled with work during the 1926 general strike, helped to finance a summer in Provence. The on-the-spot sketches made at this time became the source for an impressive group of etchings of Carcassonne, Avignon, Nimes, and other medieval hilltowns: 'Les Baux' was exhibited at the Royal Academy, London, in 1928. The assured design and strength of draughtsmanship displayed in these works attracted attention, and by the time he left Glasgow Patrick had signed a contract with Harold Dickins, one of London's leading print dealers and publishers. The Provencal etchings, strongly influenced by Patrick's admiration for the Italian Quattrocento, were followed by a series based on the Scottish landscape, most notably the dramatic scenery of Glencoe, in which nature is depicted with awesome grandeur. 
The etching market collapsed in 1929 with the Wall Street crash, and did not revive for half a century, so Patrick, like other young etchers of his generation -- such as Sutherland, Badmin, and Tunnicliffe -- was forced to seek alternative sources of income. He found a ready market for drawings of local landmarks, which were published in the 'Dundee Courier', and in 1930 became a part-time teacher at Dundee College of Art. He also turned to oil painting, and recycled some of his earlier subject matter by exhibiting 'The Church of St Francis, Assisi' (National Gallery of South Africa) at the Royal Academy in 1931, his most ambitious work to date. Three years later the academy inexplicably rejected one of his finest early works, 'The Pass of Glencoe' (1933-4), as a result of which Harold Dickins introduced him to E. P. Dawbarn, managing director of the Fine Art Society in London's New Bond Street, who remained his principal dealers for the rest of his life. This first essay into Scottish landscape painting was followed by a successful series of the four seasons, each of which found a permanent home in a public gallery: 'Winter in Angus', painted in 1935, was purchased by the Chantrey Bequest for the Tate Gallery, followed by 'Springtime in Eskdale' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), 'Midsummer in East Fife' (Aberdeen Art Gallery) and 'Autumn in Kinordy' (McManus Gallery, Dundee). Although 'The Pass of Glencoe', a snow-bound and desolate scene, is starved of human life, the landscapes which followed were of a more pastoral nature and celebrated the impact that man had had on nature: the influence of Breughel was now mixed with that of the earlier Italians. 
On 4 July 1933, with his reputation increasing and his income underpinned by part-time teaching, Patrick married Janet Rosalind Winifred Watterston (1904-1983). They had two children: Andrew ('b'. 1935), who joined the Fine Art Society and later became its managing director and Ann ('b'. 1937), who became a painter. The steady flow of fine Scottish landscapes painted throughout the decade enabled Patrick in 1939 to purchase The Shrubbery, 67 Magdalen Yard Road, Dundee, a handsome Georgian house overlooking the Tay Bridge. The price was affordable because other potential buyers regarded the area as a prime target for German bombs. The house remained Patrick's home for the rest of his life, and from its windows he painted two of his most celebrated canvases: 'A City Garden' (1939) and 'The Tay Bridge from my Studio Window' (1948), both now in the McManus Gallery, Dundee. Called up in 1940, Patrick was trained initially as a tank driver before being commissioned in the camouflage corps, where his knowledge of the countryside was appreciated more than his artistic ability. He spent much time close to the fighting in north Africa and Italy, latterly at Capua, where he helped train other camouflage officers. Never employed as an official war artist, he was given no facilities for painting; sketchbook, pen, ink, and watercolour, rather than oils and canvas, became his constant companions, with the result that a new and direct naturalism superseded the studied studio painting of earlier years. One hundred of these watercolours -- depicting views in north Africa, Italy, Scotland, and Yorkshire -- were exhibited at the Fine Art Society in 1946, and well over half were sold. 
In post-war Scotland Patrick resumed landscape painting, but his approach had changed dramatically; this, coupled with the visual stimulation of Glasgow's 1948 Van Gogh exhibition, confirmed his decision to paint out of doors. From then on, Patrick and his easel became a familiar sight in lanes and fields around Dundee. He was elected an associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1949, and a full member eight years later, but for much of the next thirty years he had to endure critical neglect, though Dundee University awarded him an honorary doctorate of laws in 1973. The public, however, remained sympathetic and in tune with his vision, as was handsomely borne out by his retrospective exhibition in 1987, mounted by Dundee Art Gallery to celebrate his eightieth birthday; this travelled to Aberdeen and Liverpool, attracting 100,000 visitors. Patrick's ninetieth birthday was marked by an equally popular exhibition, this time at the National Gallery of Modern Art in Edinburgh. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of arts by Abertay University in 1995 and created OBE in the 1997 new year honours list. He died at his home, The Shrubbery, on 7 April 1998 and was cremated eight days later: his ashes were scattered in the Carse of Gowrie, the subject of many of his paintings. He was survived by his son and daughter, his wife having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 69703


Neal, Ernest Gordon (1911-1998), biologist and schoolmaster, was born on 20 May 1911 at 106 St Johns Road, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, the youngest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of the Revd Frederick Neal (died 1952), a Baptist minister, and his Scottish wife, Margaret Owen, 'nee' Keith (died 1959), daughter of a manufacturer of ivory goods. He was educated at Taunton School from 1926 to 1929. Although he would have liked to study medicine, his family could not afford it, and he enrolled in evening classes in botany, zoology, and chemistry at Chelsea Polytechnic, teaching at Highfield School, a preparatory school, during the day. He graduated with a second-class honours degree from London University in 1934. After teaching and working as a demonstrator in the zoology department of Chelsea Polytechnic for a year, he took a teaching job at Rendcomb College, a small boarding-school for boys near Cirencester. On 30 April 1937 he married Helen Elizabeth 
(Betty; 'b'. 1913)
, daughter of George Sutherland Thomson, a dairying and agricultural consultant; they had three sons. 
Although Neal's application to be registered as a conscientious objector during the Second World War was rejected, he was deemed unfit to serve as a medical orderly in the armed forces, and remained at Rendcomb until 1946, when he moved to Taunton School as biology master and in 1948 became head of science. Always keen to involve his pupils in ecological projects and field trips, he published a book for schools, 'Woodland Ecology', in 1953. He became second master in 1960, and from 1960 to 1966 was also housemaster of a senior house. He retired in 1971, and with his son Keith wrote 'Biology for Today' (1974; rev. edn, 1983), an O-level textbook. 
Neal's interest in nature began as a child when he accompanied his father on butterfly-watching expeditions, and he later took up nature photography as a hobby: he published 'Exploring Nature with a Camera' (1946), containing many of his black and white photographs, including pictures of the effects of the 'ice rain' of early 1940. He first saw badgers in the wild in 1936, and as he became fascinated by their ecology and behaviour, he began to photograph them. After the success of 'The Badger' (1948), the first in the Collins 'New Naturalist' series of monographs, which ran to five editions and included the first colour photograph of wild badgers at night, he was in demand as a lecturer. In 1949 he made a short film of badgers, which he was asked to show at a meeting of the Zoological Society of London. This led to his making a longer film, with Professor Humphrey Hewer, which took three years to complete and which was shown on BBC television in 1954. Neal became a regular broadcaster, appearing as a member of the panel of 'Country Questions' in the late 1950s, and started to make television programmes for schools in 1961. 
A founder of the Mammal Society of the British Isles (later the Mammal Society) in 1954, Neal started the badger group, which organized a national sett survey over many years: he chaired the society from 1974 to 1980, and was elected president in 1980. At the same time he was conducting research into the reproductive cycle of the badger, which formed the basis of the dissertation he submitted for a London University PhD in 1960. In the 1970s he campaigned for legislation to protect badgers from extermination by farmers and landowners, and the first 'Badger Act' was passed in 1973, protecting badgers but not their setts. In 1975, with growing evidence that badgers were implicated in infecting cattle with bovine tuberculosis, the government set up a consultative panel of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food on badgers and tuberculosis, and Neal was invited to be a member, serving for fifteen years. Gassing of badgers became illegal in 1982, and setts were given full protection in the 'Badgers Act' of 1991. As part of his efforts to win over public opinion, in 1977 Neal organized 'Badger Watch', a series of live television programmes on five consecutive nights at a badger sett in Gloucestershire. He was advisory editor for the Blandford 'Mammal Series', contributing the volume 'Badgers' (1977), and later became editor of the 'Helm Mammal Series'. He published 'The Natural History of Badgers' (1986), revised as 'Badgers' in 1996 with the help of Chris Cheeseman. 
Neal visited Africa for the first time in 1962, and in 1969 he accepted an invitation to study the banded mongoose and other small nocturnal carnivores in the Queen Elizabeth National Park in Uganda, work which he summarized in 'Uganda Quest' (1971). He became interested in the ecology of Africa, and was invited to be a guest lecturer for Swan Hellenic and Ecosafaris, accompanying wildlife safaris in east Africa and the Seychelles until 1990. He contributed 'On Safari in East Africa: a Background Guide' (1991) to the Collins 'Natural History Series'. 
Neal was elected a fellow of the Institute of Biology in 1963, and in 1966 he was given the Sir Stamford Raffles award by the Zoological Society of London. He was appointed MBE in 1976 for his work as chairman of the Somerset Trust for Nature Conservation, which he had helped to found. A practising Christian all his life, he was a deacon of Albemarle Baptist church in Taunton. His autobiography, 'The Badger Man: Memoirs of a Biologist', was published in 1994. He died on 5 April 1998 at Dial House, 38 Park Avenue, Bedford. He was survived by his wife, Betty. 


@@@@@


doc= 69722


Powell, Colin Trevor (1947-1998), rock musician, was born on 29 December 1947 at Cirencester, Gloucestershire. Adopted, he never discovered the identity of his natural parents. He was married but divorced. 
Cozy Powell was one of rock's most celebrated drummers. His powerful style was a feature of many of the biggest rock groups of the 1970s and 1980s, including Rainbow, Whitesnake, and Black Sabbath. He also epitomized the flamboyant rock star. Lean and muscular, his dark hair worn long, Powell loved to drive fast cars and motorcycles and was photographed in racing leathers and astride a powerful 'superbike' on the cover of Rainbow's 1980 album 'Down to Earth', the most successful recording of his thirty-year career. He had raced formula 3 cars before joining Rainbow in 1975. 
As a teenager Powell played in a variety of groups, including Big Bertha and the Sorcerors, before he was recruited by leading British guitarist Jeff Beck, who had been Eric Clapton's replacement in the Yardbirds. Powell appeared on two albums by the Jeff Beck Group, 'Rough and Ready' (1971) and 'Jeff Beck Group' (1972). Both albums sold well in America but less so in Britain, and when Beck split the group Powell formed his own heavy rock band, Bedlam, with singer Frank Aiello, guitarist Dave Ball, and bassist Dennis Ball. Bedlam released one album, simply titled 'Bedlam', on the Chrysalis label in 1973. 
Powell was also in demand as a session musician, and played uncredited on numerous pop records of the early 1970s. Noted producer Mickie Most hired him to work on singles by Donovan and Hot Chocolate, and encouraged Powell to make a solo recording. His first solo single, 'Dance with the Devil', was a number three hit in the UK in December 1973 -- a rare distinction indeed for a drummer. Powell formed a new ensemble, Cozy Powell's Hammer, to capitalize on his success with a British tour. Two more top twenty hits followed in 1974 ('The Man in Black', which reached number eighteen, and 'Na na na', a second top ten hit) before Powell accepted an invitation from former Deep Purple guitarist Ritchie Blackmore to join his new group, Rainbow. 
With Rainbow, Cozy Powell's star rose to its highest point. The first album he recorded with the band, 'Rainbow Rising', peaked at number eleven in the UK chart and is widely acknowledged as a classic example of 1970s rock. Powell's contribution to the track entitled 'Stargazer' helped to establish the song as Rainbow's defining moment and confirmed Powell as one of the leading rock musicians of his generation, a worthy successor to Led Zeppelin's formidable drummer, John Bonham. 
Powell recorded three more albums with Rainbow: 'On Stage' (1977), 'Long Live Rock 'n' Roll' (1978), and 'Down to Earth' (1979). The latter produced two hit singles in 'Since You Been Gone', which reached number six in September 1979, and 'All Night Long', which peaked at number five in February 1980 and featured a typically powerful performance from Powell, whose solo single 'Theme One' became his final British chart entry in November 1979. In August 1980 Rainbow topped the bill at the inaugural Monsters of Rock festival at Castle Donington racetrack in Leicestershire, drawing an audience of 50,000. 
Despite the group's success, Powell quit Rainbow near the end of 1980 and joined the Michael Schenker Group, led by the acclaimed guitarist whose reputation had been established in German hard rock act Scorpions and with British band UFO. This liaison lasted for two years and two 1981 albums: 'MSG' and 'One Night at Budokan'. Then Powell was tempted to work with another former Deep Purple star, singer David Coverdale, in Whitesnake. In a turbulent time for the group Powell appeared on the album 'Slide it in' (1984), which laid the foundation for Whitesnake's huge success in North America in the late 1990s. He also starred on a solo album by The Who's vocalist, Roger Daltrey, entitled 'Under a Raging Moon' and dedicated to the memory of Daltrey's late bandmate Keith Moon, whose aggressive style of drumming had a profound influence on Powell. His sometime collaborator Neil Murray wrote that Powell was 'the most powerful drummer I have played with... [he] always tried to get 'his' sound captured on record, which used a lot of room acoustic to achieve a huge sound'. Live, he 'liked to put on a very visual show... and... became famous for his drum solos, which incorporated explosions, strobes and flame jets, which many other drummers copied'. Powell's musical tastes were eclectic, and his shows 'usually included him playing along to pieces of music such as Tchaikovsky's '1812 Overture'' (Siegler). 
Powell was a member of Whitesnake when the band took top billing at Castle Donington in 1983 and at the Rock in Rio festival in 1985, but at the close of 1985 he joined Keith Emerson and Greg Lake in reactivating virtuoso progressive rock trio ELP. In 1989 Powell was lured by another legendary rock band, Black Sabbath, which he left two years later having suffered an injury in a riding accident. He appears on three Black Sabbath albums: 'Headless Cross' (1989), 'Tyr' (1990), and 'Forbidden' (1995). 
In the 1990s Cozy Powell recorded and toured with former Queen guitarist Brian May (he is featured on May's 1993 album 'Back to the Light' and 1998's 'Another World') and with former Fleetwood Mac guitarist Peter Green's Splinter Group. Powell, noted for his likeable personality, secured Green's return to the stage following a drug-related breakdown in the late 1960s. 
Powell recorded four solo albums: 'Over the Top' (1979), 'Tilt' (1981), 'Octopus' (1983), and 'The Drums are Back' (1992). He also played on former Led Zeppelin vocalist Robert Plant's 'Pictures at Eleven' (1982), Gary Moore's 'After the War' (1989), and Judas Priest guitarist Glenn Tipton's 'Baptism of Fire' (1998). 
Shortly before his death Powell sustained several broken ribs when his new Harley Davidson motorcycle collided with a tractor on a narrow country lane. Unfortunately, the accident did not dampen his enthusiasm for high-speed driving. On the night he died -- 5 April 1998 -- Powell was reported to have been travelling at close to 100 m.p.h. on the M4 near Bristol when his Saab vehicle veered from the road. It was also reported that he had been using a mobile phone, the safety of which devices in motor vehicles was a matter of public debate at the time. He died from his injuries at Frenchay Hospital, and his body was cremated in Wiltshire on 18 April 1998; a memorial concert was held in Buxton on 1 May 1999. 


@@@@@


doc= 69723


Ayscu, Edward (1550-1616/17), historian, was a native of Cotham or Nun Cotham, Lincolnshire. Several branches of the family were resident in Lincolnshire, and this has occasioned considerable confusion as to the identity of the historian, who was the son of Edward Ayscough (died 1558), Henry VIII's cup-bearer, and his wife, Margaret Gibson (died 1593), daughter of Thomas Gibson of Cotham. Anne Askew, the Henrician protestant martyr, was his father's sister. The elder Ayscough settled at Cotham some time before 1550, the year in which, in August, Edward the younger was born. Little is known about Ayscu's education or career, but he married Ursula, daughter of Henry Skipwith; she died in 1611. The couple had four sons, Henry, William, Edward, and John, and a daughter, Janet. 
Ayscu the historian appears to have spent most of his time in Cotham, and it is from there that he dates his only known work, 'A historie contayning the warres, treaties, marriages, and other occurrents betweene England and Scotland, from King William the Conqueror' (1607). One of a number of such histories written in the early years of the reign of James I, it was clearly inspired by the project to unite the kingdoms of Scotland and England. Dedicated to Henry, prince of Wales, it provides a history of the relations between the two kingdoms from Roman times to the accession of James to the English crown. Although presented largely in an English perspective, the 'Historie' aspired to provide a balanced account that harmonized the conflicting narratives of Scottish and English chroniclers. Although Ayscu often takes Scottish historians to task on particular points, he is firm in his belief that the two countries, cohabiting the same island, were destined to unite both by common ethnic origins and by providence. He takes the side of Robert Bruce in recounting the Scottish wars of independence in the early fourteenth century, though he periodically slips into the habit of regarding the Scots as having 'rebelled' against an English overlordship whose legitimacy is presumed. Ayscu was well read in medieval chronicles and modern authorities such as William Camden. Although the 'Historie' begins by stating that all European nations are descended from Noah's son Japheth (as was then commonly believed), its author shows a much greater degree of scepticism towards other ancient myths and legends, including that of Brutus the Trojan, than may be found in many contemporaneous works. A firm protestant who openly avows Anne Askew as his aunt, Ayscu makes frequent jibes against the papacy and Catholicism, while treading carefully around the queenship of James I's mother, Mary, queen of Scots. 
Ayscu dated his will 31 August 1616, from Lincoln, but it was not proved until 17 March 1617, principally owing to the absence overseas of his eldest son and executor, Henry. In his will he describes himself as living in Lincoln, and it may have been there that he consulted the sources used in his 'Historie'. Edward Ayscu the historian has in the past been confused with his cousin, 


@@@@@


doc= 69724


Bowyer, William (d. 1569/70), antiquary, was one of the six sons of Robert Bowyer (died 1552), of Chichester, Sussex, and his wife, Margaret. His father was four times mayor of Chichester, and MP for the borough in 1529 and 1547. His elder brother Robert (died 1567/8) represented Chichester in the parliaments of 1555 and 1559, while Agnes, one of his five sisters, married William Neale, auditor of the exchequer. Bowyer's early life before his entry into the Middle Temple in 1553 is obscure. However, in his will of 15 April 1569 he paid tribute to Alexander Nowell, dean of St Paul's and former master of Westminster School, 'my singular good Master and no lesse approved good frende' for 'my bringing up in the feare and knowledge of god' (fol. 142'v'). By 1560 Bowyer was bailiff of the borough of Westminster, where he came into contact with Sir William Cecil, the high steward. He resided in the parish of Wimbledon, Surrey, alongside Cecil, and at the time of his death was owed $500 by the queen's secretary of state. Bowyer's other residence was in Hand Alley, off London's Fleet Street. He married, at an uncertain date, Agnes, daughter of Sir John Harcourt (died 1566) of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and Ellenhall, Staffordshire, and Margaret, daughter of Sir William Barentyne. Agnes was the widow of John Knyvet of Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk. They had two sons, William and Robert, and a daughter, Judith. Bowyer's closest friend was Edward Flowerdew of Norfolk, a lawyer who became a serjeant-at-law and a baron of the exchequer. 
Bowyer sat in the parliament of 1563 for Westminster. A year later he was identified as a supporter of the protestant faith and appointed a JP for Surrey. In 1565 he assisted the city of London in the defence of its trading privileges at the Anglo-Netherlandish colloquy of Bruges. By January 1563 Bowyer was occupying the position of keeper of records in the Tower of London, although his patent for that office was not issued until 18 June 1567. His efforts in the latter year to secure custody of the records of parliament and chancery stored in the Rolls Chapel and Rolls House were thwarted by Sir William Cordell, the master of the rolls, but Bowyer still had in his keeping the largest collection of government records, and he was credited by John Strype in the early eighteenth century with being 'the first Digester of them into some Method' (McKisack, 82-3). It was later stated that he devoted eight years and $1000 to his labours, producing digests of the parliament, patent, charter, close, and foreign rolls, from the reigns of King John to Edward IV (now in the College of Arms), as well as a list of escheats, a medieval roll of arms and a heraldic commonplace book. As a collector of manuscripts, Bowyer acquired the Rievaulx Abbey copy of Roger of Howden's 'Chronica', the C manuscript of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', William of Malmesbury's 'De antiquitate Glastoniensis ecclesiae', Ranulf Higden's 'Polychronicon', and Laurence Nowell's transcription of the 'Vita et mors Edwardi secundi' (part of Geoffrey le Baker's chronicle), among other notable documents of the English medieval past. His second son, Robert Bowyer (d. 1621), who became keeper of the records in the Tower in 1604, inherited many of his father's heraldic and historical manuscripts, some of which are preserved in the library of the Inner Temple. The eldest son, William, acquired the 'bokes escriptes writinges and monuments... as be of my own hande writing... as matters of greater value then all that I leave' (fol. 142'r'). Bowyer died possessed of the leases of his residences, the prebend of Waltham in Chichester Cathedral and parsonage of Selsey, Sussex, and the farm of Little Thetford, Cambridgeshire. Probate of his will was granted on 23 June 1570, his widow being his executor. 


