@@@@@


doc= 70136


(Stephen) Lucas Bridges (1874-1949), writer and sheep farmer, was born on 31 December 1874 at Ushuaia, the third of Thomas Bridges' six children. On hearing of Cook's appropriation of his father's work Bridges travelled to Belgium in 1910 and convinced M. Lequent, curator of the observatoire, that the order of names on the cover should be reversed, with the authorship going to Thomas Bridges 'while at the foot it was to be stated in small type that Dr. Frederick A. Cook had brought the work to the notice of the Observatoire Royal' (L. Bridges, 534). With the outbreak of the First World War, in 1914 the manuscript of the dictionary disappeared until, fifteen years later, the family received a letter from Dr Ferdinand Hestermann, professor at the University of Munster, informing them that he had the manuscript. Hestermann transcribed the dictionary into the anthropos phonetic system and in 1933 it was privately printed at Modling, in Austria, in a limited edition of 300 copies. The Bridges family wanted the manuscript donated to the British Museum, but on the outbreak of the Second World War both Hestermann and the manuscript disappeared. At the end of the war both were rediscovered, Hestermann having hidden the manuscript in a kitchen cupboard. It was presented to the British Museum on 9 January 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 70137


Wilson, Mona (1872-1954), civil servant and author, was born in Hillmorton Road, Rugby, on 29 May 1872, the eldest of the four children of James Maurice Wilson (1836-1931), headmaster and Church of England clergyman, and his first wife, Annie Elizabeth Moore, who died in childbirth in July 1878. Her father subsequently married Georgina Mary Talbot (died 1926) on 26 March 1883; there were four children of the second marriage. Arnold Talbot Wilson and (James) Steuart Wilson were her half-brothers. She was educated at Clifton high school and St Leonard's School, St Andrews, before going in 1892 to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she remained until 1896, though she took no examinations. She was made an associate of Newnham in 1932. 
Mona Wilson shared her father's interest in the investigation of social and industrial problems, and after she left university she joined the Women's Trade Union League as its secretary in 1899. The league's president was Lady Emilia Dilke, and through her Wilson came to know other young women prominent in the movement for social reform, such as Lucy Streatfeild, May Tennant, Gertrude Tuckwell, and Mary Macarthur -- many of whom became state employees. In 1899, under the auspices of the Industrial Law Committee, she compiled a handbook of the legal regulations affecting the working conditions of women employed in factories, workshops, shops, and laundries. It was intended to inform district visitors, deaconesses, mission workers, residents in settlements, helpers in friendly societies and working girls' clubs, and other social workers of what the legal rights of women workers were, so that they could alert the factory inspectorate when the regulations were not complied with. 
In the 1890s Wilson began her friendship with the writer Thomas Sturge Moore (1870-1944) and others of his literary and artistic circle. Despite her strong sense of public duty, she sometimes described her work in social investigation and administration as uncongenial and was much more attracted by the literary world (reminiscences of Sturge Moore sent to Marie Sturge Moore, Sturge Moore MSS, 25/126B). She joined the literary theatre club set up by Moore; his description of her to Robert Trevelyan as 'the lady with the terrible eyes' (Legge, 193) was no doubt a reference to her serious and direct gaze. Her obituary noted that 'her ethereal beauty might well have provided a model for Sir Edward Burne-Jones' ('The Times'). 
In 1902 Wilson took part in an investigation of social conditions in West Ham, and in 1904, with Miss Mary L. Walker, she directed an inquiry into housing, income, and employment in Dundee -- described as one of the most exhaustive ever undertaken. The work also took its toll on her. She described Dundee as 'the most depressing place you can possibly imagine', and although she hoped that her inquiry might do something to eliminate some of the worst social ills, she concluded, 'things here are altogether past praying for' and expressed a wider disillusion (20 Aug 1904, Sturge Moore MSS, 32/85). Later in 1904 she spent some time in Edinburgh to get away from Dundee, and wrote to Mrs Moore that although her work was interesting, 'the absolute lack of variety -- of friends and pictures and of superfluous brains to read with -- make the time pass so slowly...' (letter to Marie Sturge Moore, 6 Nov 1904, Sturge Moore MSS, 32/87). When the Dundee inquiry was completed, she made plans for a visit to France to 'do something cheerful before I settle down to a new job or I shall become as dull as a Blue Book'. She sent the Moores a copy of her report with apologies for its dullness, noting that journalism was easier to write and read, but that 'colourless fact' was needed to 'back up certain reforms' (letter to Marie Sturge Moore, 4 June 1905, Sturge Moore MSS, 32/90). 
Wilson drew on that experience in her only traced novel, 'The Story of Rosalind Retold from her Diary' (1910), a short account of a talented writer and artist who took up 'studying social problems in the slums' when her father died, and who died young and tragically. She wrote the book under the pseudonym Monica Moore, presumably as a tribute to Moore. The novel's male narrator reflects Wilson's ambivalence about the work of social reform, describing it as work for which he had 'little liking' and 'less knowledge... To me it seemed a terrible waste of her gracious beauty and unusual gifts' (p. 2). 
Wilson was subject to bouts of ill health, and her correspondence during the early years of the twentieth century refers to escapes -- often to Ireland -- from the work of social inquiry. During one such interlude, riding and hunting in co. Wicklow, she set out her views on women's suffrage and expressed her reservations about women's voluntary social work: she had 'always found the ordinary middle class woman the worst enemy of the questions I care about which does not induce me to be particularly anxious that she should have a vote. I cannot bring myself to be a 'womaniser' and work for 'women's revolution' etc. as it seems to entail a belief that women are better than men -- whereas I think that only a handful of either sex is very conspicuous for brains and virtue combined, and have a suspicion that the hand containing the men would be distinctly the largest. (letter to Marie Sturge Moore, 15 March 1908, Sturge Moore MSS, 32/94)' In November 1911 Wilson was appointed to the National Insurance Commission. She received the same salary -- $1000 a year -- as her male colleagues, becoming the highest-paid woman civil servant and one of the first to receive equal pay. In 1917 she was seconded to the secretariat of the newly formed Ministry of Reconstruction, where she was the first woman assistant secretary. She acted as secretary to various committees at the ministry and had some responsibility for co-ordinating the voluntary and professional sectors of women's social work during and just after the First World War. She also played a part in the preliminary investigations into setting up a ministry of health. As one of the most senior women civil servants, she found that her views on policy issues affecting women carried some weight. In a record of a meeting with her friend Margaret Llewelyn Davies, the general secretary of the Women's Co-operative Guild, she set out her reservations about the scheme of mother's allowances proposed by the guild during discussions on the 'National Insurance Bill', noting that Miss Davies: 'seemed inclined to the view, which has apparently been taken by Miss Eleanor Rathbone... that the father should be relieved by the State of all responsibility for the upkeep of his wife and family... She advocated the individual wage for the father, and was not prepared to agree that this might be taken as a direct encouragement to polygamy, or that the introduction of such a measure after the War would tend to keep down wages. (memorandum to Vaughan Nash, 19 Nov 1917, TNA: PRO, MH78/80)' In the light of criticism from Miss Wilson and Michael Heseltine, also an assistant secretary at the ministry, the Women's Co-operative Guild amended its proposals on the bill. 
Given the tone of her letters to the Sturge Moores, it is unlikely that Wilson regretted her retirement from the civil service in 1919. The optimism with which the Ministry of Reconstruction had been set up in 1917 was quickly followed by disappointment and disillusion. In 1919 the ministry was combined with the Ministry of National Service, amalgamated with the Board of Trade, and abolished. Its programmes for wide and enlightened social reform were restricted or ignored by departments more concerned with economy. Her own job disappeared; it had been decided in 1918 that it was 'not desirable to continue the appointment of a woman Assistant Secretary' (memo from Eustace Davies to Vaughan Nash, 15 March 1918, TNA: PRO, RECO1/201). 
Wilson moved to Wiltshire, where she lived with her close friend, the writer and historian George Malcolm Young (1882-1959), with whom she had worked at the Ministry of Reconstruction. She was made a JP and served as a member of the Industrial Fatigue Research Board (1919-29), but devoted most of her time to a prolific literary career. She wrote a series of biographies and biographical studies and often contributed to several literary journals -- especially 'English', for which she wrote many reviews. She wrote a chapter, 'Travel and holidays', in 'Early Victorian England' (1934), edited by Young. 
Wilson's account of the life and work of William Blake (first published in 1927) remained popular for several decades and was reprinted several times. Her work on less well-known eighteenth-century women writers, 'These were Muses' (1924) and 'Jane Austen and some Contemporaries' (1938), betrays her preference for a more subtle advocacy of women's claims for equal consideration. In the latter, she referred to her conviction that Austen's name 'should be linked with that of the great Vindicator of the Rights of Women, Mary Wollstonecraft, and that the 'vis comica' of the one has been as powerful an agency in their vindication as the 'saeva indignatio' of the other' (p. ix). In her contribution to 'From Anne to Victoria: Essays by Various Hands', edited by Bonamy Dobree (1937), she noted that Austen was 'the most effective exponent' of Wollstonecraft's 'main thesis' (p. 572). Her biography 'Queen Elizabeth' (1932) shows an understanding of the problems faced by women who hold positions of power as well as those of a monarch who was the head of her own civil service. 
Towards the end of her life, Mona Wilson suffered from eye problems and hyperthyroidism, but her letters suggest that she was more concerned about Young's health than about her own. Several letters refuse invitations because 'Mr. Young' was too ill to travel far. In the event, she died at 99 Howards Lane, Putney, London, on 26 October 1954, four years before him. She was always circumspect in describing their relationship -- as was he (his 'Who's Who' entries gave his address only as his club), although she clearly felt deep affection and respect for him and set great store by his judgement. A pointed comment on the fact that the Blakes had no children implies her views on the discussion of the private lives of writers and artists: she observed that 'speculation as to the influence of this deprivation may be left to those who deem it worth their pains' ('The Life of William Blake', 1971, 20). 
Mona Wilson belonged to a generation of civil servants who shaped much of twentieth-century social policy, and to a group of women who powerfully influenced the civil service careers of their successors. She was a successful writer, whose work -- especially on eighteenth-century women -- deserves to be better known. On the surface, her writing has the calm detachment of the historical observer; as one reviewer noted, she 'narrated all the facts [with] thorough but lightly borne knowledge' ('The Times', review of 'Sir Philip Sidney', 19 May 1931). However, some of her choices of subject -- and, in particular, her sensitive discussion of Blake and Sidney -- suggest that the passion that lay behind her quiet but clear style was not only for historical truth. 


@@@@@


doc= 70139


Higginson, Eleanor Beatrice (1881-1969), suffragette, was born on 19 April 1881 at 2 Caroline Villas, Plashet Road, Plaistow, London, the eldest of the four children of Alfred Leopold Ellis, a merchant seaman, and his wife, Elizabeth Vernon. Her family moved first to Manchester, then to Preston, Lancashire. There, Eleanor trained as a schoolteacher, working at St Mark's School until she married Arnold Higginson (1879-1938), a chemist, on 9 September 1905. The couple had five children, four of whom survived into adulthood. About 1910 Eleanor opened a health food shop in Preston, which she ran until 1920. 
Eleanor Higginson's involvement in the suffrage campaign was at the instigation of another suffragette, Edith Rigby, then honorary secretary of the Preston branch of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU). Preston WSPU recruited many women from the Labour Party and the Women's Labour League, and as a prominent Labour Party member Higginson was encouraged to become involved. However, she initially refused the invitation, but agreed to attend local meetings. 
Higginson became actively involved in the suffrage movement relatively late in the campaign, in summer 1913. In April 1914 she became the honorary secretary of Preston WSPU, replacing another active suffragette, Elizabeth Ellen (Beth) Hesmondhalgh. Both women ran the Preston branch during late 1913 and early 1914 while its mainstay, Edith Rigby, was in hiding from the authorities. 
On 21 May 1914 Higginson took part in a WSPU deputation to the king. The deputation was not received, and in the struggle of protest Higginson, like others, experienced violent treatment from the police. She later said that 'they mauled us about the shoulders and we were all of us black and blue the next day' (Raeburn, 230). She was not arrested, and so returned to the 'safe house' that had been arranged by the London membership, where she and the other women who had not been arrested were given stones and asked to go out and break windows in protest at the king's refusal to hear the deputation. 
Higginson threw a brick at a pub window, and was soon arrested along with a total of sixty-five other women and two men. The scenes in court as the accused were committed for trial were chaotic, and Higginson was eventually charged, alongside two other women, with breaking a shop window in Parliament Street. Of the three charged, one pleaded guilty, while the other two were convicted by jury. All were sentenced to four months in prison. 
In Holloway gaol Higginson adopted a hunger and thirst strike and was released after less than two weeks under the provisions of the ''Cat and Mouse Act''. This act allowed prisoners debilitated by hunger strikes to be released under licence, giving them time to recover before they were fit to be re-arrested and returned to prison. Higginson was released for about three weeks before being re-arrested and detained in Holloway for three days, after which she was again released on licence owing to ill health. The First World War broke out before she was required to return to prison, and thus she benefited from the amnesty that was then declared for all suffragette prisoners. 
Like the WSPU leadership, the Preston branch called off its suffrage campaign during the war, and instead Higginson and her colleague Edith Rigby organized a jam-making enterprise to combat the food shortage. When the war and the campaign for the vote were over, Higginson turned to local politics. She took a keen interest in local government throughout the remainder of her life, becoming a local magistrate and from 1940 to 1945 serving as a representative on Preston town council. She took Workers' Education Association classes in Preston, was a delegate to Preston's trades and labour council and also unsuccessfully stood as a local government candidate for Ashton ward. 
Throughout her life Higginson kept in touch with Edith Rigby and a number of her suffragette colleagues. Her husband, Arnold, died on 10 June 1938, and in 1954 she moved to Bognor Regis, Sussex, where she lived for the remainder of her life with her old WSPU colleague Beth Hesmondhalgh. Eleanor Higginson died in St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, on 8 June 1969, aged eighty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 70140


Stewart, Frederick (1836-1889), educationist and colonial administrator, was born on 17 October 1836 at Rathen, near Fraserburgh, Scotland, the eldest of the three children of James Stewart ('bap'. 1810, died 1896), a crofter and merchant tailor, and his wife, Jane (Jean) Stewart ('c'.1801-1874), the daughter of a farmer, Alexander Brown, and his wife, Catherine Lyon Brown. He was educated first at Rathen parish school and Aberdeen grammar school, where he studied under W. D. Strahan, the Latinist James Melvin, and the Greek scholar W. D. Geddes. In 1859 he headed the honours list at King's College, Aberdeen, with a first class in intellectual and moral sciences. He then studied at Divinity Hall, Aberdeen University. While occupying a vacation position at Stubbington House School, near Fareham, Hampshire, he applied for the concurrent posts in Hong Kong of headmaster of the new Hong Kong Government Central School for [Chinese] Boys and inspector of government schools for Chinese. 
Popular among fellow pupils and students, Stewart was glowingly recommended by the principal of Aberdeen University, P. C. Campbell, and at his interview with the chairman of the Hong Kong board of education, George Smith, first (Anglican) bishop of Victoria, he was selected for appointment. He then abandoned his preparation for the Presbyterian ministry and sailed from Southampton by Peninsular and Oriental steamer on 20 December 1861. He disembarked at Hong Kong on 15 February 1862. 
Although much developed since its first (unofficial) British occupation in 1841, Hong Kong was still a barren rock. Smaller-scale earlier missionary initiatives in education for the Chinese, largely fruitless in establishing a Chinese Christian ministry for the conversion of China, had been abandoned. The increased access to China granted by a recent treaty highlighted the British need for bilinguals. With its growing Chinese population mixed with English and other nationals, Hong Kong itself needed culturally sympathetic residents who could intercommunicate. 
Stewart passionately valued education for individual fulfilment and only secondly for society's needs. Over the next sixteen years he established, developed, and managed both a school and a system, learning and using spoken Cantonese and written Chinese in his work. On 30 June 1865 he became the first head of the government education department. He enjoyed strong support from the governors Sir Richard MacDonnell and Sir Arthur Kennedy, but his work was obstructed after the arrival as governor in 1877 of John Pope Hennessy, who unfairly faulted the English-language achievements of Stewart's Central School pupils and disapproved of the dual curriculum which was the school's unique and particular strength. 
After registering a minority vote at a one-day educational conference called by Hennessy in 1878, Stewart left for his planned only home leave. Before he embarked, representative groups of residents showed their support by deputations, addresses, and gifts. The Colonial Office consulted Stewart at length in London during his year's leave, and consequently requested Hennessy in future to consult Stewart on all educational matters. But, to public indignation, Hennessy replaced Stewart as inspector of schools immediately he returned to Hong Kong. Stewart protested to no avail. Soon news arrived that the University of Aberdeen had awarded him an LLD. 
In 1881 Stewart was appointed police magistrate and resigned as headmaster of the Central School. In 1883, on the initiative of the Colonial Office, and under a new governor, Sir George Bowen, he was appointed registrar-general and protector of Chinese. In 1884 former pupils -- now community leaders -- established in his honour the Central School Stewart scholarship. Bowen twice recommended him for the CMG, but Stewart deflected the award, writing, 'My ambition is to be allowed to do my work and be left unknown to the World at large' (Bickley, 'Golden Needle', 234). In 1887 Stewart was appointed colonial secretary -- the head of the permanent civil service -- and he occasionally acted as governor. 
After a short illness, probably caused by a chill, Stewart died of double pneumonia at his home, 10 Arbuthnot Road, Hong Kong, on 29 September 1889. The next day's private funeral procession to the protestant cemetery, Happy Valley, of the man the 'Pall Mall Gazette' considered one of Hong Kong's 'ablest officials' (Bickley, 'Golden Needle', 255), was the largest that the colony had experienced; it was attended by leading officials, dignitaries, merchants, and religious leaders, and the school Stewart founded. A memorial stained-glass window was erected in St John's Cathedral by public subscription. His successor Bateson Wright wrote that Stewart would 'ever be famous as the Founder of Education' in Hong Kong (Bickley, 'Contact pedagogies', 382). A grateful pupil -- in the first Chinese to be knighted by the British crown -- willed instructions for maintaining Stewart's grave. Stewart's personal estate, at just over $2000, was considered surprisingly small, a result of continual quiet acts of charity. 
Stewart never married. His mother and brother having predeceased him, his will named his aged father and spinster sister. A third beneficiary was a young Macanese who, with his pregnant wife, was living with Stewart in Stewart's large house when he died. Also mentioned were a friend from Stewart's student days and the University of Aberdeen. He was remembered as scholarly, modest, and reclusive; yet he had warm friends and many admirers. When British administration of Hong Kong ended on 30 June 1997, Stewart Road and Stewart Terrace still bore his name. The prestigious Queen's College (the former Central School) had a Stewart house and the Stewart scholarship. 
Stewart's own classical education taught him cultural and historical perspective and the need for cultural accommodation. During his time, many in Hong Kong were too poor to educate their children: school attendance among the farming and large transient fishing communities was irregular and Chinese girls generally were not educated. Stewart had appeals distributed door to door to encourage attendance. In 1873 he established a successful grant-in-aid scheme for non-government schools (generally warmly supported by missionaries) and secured considerable increases in the proportion of children attending school. In 1889 he supported a successful initiative to extend government Western education taught through English to Chinese girls. 
Nevertheless, responding to Chinese conservatism, Stewart accepted that the full-scale changes that he hoped for would take time; he confided to readers of his thirteen published annual inspector's reports (1866-1878) that: 'education... bears a relation not to this arbitrary standard or to that, but to the particular mental condition of the people among whom it is being disseminated' (Bickley, 'Plus ca change', 295). 
Stewart's early influences were also apparent in the high moral tone of his popular school, which in 1867 was opened to all races and nationalities. Nevertheless, controversy followed his principled decision to omit direct Christian instruction in government schools. 
Through his work in setting up a government education system which accommodated the best of two cultures -- English and Chinese languages, Western and Chinese curricula, and modern and traditional pedagogies -- Stewart made an important impact on Hong Kong society and contributed to the modernization of China and Western influence by his own educational example, the pedagogical materials produced for his schools, and the pupils educated within his system. Bilingual and bicultural pupils from the flagship Hong Kong Government Central School for Boys provided suitable entrants to the Chinese government's modern schools and staff for many Chinese institutions, including Sir Robert Hart's maritime customs service. Several won positions of influence in the imperial Chinese or Hong Kong colonial governments. Others, admiring Western communities, became revolutionaries, most notably Sun Yatsen, whose Chinese republic replaced the Manchu empire in 1911. The Central School also provided a nucleus of students for the Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese, of which Stewart was the first rector. This developed into the University of Hong Kong, and the seed was sown for the later mature expansion of Western-style tertiary education in this former British crown colony. 


@@@@@


doc= 70143


Sir James MacDonald of Knockrinsay (c.1570-1626), and Angus's inability to control the divisions within his own clan was most poignantly manifested in the utter breakdown of relations which followed between himself and his heir. James MacDonald was now in his mid-twenties. Knighted between 1594 and 1596, he married Margaret, sister of Campbell of Cawdor, about 1597, but had no children. He spent several years in custody as a result of the government's hostage diplomacy, thereby losing all faith in his father. The terms he obtained in 1596 would have required him yet again to stay at court. Sir James understood, where his father did not, that prolonged passive resistance could no longer force an issue with the government. He felt that the clan should make a tactical withdrawal from Kintyre so that it could at least retain Islay. Angus disagreed. Having abandoned hope of persuading his father to submit to the crown, and bitter at the years of imprisonment in his stead, Sir James set fire to his father's house of Askomull, in Campbeltown in Kintyre, in February 1598, in the full knowledge that his parents were inside. But though he was badly burnt, Angus survived to be imprisoned by Sir James, who now assumed leadership of the clan. 


@@@@@


doc= 70144


Kerr, Sir Thomas (d. in or before 1611), soldier, is first recorded in 1571 as captain to Adam Gordon of Auchindoun, brother to the fifth earl of Huntly, in one of the recurrent outbreaks of the bitter feud between the Gordon and Forbes families. After Auchindoun was victorious at Crabstane on 20 November, he sent Kerr to take possession of Corgarffe, the stronghold of Black Arthour Forbes in Towy; when Forbes's wife, Margaret, refused to surrender, Auchindoun authorized his captain to fire the building, leading to the deaths of the lady and her daughters. His action understandably gave Kerr a reputation for ruthlessness, preserved in the earliest versions of the ballad 'Edom o' Gordon', in which he appears as 'traitour Captaine Care' (Child, 3.430). In February 1573 Kerr was ordered to appear before Regent Morton as one of Auchindoun's agents, but on the 23rd he was comprehended, with the rank of captain, in the pacification of Perth. His relations with the Morton regime remained uneasy, and he was imprisoned in 1578. 
Kerr's luck had improved by February 1583, when he was granted a remission as one of the sixth earl of Huntly's household servants. In the following year he served as a commissioner of parliament for Aberdeen. His increasing influence in local government was confirmed on 11 October 1585, when he held court in Inverness as lieutenant-depute, punishing all 'slayris of blak fische' in Loch Ness (Mackay and Boyd, 1.304). In May 1587 he joined the laird of Fentry and Mr David Maxwell in trying to persuade Chancellor Maitland to allow the eighth Lord Maxwell, recently sentenced to banishment, to remain in Scotland. Kerr also served as Huntly's intelligencer, intriguing with the Kerrs in the borders to obtain measurements for the walls of Berwick, ahead of a proposed attack upon them. Writing in September, William Ker of Ford in Northumberland described Kerr as having 'the chefe rule and credit about the Erle Huntlie' and one who stood 'in good favour with the Kinge him selfe' (Bain, 1.270). Thomas Kerr forewarned the earl of two imminent attacks, one by a group of royal councillors (including Maitland) on 1 March 1589, and the other by the master of Glamis on 22 May. 
As a burgess of Aberdeen Kerr was less well regarded, being among those complained of in 1591 during a civic dispute over the burgh's black and white friars' crofts. By April 1592 he and his brother James had been assigned to protect the countess of Huntly, the two men being her 'kinsmen and such as she greatly trusted' ('CSP Scot.', '1589-93', 669). Then in 1594 Kerr reappeared in a military guise, with a reactive strike against the seventh earl of Argyll, who had been authorized by the king to take the Gordon stronghold of Strathbogie; Kerr's stance led to his being declared a traitor, having compounded his offence by refusing to appear before the privy council on 4 November. Kerr subsequently avoided controversy for a while, and on 20 November 1600 he was knighted and promised the isle of St Kilda (Hirtha) in the Western Isles. 
Kerr's apparent rehabilitation did not last long, for on 2 June 1601 the council ordered the marquess of Huntly (as the sixth earl had now become) to apprehend him for coining. After receiving a remission alongside his master in April 1603, he served as justiciar for Lewis on 18 July 1605 and was also one of four commissioners of fire and sword ordered to pursue and punish those inhabitants of the northern isles who had refused to surrender their castles and boats to royal officers. In 1610 Kerr received a formal charter for St Kilda, but he was unable to make the grant effective in the face of resistance by the Macleods of Dunvegan. Meanwhile he was still noted as Huntly's factor in the records of the Aberdeen sheriff court, and on 2 October 1610 he served as witness when the marquess transferred his ancestral lands in Berwickshire to the earl of Home. Kerr's personal life remains obscure though he is known to have married one Isobel Buk, mentioned in a sasine of 22 December 1604. He had died by 1 October 1611, when his son John was served as his heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 70145


Besse, Antonin (1877-1951), entrepreneur and benefactor, was born on 26 June 1877 at Carcassonne in southern France, the third son and fourth child in the family of four boys and three girls of Pierre Besse, leather merchant, and his wife, Marie Bonnafous. In failing health Pierre Besse moved his family to Montpellier, where he died in 1884. 
Besse attended the local 'lycee' but failed his 'baccalaureat', and after four years' military service he joined a coffee-exporting firm in Aden in 1899. He later set up in business in Aden on his own, keeping himself fit with tennis, swimming, and mountaineering. In 1908 he married Marguerite Hortense Eulalie Godefroid, who came from a wealthy Brussels family, with whom he had a son and a daughter. She contributed money from her private fortune and kept the firm's books. Besse began trading in a wide variety of products, from hides and skins to incense, exploiting the huge demand from churches and mosques. In the seven years to 1914 his annual profits increased twentyfold. 
After 1918 Besse opened offices in London and Marseilles, and added steamships to his extensive fleet of dhows. Two years later the errors of a partner left him with large debts. When his creditors threatened to bankrupt him he won an agreement to repay in instalments. This setback was compounded when, in 1922, his wife divorced him. The financial wranglings were acrimonious and long drawn out, and left him with a further massive overdraft, not finally paid off until after his death. In 1923 he married, as his second wife, an employee, Hilda Florence Crowther (1890-1981), daughter of Thomas Crowther, a businessman and his wife, Margaret Leitch, with whom he had two sons and three daughters. 
Besse was small, roundish, and keen on creature comforts: his own generator for electricity, the best chef in Aden, a piano and gramophone for his beloved classical music, and hundreds of books, which he devoured while making extensive notes and reading aloud whenever possible. He had a good eye for nature and a quick and exceptionally receptive mind. Those admitted to his hospitality on the roof of his apartment over the business premises in Aden were enchanted by the Arabian Nights atmosphere of luxury. He impressed even hardened travellers such as Freya Stark and Evelyn Waugh, the former dubbing him 'a wonderful man who lets life play upon him as if he were an instrument responsive to all its variations' (Stark, 41). 
Besse had a natural empathy for the Eastern mind and spoke fluent, if idiosyncratic, Arabic. However, he showed scant consideration for his expatriate staff; the men were not paid well and they seldom stayed for long. He could be mean with money and would travel second class on European railways. Despite his many failings he and his second wife were devoted to each other, regularly occupying their respective desks in the office. His son and daughter from his first marriage also kept in touch with him. 
In 1923 Besse became an agent for Royal Dutch-Shell, distributing oil products throughout the Red Sea area. His vast local knowledge and attention to detail allowed him to hold his own against very powerful American rivals. He later acquired other commercial agencies, entered the sugar- and pilgrim-transporting trades, and even made money out of waste paper. The world depression of 1929-33 hit him badly but his firm soon recovered. His 1937 venture, Arabian Airways Ltd, was one of his very few business failures. The next few years were the most successful in the firm's history; in 1940, however, he injured his back very seriously in an aircraft crash, and this much reduced his energies while inflicting great physical pain. In France during the German occupation, he succeeded in returning to Aden via New York, Colombo, and Bombay. He had already placed all his business interests at the disposal of the British government. 
After 1945 Besse started up new ventures in Aden and Ethiopia but as he approached his seventieth year he spent increasingly long periods away from the firm, his son Tony taking the reins. Having made a number of benefactions in the Near East, during 1947 he proposed the establishment of an educational foundation to encourage personal initiative and independence of thought. His approach to the French authorities was rebuffed on bureaucratic grounds, and he at once turned to Britain, where soundings were made on his behalf. The foundation of a college in an existing university seemed the most practicable plan, and Oxford was finally chosen. 
Although in the spring of 1948 Besse had a severe stroke he was able to visit Oxford incognito, and that September the university's congregation approved the proposal of a donation of $1,500,000 for a postgraduate college, one third of the students to be French nationals. Although his name was initially kept secret the chosen title was St Antony's College. Besse earmarked $250,000 of this benefaction to help the less well-endowed Oxford colleges to improve their teaching and other facilities. A former Anglican convent in Woodstock Road was acquired and Frederick William Deakin appointed the first warden. Besse was also generous to Gordonstoun School, whose spartan regime chimed with his view of what the wimpishly-inclined younger generation really needed. 
In the new year honours of 1951 Besse, a French national, was created an honorary KBE for public services in the British colony of Aden. Shortly afterwards Oxford University offered him an honorary doctorate of civil law, which was conferred at a private ceremony in June of the same year. Shortly afterwards, at Gordonstoun, Besse was taken gravely ill with thrombosis and double pneumonia. He died there on 2 July 1951, and was buried near the family retreat at Le Paradou, outside Toulon. 


@@@@@


doc= 70146


Gloag, James (bap. 1795, d. 1870), teacher of mathematics and educationist, was baptized on 5 October 1795 at Gretna, Dumfriesshire, the second of six children of Andrew Gloag ('b'. 1761), a cotton hand-loom weaver at Rigg in that parish, and his wife, Agnes Gordon. Though details of Gloag's early schooling are unknown it was adequate to prepare him for the arts and philosophy course at United College, St Andrews, which he studied in 1814-18. His attendance at the first session of the divinity course at St Mary's College, St Andrews (1818-19), together with the tutoring he undertook to finance his studies, reveals Gloag's original intention to become a Church of Scotland minister. After an unsuccessful attempt in 1820 to become rector of Dundee Academy he became mathematics master at George Heriot's Hospital in Edinburgh, and taught there from 1820 to 1824. 
With the creation of the new and progressive Edinburgh Academy in 1824 Gloag submitted his printed 'Testimonials in Favour of James Gloag', which contained references from no fewer than five professors and from the ministers of eight of the most important Edinburgh churches. Henry (later Lord) Cockburn, in an annotation to his own copy, wrote of Gloag that he was 'A sensible looking man with a pale face and hoarse voice. Gentle and amiable'; the latter point was debatable as Gloag was repeatedly censured for his use of excessive corporal punishment. He was nevertheless appointed as the academy's first master of the mathematical and geometrical school, a post which he held with distinction for exactly forty years until his retirement in July 1864, when his former pupils established the Gloag medal for mathematics in his honour. A born, though irascible, teacher -- the rector's annual report for 1833 described him as 'most honest, zealous and energetic' -- the quantifiable successes of his mathematical pupils at Cambridge University alone included ten wranglers, most importantly James Clerk Maxwell (second wrangler, 1854) and Peter Guthrie Tait (senior wrangler, 1852), both of whom were also first Smith's prizeman. At a dinner celebrating Tait's success Gloag 'could hardly divest himself of the idea that 'he' was the hero of the occasion, such credit did he take to himself' (Fergusson, 85). While most writers on Maxwell and Tait have noted Gloag's early influence, George Davie cites Gloag directly (though he misnames him John) as one of the last of a type of Scottish schoolmaster, himself taught at a Scottish university, who brought a distinctively Scottish, metaphysical approach to the teaching of mathematics and science (Davie, 197). Indeed it has been suggested that 'The Directors dreamed of a great classical school and accidentally [in Gloag] founded a great mathematical one' (Harris). 
Gloag was a founder member, in 1847, of the Educational Institute of Scotland, of which he was also a fellow. He was secretary to its board of examiners for many years, and its president in 1855-6, having already received an honorary degree of LLD in 1848 for his legendary educational prowess. In an uncharacteristically apologetic presidential address, on 20 September 1856, Gloag bewailed the failure of the institute to make a sufficient impact on the Scottish teaching profession while at the same time applauding the efforts of the lord advocate, James Moncrieff, in acknowledging, for the first time, the institute's essential and professional role. 
In appearance Gloag was: 'a heavy, broad, square-shaped man of average height; with a long oval face; keen, deep-set, black eyes under bushy black eye-brows, and... at first, short, black hair and close-cut whiskers -- not an ill-looking man. His voice had a peculiarly deep sound, very impressive. (Fergusson, 36-7)' With an impenetrable Dumfriesshire accent, which he never lost, Gloag was an iron disciplinarian and a legendary flogger, presenting his tawse to one of the school clubs after his retirement. In the many anecdotal recollections of him by his eminent pupils he comes across as fair, though strict -- 'outwardly playful, but fraught with concealed severity' -- but well respected by his pupils (Fergusson, 46). 
On 28 September 1832, at St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh, James Gloag married Elizabeth (1793-1869), daughter of James Muir, a burgess of the Merchant Company of Edinburgh, and his wife, Janet Black. They had one daughter, Janet (Jessie) Black Gloag, later Shepherd (1835-1873), whose two daughters both died in infancy. Gloag himself died, of influenza and bronchitis, at 32 Tower Street, Portobello, Edinburgh, on 21 January 1870. He was buried two days later in Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh, where his headstone survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 70147


Alexander, David Lindo (1842-1922), lawyer and Jewish community leader, was born at 6 South Street, London, on 5 October 1842, second son in the large family of solicitor Joshua Alexander and his wife, Jemima ('b'. 1819), one of eighteen children of David Abarbanel Lindo (1772-1852) and Sarah Mocatta (1777-1852). He was educated at the City of London School and Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he graduated in mathematics among the wranglers in 1864. He was one of the first Jews to benefit from legislation passed in 1856 which abolished the Anglican religious test at Cambridge that had prevented Jews from matriculating. His obvious aptitude for mathematics notwithstanding (he had won prizes for this subject throughout his scholastic career), Alexander was elected by his college to a three-year studentship in law. He was destined to follow in the professional footsteps of his father and, like him, to enter Jewish communal life. 
Alexander was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1866, took silk in 1892, was elected a bencher of his inn in 1895, and retired from legal practice around 1907. His family were well connected to the elite 'cousinhood' of Anglo-Jewry, a fortunate advantage for a specialist in conveyancing law. In his youth the family were resident in South Street, Finsbury, and later moved to Wimpole Street in the heart of the West End. Two of his sisters married into the wealthy Beddington clan. Alexander never moved outside the smarter parts of London. 
In 1886 the eligible bachelor married Hester (1845-1913), daughter of Simeon Joseph, a member of the London stock exchange. The couple, who lived at York Gate, Regent's Park, had three children, two sons and a daughter. The promising younger son, George Simeon, died young after being called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn. Hester herself became 'a confirmed invalid' soon after their marriage, and her husband cared for her with great devotion until her death on 29 May 1913. 
Alexander was the product of an Ashkenazi-Sephardi union. On the maternal side he was a direct descendant of Isaac Lindo (died 1712), one of the earliest 'Jew brokers' on the London stock exchange. His maternal grandfather, David Abarbanel Lindo (an uncle of Benjamin Disraeli), was prominent in the affairs of the Bevis Marks Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, the oldest congregation in Britain, and was a staunch opponent of Jewish religious reform. Alexander's parents were apparently traditional in outlook. While he was at Cambridge his father arranged for him to dine with a local Jewish family rather than in hall, thus enabling Alexander to observe the Jewish dietary laws. His parents were members of the Ashkenazi Central Synagogue in Great Portland Street, London, and he started his own forty-year communal career in 1877 as one of its representatives on the Board of Deputies of British Jews. He was also associated with the New West End Synagogue in Bayswater. Both of these synagogues were prestigious 'cathedrals' of the establishment United Synagogue. Among other communal posts, Alexander served as vice-president of the Anglo-Jewish Association, on the council of Jews' College, and, most importantly, as president of the Board of Deputies between 1903 and 1917. His youngest brother, Lionel, was a president of the Jewish Board of Guardians, the premier welfare agency within the Jewish community. 
As board president, Alexander was closely identified with the native Anglo-Jewish 'establishment' at a time when its hegemony was being increasingly challenged by the mass immigration of Jewish refugees from eastern Europe. Yiddish-speaking foreign-born Jews, crowded into the slums of the East End and equivalent metropolitan districts, had little in common with their English-speaking acculturated co-religionists, whose elite Alexander typified. 
Almost from the beginning Alexander's presidency was criticized for being out of touch. On foreign policy matters dear to the heart of the immigrants, Alexander protested with reticence against atrocities in Russia at the time of the Kishinyov pogrom (1903) and he half-heartedly welcomed the liberal February revolution in 1917. Nearer home Alexander was attacked for the evidence he gave before the royal commission on divorce (1910). Rather than uphold freedom of religious conscience, he preferred to denounce 'foreign rabbis' in Britain who granted religious divorces ('gittin') to couples still married according to civil law. He consistently adopted what the 'Jewish Chronicle' dismissed as a 'no khaki, no soup' policy towards immigrant Russian Jews who refused to serve in the British army during the First World War. 
Alexander is best remembered as co-signatory of a letter to 'The Times' on 24 May 1917, framed by the leading Anglo-Jewish ideologue of Liberal Judaism and anti-Zionism, Claude G. Montefiore, president of the Anglo-Jewish Association. The letter stated that 'Emancipated Jews in this country regard themselves primarily as a religious community' with 'no separate aspirations in a political sense'. They were not 'a homeless nationality' that aimed to set up its own territorial centre. Indeed, such an aspiration would only undermine the struggle for equal rights everywhere and would brand all Jews 'as strangers in their native lands'. This manifesto was intended as a riposte to the Zionists who, led by the Russian-born Chaim Weizmann, were then conducting negotiations with the British government which resulted in the Balfour declaration on Palestine of 2 November 1917. The letter provoked a 'communal revolution' in Anglo-Jewry. The issue at stake was less the well-known anti-Zionism of the communal grandees than the manner in which their broadside had been delivered, without reference to ordinary members of the board. Alexander's presidency was denounced as secretive and autocratic. On 17 June the letter was condemned in a vote of censure by fifty-six votes to fifty-one, and Alexander was forced to resign. His departure did not mean that Zionist ascendancy of the board had been achieved. It did mean that the time for constitutional reform was at hand. The representative base of the Board of Deputies was broadened in 1919. 
Although he joined the anti-Zionist League of British Jews formed in the aftermath of the declaration, Alexander's resignation in 1917 effectively marked the end of his political career. He died on 29 April 1922, aged seventy-nine, at his home, 50 Harrington Gardens, South Kensington, London, and was buried next to his wife at Willesden Jewish cemetery on 2 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 70148


Chaikin, Moses Avigdor (1852-1928), rabbi, was born in Shklov, in Mohilev province, Belorussia, then in the Russian empire, on 11 May 1852, the son of Rabbi Israel Shraga Chaikin and his wife, Chaya Dina. His parents were Hasidic Jews, adherents of the Lubavitch sect. Chaikin's father was appointed 'shochet' (ritual slaughterman) to the Jewish community of St Petersburg, where Moses Chaikin began his religious education. He then studied at 'yeshivot' (Talmudic colleges) in Volkovysk under Rabbi Abraham Samuel Diskin, who bestowed on him the first of several 'semichot' (rabbinical ordinations) in 1877, and in Kovno under the renowned Rabbi Isaac Elhanan Spektor. He also gained 'semichot' from rabbis Yekutiel Salmon Landau and Isaac Woolf Olschwanger of St Petersburg as well as from Rabbi Jacob Vidrevitz of Moscow. 
Some time during 1882-4, in the aftermath of the pogroms that followed the assassination of Tsar Alexander II, Chaikin went to Paris, where he became rabbi of the Russian and Polish Jews in the city and in 1887 established a Talmud Torah (traditional Jewish high school). He returned to Russia as rabbi of Rostov-on-Don, but was expelled in 1890 for reasons that are unclear. He emigrated to England to serve the Jewish community of Sheffield (1892-1901), as minister and 'shochet' to the New Hebrew Congregation at West Bar, which largely consisted of new immigrants like himself. This was a breakaway from the old established synagogue at North Church Street, and Chaikin tried his utmost to unite the feuding community. He established a Talmud Torah and Sabbath Observance Society in Sheffield. 
In July 1901 Rabbi Chaikin was selected to fill the post of chief minister of the Federation of Synagogues, which had been vacant since the departure of Rabbi Meyer Lerner in 1894, and he moved to London. Between 1902 and 1906 he was, with reluctance, permitted to participate in the work of the chief rabbi's 'bet din' (ecclesiastical court). However, the title of 'dayan' (judge) was withheld from him until 1911. This was on account of rivalry between the federation and the establishment United Synagogue which was under the chief rabbi's jurisdiction. Hermann Adler, the chief rabbi, was for a long time loath to appoint rabbis trained in eastern Europe to his court, which he preferred to maintain as a preserve of the 'native Anglo-Jewish ministry' -- consisting of English-educated 'reverend gentlemen', not rabbis. This attitude was endorsed by the lay leaders of the United Synagogue, principally Lord Rothschild, but was increasingly resented by the Yiddish-speaking Jewish immigrants of east London, many of whom were members of synagogues of the Federation of Synagogues. In 1906 Chaikin's services were withdrawn from the 'bet din' on the insistence of Samuel Montagu, president of the federation. Following Montagu's death, however, Chaikin served on the United Synagogue 'bet din' from the end of 1911 until his retirement in August 1926. 
Chaikin married, probably in Russia, Tony Rebecca Pinsker (1851-1923), a daughter of Rabbi Solomon Pinsker, 'av bet din' (senior judge of the Jewish ecclesiastical court) of Kherson, who had also studied Latin and medicine at St Petersburg. A descendant of the seventeenth-century scholar Rabbi Yom Tov Lipmann Heller, Mrs Chaikin inherited a 'brilliant intellect' and was learned in rabbinics in her own right. The couple had two known children: a son, George, and a daughter. Mrs Chaikin died on 10 January 1923 and was buried the following day at the Federation Jewish cemetery, Edmonton. 
Chaikin was a quiet, scholarly man who lacked the charisma of his fellow Hasidic contemporary in the East End Rabbi Chaim Zundel Maccoby. He made his home at 47 White Lion Street, Aldgate, in the heart of the Jewish East End, and he worshipped, preached, and taught at the Old Castle Street 'shtiebl' (Hasidic conventicle), known as Agudat Achim ('Society of brothers'). He published studies of biblical commentaries and compendia of rabbinical 'responsa' in Hebrew. He also wrote in French and English on general Jewish history, including 'Apologie des Juifs' (1887), and a work of biographical sketches entitled 'The Celebrities of the Jews' (1899). In 1926 Chaikin retired to join his daughter's family in Tel Aviv, where he died on 17 June 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 70149


Davis, Morris Harold (1894-1985), local politician, was born on 7 November 1894 at 47 Langdale Street, in the heart of the Jewish East End of London, the son of Joseph Davis (1868-1940) and his wife, Bertha (died 1954). His father, variously described as a boot maker and a licensee of public houses, hailed from Minsk; his mother was also of eastern European origin. Having married abroad, they appear to have settled in London at the end of the 1880s. Educated at various London county council schools, Davis was apprenticed within the ladies' tailoring trade, but later assisted his father in the running of a public house, and later still ceased regular employment, living, it would seem, off his own wealth and that of his parents. 
Davis grew up in a staunchly Orthodox Jewish household, and followed his father in interesting himself in the governance of a variety of Jewish communal bodies in east London. He was also, like many members of the Yiddish-speaking Jewish immigrant community, a passionate Zionist and a man of very left-wing views. In 1887 the banker Samuel Montagu, first Baron Swaythling, had induced the numerous small 'conventicles' which Russian and Polish Jewish immigrants had established in the East End to form themselves into the Federation of Synagogues, which rapidly became the largest Jewish communal body in the United Kingdom. On Montagu's death in 1911 the leadership of the federation had passed to his son, the second baron, Louis Montagu, who in common with many members of the Anglo-Jewish gentry evinced a strong antipathy to Zionism. Louis was one of the ten signatories of an infamous letter, published in the 'Morning Post' on 23 April 1919, implicating foreign-born Jews in the spread of Bolshevism in England. Louis's action outraged the impoverished Yiddish-speaking members of the federation's affiliated congregations, and Davis (who spoke fluent Yiddish but also impeccable English) put himself at their head. On 25 November 1925 Davis persuaded the board of the federation to permit delegates to speak in Yiddish. Louis Montagu acknowledged that he could not understand Yiddish and resigned. On 20 March 1928 Davis succeeded to the presidency of the federation, a move which symbolized and signalled the first major transfer of power within Anglo-Jewry from the moneyed Anglicized aristocracy to the sons of the immigrant generation. 
Meanwhile Davis had risen in the ranks of the Stepney central Labour Party. Founded in 1918, its creation owed much to its Jewish secretary, the immigrant chemist Oscar Tobin. It was to Tobin's pharmacy in Harford Street, Mile End, that the young Major Clement Attlee had come on his discharge from the army, there to learn the politics of the East End and to take the first steps in his own political career. Tobin had studied the demography of political power in Stepney, and had reached the simple conclusion that a party which retained the support of the Jews and the Irish was bound to win control of the borough council. Tobin forged an alliance with the Irish Catholic community in the borough, and in November 1919 Labour, never having held a single seat on the council, swept to power; Attlee became the borough's first Labour mayor. 
Davis appointed himself Tobin's protege and heir. He made friends with Attlee, who was instrumental in arranging for his election as an alderman of the borough in 1921. That November Tobin became the first Jewish mayor of Stepney. The following year Davis was elected vice-president of the Stepney Labour Party, and within a few years he had succeeded in gaining election to the key committees of the council, becoming in 1928 chairman of its finance committee. In 1930 Davis became mayor, and in 1935 he succeeded to the council leadership. Meanwhile, in 1925, he had secured election to the London county council. 
Davis's leadership of Stepney borough council, like that of the Federation of Synagogues, became highly controversial. He steered the federation along the Zionist course its rank and file wished it to go, but at the same time he turned his presidency into (literally) an unelected dictatorship. His political alliance with the Irish Catholics on the borough council was unshakeable. But with the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in July 1936 this alliance became a source of weakness rather than of strength. On the whole, East End Jewry adopted a position sympathetic to the Spanish republicans. Irish support for General Franco acted, therefore, as a powerful solvent of the Jewish-Irish dialogue that had characterized East End politics hitherto. Davis took very little active part in combating the fascist menace in Jewish Stepney in 1936-7; in February 1937 he and three other Jewish councillors voted to permit the British Union of Fascists to hold a meeting in Limehouse town hall. 
Meanwhile, apparently well-founded allegations of wholesale corruption surfaced against Davis and his Irish allies on Stepney council. In October 1940 Herbert Morrison, then minister of home security in Churchill's wartime coalition government, bowed to local pressure by stripping Davis of his role as air raid precautions controller in the borough. These events brought Labour in Stepney into disrepute, and were in part responsible for the growing popularity of communism in the borough. They also impinged on Davis's presidency of the federation. Davis had been able to dispense with elections for offices in the federation, and his retainers saw to it that opponents of his dictatorship were cowed into silence. But the reputation of the federation fell as a result, and it was under Davis that it began its long decline within the communal structure of Anglo-Jewry. 
To his enemies Davis was utterly ruthless. To his friends, and to those whom he befriended, no act of kindness was too small for him to undertake. But in the second half of 1944 his careers came to an abrupt end. Attempting to avoid prosecution for alleged non-payment of a railway fare by inciting a Stepney council employee to provide him with a false national identity card, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. On his release from gaol he became a recluse, perhaps mentally unstable, and died (of heart disease) in West Heath, a private nursing home in north-west London, on 15 March 1985. He was buried next to his parents at the Federation Jewish cemetery, Edmonton. He never married and left no heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 70150


Grunfeld, Isidor (1900-1975), rabbi, was born on 27 October 1900 in Tauberettersheim, near Wurzburg, Bavaria, the eldest son of wealthy cattle drover and agricultural merchant Joseph Grunfeld and his second wife, Carolina Fromm. Both his parents claimed family connections with important rabbis. Joseph was a descendant of Rabbi Meir of Rothenberg, and Carolina was related to Rabbi Isaac Dov (Seligman Baer) Bamberger of Wurzburg, as well as being a cousin of the psychoanalyst Eric Fromm. Joseph Grunfeld's first wife had died during or just after the First World War, leaving four young children, two boys and two girls. Carolina bore seven more children; the combined family, which was brought up as a single unit, consisted of six boys and five girls. 
Isidor Grunfeld was educated privately by a Lithuanian rabbi who taught him the 'Talmud' in Yiddish. From 1920 to 1925 he studied law and philosophy at Frankfurt and Heidelberg universities, gaining a doctorate in comparative Roman and Talmudic law. While pursuing a secular education, Grunfeld continued at 'yeshivot' (Talmudic colleges) in these towns and, something of a student activist at a time of rising nationalist tensions, was knifed in an incident at Marburg. He was for a short time senior master in mathematics and 'Talmud' at the Jewish secondary school in Hamburg. He then pursued a legal career. He was called to the bar at the county court of Wurzburg and acted as assessor of the juvenile court. 
Grunfeld's father had been a supporter of the Hovevei Tsion ('Lovers of Zion'), a proto-Zionist society which advocated agricultural colonization in Palestine. Isidor Grunfeld joined the German Zionist Federation and afterwards the 'Mizrakhi' religious Zionist organization. Grunfeld married Dr Judith Rosenbaum, a schoolteacher ['see 'Grunfeld, Judith (1902-1998)], in Wurzburg on 22 November 1932; they had five children, two daughters followed by three sons. When Hitler came to power in 1933 Grunfeld, as a former student activist, was warned that he was in danger of arrest. He left for Strasbourg on the day the Brownshirts came to pick him up. Judith followed him a week later and their first child was born there that year; their four other children, another daughter and three sons, were later born in England. In 1933 Grunfeld spent eight months in Palestine, where he hoped to pursue his legal career, articled to Mordechai Eliash, later first Israeli ambassador to Britain. 
Advised to move to England, Isidor and Judith were reunited in 1934 in London, where he read for the English bar with a view to returning to Palestine on qualifying. His plans were overtaken by the urgent need to rescue his mother and siblings from Germany. In 1938 he provided affidavits for nine brothers and sisters, all of whom (except one brother) travelled on from London to the USA; they were later joined by his mother. Only one sister remained in Germany, and she was murdered in the holocaust. Grunfeld enrolled at Jews' College and qualified for the rabbinate in 1938. He served as minister of the Finsbury Park District (United) Synagogue between 1936 and 1938 and took up permanent residence in Green Lanes, north London. However, his rare combination of legal and rabbinical training was quickly put to more direct use. Chief Rabbi J. H. Hertz recruited Grunfeld as the first registrar to the London 'bet din' (Jewish ecclesiastical court), in 1939 he was promoted 'dayan' (judge), and in 1951 senior 'dayan', as successor to Rabbi Yehezkel Abramsky. During the Second World War, Grunfeld narrowly escaped when the offices of the 'bet din' in Mulberry Street, off Commercial Road, east London, were bombed. In 1952, together with Rabbi Alexander Altmann of the Manchester 'bet din', Grunfeld assumed the temporary role of acting chief rabbi, while Israel Brodie was away on a pastoral tour of Australia. He retired from the 'bet din' in 1965 after a serious heart attack the previous year. At this time he was privately unhappy at the harsh treatment meted out to Rabbi Louis Jacobs, one of the most gifted religious thinkers produced by Anglo-Jewry, whose outspoken unorthodox views may have cost him the chief rabbinate. 
In January 1946 Chief Rabbi Hertz asked Grunfeld to take his place as the first witness called to testify before the Anglo-American commission of inquiry into Palestine, being held in London. Indeed, throughout the late 1930s and during the Second World War, Grunfeld evinced deep personal interest in the plight of the Jews of Europe. In 1940 he was acting chairman of the chief rabbi's Religious Emergency Council, set up to aid refugees from Nazism. In this capacity he went to Cyprus to report on conditions in the internment camps. He organized welfare provision for some 5000 Jewish refugees and lobbied for their entry into Palestine. He was also chairman of the commission on the status of Jewish war orphans in Europe, dedicated after the war to retrieving Jewish children who had been sheltered in Christian homes and restoring them to the Jewish community. He made an emotional appeal to the Human Rights Commission on this issue. He served as chairman of the Anglo-Jewish Association and the Central British Fund for World Jewish Relief. He was active in Amnesty International and spoke out in favour of world peace. 
Grunfeld was a prolific writer in English on Jewish religious themes, and published several popular titles as well as articles in the general press. He wrote a two-volume study of the Jewish dietary laws and another about the will and testament in Jewish law. He devoted his retirement to editing and annotating English translations of the writings of Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch, the German founder of neo-Orthodoxy. Hirsch's philosophy, which combined strict adherence to Jewish tradition and interaction with the modern secular world, greatly influenced Grunfeld's own life. Aged seventy-five, Isidor Grunfeld died in the Royal Northern Hospital, Holloway, London, of a heart attack on 8 September 1975 and was buried the same day in the Har Menuhot cemetery in Jerusalem. 


@@@@@


doc= 70151


Jung, Meir Zvi (1858?-1921), rabbi, was born in Tisza Eszlar, near Tokay, Hungary, then part of the Austrian empire, the son of Rabbi Abraham Jung, a businessman and landowner. He studied in a 'yeshivah' (Talmudic college) in Pressburg under Rabbi Samuel Ehrenfeld and Rabbi S. B. Schreiber. He also studied in Huszt under Rabbi Moses Schick. He gained 'semichot' (rabbinical ordinations) in Pressburg, as well as from Rabbi Isaac Glick of Tolscva, Rabbi Judah Leib Julius of Shebesh, and from Rabbi Solomon Spitzer of Vienna. He received his secular education in the 'Gymnasium' of Budapest. He then studied philosophy, history, and Semitics at a string of German universities including Marburg (under Professor Hermann Cohen), Heidelberg, and Leipzig, gaining his doctorate from the latter under the protestant theologian Professor Franz Delitzsch. He published a study of the 'Pirke avot' ('ethics of the fathers') based on his dissertation. 
Some time in the 1880s Jung was appointed rabbi in Mannheim, where he staunchly opposed the growing influence of Reform Judaism. In 1891 he took up a position in Ungarisch-Brod, Moravia. He was probably the earliest pioneer in Europe of Jewish day schools that offered secular as well as religious instruction, in the German-Jewish spirit of 'Torah im Derekh Eretz'. He began a network of 'Gymnasia' in Austria-Hungary, the first opening in Ungarisch-Brod (1901), followed by Lemberg (Lwow) (1908), Storozynetz, Bukovina (1906 or 1909), and Vienna (1911). He saw these institutions as a means of counteracting assimilation brought about by attendance at state schools. Jung's schools flourished until 1915 and the dislocation caused by the First World War. 
However, another school established in Cracow in September 1906 was short-lived. Jung's schools offered a classical education in Greek and Latin alongside traditional 'yeshivah' training. This combination aroused bitter opposition from the local Hasidim, with the support of Rabbi Issachar Dov Rokeakh of Belz and other Hasidic groups throughout Hungary, and they plastered the streets with posters proclaiming in Hebrew 'HaMashchit bo el HaIr' ('The destroyer has come to town'). Jung responded by issuing a Hebrew 'kol kore' or open letter addressed to the 'rebbes' (heads of Hasidic sects), appealing to them to support his work. It fell on deaf ears. An unholy alliance was formed between the Hasidim and assimilationist Jews in the city and they made a successful joint appeal to the Galician authorities to have the school closed down. 
In 1912, on the recommendation of Rabbi Moritz Gudemann, chief rabbi of Vienna, Jung was selected out of some twenty or thirty applicants to succeed Rabbi Moses Avigdor Chaikin as chief minister of the Federation of Synagogues in London. Within a year Rabbi Jung, a native German speaker, had mastered both Yiddish and English. He founded and was first president of the Va'ad ha Rabbonim (council of rabbis) set up to bolster both standards of religious observance and the influence of the rabbinate in Anglo-Jewish life. He was particularly critical of the inadequate standards of 'kashrut' (kosher food provision) of the chief rabbi's 'bet din' (Jewish ecclesiastical court). Between 1912 and 1915 he acted as unofficial spiritual guide to the Machzike Hadas ('upholders of the faith') or Spitalfields Great Synagogue, when this was the most influential east European style Orthodox congregation in Britain. However, the authority of the Va'ad and of Jung in particular was never accepted by the rival United Synagogue, which represented the interests of establishment Anglo-Jewry. 
Jung continued his educational work in London. In December 1912 he opened a Jewish trade school for the sons of poor East End Jewish immigrants. The curriculum combined paid apprenticeship training with traditional religious studies. However, the school, which settled in premises in Cambridge Heath, Bethnal Green, foundered not for want of potential pupils but for lack of funding from the lay leaders of Anglo-Jewry. Unlike the Jews' Free School, the ethos of Jung's establishment was an unfashionable loyalty to traditional Judaism, not rapid Anglicization designed to smooth passage into British society. In addition, Jung encouraged the introduction of secular studies into the curriculum of the Etz Chaim Yeshiva, the first Talmudic college founded in Britain, in order to widen its appeal. 
The Sinai League was another educational initiative of Rabbi Jung's. This was an informal association of youth clubs that combined social activities with Jewish learning, aimed at school leavers, the sons and daughters of the first generation of immigrants who were defecting from their Jewish roots. The clubs, which segregated the sexes, usually met on the premises of synagogues affiliated with the federation and developed a strongly Zionist complexion. 
In 1886 Rabbi Jung married Ernestine Silbermann ('b'. 1860/61), a daughter of Jacob Silbermann of Eperjes (Presov), Slovakia, and sister of Abraham Silbermann, translator and publisher of London. They had six children: four sons and two daughters. The eldest child, Lolla, was born in Mannheim and the rest in Ungarisch-Brod. Two of the sons, Professor Moses Jung (1891-1960) and Rabbi Leo Jung (1892-1987), emigrated to the United States where they both became leading figures in Jewish education, the elder as an academic, eventually professor of comparative religion at Columbia University, New York, and the younger as a congregational rabbi. A third brother, Julius Jung (1894-1975), remained in London; following in his father's footsteps, albeit in a lay capacity, in 1925 he became secretary, and in due course executive director, of the Federation of Synagogues (1952-9). In 1914 Rabbi Jung set up a branch of the non-Zionist Orthodox political party Agudat Yisrael in the East End and invited a number of Hasidic leaders to join, his Cracow experience notwithstanding. When the Aguda was revived after the First World War, he served as secretary of the London branch in 1920-21. 
Jung's wife died on 30 January 1915. He married Regina Silbermann ('b'. 1870/71), his late wife's sister, on 13 April 1921, only weeks before his death. This took place on 10 June 1921 in 'tragic circumstances' in his bathroom at home at 14 Bancroft Road, Mile End. An inquest recorded a verdict of 'accidental death' caused by 'bronchial pneumonia accelerated by coal-gas poisoning': there had been a gas leak. He was buried on 14 June at the Federation Jewish cemetery, Edmonton, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 70152


Kook, Abraham Isaac (1865-1935), rabbi and Zionist, was born on 6 September 1865 in the small town of Greiva in Latvia (then part of tsarist Russia), the son of Rabbi Shlomo Zalman Kook and his wife, Faigah Leah. Born into a strictly Orthodox Jewish family, Kook attended the famous Lithuanian Talmudic academies of Volozhin (1884-6) and Ponovezh (1887-8). Ordained while still a teenager, he was appointed rabbi of Zaumel, Lithuania, in 1888 and of Bausk, Lithuania, in 1895. He married Batsheva Rabinowicz-Teumim; and after her death in 1890 he married Raiza Rivka Rabinowicz-Teumim, with whom he had a son. In 1904 he rejected offers of even more illustrious communal positions in eastern Europe and emigrated to Palestine, then part of the Ottoman empire, becoming rabbi of Jaffa and of the Jewish colonies recently established in the surrounding region. 
This move reflected the depth and uniqueness of Kook's religious commitment to Zionism, the modern Jewish national movement which had been formally inaugurated with the convention of the First Zionist Congress at Basel in 1897. The vast majority of contemporary rabbinical authorities opposed Zionism, considering it a sinful attempt by avowed secularists to bring Jewry's divinely ordained exile to a premature end. Kook, however, argued that the impulses underlying modern Jewish nationalism constituted authentic testimony to the presence of sacred properties within the Jewish soul. Moreover, he regarded Zionism, in its organized form, as an agency which would facilitate the advent of the Messiah. In Jaffa, Kook developed these themes, increasingly stressing the mystical dimensions of Jewry's attachment to the Holy Land. He also composed a series of erudite 'responsa', which supplied practical solutions within the framework of Orthodox Jewish law to the ritual dilemmas arising from the resumption of Jewish agricultural enterprise in Palestine. He thereby laid the intellectual foundations for a brand of religious Zionism which sought to harmonize the requirements of traditional practice with the realities of the Jewish national revival. 
In the summer of 1914 Kook visited Europe with the purpose of generating wider support for his ideas, only to be stranded on the continent by the outbreak of the First World War. Unable to return to Jaffa, he set up home in Switzerland until accepting, in 1916, an invitation to serve in England as rabbi of the Spitalfields Great Synagogue ('Machzike Hadath', 'upholders of the faith'), an immigrant Orthodox community located in Brick Lane in the East End of London. This fortuitous circumstance placed Kook at the very focus of Zionist activity during the period of diplomatic negotiations which culminated in the publication on 2 November 1917 of the Balfour declaration (which expressed the British government's support for the establishment of a Jewish national home in Palestine). Convinced that he was living out the 'end of days' foretold by the biblical prophets, Kook regarded British official approval of Zionism as a crucial step towards ultimate Jewish redemption. He invested considerable energy in advertising this view to Anglo-Jewry, appearing on numerous public platforms alongside proponents of alternative -- and sometimes competing -- brands of Jewish nationalism. The support of so illustrious a rabbinical figure was undoubtedly of some help to the Zionists in their struggle for local communal legitimacy. In practical terms, however, Kook was a more doubtful asset. As one Zionist leader wrote to another, his ideas were thought to be 'too full of 'sancta simplicitas'' to be of much utility (Nahum Sokolow to Chaim Weizmann, 6 March 1917, Weizmann Archives, file 213). 
At the end of the First World War, Kook called for renewed efforts to strengthen the spiritual aspects of the Jewish national revival in 'Degel Yerushalayim' ('The flag of Jerusalem'), published in London, 1918. In the summer of 1919 he himself returned to Jaffa, and two years later was elected the Ashkenazi (occidental Jewish) head of the new rabbinic court of appeals established by the British mandatory government of Palestine. As such, he effectively functioned as the Ashkenazi chief rabbi of Palestine, a post which he held with distinction until his death in Jerusalem on 1 September 1935. 
In office Kook demonstrated a rare ability to combine a deeply mystical outlook with an intense involvement in communal affairs. Thus he seriously prepared himself for future office as priest of a restored temple cult while also supporting the foundation of a secular Hebrew university. Unusually for a rabbi he composed poetry, but also established a traditional seminary of advanced Jewish learning in Jerusalem. Above all Kook, although himself always rigorous in the observance of traditional Jewish practices (and dress), sought tirelessly to promote religious-secular understanding. He regarded all of the Jewish pioneers in mandatory Palestine, self-confessed heretics included, as unwitting instruments of the imminent redemption, and insisted that they be respected as such. The manifest love of the heavily bearded rabbi for all his fellow Jews, whatever their personal beliefs, was widely reciprocated, and his funeral in Jerusalem, on 1 September 1935, occasioned a rare demonstration of Jewish communal unity. 
Never a systematic thinker, and prone to compose his thoughts in a rather esoteric Hebrew style, Kook's principal intellectual influence was posthumous. His subsequent renown as a Zionist theorist owed much to the efforts of his only son, Rabbi Zevi Yehudah Kook (1891-1982), who succeeded him as head of the Central Kook Academy in Jerusalem. It was the younger Kook who saw many of his father's edited writings through the press, notably 'Orot' ('Lights'), first published in Jerusalem in 1942, thereby making them accessible to wider groups of disciples. However, the full text of his manuscripts, entitled 'Shemonah kevatzim' ('Eight collections'), was not published until 1999, and even then in only a limited edition. Aspects of Kook's school of thought, and especially those which stressed the immanent sanctity of the Holy Land, became influential in national religious circles in Israel after the Six Day War of 1967, when they were frequently cited by supporters of the Jewish settler movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 70155


Lazarus, Harris Meyer (1878-1962), rabbi, was born in Riga, Latvia, on 11 June 1878, the eldest son of nine children of Julius Lazarus (Yudel Leiser or Leizera) (1852-1940) and his wife, Esther Golda Itzikovitz (1858-1928). Julius Lazarus emigrated to England about February 1895, and his eldest son, aged nineteen, followed in June 1897, Anglicizing his name Hirsch as Harris. He was naturalized on 18 January 1904. He had received a traditional Jewish education in Riga and had qualified as a 'shochet' (Jewish ritual slaughterman). In January 1898 he entered Jews' College, the training ground for the 'native' Anglo-Jewish ministry. He at first studied 'hazanut' (Jewish cantoral music) and then turned to rabbinics, gaining 'semicha' (rabbinical ordination) in 1910. He was also a student at University College, London, graduating BA in 1904 and MA in 1913. Between 1904 and 1906 he taught in the East End at the Toynbee Hall Hebrew training classes. In 1905 Lazarus was appointed minister of the newly built Brondesbury synagogue in north-west London, where he remained until 1938, the only congregational post which he ever held. 
In the same year, on 15 June 1905, Lazarus married Ada (1884-1950), the youngest daughter of Rabbi Susman Cohen of Manchester and his wife, Bertha, a daughter of Dayan Jacob Reinovitz (1818-1893). The couple made their home in the Willesden and Brondesbury neighbourhood and had one son and two daughters. Lazarus's father-in-law had served as a 'dayan' or judge on the 'bet din' (ecclesiastical court) of Chief Rabbi Hermann Adler between 1893 and 1906. Lazarus followed in his footsteps. In 1914 he was appointed an assistant 'dayan' and combined his work at the court with his synagogal duties until he retired from Brondesbury at the age of sixty. He then served as a full-time 'dayan' until 1945. 
From 1946 to 1948 Lazarus was recalled from retirement to the post of deputy chief rabbi, after the death of J. H. Hertz. He stood firm against recognition of the legitimacy of Liberal Judaism that was then seeking the right of its synagogues to appoint marriage secretaries and conduct weddings approved by the registrar-general. Under civil law such rights were conferred following certification by the president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews in consultation with his (exclusively Orthodox) 'ecclesiastical authorities', namely the 'haham' (chief rabbi) of the Spanish and Portuguese Jews' Congregation and the chief rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations, on whose 'bet din' Lazarus served. No compromise was possible, even after Lazarus's departure from office, and in 1949 the Liberals left the board. They eventually (in 1958) had recourse to parliament in order to redress their grievances. 
Lazarus collaborated on the Soncino Press translation of the 'Talmud' and translated some previously unpublished poems by the medieval Spanish Hebrew poet Solomon Ibn Gabirol (1906). His most widely read work was a traditionalist handbook for Jewish women entitled 'The Ways of her Household' (1923). He died at his home, 33 Cholmley Gardens, West Hampstead, on 25 February 1962 and was buried the following day at Willesden Jewish (United) cemetery, next to his wife, who had predeceased him by a dozen years. 


@@@@@


doc= 70156


Lerner, Meyer (1857-1930), rabbi, was born in Czestochowa, Poland, on 10 March 1857, the son of Mordechai Lerner, a leather merchant. At the age of nine he was sent to the 'yeshivah' (Talmudic college) of Biala. Between the ages of thirteen and sixteen he studied in Eisenstadt, near Vienna, under Rabbi Salomon Kutner, to whom he had been recommended by his uncle Rabbi Abraham Jener, the 'av bet din' (senior judge of the Jewish ecclesiastical court) of Cracow. Rabbi Kutner in turn recommended the promising student to Rabbi Ezriel Hildesheimer of the Adas Yisroel Synagogue in Berlin, who had been his predecessor at Eisenstadt and was one of the foremost exponents of neo-Orthodoxy in Europe. While remaining strictly Orthodox, Hildesheimer and his school were imbued with the scholarly spirit of the German 'Wissenschaft des Judentums' that set a high value on a secular as well as a religious education. Hildesheimer became Lerner's patron, paying for private instruction in Greek and Latin and transferring him to the Orthodox rabbinical seminary that he had founded in Berlin. At the Hildesheimer Seminar, Lerner continued his studies under Rabbi David Zvi Hoffmann, and his 'semicha' (rabbinical ordination) was conferred by Hildesheimer himself. 
At twenty-one Lerner matriculated at Berlin University, where he studied philosophy and oriental languages. His treatise 'Bereshit Rabba' (Midrashic commentary on the book of 'Genesis') was awarded a prize in 1879, and three years later he gained his doctorate at the University of Leipzig. In 1886 Lerner married Henriette, a daughter of Rabbi Hirsch Plato of Cologne and a granddaughter of the outstanding exponent of German neo-Orthodoxy Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch. 
Lerner was appointed rabbi of Wintzenheim, near Colmar in Alsace, in 1884 and remained there for six years. In January 1890 he was one of four shortlisted candidates for chief minister of the London Federation of Synagogues, a post especially created and underwritten by Samuel Montagu, banker and Liberal MP for Whitechapel. Montagu had founded the federation in 1887 as an umbrella body for the multitude of independent synagogues and prayer circles ('hevrot') that had grown up among Jewish immigrants in the East End of London. A semi-public preaching competition was held at the Jewish Workingmen's Club, Great Alie Street, east London, from which Lerner emerged as the winner by thirty votes to six. Lerner took up residence at 46 Great Prescott Street, Aldgate, and concerned himself with the religious needs of his Yiddish-speaking neighbours. He founded the Sabbath Observance Society to assist Jews to keep the Jewish sabbath (from sunset on Friday to nightfall on Saturday), notwithstanding the considerable economic pressures dictating otherwise. In the autumn of 1892, together with Montagu, Lerner successfully intervened to save 100 Jewish tailors from losing their jobs in a non-Jewish firm because they refused to work on the Jewish festival of 'Succot' (Tabernacles). Part of his job was to preach against the 'Jewish Socialists, Atheists and Nihilists' who were regarded by the Anglo-Jewish establishment as a deleterious influence on East End Jewry. 
Lerner was taken aback at the poor standard of Jewish education in England. In 1890-92 he carried out a thorough investigation into the state of Hebrew education. His report found both the traditional system of religious study in the 'heder' (private schoolroom) and the education on offer in state board schools, and even in the Jews' Free School, to be wanting. He proposed sweeping reform of the system and advocated the use of English as the language of instruction rather than Yiddish. Lerner's initiatives met with a disappointing response but sowed the seeds for the later formation of the Jewish Religious Education Board. 
The chief minister of the federation came into conflict with Chief Rabbi Hermann Adler to whom he was supposed to defer. Under pressure from 'progressive' elements, Adler was willing to introduce some English and certain modifications into the liturgy of congregations within the establishment United Synagogue. In May 1894 Lerner quit Britain to become rabbi of Altona and Schleswig-Holstein, a position he retained until 1926. 
Lerner was a rabbinic scholar of considerable stature, a fact that was little appreciated in England. He published in Hebrew and German. His writings included studies of commentaries on the 'Torah' and the 'Mishnah' as well as rabbinical responsa on contemporary issues in Jewish law, for instance the Jewish prohibition of cremation. His most important work was his two-volume 'Torat haMishnah' (1915, 1928), which dealt with the origin of the oral tradition in Jewish law. 
Sympathetic to Zionism, Lerner took an active interest in the Hovevei Tsion 'Lovers of Zion' societies in London. In 1905 he set up the Moriah society that sought 'to restore the ancient ruins, and the national and religious culture of the Jews'. However, he found himself at odds with both the secular majority and the 'mizrakhi' religious wing of the Zionist movement. In 1930 Moriah merged with the non-Zionist strictly Orthodox political party Agudat Yisrael. 
Rabbi Lerner died in Altona, Germany, in early July 1930. His death received only a brief mention in the London 'Jewish Chronicle'. 


@@@@@


doc= 70157


Carvajal y Mendoza, Antonia Luisa de (1566-1614), Catholic missionary, was born in Jaraicejo, Extremadura, Spain, on 2 January 1566, the sixth child of Francisco de Carvajal y Vargas (died 1572), a nobleman commissioned by the king to high regional posts, and Maria de Mendoza y Pacheco (died 1572), also of the high nobility. She was baptized there on 15 January. Unsubstantiated seventeenth-century texts refer to Carvajal as the niece of Ignatius of Loyola, which would have facilitated her later intimacy with the Society of Jesus. 
Following a move to Leon in 1571 both of Carvajal's parents died of a contagious disease a year later and she was moved to the royal palace in Madrid under the guardianship of her maternal grandmother's sister, Maria Chacon, governess of the crown prince. Carvajal's great-aunt died suddenly in 1576, thrusting the young girl into yet another dramatic change. Her maternal uncle, Francisco Hurtado de Mendoza, had unsuccessfully vied for her guardianship in 1572 and aggressively made her his ward at Almazan. A prominent figure in Spanish imperial politics, Mendoza also had close ties to the Jesuits. Under the tutelage of Mendoza's wife, the Marquesa Maria de Cardenas, Carvajal learned Latin, accounting, estate management, and the exercise of charity -- all standard fare for noblewomen of her day. Her uncle, on the other hand, exercised her in perverse rituals of mortification in which she was forced to disrobe and was whipped and disparaged by two servants appointed to carry out such 'exercises'. Similarly, he denied her the exercise of normal bodily functions and arranged other circumstances of deprivation, presumably to teach her to 'conquer herself'. Carvajal describes these unseemly activities in her spiritual life story. 
In 1586 the family moved to Madrid, where Carvajal's guardians died in 1592. Carvajal took up the life of an urban holy woman, residing with a small community of women in a house close to the Jesuit college. In the 1590s she vowed poverty, obedience to her spiritual superior (whom she chose herself), and the pursuit of perfection. She was still unsatisfied. In 1598 she manifested her anxious desire for God by vowing to seek out martyrdom, a singular promise indeed. By this time Carvajal had designs on an English mission and these vows proved her solidarity with Jesuit politics and faith. She also wrote poetry, most of which dates from this period. 
Carvajal's public display of her self-inflicted poverty scandalized her important relatives, and they sued for her inheritance. However, she managed to retain most of her sizeable estate, at the cost of nine years in court and a move to Valladolid in 1601. On 6 January 1605 she willed 12,000 ducats to the Jesuits for the foundation of an English college, leaving 5000 as settlement with her brother. She probably wrote her spiritual life story during her years in Valladolid. 
The exile of Catholic priests from England in 1604 moved Carvajal to seek permission officially, if secretly, to go to London, where she would be able to circulate openly in public, which a priest could not do. In spite of an illness related to a heart condition she left Valladolid on 26 January 1605, probably with her confessor, Jesuit Michael Walpole, in disguise as her servant. Five months later she reached Dover and was installed in the house of Henry Garnett, superior of the Jesuit English mission, only to be left to fend for herself when the group suddenly scattered upon threats of a raid. Late in 1605 the Spanish ambassador, Pedro de Zuniga, installed her at his insistence in his residence in London. The Gunpowder Plot of 5 November 1605, which led to Garnett's execution, endangered Carvajal as a Catholic with close connections to the Jesuits. Insisting that she had not come to England to live with Spaniards, she firmly pursued independence. 
By January 1607 Carvajal had rented a house next to the Spanish embassy, where she lived with select English companions, refining her English and beginning her mission in earnest. She visited imprisoned Catholics, particularly priests, to fortify them in the face of execution, recruited funds for Catholic vocations, catechized, hid priests in her house, and supervised the collection and care of the drawn and quartered body parts of executed Catholics. She also arranged baptisms, recruited prostitutes for conversion, and cared for the poor and infirm. Carvajal's Society of the Sovereign Virgin, modelled on the Jesuits, was founded during this period and included the six women who lived with her. 
During the last week of June 1608 Carvajal was arrested for public proselytizing in a Cheapside shop, and spent four days in prison. Zuniga refused to have her released, making it clear that her imprudence was becoming a national liability for Spain. Her letters, however, describe her own exaltation over the experience, which evidently only intensified her zeal. 
George Abbot's succession as archbishop of Canterbury on 9 April 1611 assured Carvajal's downfall. Abbot had long been enraged by her freedom of movement and effectiveness, and ordered her arrest at any prison where she appeared. Deteriorating health led Carvajal to move to Spitalfields, where she lived enclosed with her companions because of illness. Such enclosure only fuelled Abbot's rage for its semblance to monastic retirement, and on 28 October 1613 one of the sheriffs of London broke into Carvajal's house and arrested her. However, the diplomatic crisis this provoked was resolved by the able Spanish ambassador, Diego de Sarmiento, who successfully bargained with King James for her release. Three days later Carvajal was removed to the Spanish embassy, where she died, probably resulting from her heart condition, quietly in her bed on 2 January 1614, her forty-eighth birthday. 
In her will Carvajal had asked that her body be buried at the Jesuit college in Louvain that her money had founded. The society took her ducats but did not claim her corpse, which was instead welcomed into the reliquary collection of the Real Monasterio de la Encarnacion in Madrid in 1615 by her dear friend, Prioress Mariana de San Jose. The members of Carvajal's company were reported to be continuing their work in the London Catholic underground several months after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 70158


Lieberman, Aaron Samuel (1849?-1880), socialist activist, was probably born in 1849 in Lunna in Grodno province, then part of the Russian empire, son of Eliezer Dov Lieberman, a scholar of the Jewish enlightenment (haskalah). The family moved to BiaLystok and thence to SuwaLki. Aaron Lieberman studied at the crown-controlled rabbinical seminary in Vilna, obtaining his teaching diploma in 1867. In 1870 he was also briefly enrolled as an external student at the Technological Institute of St Petersburg. He returned to SuwaLki where he was appointed as a teacher and as secretary of the Jewish community, and is known to have worked for an insurance company in Vilna and as a draughtsman, having shown some talent in drawing. 
By 1872 Lieberman was active in the local revolutionary circle based on ex-students of the Vilna seminary. He had been initiated by Aaron Zundelevich, a future leader of the Narodniki ('Popularists'), the forerunners of the Russian Social Revolutionary Party which advocated a form of peasant socialism in contrast to Marx's proletarian socialism. He was forced to flee abroad in June 1875, first to Berlin and then to London, where he arrived in August of that year. He found employment as a typesetter on the underground international socialist journal 'Vperyod' ('Forward') (1872), then being published in London under the editorship of Pyotr Lavrov. Lieberman wrote under several English and Hebrew 'noms de plume' including Arnold Lieberman and Arthur Freeman. From December 1875 he was sharing an address in north London with Lavrov and sub-editor V. N. Smirnov. 
Through his old Vilna comrade Leib Weiner, Lieberman was introduced to the Jewish East End of London. Back in Russia, Lieberman had evinced attachment to the Hebrew language and interest in the specific plight of the Jewish working classes, in opposition to the assimilationism of mainstream Russian socialism. At Weiner's home, 40 Gun Street, Spitalfields, he founded the Hebrew Socialist Union in May 1876, claimed to be the first Jewish socialist organization in the world. The ten original members were all Russian political exiles working in the immigrant trades, especially tailoring, and the core membership never rose beyond forty. The union called a public meeting at the Zetland Hall, 51 Mansell Street, Goodman's Fields, on 26 August 1876, for which handbills were printed in Yiddish. Publication of a socialist appeal to Jewish workers in the native tongue of East European Jewry was itself unprecedented. At about the same time Lieberman published in 'Vperyod' a 'Call to Jewish youth', the first socialist manifesto written in Hebrew. The London meeting was attended by several hundred, but broke up in disorder when Lieberman was accused of making anti-clerical statements against the chief rabbi and the synagogue establishment. Jewish immigrants in England may have shared Lieberman's views on the need to impose a ten-hour day in the sweated trades, but they were by and large traditionalist in matters of religion. 
For their part, the leaders of Anglo-Jewry took steps to curb the Jewish socialists, by a mixture of economic pressure, the use of 'agents provocateurs', and rabbinical censure. The talents of the charismatic Rabbi Zvi Hirsch Dainov, the 'maggid' (preacher) of Slutsk, were deployed to fulminate against the socialists while the 'Jewish Chronicle' denounced them as missionaries. Lieberman's early attempt to create a Jewish Tailors' Union in London collapsed when the treasurer absconded with the funds. Tempers flared and he left London for Berlin in December 1876. 
In 1877 in Vienna, Lieberman founded 'HaEmet' ('The Truth'), significant as the first socialist propaganda periodical published in Hebrew, although it lasted for only three issues. He was arrested and expelled by both the Austrian and German authorities in turn and spent a total of two years behind bars. He appeared as a defendant in the so-called 'trial of the Russian nihilists' in Berlin in April 1879. He was finally deported to England and briefly returned to the East End, living at 21 Elder Street, Spitalfields. He worked with the young Morris Winchevsky (1856-1932) to set up an abortive Jewish Workingmen's Benefit and Educational Society, but eventually emigrated to the United States. In true Russian revolutionary style, in November 1880 Lieberman shot himself in a cheap lodging house in Syracuse, New York, after a failed love affair with Winchevsky's sister-in-law. (He is reputed to have left a wife in Russia.) In 1934 he was reinterred next to Winchevsky in the Workers' Circle cemetery in New York. 
Lieberman never resolved the contradiction between international socialism and Jewish particularism. His position was attacked by anti-Jewish Russian intellectuals on the one hand and by traditionalist Jewish opinion on the other, a dilemma that was to face many Jewish socialists, both bundists and Labour Zionists, who came after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 70159


Lyons, Lewis (1862-1918), trade unionist, was born on 20 November 1862, at 20 Fashion Street, Whitechapel, London, of German-Jewish parents, Moses Lyons, a journeyman tailor, and his wife, Hannah Goldsmith. Educated at the Jews' Free School, Bell Lane, Spitalfields, from about 1869 to 1873, he left at eleven to start work as a tailor's machinist in one of the many small workshops in the East End of London. Of strong socialist convictions, he soon became acutely aware of the iniquities of the trade -- low wages and long hours of work (up to eighteen hours a day) in unhealthy conditions. This, he believed, was caused largely by the prevailing system, commonly known as 'sweating'. Labour was subdivided, each worker being involved in making only a small part of each garment, with no apprenticeship available that would enable him or her to become a skilled tailor earning higher wages. 
Lyons campaigned for the licensing, under strict conditions, of all workshops, improved physical conditions, a four-year apprenticeship, higher wages, and a shortened working day, with penal procedures to enforce compliance. Handsome and charismatic, Lyons speedily emerged despite his youth as the principal figure in London's Jewish tailoring trade unions, being involved, usually as secretary, in running no fewer than nine unions between 1885 and 1912. His constant agitation at his workplace, the poor pay his union employers could afford, and his behaviour at public demonstrations led to frequent dismissal, regular visits to his home by bailiffs, fines, and on two occasions short spells of imprisonment. He met his wife, Fanny, whom he married in 1887, while linking arms against the police at a Trafalgar Square protest meeting. The couple had two daughters. His constant shortage of funds, and the time he had to spend attending to his financial private affairs, may to some extent have obstructed his work. 
To promote his ideals Lyons wrote widely in the local and national press, including articles in the 'East London Observer', 'Jewish World', the 'Tailor and Cutter', 'The Briton', and 'Reynolds', often under pseudonyms. The culmination of this activity was the production of his own penny monthly journal, 'The Anti-Sweater', that ran for eight editions from July 1886 to February 1887. He wrote, edited, and published the paper while working full time as a machinist. Invited to give evidence to the House of Lords select committee on the sweating system (1888) Lyons made an impressive wide-ranging survey of the state of the tailoring sweating industry, and detailed suggestions (though to some extent impractical) for improvement. 
The following year was pivotal for London's immigrant tailors, and for Lyons's career. Public meetings of three tailoring unions resolved on a call for a strike to secure a twelve-hour working day and other improvements in working conditions. As chairman of the elected strike committee Lyons was its driving force. The strike, which began on 29 August 1889, was settled following the mediation of Lord Rothschild and Samuel Montagu. Though initially apparently successful, Lyons said later that within weeks the employers ignored the concessions they had made. 
The 1890s was a difficult decade for unions because of a trade depression, and during this time Lyons fell foul of many of his socialist colleagues and earned their distrust. He became convinced that employees had interests similar to those of their immediate employers, who were themselves sub-contractors earning little more than their employees. Lyons believed they should combine forces and present a united front against the superior employers. This led to attacks upon him by trade unionists and anarchists for what were perceived to be capitalist leanings. He was accused of misappropriating funds of the Tailors', Machinists' and Pressers' Union without the members' sanction, though this remained unproven. 'How long', wrote the (Yiddish) 'Arbiter Fraint', 'will you allow yourselves and your union to come to such shame, by letting this man lead you by the nose?... Do you want a union which will be strong enough to press your interests? Then get rid of Lyons' (10 July 1891). 
Shortly afterwards Lyons settled with his family in Bristol, where he ran a tobacconist shop selling rolled cigars made by his wife; but by the turn of the century they had returned to London. He once again became involved in union affairs and in April 1911 was elected to sit on the tailoring trade board, but ill health forced his early retirement. 
Lyons made an important contribution to developing trade unions, particularly among newly arrived Jewish immigrant workers. Completely independent of thought, he was not fazed by the eminence of his opponents, crossing swords with the chief rabbi, Hermann Adler, and speaking out fearlessly in favour of immigrants when giving evidence in 1903 to the royal commission on alien immigration. He told the commission that the 1901 census had revealed that there were 80,074 tailors and tailoresses in London alone; and when the chairman asked him to 'Call it 80,000', he replied 'No, my Lord, we will call it 80,100; we will not make it less than it is' ('Royal Commission', q.14073). 
Lewis Lyons died on 7 July 1918 at his home, 255 Franciscan Road, Tooting, Surrey, as impecunious as he had been throughout his life. He was a compassionate man, but did not truly appreciate when to subjugate his ideals to the reality of what could be achieved. In its obituary the 'Jewish World' (24 July 1918) said that he was guided by a sense of the wrong the poor had to endure, and by the conviction that much of their suffering was avoidable. His work brought him no material advantage, a fact that marked him as one 'in whom was the spirit of service to his fellows'. 


@@@@@


doc= 70160


Maccoby, Chaim Zundel (1858-1916), Zionist and preacher, was born near the town of Kobrin, Poland, the son of 'Simche'. Little is known of his parents, except that they were poor, devoutly Orthodox Jews. Maccoby had a thoroughly religious education, studying Talmudic subjects first in Kobrin and later in Brisk and Prusznin, where he delved into secular subjects; and he became a rabbi. At the age of sixteen Maccoby married Hannah Blumah Belber (died 1921), whose parents lived in Prusznin. There were four sons and four daughters of the marriage. 
As a rabbinical authority Maccoby was not in the first rank. But his powers as an orator were widely recognized, and he found himself in demand as a preacher of extraordinary charisma. In 1874 he accepted a call to become the 'maggid' (or preacher) of the town of Kamenitsk, and though his sojourn there was little more than two years he became known thereafter as the Kamenitsker 'Maggid'. 
Maccoby had many followers, but he made many enemies, both among anti-Zionist Orthodox rabbis and within the Russian government of Poland. Though not a supporter of political Zionism, which sought to re-establish a Jewish nation state in the Holy Land (an ambition which he regarded as heretical), he was none the less an early adherent of the Chovevi Zion ('Lovers of Zion') movement, which merely supported Jewish settlement in Palestine. In 1883 he became the first full-time preacher for Chovevi Zion, and spent the next six years travelling widely in Russia, Poland, and Lithuania to gather support for the cause. This peripatetic activity became highly controversial, the more so as he had no compunction about censuring fellow rabbis for having failed to do anything to alleviate the condition of Jews living under tsarist rule. The Russian authorities eventually forbade his lecturing activities, and in January 1890 he fled with his family to England, where he had previously agreed to serve as rabbi of a small congregation in London's East End. 
Maccoby's arrival in London coincided with a number of developments central to the future direction of London Jewry. The practicality of Jewish settlement in Palestine was a matter of wide discussion, and Maccoby played a part in the formation of an English branch of Chovevi Zion in London in April 1890. Militant socialism was spreading among the Jewish poor of the East End. Maccoby preached the virtues of Chovevi Zion, but also spoke out against the vices of socialism and atheism. His ability to draw crowds to his lectures was evident. In 1892 Samuel Montagu, the Liberal MP for Whitechapel and founder (1887) of the Federation of Synagogues in east London, suggested that he finance Maccoby's appointment as official 'maggid' of the federation. Maccoby accepted the post in February 1894 and retained it until his death. 
Maccoby's task, for which Montagu had appointed him, was to counter the propaganda of socialists and atheists. In 1895 Theodor Herzl, the founder of political Zionism, made the first of several visits to England, where his ideas found enthusiastic audiences among the Yiddish-speaking refugees. Herzlian Zionists established the English Zionist Federation; in December 1902 the English branch of Chovevi Zion was wound up. Maccoby regarded Herzl as a false messiah, and his movement as a threat to the preservation of Orthodox Jewish values. But in his bitter opposition to Herzl we may detect more than a vague hint of wounded pride. He spoke out ever more vehemently against Herzl, the self-confessed atheist, and his followers, refusing to preach at one federation synagogue because it dared to host a branch of the Zionist Federation. Maccoby's relationship with Montagu and the Federation of Synagogues deteriorated, and he seems to have withdrawn from social gatherings, offering his strict vegetarianism as a pretext. In 1910 his health began to break down. He died of kidney disease at his home, 4 St Agnes Terrace, South Hackney, London, on 4 April 1916, and was buried at the Edmonton cemetery of the Federation of Synagogues. A collection of Maccoby's sermons was published in 1929 under the title 'Chayim' ('Life'). 


@@@@@


doc= 70161


Mattuck, Israel Isidor (1883-1954), rabbi, was born on 28 December 1883 in Shirvint, Lithuania, the third child of the seven children of Benjamin and Bessie (their original surname is unknown), who took the name Mattuck on arrival in the USA, 'c'.1890. Israel Mattuck was enrolled at the Classical High School in Worcester, Massachusetts, and in 1901 gained entry to Harvard University, where he specialized in Semitics. His teachers included C. H. Toy, the eminent biblical scholar, and George Foot Moore, the outstanding authority on rabbinic Judaism. In his leaving testimonial of 1905 Toy described Mattuck as 'an exceptionally promising man, both in scholarship and character' ('Liberal Jewish Monthly', June 1954). Moore was equally impressed. 
From an early age Mattuck had studied the 'Talmud' with his father. His interpretation and practice of Judaism would diverge radically from that of his traditional background, not least when he enrolled at the Hebrew Union College, Cincinnati, the foremost seminary for the training of Reform rabbis. Part of his studentship was spent in leading a congregation in Lincoln, Nebraska, where he met his wife-to-be, Edna Minna Mayer (1888-1957). They married on 3 November 1910, had their first child, Robert, in 1911, and subsequently also had two daughters, Dorothy and Naomi. Theirs was a happy and compatible marriage. 
After ordination in 1910 Mattuck became rabbi of a fledgeling congregation in Far Rockaway, New York. He was to stay only a few months. By 1911 the Jewish Religious Union, established in London in 1902, had grown to the stage where it required a rabbi to expound its distinctive message. The movement acquired a building in Hill Street, near Regent's Park, and founded the Liberal Jewish Synagogue (LJS). Mattuck accepted the invitation to become its first minister. His inaugural sermon on 20 January 1912 was entitled 'The aim of Liberal Judaism'. Those who heard it, and those who heard him from the pulpit during the subsequent four decades, recall an exceptionally powerful, compelling preacher. Small of stature, slim, ascetic-looking, decisive in his judgments, thoroughly grounded in Jewish sources and well read in general culture, his eloquence laced with humour, Mattuck had the rare gift of being able to communicate with all manner of people at the appropriate level, from children to university dons. Under his leadership, the LJS developed rapidly. He was fortunate in having gifted co-workers in Claude Montefiore, a distinguished scholar, and the Hon. Lily Montagu, daughter of Edwin Montagu, the first Lord Swaythling (the triumvirate was called 'the three Ms'); but it was the force of Mattuck's personality, the sway of his preaching, and the quality of his religious instruction that turned curious newcomers into ardent disciples. 
The congregation outgrew its Hill Street premises. Mattuck, although personally diffident about fund-raising, spearheaded the building appeal which resulted in the imposing sanctuary behind stone pillars that stands opposite the Grace gate of Lord's cricket ground. His consecration sermon of 13 September 1925 contained a summation of his own credo: 'In the simple, the almost austere beauty of this synagogue, I feel a token of our faith. It has for us the beauty of simplicity, and it is austere in the demands it makes' (Mattuck MSS, London). Implementation of those demands elevated Mattuck to a leading role among clergy of whatever denomination in the UK. He was controversially sympathetic to the workers' cause during the general strike of 1926, in 1927 co-founded with W. R. Matthews, dean of St Paul's, the (London) Society of Jews and Christians, the first inter-faith group in the country, and for several years conducted Sunday morning services in addition to the regular sabbath ones, which many non-Jews would attend in order to hear his views on topical issues. He considered it his task to spread Liberal Judaism beyond the LJS. Conferences were organized in London and the provinces. These provoked lively reactions from Orthodox Jewish opponents, but usually his eloquence, personal charm, and formidable Jewish knowledge carried the day and led to the establishment of several new Liberal congregations. 
Mattuck wrote numerous pamphlets, monographs, and essays, and broadcast regularly. Substantial and lasting works of his include 'What are the Jews?' (1937), a religious interpretation of Jewish history and mission, 'The Essentials of Liberal Judaism' (1947), a concise summation of its principles and beliefs, and the three volumes of the 'Liberal Jewish Prayer Book' (1926; rev. edn, 1937), radical compilations that combined a drastically pruned traditional liturgy with material from the 'Bible', the 'Apocrypha', later Jewish literature, English poetry, and many of Mattuck's own compositions. On 1 November 1940 an enemy bomb partially destroyed the synagogue, but services continued throughout the war, at Lord's, then in a neighbouring church hall, and finally in the homes of local congregants. Those years took a heavy toll on his health. In 1948 he retired as senior minister of the LJS, and became minister emeritus. Three years later he was taken critically ill with coronary thrombosis, but he recovered sufficiently to give a stirring address at the reconsecration service of the rebuilt synagogue in September 1951. 
The respite was brief. Although he managed to write two books, 'The Thought of the Prophets' (1953) and 'Jewish Ethics' (1953), and was planning another, Mattuck's health was deteriorating. He was too ill to celebrate publicly his seventieth birthday in December 1953, and died four months later, on 3 April 1954 at home at Wildwood, North End, London. He was buried three days later in the Liberal Jewish cemetery at Willesden. His death was reported on the BBC national news, received obituary notices in the major newspapers, and occasioned widespread tributes in Anglo-Jewry and beyond. 


@@@@@


doc= 70162


Moses, Miriam (1884-1965), local politician, was born on 13 November 1884 at 19 Princes Street, Spitalfields, London, one of nine surviving children of Mark Moses (1855-1921), tailor, and his wife, Hannah (Annie) Ehrenberg (1853/4-1899). Mark Moses had been born in Torun, a port on the Vistula, then part of Germany, and came to Britain as an eight-year-old immigrant child. He established himself as a master tailor in a workshop situated on the lower floors of the tall Georgian house in Princes Street (later Princelet Street) where Miriam was born. Mark Moses became a local councillor, a member of the Whitechapel board of guardians, and a school governor. He was made a JP for the City of London in 1909. An Orthodox Jew, he was also active in Jewish communal life, in several synagogues, on the Board of Deputies of British Jews, and as treasurer of the Federation of Synagogues. Miriam was educated at Old Castle Street elementary school in Whitechapel. Her mother, also an active charity worker, died in 1899 at the age of forty-five when Miriam was only fourteen. Choosing never to marry, she followed in her father's footsteps into public life and Jewish communal service. 
On the death of her father in May 1921 Miriam succeeded to his seat on Stepney borough council representing Spitalfields East in the Liberal interest. During the period 1921-31 she was returned five times, always heading the poll by a significant majority. She also held office in the Whitechapel and St George's Liberal Association, of which her father had been chairman for twenty-five years. In 1931 Miriam was elected the first female mayor of Stepney. She stood as an independent, but effectively worked in the Progressive cause, in the face of Labour resentment. In fact, her popularity probably accounted for Labour's failure to take control in Spitalfields East until 1934, when she decided not to stand for re-election. 
Miriam Moses combined her political work with practical engagement in social issues. She was particularly concerned to broaden opportunities for youngsters from deprived backgrounds. Among her earliest activities was the role of school manager for the Robert Montefiore and Buxton Street schools, and she was honorary secretary of the Stepney committee of the Children's Country Holiday Fund and chair of the Whitechapel Tuberculosis After-Care Committee. She was a member of the Whitechapel and Stepney board of guardians. About 1922 she became the first woman JP in Whitechapel, and she served on the east London juvenile court that sat at Toynbee Hall. 
In 1925, together with Elsie Cohen, who later married Barnett Janner MP, Moses established the Brady Girls' Club at Buxton Street School. It was conceived as the girls' parallel of the Brady Boys' Club that had been founded in 1896. Miriam effectively served as club leader for thirty-three years, living in during the Second World War as warden of the purpose-built Brady Settlement which had been opened in Hanbury Street, in the East End, in 1935. Despite her progressive ideas, the boys' and girls' clubs were kept strictly apart along traditional lines. On retirement in 1958 Miriam appeared on the popular television show 'This is your Life', in which she was brought face to face with many old 'Brady girls' upon whose lives she had exerted such influence. 
Miriam saw service on the home front in both world wars: as a Voluntary Aid Detachment nurse at the Bancroft Road Hospital, off London's Mile End Road, in 1914-18, and as chief air raid officer for the neighbourhood in 1939-45. The shelter was located in the basement of the Brady Settlement, and Miriam set up a hostel on the premises for girls made homeless by bombing. She was appointed OBE in 1945, not least in recognition of her outstanding bravery during air raids. 
About 1914, the Moses family had moved from the East End to Stamford Hill. Miriam was active on the ladies' guild of the newly built New Synagogue, Egerton Road, not far from the family home in Colberg Place. In 1931, during the same year that she was elected first woman mayor of Stepney, Miriam was the first woman chosen to represent a constituent synagogue of the umbrella United Synagogue on the Board of Deputies of British Jews. She waged a long campaign for the right of women seat-holders to vote in elections for the United Synagogue executive. This right was eventually granted in 1954. She was a founder member and later president of the League of Jewish Women, was on the executive of the Jewish Board of Guardians, and was a vice-president of the Association of Jewish Youth. 
As a pioneer woman in public life in the 1930s, Miriam Moses was in favour of the municipal provision of contraception for poor mothers, an issue that she saw as a social question divorced from religion (Marks, 267). Nevertheless, she personally remained attached to traditional Jewish practice and was known for her public observance of the Jewish sabbath and dietary laws. About 1934 Miriam Moses moved from Stamford Hill to West Hampstead. After returning to the East End during the war years, she subsequently retired to north-west London, living in turn in St John's Wood, West Hampstead, and Maida Vale. She died on 24 June 1965, aged eighty, at the Middlesex Hospital, London, and was buried three days later at the Federation Jewish cemetery, Edmonton. 


@@@@@


doc= 70163


Werner, Abraham Abel (1837-1912), rabbi, was born in Tels, a small town in the Kovno (Kaunas) district of Lithuania, then part of the Russian empire. Of his parents little is known, save that they were Orthodox Jews. His father was Yakov Chaima; the surname Werner was adopted by Abraham before he moved to Finland. Lithuania then boasted some of the most vibrant centres of Talmudic scholarship in Europe, and Tels was especially distinguished in this respect. The young Werner studied under the direction of prominent Lithuanian rabbis; at the age of twenty he received the rabbinical diploma, and in 1865, at an astonishingly young age, he was appointed a 'dayan' -- that is, a member of the Jewish ecclesiastical court -- of Tels, a testimony to the reputation of his rabbinical scholarship. In 1854 Werner had married Sima Gittel (1837-1906). There were two sons and a daughter of the marriage. In 1880 he moved to Helsingfors (Helsinki) to become the chief rabbi of Finland. Eleven years later he accepted an invitation to journey to London to become the rabbi of a small but immensely influential community of Orthodox Jews in that city. 
In 1891 London Jewry was in the middle of a veritable 'Kulturkampf'. That summer Hermann Adler had succeeded his father, Nathan Marcus Adler, as chief rabbi of the British empire, a post which was, in effect, in the gift of the United Synagogue, presided over by the house of Rothschild. The Judaism of the United Synagogue represented a compromise: nominally it was Orthodox, but most of its members did not practise this orthodoxy, and there had developed during the 1880s a bitter rift between the United Synagogue (in effect, the Anglo-Jewish establishment at prayer) and the Jewish refugees from Russia and Poland who flooded into England, and primarily into London, during that decade to escape persecution and to seek economic advancement. 
The Yiddish-speaking immigrants had accepted the authority of Nathan Adler, a Talmudic scholar of international repute, but they had much less time for Hermann, whom they regarded as lacking in rabbinical scholarship and weak in commitment to Orthodox Judaism. Moreover, they were outraged at Hermann's determination that he alone should be accorded the status and title of rabbi (indeed, of chief rabbi) within the British empire; in eastern Europe every Jewish town had one or more rabbis, all of whom could exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction. To fight Hermann's claims an alliance had been formed between two rigidly Orthodox communities, one of German and Austro-Hungarian origin, the other composed of Russian and Polish immigrants. Together, these groups established the Chevra Machzike Hadath ('the society of the upholders of the religion'). And it was from this Chevra that Werner received the invitation to come to London a short time after Hermann had succeeded to his father's position. 
Werner lost no time in declaring war on United Synagogue Judaism and on the United Synagogue's rabbinical leadership. He condemned the meat and poultry sold as kosher under Hermann Adler's authority, and established a quite separate facility, under his supervision, for the slaughter and preparation of kosher meat and meat products. He solemnized marriages and authorized divorces without any reference to Hermann Adler, and he established a Talmud Torah (religion school) which taught in Yiddish, a language the Anglo-Jewish establishment despised. 
The Machzike Hadath grew in popularity and size, and in 1898 moved into a former Huguenot chapel at the corner of Brick Lane and Fournier Street, in the heart of the Jewish East End of London. Known as the Spitalfields Great Synagogue, it became the acknowledged centre of immigrant opposition to Adlerian Judaism. Its success inspired other communities of Jewish immigrants in Liverpool and Manchester to rebel also against Hermann Adler's jurisdiction. By the end of the nineteenth century Hermann was faced with a full-scale rebellion on the part of the immigrants, who now comprised the numerical majority of the Jews in Great Britain. What saved his authority, and that of the Anglo-Jewish establishment, was the financial poverty of the Machzike Hadath and of its members. In 1905, in return for financial assistance, the community agreed to recognize Adler's jurisdiction; Werner renounced his right to authorize marriages and divorces, and his separate slaughtering facilities were also brought under Adler's overall authority. Werner was criticized in some quarters for what was seen as a capitulation. A man of great humility, his concern was never for his own status, but rather for the status of Orthodox Judaism; in this respect, the United Synagogue had learned a lesson which it was never to forget: that it had to accommodate the wishes of East End as well as of West End Jews. 
Werner also clashed with Adler over Zionism. Hermann, fearful for the status of emancipated Jews in Britain, had condemned Zionism as contrary to Jewish principles. Werner, from a much stronger Talmudic perspective, supported the Zionist movement, and spoke at the famous monster rally which Theodor Herzl addressed at the Great Assembly Hall, Mile End, east London, in October 1898. 
In his long black frock coat and flowing beard, Werner was an imposing figure. He wrote little. His strengths lay in his faith, his piety, his Talmudic learning, and in the propagation of the study of the 'Talmud' among British Jews. His death in London at 9 Princelet Street, Spitalfields, on 20 December 1912, provoked one of the largest gatherings of Jews ever seen in Britain, and his funeral, at the Federation Jewish cemetery, Edmonton, the same day, witnessed an outpouring of grief which was certainly without precedent; it merited a report in the 'Manchester Guardian' (23 December). 


@@@@@


doc= 70164


Winchevsky, Morris (1856-1932), socialist and Yiddish writer, was born as Lippe Benzion Novochovitz to a pious Jewish family in Yanova, Lithuania, in the Russian empire on 9 August 1856. He and two younger sisters were the surviving children of Zissel (died 1888) and Golda Novochovitz. Winchevsky's maternal grandparents were honoured in the town, the grandfather because he was killed for sympathizing with Polish rebels in 1831, the grandmother for lifelong charitable work. In 1861 the family moved to Kovno, a large town and a Jewish communal and cultural centre. Benzion went to 'heder', elementary Jewish school, until, aged eleven, he was sent to a Russian school for two years and then to a 'Gymnasium' for a year. At the same time he studied the 'Bible' with his father. Formal education ended with a few months at the government-sponsored enlightenment rabbinical school at Vilna. By this time, at the height of the Russian Jewish enlightenment, he was avidly reading its literature in Russian, Hebrew, and Yiddish. He abandoned religious life as a youth but, unlike many who did so, without significant conflict with his family. Winchevsky's literary career began in 1873 with articles for the Hebrew weekly 'Ha-Maggid'. In the following year his father secured for him a position at a Jewish bank's branch in Oryol, outside the pale of settlement, where all Jews except a small minority had to live. Meetings with Russian radicals in Oryol were the beginning of Winchevsky's socialism. He wrote originally as Ben-Netz, and worked at the bank as Leopold Benedict; Morris Winchevsky, under which he acquired fame, came during the 1880s, and there were other occasional pseudonyms. 
The decade between Oryol and a socialist Yiddish career in London was intellectually formative. Winchevsky's foremost mentors were the Russian socialist exile Pyotr Lavrov in Paris, who had several Jewish disciples, and Aaron Lieberman, the founder of Hebrew language socialism to whose publications Winchevsky contributed. Winchevsky's early writings already identified with downtrodden, impoverished Jews and scorned their petty bourgeois, pious oppressors. While writing occasionally in Hebrew, Winchevsky wrote largely in Yiddish, the plebeian tongue, in a fluent style replete with irony, wit, and phrases drawn from Jewish traditional literature. 
The danger of arrest in Russia impelled Winchevsky to emigrate to Germany in 1874, where he settled in Konigsberg. Arrested and briefly imprisoned in 1879 under the newly enacted anti-socialist laws, he was deported to Denmark and promptly went on to England. Attracted by the possibilities of agitation among the growing Jewish immigrant proletariat, he stayed in London until 1894. Winchevsky differed from his comrades who had to work in sweatshops by having clean, secure employment at the Seligman bank in London. As Benedict Novokhovitch he married on 23 June 1886, in a Jewish ceremony at 29 Colchester Street, Whitechapel, Rebecca ('b'. 1865/6), daughter of Harris Salligaller, traveller. They had a son and a daughter, born in 1887 and 1888. Bank employment and family life were kept separate from socialist endeavours. 
In 1879 Winchevsky composed the first Yiddish socialist tract, 'Yehi Or' ('Let there be light'), published in 1885. Following several years of agitation, he joined E. W. Rabbinowitz to publish the first Yiddish, cautiously socialist weekly newspaper, 'Der Poylisher Yidl' ('The Little Polish Jew'). When Rabbinowitz drew the newspaper away from socialism Winchevsky quit and joined a new revolutionary socialist weekly, 'Der Arbayter Freind' ('The worker's friend'), which was also radically anti-religious. After it was taken over by anarchists in 1891 Winchevsky again left and took part in a new venture, 'Fraye Velt' ('Free world'). In these and later periodicals he was much in demand for his literary skill. As a socialist he went his own way, indifferent to party doctrines and with little ideological consistency, upholding socialism as an ethical demand for justice. Although he was later called a Marxist, Marxism does not appear significantly in his work. 
When the movement in England declined Winchevsky, like most of its leaders, moved to the United States in 1894, where there was a vast, rapidly increasing immigrant Jewish proletariat. He commenced his American career as editor of the short-lived Yiddish weekly 'Der Emes' ('Truth') in Boston, a 'family newspaper' of 'literature and [socialist] enlightenment'. Back in New York city, Winchevsky was a founder with Abraham Cahan in 1897 of the hugely successful Yiddish daily 'Forverts' ('Forward'). He later broke with Cahan and edited 'Di Tsukunft' ('The future'), a political and literary monthly, and took part in many other Yiddish socialist publications, as well as writing verse and plays. His life was tied to the Jewish socialist movement, where his strength as a writer lay in his homely, witty style which used puns, proverbs, and anecdotes from Jewish life and religious literature. 
After decades of supporting cosmopolitan internationalism in Yiddish guise, Winchevsky shifted to a more ethnic, nearly Zionist position during the First World War. He joined the bourgeois American Jewish delegation to the Versailles peace conference in 1919 on behalf of Jewish minority rights in eastern Europe, yet in 1921 he affiliated himself with the communists because in Soviet Russia a secular Yiddish culture of the masses was developing. He visited the Soviet Union in triumph in 1924-5, but declined the lifetime pension he was offered and returned to America, where he lived out his years in need. By then he was called the grandfather of his movement. From 1927 Winchevsky was disabled, apparently by a stroke, but was brought to a public celebration of his seventy-fifth birthday. Winchevsky died on 18 March 1932 in the Bronx, New York. His family's acceptance of the socialist, anti-communist Workmen's Circle offer of burial in its Mount Carmel cemetery in Queens, New York city, within the section of heroes of the Jewish labour movement, angered the communists. Police were needed to control the large, quarrelling crowd at Winchevsky's funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 70165


Kalm, Pehr (1716-1779), botanist, was born in Angermanland, Sweden, in March 1716, the son of Gabriel Kalm, minister of Korsnas chapel, Narpes, Vasa county, in Osterbotten, and Catharina Ross. His father died before Kalm was born, but with the help of relatives Kalm was able to attend elementary school in Vasa, and to matriculate in 1735 at Abo Academy, both in the Swedish-speaking part of Finland and the latter then a flourishing centre for the study of natural history. In 1740 he gained the patronage of Friherre Sten Carl Bielke who took him to live on his estate near Uppsala, at which university Kalm matriculated on 5 December 1740. Here his teachers were Linnaeus and Anders Celsius. Their example and the support of Bielke, who was keenly interested in natural history, particularly as applied to agricultural improvement, led to Kalm's undertaking several journeys for research purposes between 1740 and 1745 through Finland, Sweden, Russia, and Ukraine. He graduated doctor of natural history and economics of Abo Academy in 1746 and became on 31 August 1747 its first professor of 'oeconomie', a subject which included mineralogy, botany, zoology, and chemistry, and their economic application. At the instigation of Linnaeus, who had himself hoped to make the journey, and with the support of the Abo Academy, Kalm travelled in North America between 1747 and 1751 with explicit instructions to gather information and specimens such as seed which would be of practical economic use to Sweden. To this end he was to go particularly to areas in the north with climates similar to that of Sweden. Setting off in November 1747 he travelled first to England. The English leg was always seen as an important part of his journey since British botanists had had considerable experience and success in introducing North American plants and they had important contacts with American botanists. He stayed and met with British scientists, particularly Peter Collinson, a botanist with American contacts who introduced Kalm to the Royal Society, Mark Catesby, a botanist with extensive American contacts, Philip Miller, keeper of the Chelsea Physic Garden, and John Mitchell, the Virginian natural historian, then in London, who was Kalm's chief guide in England. He made a visit into the Chilterns to see William Ellis whose works on agricultural improvements he had read in Abo and Uppsala, but came away sharing the poor opinion of Ellis held by some of his neighbours. He sent quantities of seed and specimens back to Sweden and made detailed notes of all he saw. 
The War of the Austrian Succession disrupted shipping but Kalm finally sailed for America on 6 August 1748, arriving there in November. He visited Philadelphia, where on 1 January 1750 he married Anna Margareta (died 1787), daughter of Johan Sjoman, commissioner at the Stockholm arsenal, and widow of John Sandin, dean of the Swedish congregation in Philadelphia. He was warmly received into the leading scientific circles in Philadelphia. He then went on to Canada, where he arrived in the summer of 1749, and travelled extensively in areas of British and French settlement. He was particularly well received in New France, then the focus of much French scientific attention. He reached home in 1751, having been away four instead of the projected two years. He brought back plants and seeds of medicinal use and of benefit to agriculture and industry. All were planted enthusiastically, notably in his new botanical garden at Abo. Although few flourished the practice of systematic cultivation and experiment with plants gained wide currency among the well educated and the well born and his efforts were in this way very influential. 
Kalm reached a wider audience through his publications. Reports of his travels were published in Swedish, German, Dutch, and English in the eighteenth century, some in his lifetime, and a French and other editions followed in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. These reports, although containing detailed and pertinent observations, were less detailed than his journals (fair copy in Helsinki University Library), which were published in the twentieth century in Swedish and English and further consolidated his reputation. All his writings show his thirst for information, and his thoughtfulness in interpreting what he saw, particularly in the light of his scientific and medical knowledge. He was the first European traveller with scientific knowledge to visit and report on many areas; his report of Niagara Falls, for example, published by Benjamin Franklin and John Bartram in 1751, was the first English description of the falls. Though his primary aim was scientific Kalm was no less acute an observer of the economic, ethnographic, and social characteristics of the lands through which he travelled, and his comments on Native Americans, European colonists, and the relations between the two are of particular interest on both sides of the Atlantic. Kalm intended a Flora Canadiensis, but this eagerly awaited work was never completed. Most of the material for it was recorded in his travel diaries and Kalm's students and Linnaeus and his students made considerable use of the information in their writings. 
In 1763 Kalm declined the offer of the chair of botany from the academy of sciences in St Petersburg and remained at Abo, where he took his duties very seriously. Under his direction 146 dissertations were completed. His emphasis on the applied and the empirical and on communicating in Swedish set his school apart from the old academic tradition and foreshadowed the later establishment of agricultural, economic, and technical colleges. Most of his students became clergymen and, by adopting new practices on their church farms, helped to raise the standards of Finnish agriculture and husbandry. He was made doctor of theology at Lund University in 1768. He died on 16 November 1779 in Abo. 
Kalm was important as a link between the natural history communities of England, North America, and Sweden, the last being in the mid-eighteenth century of crucial importance because of Linnaeus. Scientific links between Sweden and England were well established, not least by Linnaeus himself and his pupil Daniel Solander, Joseph Banks's secretary. Connections between North America and England were similarly well developed, for example by John Ellis, Peter Collinson, and John Mitchell; but Kalm linked all three. These links make him important in the development of eighteenth-century natural history, and the quality and early date of his descriptions, economic and social as well as botanical, give them continuing importance as a historical source. 


@@@@@


doc= 70166


Industrial spies (act. c.1700-c.1800) were among numerous Europeans with an interest in technology who visited Britain during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, knowing that the country was ahead of the rest of Europe in its manufacturing techniques and organization. 
Depending on the particular field, an 'industrial grand tour' could include much of Great Britain and Ireland. Not all these men were entirely innocent visitors. Some were industrial spies, sent by their governments or acting on behalf of their own or family businesses, and knowing that they were not welcome at every door, while some of them concocted elaborate deceptions to cover their real purpose. The focus of interest changed over time, from the early Scandinavian concern with the iron and brass industries, through the Russian and French interest in shipbuilding and gun founding, to the later study of steam engines, textiles, pottery, and glass, but most took the opportunity to view whatever was available to them. Some already spoke good English, others took steps to learn. They also needed to recognize the important elements of what they were seeing, and to record these as notes and/or technical drawings. Many of these documents, having been submitted to authority on return and preserved in official archives, are now being studied and, in a few cases, published for the benefit of scholars. 
As British technology improved on that of its neighbours, steps were taken to prevent the recruitment of skilled men and the transfer overseas of information and actual machines. In 1696 an act was passed to ban export of machinery: it was aimed primarily at the export of knitting frames. Other legislation followed, to prohibit the export of various types of machines and tools and prevent skilled men from leaving the country, with France seen as the principal attraction. The act of 1774 applied to 'any machine, tool, press, paper, utensil or implement whatsoever', and the 1785 'Tools Act' prohibited all exportation of tools, with an emphasis on manufacturing machines and engines of all sorts. Despite these restrictions, many skilled machine makers and operatives were tempted to emigrate, and, by more or less devious methods, various foreigners managed to take down descriptions and drawings of machinery and processes for replication in their own countries. British manufacturers were often in a difficult situation; while they sought to keep certain processes secret, they were at the same time eager to show off their manufacturing facilities and their products, with a view to selling overseas. A number of young men went to London as apprentices or journeymen with the leading scientific instrument makers. While expected to learn, some undoubtedly contravened the law by taking home drawings, models, and even machinery. 
The reverse process also operated, albeit on a smaller scale, since Britain was a leader in so many fields. In the seventeenth century the art of making crystal glass was jealously guarded in Venice, and was furtively investigated by English merchants and travellers. They found, as was often the case, that written descriptions were unsatisfactory, for only experienced workmen could make the apparatus and carry out the operations necessary for many of these technical processes. Despite strict laws prohibiting their movement, many Venetian glassworkers were enticed to various parts of western Europe, including London. In the eighteenth century similar attempts were made to bring from France the manufacture of large crystal plates for mirrors, leading by the 1770s to their production at St Helens in Lancashire. The most successful British spying mission seems to have been that of John Lombe ['see under 'Lombe, Thomas], who in 1716 went to Leghorn and managed to see and draw the machinery for twisting silk thread. Small quantities of this thread had hitherto been illicitly imported into Britain, but with the arrival of immigrant Huguenot silk weavers far more was needed. John's brother Thomas secured a patent and the necessary capital and erected a vast silk throwing mill, powered by the River Derwent, near Derby. 
By the end of the seventeenth century Britain still imported the bulk of her needs of bar iron and copper from Sweden, but copper refining was already under way around Bristol, an area of mercantile importance close to ample supplies of fuel and water. Other products of the Bristol area included iron, brass, pottery, glass, and gunpowder. The Swedish mining industry therefore had cause for concern lest the advancement of refining processes in Britain diminish the need for Swedish goods. As early as 1696 the Bergskollegium ('College of Mines') sent a mining expert, Thomas Cletcher, to inspect the copper works of Elton and Wayne at Bristol. In 1710 Goran Wallerius, a metallurgist, visited Redbrook copper works near Bristol, but he was taken for a spy and told to leave. 
A more professional approach was that of 


@@@@@


doc= 70167


Eyre, William (fl. 1634-1675), parliamentarian army officer and Leveller, is of obscure origins; the place and date of his birth and the names of his parents are not known. His rank of captain in a cavalry regiment during the first civil war suggests that he may have come from the rural middling sort. In his 'The Serious Representation' (1649), he stated that, 'fifteen years ago, I was forc'd to leave this my Native Land, for opposing the 'Service Book', and other 'Traditions of men', and lived in 'New-England' till the sitting of the last Parliament' (Eyre, 'Serious Representation', 1-2). 
In 1642 Eyre became a sergeant in Denzil Holles's regiment, and was engaged at Edgehill and at Brentford, where the regiment was destroyed. Eyre joined the army of the eastern association, and was commissioned by Oliver Cromwell quartermaster in his own troop, and soon promoted captain of the sixth troop in Cromwell's cavalry regiment, the Ironsides. Eyre participated in Cromwell's campaign in Lincolnshire until January 1644, when his troop and two others were captured at Sleaford. By his own later account in 'The Serious Representation', written with the hindsight of a Leveller prisoner in Oxford Castle, he fell out with Cromwell and left the regiment in the summer 'for standing to my first Principles'. Cromwell, he added, 'would often (when he was low) stroke me on the head, saying, 'The Nation was bound to bless God for me': But when he saw the Country and Souldiery respect me, he and his Creatures studied how to make me odious in the sight of all honest men. (Eyre, 'Serious Representation', 3)' In 1647 Eyre married Mary, 'nee' Leycester, widow successively of Calcott Chambre (or Culvert Chambers) and of Job Ward. Her first husband's father had bought the half-barony of Shillelagh and Carnew Castle in co. Wicklow, and through his marriage Eyre now acquired a right to this property. Henceforth the relief of Ireland was central to his hopes. Parliament authorized a force for that purpose, directing Sir Thomas Fairfax to nominate the officers, and Eyre was named colonel of a foot regiment to be so raised. 
Eyre's regiment was not part of the New Model Army. Nevertheless he was at Corkbush Field, near Ware, in Hertfordshire, on 15 November 1647 for the New Model's mutinous rendezvous, inciting the soldiers and urging them to accept the Leveller 'Agreement of the People'. Immediately arrested, he was held pending court martial with William Bray, captain-lieutenant of the regiment of Robert Lilburne which had been so prominent in the mutiny. Hailed as a martyr by the Levellers, Eyre (with eight fellow prisoners) submitted an inflammatory petition clearing the Levellers from an unfounded aspersion made by Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Lilburne of a plot to kill the king. The court martial was convened at Windsor on 3 December and ordinary soldiers among the accused were soon sentenced and punished, but Eyre's trial was postponed. He remained in custody until 23 December, when he was among those allowed to return to their regiments without any further punishment upon acknowledgement and submission to military discipline. 
Eyre's regiment was then quartered in Worcestershire, where, with several others, it was scheduled for disbandment as a 'supernumerary' force. Eyre was absent while he lobbied for his men's pay and arrears. In January 1648 about eighty officers representing five regiments (including Eyre's) met at Broadway in Gloucestershire to discuss their discontents, following which they planned to seize Gloucester. In February orders were issued for the regiment's immediate disbandment. 
In the summer of 1648 Henry Marten, a member of the Berkshire county committee, began to raise local forces in Berkshire, proclaiming Leveller and egalitarian principles. Joined by Eyre these irregulars terrorized the county. The Commons summoned Marten and Eyre and ordered the Berkshire committee to disband their forces. Both Eyre and Marten left Berkshire and sought protection with Cromwell. 
Eyre still wished to serve in Ireland. 'I had three troops that were willing to have engaged in that service, and L[ieutenant-]G[eneral] Cromwel gave me orders to quarter them' (Eyre, 'Serious Representation', 3). But in February 1649 Fairfax, the lord general, issued a declaration against taking quarters without his commission. Fairfax ordered Eyre to a council of war for quartering troops without sanction, 'and then L. G. Cromwell did deny that he gave me any order to do it, and likewise tore his own order in peeces' (ibid., 4). The three troops were ordered to be disbanded. Eyre was now a civilian. 
In May 1649 Eyre took part in the Leveller-influenced Burford mutiny; his account in 'The Serious Representation' agrees generally with the newsbook accounts. Hearing of the regiments that were refusing to take service in Ireland on the terms of compulsion imposed on them by the generals, he searched them out, conferred with Cornet Henry Denne of Scrope's regiment, and accompanied the mutineers to New Bridge on the Thames, where they faced Colonel John Reynolds who kept the bridge. Eyre exhorted the mutineers to attack, but rather than leading a forlorn hope against Reynolds, Eyre reports that the men, 'unwilling to draw their swords against their fellow souldiers, marched over the River a little above the bridg', Eyre himself 'having no Command, nor being under any' (Eyre, 'Serious Representation', 5). At Burford Fairfax's men 'fell upon shooting in at every window where they saw light', and seized Eyre at an inn where he was lodging (ibid.). 
Eyre again appeared before Fairfax and Cromwell and justified his presence at Burford. 'I was a Volunteer at the first, and I hoped I might be so still, and till that which we fought for were accomplished, if there were but ten men appeared for it, I would make eleven' (Eyre, 'Serious Representation', 6). Cromwell railed at him and three days later he was brought to Oxford prison. 
In July the council of state, fearful of conspiracies hatching in Oxford, directed that Eyre be removed to Warwick Castle, where he spent the next year. Finally his spirit broke, and in a petition to the council he admitted that he had been misguided and mistaken as to the good purpose of others, and begged that he might go with his family to Ireland. The council ordered his release on 1 August 1650. 
In Ireland the lord deputy, Henry Ireton, put Eyre in possession of Shillelagh. His victory was short-lived. In 1654 he was back in London and involved in a new Leveller plot, conspiring with old prison companions against the protectorate and complaining, as a witness reported, 'that it was as good living in Turky as here' (Thurloe, 3.35). In January 1655 he was arrested upon landing in Dublin. In his examination he asserted that it was his duty to 'make good' the principles of the army's engagement at Triploe Heath -- a reference to the army's espousal of its solemn engagement in the summer of 1647 (ibid.). While he loved and honoured the protector, even the best of men were subject to corruption. 
After eleven weeks, 'very much distempered both in body and mind', Eyre begged either to be tried or else permitted to join Robert Venables's expedition, then at Hispaniola. His appeal was fruitless, and he remained in gaol. Meanwhile a number of suits were entered against his claim to Shillelagh. He was released briefly in 1659, but was arrested again in May 1660 as one of a group of 'rebellious spirits' who threatened the peace of the restored monarchy. Imprisoned in Dublin Castle, he was charged with tampering with members of the Irish foot guards garrisoning the castle, employing a soldier to act as his agent in trying to foment mutiny. However, he was not brought to trial because the only witness, the soldier, was unclear as to the treasonable design. The earl of Clarendon advised that if there were 'a morall satisfaction of the truth of the charge', Ormond might secure Eyre in another prison. In Eyre's words, he was 'hurried (from prison to prison) above ten years space' (Eyre, 'William Eyres', 22). His wife died while he was in prison. About December 1669 he was at last released and, accompanied by his daughter, travelled to England to pursue the case for his Irish estates before parliament and the king. In 1675 he published two appeals, 'The Case of William Eyres, Esq.' and 'A Particular Deduction of the Case of William Eyre'. The former was referred by the House of Lords to its committee of privileges in May 1675 upon the complaint of the second earl of Strafford that its claims had libelled both himself and his father, though what action the committee took is not recorded. Eyre's subsequent history and the date of his death are unknown. 
Eyre has sometimes been confused with his namesake William Eyre (fl. 1642-1660), parliamentarian army officer and politician, of Neston, Wiltshire. He fought during the civil war -- in 1659 he claimed to have served through to the battle of Worcester and to have held the ranks from captain of foot to colonel (the latter probably a reference to his rank in the Wiltshire militia). He was returned MP for Chippenham in that county on 29 November 1648, thereby missing Pride's Purge, and was admitted to the Rump Parliament on 15 January 1649. In January 1660 the restored Rump appointed him colonel of the regiment of foot recently commanded by John Lambert though a suspicious George Monck quickly removed him from its command. 


@@@@@


doc= 70168


Jane Sowle (c.1631-1711) played a key role in the Sowle press both during her marriage to Andrew and for sixteen years after his death. While Tace Sowle officially succeeded her father, Jane remained an important force in the family business. When Tace eventually married in 1706 she ensured that her mother would retain command of her house. At the age of seventy-four Jane Sowle became the nominal head of the business, and imprints after this date read 'J. Sowle'. Even after Jane died at Clapton, Hackney, on 18 June 1711, aged about eighty, Tace (now Tace Raylton) continued to use her mother's name in imprints. From 1711 to 1735 imprints show 'assigns of J. Sowle' (that is, Tace). Jane Sowle is also remembered for having contributed a testimony to the collectively authored 'Piety Promoted by Faithfulness... Concerning Ann Whitehead' (1686). She was buried at Bunhill Fields, London, two days after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 70172


Nolan, Anthony Edward (1971-1979), inspiration of a medical charity, was born at the Memorial Hospital, North Adelaide, South Australia, on 2 December 1971, the only son of 
Within hours of his birth Anthony Nolan suffered the first of countless haemorrhages. Following many periods of critical illness, he was diagnosed as suffering from Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a rare bone marrow disease which incapacitated his immune system. These early months established the pattern which continued throughout his life. Shirley Nolan dedicated her entire life to him, battling without ceasing for his life, praying but only occasionally being sure her prayers were heard, and fluctuating as to whether she was fighting simply for him to live, or for him to lead a life better than she could give him without treatment. Her own mother proved a tireless help to Anthony throughout his life; Ted gave financial support in the early stages and later donated blood in the search for a successful treatment. 
Since no suitable donor of bone marrow could be found for Anthony among blood relatives, his disease was diagnosed as incurable, but a successful transplant using bone marrow from a non-relative in 1973 offered new hope. Shirley took Anthony to London in August 1973 hoping to find a donor, but discovered that there was no register of tissue-typed potential donors. She decided to found one, and, ending the strict ban on publicity to which she had previously agreed, launched a public campaign to raise money. In 1974 she was able to establish the Anthony Nolan register at Westminster Children's Hospital, supported by the pathologist John Hobbs and the tissue-typing expert David James. Financial backing from well-wishers, notably the Round Table charity, enabled the expensive and complex tissue-typing to proceed. In 1978 the register moved to St Mary Abbots Hospital, Kensington, where the Anthony Nolan laboratory was opened. 
The striking success of the fund-raising campaign contrasted with the daily struggle to keep Anthony alive. Shirley and Anthony lived in the Westminster Children's Hospital from August to December 1973, her mother spending hours each day there. The three then moved to Thanet, Kent, and in 1975 to Challock, Kent. In these two cottages Shirley Nolan sought to create a safe environment for Anthony, who frequently haemorrhaged, and was anaemic and so vulnerable to infection that he could not play with children, animals, or any adult who might be infectious. Ted remained in Australia and his visit in May 1975 marked the effective end of Shirley's and his partnership, though towards the end of her life they again became closer. While lack of contact with others kept Anthony alive, it left him frustrated and on occasion very disturbed, though publicity photographs of him smiling captured moments of genuine happiness. His physical appearance fluctuated dramatically with his health and with the drugs he was taking, but the effects of steroids ensured that he never grew much beyond toddler stature and gave him chubby cheeks, both of which were captured in engaging photographs. 
The struggle to keep Anthony alive while fund-raising tirelessly took its toll on Shirley. Unable to face the British winter of 1977-8 and wanting to rejoin her mother, who had gone to Australia to comfort her son Bob whose only son had just died there, Shirley and Anthony Nolan moved back to South Australia, settling first in the country and then in Adelaide. In 1978 she decided to allow Anthony to mix with other children, and he greatly enjoyed attending school and daily tasks such as shopping. In January 1979 this happy period ended when Shirley decided to take Anthony back to London, where the possibility of 'manufacturing' compatible donor marrow using material from various family members seemed to offer a way round the continuing failure to find a single suitable donor for him. The effort, however, failed, and Anthony died on 21 October 1979 at the Westminster Children's Hospital, London, aged seven, from a cerebral haemorrhage like those he had suffered since birth. Later in 1979 Shirley Nolan published a book telling Anthony's story, 'A Kiss through Glass'. After his death she continued her work in his name. In 1988 the Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust was established and after 1996 the Anthony Nolan Research Institute undertook research on bone marrow transplants and related questions from two well-equipped laboratories funded by the trust. By 2002, 3500 donors had been found for transplants through the work of the trust, which by then maintained a register of 330,000 tissue-typed volunteers. One of the largest such databases and the model for some fifty registers around the world, its staff co-ordinated all UK patient searches on overseas registers, giving sufferers access to information on seven million potential donors. 
Shirley Nolan returned to Adelaide after Anthony's death but continued her involvement with the trust, being appointed OBE in 2000 in recognition of her work. Tragically she was diagnosed as suffering from Parkinson's disease at the age of only thirty-nine, and the effects of the disease and its treatment left her, in her words, 'hopelessly', though not terminally, ill. She joined the South Australia Voluntary Euthanasia Society (SAVES) and campaigned for the legalization of assisted death. On 3 December 2001 she made her first attempt at suicide but, in her words, 'botched it', being discovered by ambulance staff and resuscitated against her clear written wishes. She was denied painkillers thereafter to try to prevent a recurrence. Her second attempt at suicide succeeded and she died on 14 July 2002 having injected herself with a variety of drugs at her home at 10 Lema Avenue, Fairview Park, South Australia. She was cremated at the Northern Region crematorium, Gawler. Relatives, friends, and campaigners complained angrily to the press that they knew she planned suicide, yet could not be with her for fear that they would be implicated in her death. Shirley Nolan left her personal papers to SAVES to be used to further its work. SAVES named 31 March 2004 Shirley Nolan day, marked by a rally to promote the cause of assisted death. Two months later, in May 2004, the first Shirley Nolan lecturer spoke of lives saved by advances in bone marrow transplants. 
In two powerful letters published in newspapers around the world after her death, Shirley Nolan named 'the gift of life' 'the greatest gift of all', yet claimed 'the right to die -- with dignity', while speaking bitterly against those who blocked (stem cell) research into neurological conditions such as Parkinson's disease. While the poignancy of Shirley Nolan's lonely suicide aroused the sympathy of the public, her outspoken statements connecting the right to life, the right to death, the right to have and to refuse treatment, and the right to the fruits of stem cell research (which seemed likely to help sufferers from her and her son's conditions) captured the complexity of moral questions often oversimplified by single-issue pressure groups. 


@@@@@


doc= 70174


Croft, (Noel) Andrew Cotton (1906-1998), army officer and Arctic explorer, was born on 30 November 1906 at Abbey Cottage, Essex Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, the only son and fourth child of the Revd Robert William Croft, curate of Stevenage, and his wife, Lottie Alice Bland Clayton. His father, a gentle, saintly man and a classical scholar, took a living in a remote hamlet on the Essex coast before becoming vicar of Kelvedon, and a canon of Chelmsford Cathedral. Croft attended two preparatory schools before going to Lancing College, where he was in the house of J. F. Roxburgh, who recognized his potential and took him with him as one of his senior pupils when he became first headmaster of Stowe School in 1923. He went to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1925, and took a pass degree in 1928. New interests, developed at Oxford, led to his working in Geneva with the American committee at the League of Nations in 1927. There he met the polar explorer Fridtjof Nansen, and also Gustav Stresemann who had brought Germany into the league. Stresemann's right-hand man, Werner Kissling, became a lifelong friend. 
Croft intended to go into the cotton trade, and studied at the Manchester School of Technology. But he spent a brief unhappy time in the textile industry in Carlisle until he was invited by the headmaster of Eton College to join his staff, provided that he first became fluent in German. He spent a year in Europe, learning German and French. Happening to be in Berlin on 28 February 1933, he was a witness to the Reichstag fire, and to the fact that the watching Brownshirts made no attempt to put it out. He taught briefly in a preparatory school, but in autumn 1933 he was invited to join Martin Lindsay's three-man expedition across Greenland. Croft put in much of the preparatory work in west Greenland, essential to the expedition's success, and he was principal dog-driver on what remains the longest self-supporting dog-sledge journey on record, at 1080 miles. The expedition crossed the ice cap in 1934, and mapped Greenland's highest mountains. 
Croft spent 1934-5 as aide-de-camp to the young maharaja of Cooch Bihar, before joining the Oxford University Arctic expedition to Nordaustland, the most northerly of the Spitsbergen group, as deputy leader under Alexander (Sandy) Glen. The team were all awarded the polar medal for the expedition, for their contributions to radar development by research on the ionosphere, and glaciological discoveries and survey. From 1937 to 1939 Croft was secretary to Louis Clarke, the director of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and he accompanied an ethnographical expedition to Swedish Lapland in 1938. He published 'Polar Exploration' in 1939. 
His time in Germany had left Croft in no doubt that war was likely and from summer 1939 he was involved in the secret and intelligence organizations then being improvised. He was initially engaged in the War Office mission to the Finno-Soviet war, and then in attempts to frustrate the German invasion of Norway. He was in Bergen as the Germans invaded, and, in ordinary clothes, evaded them and walked over the mountains to Voss, eventually joining the evacuating British forces. With the rank of major, he was sent to Stockholm in 1941, ostensibly as an assistant military attache, actually with the Special Operations Executive (SOE). From the Shetland Islands he undertook long-range reconnaissance flights to map the sea ice edge with Sandy Glen, in support of the north Russian convoys. In 1943 Croft was posted to the Mediterranean, to launch commando raids on Italy and the south of France, first from north Africa and then, after the fall of Italy, from Corsica, and to infiltrate SOE agents into occupied France. He personally led twenty-four sorties into enemy territory, and in 1944 parachuted into France to work with the resistance. He ended the war in Denmark, and was awarded the DSO. 
After the war Croft was internationally recognized as an expert on cold-weather warfare, and on special operations more generally. He stayed with the army, and was attached to the Canadian Operation Musk Ox in 1945-6, testing equipment in Canada's frozen northern territories, and to the north-west frontier trials in India in 1946-7, where he witnessed the communal massacres after partition later that year. By now a lieutenant-colonel in the regular army, he served as liaison officer headquarters continental army in the United States (1952-4). On 24 July 1952 he married Rosalind Madden, 'nee' de Kantzow (1917/18-1996); they had three daughters. A skilled soldier, and a perfectionist, Croft found other talents, during these years, in training and human development, especially with the young. In 1954 he took over and reorganized the boys' infantry battalion at Plymouth, transforming a hitherto dispirited unit with such success that in 1957 he was promoted colonel and commandant of the army apprentices school at Harrogate. He retired from the army in 1960, and was asked to create and run a training college for the Metropolitan Police at Hendon. He organized the college along public-school lines, and encouraged the cadets to take GCE examinations. It was, he said, the most exciting job he had taken on: 'parachuting had nothing on it' ('Independent', 1 July 1998). He was appointed OBE in 1970, and retired in 1971 to his home, River House, 52 Strand-on-the-Green, Chiswick, where he and his wife entertained generously. He published his autobiography, 'A Talent for Adventure', in 1991. Andrew Croft died in Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, on 26 June 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 70176


Robinson, John (1682-1762), organist, was a chorister of the Chapel Royal in 1700 under Dr John Blow. In 1710 he was appointed organist of St Lawrence Jewry in the City of London. As an organist he enjoyed wide popularity, although his playing received mixed reviews. In 1713 he was the first person in England to play an organ with a swell manual, when he inaugurated the Jordan instrument in the church of St Magnus the Martyr, Thames Street. He married, on 6 September 1716 in Westminster Abbey, Ann Turner ['see below']; they had several daughters, one of whom became a singer. After Ann's death he married again and had a son, John Daniel. In September 1727 he succeeded William Croft as organist of Westminster Abbey, retaining his post at St Lawrence Jewry; he had been Croft's assistant for some time. He composed nothing of significance. He died on 30 April 1762 and was buried on 13 May in the same grave as Croft in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey. 

Ann Turner Robinson (d. 1741), the youngest daughter of William Turner (1651/2-1740), singer and composer, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1740), was a singer of some note. She made her debut at the King's Theatre on 5 April 1718; she was known as Mrs Turner Robinson to distinguish her from the singer Anastasia Robinson. She sang in Handel's first London oratorios at the King's Theatre in May and June 1732. She died on 5 January 1741 and was buried on 8 January in the west cloister of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 70183


Patterson, Sheila (1918-1998), social anthropologist, was born on 30 March 1918 at 64 Bower Mount Road, Maidstone, Kent, the daughter of Thomas Percy Caffyn (1871/2-1920), master draper, and his wife, Edith, daughter of Jason Saville, engineer. Her father had been ill for several years before her birth, and died when she was two. On 19 September 1928 her mother married Malcolm Kenneth Pridmore, solicitor, of Cromers Close, Kenilworth Road, Coventry. Sheila Pridmore, as she became, was educated at Roedean School and at St Hugh's College, Oxford, where she obtained a third class in classical moderations in 1938 and a third class in 'literae humaniores' in 1940. She joined the War Office as a temporary civil servant in October 1940, but in 1941 became assistant secretary at Polish House, London, which came under the direction of the British Council. On 6 May 1944 she married Captain Zdzislaw Gadomski ('b'. 1909/10), an officer with the general staff of the Polish army. The marriage ended shortly thereafter, but she retained a keen interest in Poland and its emigre communities. 
In 1947 Sheila Gadomski enrolled for a postgraduate diploma in social anthropology at the London School of Economics, and undertook research in South Africa. She was awarded the diploma in 1950 for her thesis, 'The status of the Cape Coloured people within the South African social structure'. Her research in South Africa led to two books, 'Colour and Culture in South Africa' (1953) and a history of the Afrikaners, 'The Last Trek' (1957), and to a lasting friendship with Ellen Hellman, a founder of the South African Institute of Race Relations. On 23 January 1948 she married Captain Bruce Tyrrell Patterson (died 2000), with whom she had one daughter, (Anne) Clarissa (1953-1973). The marriage was again short-lived, and she returned to Britain in 1954, after two years' research among the Polish community in Canada. On 7 May 1955 she married, lastly, Tadeusz Horko, a Polish journalist, but she retained the name Sheila Patterson for professional purposes. 
Between 1955 and 1959 Patterson undertook the research among West Indian settlers in Brixton, south London, which led to her best-known book, 'Dark Strangers' (1959). This was a descriptive study based on the assumption that the settlers would eventually be assimilated into the general population. It was followed by a volume that earned her a London PhD in social anthropology, 'Immigrants in Industry' (1968), which derived from research conducted in Croydon in 1959-60. In 1958 she had begun working for the Institute of Race Relations in London, a recent offshoot of the Royal Institute of International Affairs. From 1960 she edited the institute's newsletter, a factual record of events that included an occasional commentary. This work was later built into a book-length chronicle under her authorship, 'Immigration and Race Relations in Britain, 1960-1967' (1969). Following a break in 1968-70 for research in Barbados and St Vincent, she was from 1971 for sixteen years editor of 'New Community', the quarterly journal of the Community Relations Commission (a body which later became the Commission for Racial Equality). 
From the mid-1950s to the end of the 1960s public discussion of the issues posed by new Commonwealth immigration into Britain was led by a group disparaged by one critic as 'the lords and ladies of race relations'. Patterson might have been one of them. She had returned to Britain as a strikingly attractive and elegant woman with a cut-glass accent. Her sometimes imperious manner concealed a basic shyness: someone who worked closely with her in the 1970s testified that 'she declined more public speaking invitations than anyone I have ever known' (private information). The end of the era of the lords and ladies was foretold in 1967, when a very successful white-led pressure group, the Campaign against Racial Discrimination, was taken over by black militants. In 1972 the Institute of Race Relations was the subject of a take-over that gave it a radically leftist character. The Community Relations Commission, established under the 'Race Relations Act 1968' to promote harmonious community relations, occupied a central position in a very contested field. 'New Community' set out to bridge the gaps between academics, those working in the applied field, and policy-makers, by publishing a wide range of research findings in a jargon-free style. Patterson was an excellent choice as editor, for she observed strict standards of accuracy in reporting, in the selection of appropriate names for groups and social processes, and in political impartiality. Though many of those around her were left-wingers, she was ready to tell them that she herself was a Conservative with a capital C. She and her husband had a flat in Nerja, Andalusia, Spain, where everything appealed to her: the warmth, the way of life, the food, and above all the people. 
The 1970s were also a decade of change in social anthropology, with the passing of a generation of scholars who had conducted field research in the colonial era and had focused on the study of social structure. Interest switched to new fields and new theories. Patterson did not contribute to the change of direction, or, indeed, follow it very closely. She had by this time come to concentrate upon the study of race relations within the Commonwealth and to develop an approach that had more in common with that of a historian than of a social theorist. 
Patterson retired as editor of 'New Community' in 1987, though she maintained contact with her former colleagues in Britain and elsewhere. Her last years were spent at the Victoria Highgrove Nursing Home, 59 Dyke Road Avenue, Hove, Sussex, and she died there on 21 June 1998, following a stroke. Her husband Tadeusz Horko predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 70186


Cunningham, Sir Charles Craik (1906-1998), civil servant, was born on 7 May 1906 in Dundee, the only child of Richard Yule Cunningham of Abergeldie, Kirriemuir, Forfarshire, a stationer and bookseller, and his wife, Isabella Adam, 'nee' Craik. He had a brilliant academic career at the Harris Academy, Dundee, and St Andrews University, where he read English, German, and Humanity, graduating with a first-class degree in 1928 and BLitt in 1929. (He later received an honorary LLD from St Andrews, in 1960.) He joined the administrative civil service in 1929. He was posted to the small Scottish Office in Whitehall, and was soon spotted as a high flyer. From 1933 to 1934 he was private secretary to the parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland, and from 1935 to 1938 he was private secretary to three successive secretaries of state. He married, on 10 July 1934, Edith Louisa (1910-1990), daughter of Frank Coutts Webster. It was a long and happy marriage. They had two daughters, Edith Isobel ('b'. 1935) and Margaret ('b'. 1937). 
In 1939 Cunningham was due to go to Edinburgh as an assistant secretary in the newly created Scottish home department, but the outbreak of the Second World War kept him in London for some fifteen months, acting as a liaison officer between the new department and the Whitehall ministries. When he eventually moved to Edinburgh, he rose steadily up the hierarchy and in 1948 was appointed secretary of the department, a post he held for nine years. He remained throughout firmly in charge. Later in life he looked back nostalgically to the time when James Stuart was his political superior, as secretary of state (from 1951 to 1957); Stuart concentrated on major governmental policies, and gave his senior officials a fairly free hand. The Scottish home department's role was at this period expanding in a wide spectrum of activity, including penal reform, police and fire service training, child care, hydroelectricity, roads, tourism, and the fishing industry. Cunningham felt that his department had a real contribution to make in promoting Scotland's economic development. He was knighted KBE in 1952, having been appointed CVO in 1941 and CB in 1946. 
Cunningham, as a stout defender of Scottish interests, became well known in Whitehall, and in 1957 the home secretary R. A. (Rab) Butler agreed to his appointment as permanent under-secretary of state at the Home Office. The responsibilities of the Home Office in the field of criminal justice were familiar enough to Cunningham from his Scottish experience, although the scale was greater. He lost no time in setting up for the first time a professional research unit, and encouraged the creation of the Cambridge Institute of Criminology. The year 1959 saw the publication of Butler's white paper 'Penal Practice in a Changing Society', the first general discussion on penal methods since the Gladstone report of 1895. In 1960 a royal commission on the police was appointed. In 1963 Cunningham merged the work of the Prison Commission into that of the Home Office, to improve co-operation between all the divisions dealing with offenders. When he left office, he had brought to an advanced state proposals for appointing a Parole Board. 
Cunningham was assiduous in coping with the various other activities of the Home Office, which included relations with the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and running the state management scheme for the public houses and breweries of the Carlisle and Gretna Green districts. He used to travel and meet those concerned on the ground. He also found himself facing a new problem: immigration from the Commonwealth. He was involved in the anxious discussions which led to the 'Commonwealth Immigration Act', 1962, which for the first time imposed restrictions on entry to the UK from the Commonwealth. In 1965 he accompanied Lord Mountbatten on a mission to various Commonwealth countries to try to persuade them to set up controls and health checks at source. In Pakistan it fell to him to conduct the negotiations. 
Cunningham (who was promoted KCB in 1961) brought with him to the Home Office the personal style he had evolved in Scotland, a style made possible only by his prodigious capacity for work. On important policy issues he liked to present to ministers only his own submission, setting out his account of the facts and arguments, and his recommendations. The staff found it somewhat frustrating that their efforts were not seen by ministers, but Butler, although he found the procedure rather odd compared with his experience in the Foreign Office, did not disturb it. Nor did Henry Brooke, who succeeded Butler in 1962 and achieved unpopularity in liberal circles for what was thought to be insensitive handling of some immigration and deportation cases. Sir Frank Soskice, who followed Brooke in 1964 (and, like him, failed to improve his reputation while at the Home Office), also accepted what was on offer. But Roy Jenkins, who succeeded Soskice towards the end of 1965, found the procedure unacceptable. He wanted to know all about the background and to see what others had said so that he could make up his own mind. He began with a confrontation with Cunningham over some staff appointments, but the main battle took place over submissions. Cunningham in the end had to give way. Jenkins respected his great ability, but would not agree to a further extension of his appointment, and he retired in the summer of 1966. 
Cunningham was almost immediately appointed to the board of the Atomic Energy Authority, and in October 1966 he became its deputy chairman. During his five years in the post he devoted his skill and energy to furthering the authority's interests. He tried hard to resist proposals for breaking up the authority, and encouraged diversification into non-nuclear work. From 1971 to 1974 he chaired the newly formed Radiochemical Centre Ltd, and he was a founder member of the National Radiological Protection Board. He also chaired selection boards for the civil service commission. In 1972 he chaired the Ugandan Resettlement Board, which tackled with energy and considerable success the formidable problem of resettling some 28,500 Ugandan Asians expelled by Idi Amin. He was promoted GCB in 1974. 
Cunningham was a small, wiry individual, with extraordinary stamina. He was always punctilious in attending functions where he thought his department should be represented, and would then work at home far into the night. He was polite and courteous, albeit with touches of impatience; in private conversation he exercised a highly entertaining, if somewhat mordant, wit; and he was a fluent public speaker. He was essentially a liberal and humane man, but tended sometimes to be a little rigid in his approach. He was not a dominant figure in Whitehall, but was much respected as an effective departmental head. A man of formidable intellect and complete integrity, a prodigious and conscientious worker, an expert in so many fields, in possession of an outstanding analytical ability, he was a public servant of great distinction. 
Lady Cunningham died in 1990, and in the following year Cunningham moved back to Edinburgh. He continued to live an active life, although troubled by failing sight, but a few months before his death he went into the Strachan House Nursing Home, Edinburgh. He died there on 7 July 1998, of cancer. He was survived by his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 70188


Montagu, David Charles Samuel, fourth Baron Swaythling (1928-1998), merchant banker, was born on 6 August 1928 at 8 Grosvenor Crescent, Westminster, London, the eldest son and heir of Stuart Albert Samuel Montagu, third Baron Swaythling (1898-1990), and his first wife, Mary Violet Levy (died 1983). His father was briefly a partner in the family firm Samuel Montagu & Co., but his principal interests were his herd of English Guernsey cattle and road safety: a Liberal peer, his foremost legislative achievement was to make rear lights on bicycles compulsory. 
David Montagu was educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied English literature, having tried law and economics but found them too dull. Upon graduation in 1949 he reported for work at the family firm founded by his great-grandfather in 1853. He was interviewed by Louis Franck, the abrasive Belgian who ran the City merchant bank: 'He saw this young pip-squeak who he thought had been born with a silver spoon in his mouth', Montagu recalled; 'his first words to me were: 'you have no future in banking'' ('Financial Times', 20 May 1998). Goaded by Franck's disdain, Montagu applied himself to mastering the business of merchant banking, and in 1954 he was admitted to the partnership. It was while a trainee in Paris in 1951 that he met and married, on 14 December, Christiane Francoise (Ninette) Dreyfus, with whom he had two daughters and a son. 
While Franck focused on the firm's traditional foreign exchange and bullion trading, Montagu developed its corporate finance, capital markets, and investment management activities. Among his achievements were the invention of the split-level investment trust and a pioneering presence in the Euromarkets. When Franck retired in 1970, Montagu became chairman and chief executive at the early age of forty-one. Between his arrival at Samuel Montagu & Co. in 1949 and his departure in 1973, the staff grew from sixty to 4000. 
The firm's dynamic expansion and its new activities necessitated greater capital, so in 1967 Montagu persuaded Midland Bank to take a minority shareholding, at the time a radical departure for a merchant bank. Six years later Midland purchased full ownership and Samuel Montagu & Co. became its merchant banking subsidiary. In view of the family tie, Montagu was offered the non-executive chairmanship for life, a banking equivalent to allowing the ancestral family to live on as tenants in a wing of a house acquired by the National Trust. Montagu was outraged and resigned: 'I wanted nothing to do with it', he fulminated; 'a greater insult has never been offered' (personal knowledge). He was immediately recruited as chairman and chief executive of Orion, a joint-venture 'consortium bank' established in 1970 by six of the major banks, including the National Westminster, Chase Manhattan, and the Royal Bank of Canada, to operate in the burgeoning Eurobond and syndicated loan markets. Montagu took the helm at a particularly turbulent moment in the international financial markets, but under his leadership Orion prospered and became a powerful and profitable player in petro-dollar recycling and the Eurobond market. Orion's success inspired its shareholders to develop their own Euromarket activities, resulting in mounting conflicts of interest, a common fate of the consortium banks. But the shareholders refused to accept Montagu's advice that one of them should buy out the others, leading to an acrimonious parting in 1979. His strategic judgement was vindicated when the Royal Bank of Canada became sole owner eighteen months later. 
After Orion, Montagu worked briefly and unhappily for the American brokerage firm Merrill Lynch and then for J. Rothschild Holdings, where he had charge of Ailsa Investment Trust. In 1988 he became chairman of the tobacco giant Rothmans International, a position he retained until a few months before his death in 1998. He succeeded as fourth Baron Swaythling in 1990. 
Swaythling was much sought after as a director of banks, investment trusts, and companies, including London Weekend Television (LWT), Bovis, and the 'Daily Telegraph'. His friend the broadcaster John Freeman, whom Montagu helped to establish LWT, once described him as 'someone I trust entirely, a man with whom I would go tiger shooting' ('Daily Telegraph', 2 July 1998). He was often consulted by government and was a member of the Bank of England's board of banking supervision and its inquiry into the collapse of Barings. 
Swaythling was a man of fastidious, civilized tastes who described himself as 'a lobster-eating Jew' ('Daily Telegraph', 2 July 1998). He was an art collector, a theatre lover, a connoisseur of fine wine and cigars, a keen bridge player, and an excellent shot. He was an active supporter of a variety of causes, among them the National Theatre, and was president of the Association for Jewish Youth. But his passion was racing. He kept a string of racehorses near his Newmarket home, a house called The Kremlin. The high point of his racing career was in 1979, when his horse Zongalero finished second in the Grand National. He was proud to be a founder member of the British Horseracing Board. He had a sharp wit, which was a delight for companions but did not endear him to its targets, first and foremost commercial bankers. On one occasion when asked to justify his first-class airline ticket by an Orion shareholder he replied, 'I'm afraid a private jet wasn't available' (personal knowledge). His tongue made him a few enemies, but they were greatly outnumbered by friends, and he inspired remarkable admiration and affection among colleagues. He possessed a genuine 'joie de vivre' and instilled a sense of fun and excitement in every undertaking in which he was involved. Lord Swaythling died at his home, 14 Craven Hill Mews, Westminster, London, on 1 July 1998, and was succeeded by his son, Charles Edgar Samuel Montagu. 


@@@@@


doc= 70189


Smith, Martin Roger Seymour- (1928-1998), poet and writer, was born on 24 April 1928 at Tudor House, Newington Green, Islington, London, the only child of Frank Sidney Seymour Smith (1900-1972), a librarian and bibliographer, and his wife, Marjorie Nellie, 'nee' Harris (1901-1988), who wrote poetry under the pseudonym of Elena Fearn. As a teenage boy at Highgate School with a passion for poetry, Seymour-Smith made a pilgrimage to visit Robert Graves, who received him kindly. Despite the difference in their ages, Graves became a lifelong friend to Seymour-Smith and a dominant influence on his writing. After military service in Egypt Seymour-Smith went to St Edmund Hall, Oxford; he emerged with a poor degree in history but with a reputation as a poet who had published a pamphlet in the 'Fantasy Poets' series, which was to include some famous names. After graduating Seymour-Smith and his girlfriend, Janet de Glanville, were invited to Mallorca by Graves on a double assignment; he was to act as tutor to Graves's son, and she, a Somerville classics graduate, was to assist Graves with translations for 'The Greek Myths', on which he was then working. The couple were married at the British consulate at Palma de Mallorca on 6 September 1952. Graves was one of the witnesses. 


After Seymour-Smith and his family returned to England in 1954 he worked for a time as a schoolmaster, an unhappy phase of his life reflected in the satirical poem 'What schoolmasters say', which Philip Larkin included in the 'Oxford Book of Twentieth Century Verse'. In 1960 he became a professional writer. He brought out a variety of potboiling or educational texts, and a scholarly edition of Shakespeare's sonnets; he was also a prolific reviewer. His most substantial contribution to literary study lies in his long biographies and reference books. He published a life of his mentor Robert Graves, which had the benefit of close personal knowledge; of Kipling, which annoyed many readers by implying that he was a repressed homosexual; and of Hardy, whom Seymour-Smith revered, though he devoted too much space to attacking other Hardy biographers. He was always a combative writer, much given to airing his opinions on all sorts of subjects, but his direct and personal style made him irresistibly readable, even when provoking disagreement. 
Seymour-Smith's largest and most ambitious book is 'The Guide to Modern World Literature'; the first edition, published in 1973, was big, but the greatly enlarged second edition of 1985 was enormous, running to nearly 1400 pages. It is a rewarding book to dip into, and informative to read in at length, but it has puzzling aspects. Could Seymour-Smith have read all the works he discusses, from thirty-odd literatures? Robert Nye acknowledges that he had not and that some of the entries were written by his wife, Janet (Nye, 'The Independent'). The blurb of the 1985 edition says Seymour-Smith had a reading knowledge of some twenty languages; if he had, it may be wondered how and when he acquired this remarkable capacity in a busy life. Certainly there are translations from Hungarian, Polish, and modern Greek poets which appear to be by the author himself, and he can happily be given the benefit of the doubt. But Seymour-Smith was a joker and not everything in the guide is to be taken at face value, such as the reference to the Polish philosopher and novelist 'Herma Newticks', who was allegedly responsible for the propagation of 'hermeneutics' as a critical concept. 
Anyone who had read so much literature as Seymour-Smith, and wrote so extensively about it, might be expected to work in a university. But he was a proud, late upholder of the old Grub Street tradition, who never let slip an opportunity to cross swords with academics. Robert Nye described him as 'small and wiry, bright-eyed, bushy-bearded'; on his own admission he was 'angry as a bull when roused' (Nye, 'Martin Seymour-Smith', 13). But he had a gentle side, shown in his love of his cats, whom he named after characters in Hardy's novels. He died at his home, 36 Holliers Hill, in Bexhill-on-Sea, Sussex, of a sudden heart attack on 1 July 1998, and was cremated at Eastbourne on 10 July. Janet Seymour-Smith survived him for only two months. She died on 2 September 1998 at the Kent and Sussex Hospital, Tunbridge Wells, and was cremated at Tunbridge Wells on 11 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 70197


Lloyd, George Walter Selwyn (1913-1998), composer, was born at St Ives, Cornwall, on 28 June 1913, the son of William Alexander Charles Lloyd (1885-1951), gentleman, and his wife, Constance Priestley, 'nee' Rawson (1889-1985). Chronic rheumatic fever meant that he was denied a conventional education. However, he spent his childhood in a house overlooking St Ives' Bay, where the arts, and especially music, were highly prized and often practised. Each weekend musicians would come to a big artist's studio in the house and play chamber works. Lloyd's father had the musical and literary tastes of a connoisseur and a particularly advanced knowledge of Italian opera. The education Lloyd had at home was probably better than he would have acquired at most public schools of the time: it equipped him with a wide knowledge of literature, the classics, history, and the arts that would inform his career as a composer. 
Lloyd showed a precocious talent for music that his enlightened parents were keen to develop. He was playing the violin by the age of five, and by the time he was ten had started to compose. William Lloyd would, as an exercise, give his son short scenes from English plays for him to set to music. If he found it difficult, his father would show him what Bellini or Verdi had done in such a situation. As a consequence, Lloyd had a deep understanding of Italian operatic method at a very early age. In his teens his father arranged for him to have violin lessons with Albert Sammons and counterpoint lessons from C. H. Kitson, and to learn composition from Harry Farjeon at the Royal Academy of Music. This training paid off, for Lloyd's music is distinguished by bright orchestration that betrays the composer's deep understanding of the capabilities of every instrument. His writing for brass was particularly fine, and later in life he wrote many pieces for brass band. This intensive musical education, and a love of the Romantics, especially Verdi and Brahms, led to Lloyd's writing his first symphony at the age of nineteen. It was given its premiere by the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra in 1933, thanks to the patronage of the orchestra's conductor, Sir Dan Godfrey. 
Unlike his exact contemporary Benjamin Britten, Lloyd was motivated to write beautiful tunes for their own sake rather than to produce music as a result of intense intellectualization, experiment, or -- in the pre-war years -- turbulent emotional experiences. This attachment to the musical forms of the nineteenth century would, in time, cause him to be viewed as an anachronism by those responsible for programming music for concerts and for broadcasting; but until 1939 he enjoyed popularity, success, and celebrity. No sooner had his first symphony been launched than he wrote an opera, 'Iernin', with a libretto by his father based on a Cornish legend. Frank Howes, the music critic of 'The Times', happened to be on holiday in Cornwall and saw a performance at Penzance in November 1934. He wrote an enthusiastic review, saying that 'Lloyd showed the rarest of all qualities in a British composer, an almost unerring perception of what the stage requires' ('The Times', 7 Nov 1934). 
This encomium resulted in the opera's being staged at the Lyceum in London in June the following year. Its three-week run was the third longest in English operatic history, and it closed only because a heatwave made the theatre intolerable. No less a master than Ralph Vaughan Williams told Lloyd: 'It isn't fair. I've been trying to write operas like that all my life and here you are, a youth of 21, and you do it first time' ('Daily Telegraph', 6 July 1998). Lloyd was already at work on a second opera, 'The Serf'. It was performed at Covent Garden in 1938, this time thanks partly to the admiration Sir Thomas Beecham had for the work of the young composer. His second symphony, like the third (written contemporaneously with the first), was first performed at Eastbourne in 1935. The third was taken up by the BBC Symphony Orchestra on the recommendation of John Ireland, another admirer of 'Iernin', and a man who became something of a mentor to Lloyd. Its premiere was in a BBC concert of contemporary music in London in November 1935, conducted by the 22-year-old composer. The BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra offered Lloyd the post of conductor, but his father dissuaded him, counselling instead that his future lay in composition. The following year, on holiday in Switzerland, he met Nancy Kathleen Juvet (1913-2000), whom he married on 22 January 1937. In the course of their sixty-one-year marriage, Nancy Lloyd provided support for her husband and his work that was literally vital. 
The advent of the Second World War put a brake on Lloyd's meteoric career and almost ended it. A deeply patriotic man, he did not hesitate to enlist in the Royal Marines, and he played the cornet in a military band. On active service, this meant he doubled up as a gunner. In 1942 he served on the Arctic convoys on HMS 'Trinidad'. She was badly damaged after one of her own torpedoes executed a U-turn and hit her. Lloyd was rescued, though only after seeing many of his fellow gunners drown in oil. His lungs were damaged by oil, and a combination of severe shell-shock and trauma, on top of his weak constitution, caused a complete mental and physical collapse. His doctors told his wife he might have to be institutionalized for the rest of his life. She refused to believe it, and resolved to nurse him back to health. Slowly, she succeeded. His recovery advanced when, at the end of the war, the couple were able to go to Switzerland. He began to write music again, usually only for half an hour early each morning before the strain overcame him. 
Lloyd's first post-war work was his epic fourth symphony, finished in 1946. Regarded by many aficionados as his masterpiece, it begins in great gloom that suggests the Arctic convoys, but ends with the triumph of life over death. A fifth symphony followed in 1948, though neither received a performance at the time. None the less, Lloyd and his father were commissioned by the Arts Council to write an opera for the 1951 Festival of Britain. The result was 'John Socman', about a Wiltshire soldier returning from Agincourt. The production toured round England with the Carl Rosa Company but was a disaster, mainly because of artistic differences between director and conductor. Lloyd, still emotionally fragile after his war experiences, lacked the strength to confront and overcome this disappointment. He decided with his wife to abandon music as a way of life. In 1949 they had bought a market garden at Folke, near Sherborne in Dorset, and this became their home and their life for more than twenty years. 
Lloyd continued to write music, rising at 4.30 a.m. for three hours' composition before the start of his day's work growing carnations and mushrooms. Although his horticultural business was a success and soon expanded, nothing happened to alleviate his gloom about his music. Manuscripts sent to the BBC in the hope of performance were returned unread. Impresarios were uninterested. Musical opinion was by then in fee to serialism and atonality, modes Lloyd completely rejected. 'I never wrote 12-tone music because I didn't like the theory', he later said. 'I studied the blessed thing in the 1930s and thought it was a cock-eyed idea that produced horrible sounds. It made composers forget how to sing' ('The Times', 6 July 1998). Sir William Glock, the BBC's music director, drew up a blacklist of composers whose works failed to match his own modernist tastes, and Lloyd's name was on it. At the time, such a refusal of patronage created a formidable hurdle. 
In 1973, both aged sixty, Lloyd and his wife sold their horticultural business and moved back to London. Lloyd had a soundproofed room built in his flat near Marylebone Station in which he could embark on a new era of composition -- a bold step which was in part the result of a slight upturn in his artistic fortunes. Two conductors, Sir Charles Groves and Sir Edward Downes, had in the 1960s launched a rearguard action on Lloyd's behalf. Most successful of all, however, was the pianist John Ogdon. In recognition of Ogdon's friendship, Lloyd had earlier written a piano concerto, 'Scapegoat', for him, which the dedicatee performed with the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra under Groves in 1964. Five years later Ogdon showed the BBC the score of Lloyd's eighth symphony without revealing the name of the composer. It was accepted, though the BBC waited until 1977 to perform it. After the eighth's premiere, which was a great popular success, the BBC Philharmonic Orchestra under Sir Edward Downes set about championing Lloyd's music. In terms of his personal renaissance, 1981 was an 'annus mirabilis' for him. His sixth symphony was included in the Proms, to great acclaim, and Lyrita Records recorded, under Downes, the fourth, fifth, and eighth symphonies. A relay from the Cheltenham festival of the fourth symphony -- its first performance, ecstatically received, thirty-five years after it was written -- seemed to set the seal not just on Lloyd's cultural rehabilitation but on his status as a considerable composer. A prodigious Indian summer followed. This was due in part to Peter Kermani, an American industrialist and sponsor of the Albany Symphony Orchestra in New York state. The orchestra recorded all of Lloyd's main works, and many minor ones, between the mid-1980s and the composer's death. A huge new audience in America led to better promotion of his music in Britain. This not only expanded the audience for Lloyd's music, and brought him, in his early eighties, an income from his work: it also forced a critical reappraisal of his output that was, on the whole, positive. 
The Indian summer also inspired Lloyd to a prodigious output of music in the last fifteen years of his life, though it unquestionably put strains on his ever-delicate health. In all he wrote twelve symphonies, the last two receiving performances in 1986 and 1990 respectively. He turned increasingly to choral music in his last years. There were four notable works in this genre: 'The Vigil of Venus', whose first performance was at the Festival Hall in 1989; the 'Symphonic Mass', which the composer conducted at the Brighton festival in 1993; 'A Litany', settings of John Donne first performed at the Festival Hall in March 1996; and his 'Requiem', the posthumous premiere of which took place in Oxford in April 2000. Despite his advancing years and his and his wife's increasing frailty, both of them travelled around the world to give performances of and record his music; they made frequent trips to America and to the Far East when Lloyd was well into his eighties. 
Lloyd was a generous, modest, immensely likeable man of utter artistic integrity. He eschewed fashion because it did not chime with the convictions that motivated his art, and the neglect he endured as a result was something he bore with great moral courage. One critical assessment of him after his death had it that, 'though the idiom of his music was totally traditional, consistently tonal and lyrical in a late romantic way, it was only rarely imitative... his music had its own distinctive flavour' ('The Guardian', 8 July 1998). His genial and gentle exterior, which projected a remarkable youthfulness well into his old age, concealed fiercely held views. A committed free-marketeer, he deplored composers who demanded public subsidies to write music, for he felt it was a sure way to give the public what it did not want. He believed he could earn a living by giving audiences what they did want and, though it took him most of his life to achieve this, in the end he did. 'Composers cannot go on despising their audiences', he once observed. 'I like the same sort of thing the average person likes. I write what pleases me' ('Daily Telegraph', 6 July 1998). 
Lloyd died at University College Hospital, Marylebone, London, on 3 July 1998 after a year of increasing heart trouble, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 10 July. He completed his last work, appropriately enough the 'Requiem', three weeks before he died. He was survived by his wife; there were no children of the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 70205


Williams, Denis Joseph Ivan (1923-1998), artist, archaeologist, and novelist, was born on 1 February 1923 in Georgetown, British Guiana, the son of Joseph Alexander Williams, a merchant, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Adonis, a seamstress and amateur painter, and lady's maid to an expatriate wife. He was originally named Joseph Ivan Denis Williams, but always gave his forenames in the order Denis Joseph Ivan. His visit in 1931 to the colony's first Arts and Crafts Exhibition was seminal to his early ambitions in art. He began to attend Saturday morning art classes taken by expatriate British amateur artists, and won first prizes in watercolours, oils, and drawing after his first year. He attended private schools in Georgetown, the Progressive High School, then the Tutorial High School where, in 1941, he passed the Cambridge senior school certificate. He was an early member of the newly formed Guianese Art Group and in 1945 won a British Council scholarship to study art in Britain. 
Williams was a fine arts student at the Camberwell School of Art in south London from 1946 to 1948. His teachers included leading artists of the time: William Coldstream, Lawrence Gowing, and Victor Pasmore. His paintings exhibited at the Berkeley Galleries in 1949 were commended by the artist and critic Wyndham Lewis in 'The Listener'. On 9 July the same year, in London, he married the Welsh-born Catherine Alice Hughes (1917-2001), and together they raised their five daughters. A short return home to British Guiana, also in 1949, convinced Williams of the impossibility of making a living there as an artist/art teacher. Back in London the following year he produced new, powerful paintings, some based on those entitled 'Plantation Studies', 'Origins', and 'Burden or Release' which he had recently made and exhibited in British Guiana. Thanks to Wyndham Lewis's acceptance of his invitation to view this work Williams was given a show, with Scottie Wilson, at Gimpel Fils, the Mayfair gallery, in December 1950. The show was dominated by Williams's four large paintings in tempera and oil, entitled 'Four Dimensions of Anguish', their centrepiece being 'Human World', a complex, arresting image of the post-war population of London's streets. The exhibition was reviewed most positively in 'Time' magazine; in 'The Listener', under the heading 'A Negro artist', Lewis hailed Williams's 'very remarkable talent' ('The Listener', 7 Dec 1959). 'Human World' was purchased by public subscription in British Guiana and became the basis of its national collection. 
Williams's work was shown in further exhibitions at Gimpel Fils, in London and in Paris, and in other prestigious galleries in London each year until 1956, including the landmark exhibition This is Tomorrow at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in the latter year. The titles of these exhibitions, and the artists showing alongside Williams, reflect his place in the British avant-garde of the time. He was meanwhile a visiting tutor at the Slade and teaching at the Central School of Art and Crafts; friendships developed with fellow artist-teachers, especially Roger Hilton -- with whom Williams shared several exhibitions -- and Keith Vaughan. 'Painting in Six Related Rhythms', Williams's entry to the Young Artists Exhibition at the New Burlington Galleries in 1955, was awarded a prize in the next band after a painting entered by Lucian Freud; the judges included Graham Sutherland, Herbert Read, and Anthony Blunt. Williams's painting exemplified yet another of the rapid changes in style and form which his work underwent during the 1950s. 
Williams seemed assured of a successful career as an artist in Britain, yet he came to reject such a future and his self-perceived identity as a 'Black Englishman' (A. Walmsley, interview with D. Williams, 26-27 Nov 1993). He began applying for teaching posts in Africa and in 1957 moved from London to Khartoum, with Catherine and their young children. 
The Technical Institute of Khartoum's School of Art, Williams's first African posting, was a major centre for art in Africa. Williams found the local culture more Islamic than African and undertook independent travels in east and central Africa. The desert environment of northern Sudan did not prove conducive to art-making so he turned to writing, with his first novel 'Other Leopards' (1963) set in the Sudan. Yet the desert remains of antique Napatan and Meroitic cultures, and newly excavated artefacts, provided his first direct experience of archaeology, and marked the start of his interest in local African technologies used in making art. 
In 1962 Williams moved to Nigeria at the invitation of Ulli Beier, the German-born editor and promoter of African culture, then based at Ife. Williams's initial assignment was to direct two art workshops -- the second jointly with the celebrated African-American artist Jacob Lawrence -- at the Mbari Mbayo Club in the small town of Osogbo, an important centre of Yoruba culture and hub of the ferment of the country's post-independence creativity. Jacob Afolabi and Twins Seven Seven were among the artists who attended these workshops. Williams was then offered a teaching post at the newly founded Institute of African Art at the University of Ife and, after four years, at the University of Ibadan's School of African and Asian Studies. In both posts he undertook rigorous archaeological and anthropological research, established museum collections of African artefacts, and edited journals. His writing on west African arts and their technologies included articles on Benin bronzes and Yoruba masquerade festivals, and culminated in his pioneering book 'Icon and Image: a Study of Sacred and Secular Forms of African Classical Art' (1974). His second novel, 'The Third Temptation' (1968), was written while he was on leave with his family in Wales, where it is set. Williams meanwhile held visiting posts at Makerere University in Uganda, where, in 1962, he had attended the first African Writers' Conference. 
Williams left Nigeria for Guyana in 1967, the year after its independence, and spent the remaining thirty years of his life there. He first lived at Issano in the Upper Mazaruni area of the interior where, with Toni Dixon ('b'. 1940), who became his second wife in 1975, he established a farm and brought up their young family of five children. Artefacts unearthed there were his first encounter with Guyana's ancient Amerindian cultures. The rainforest featured in his large painting, 'Majestas', made as the centrepiece of a triptych for a nearby church, and was the setting of a novel long in progress, 'The Sperm of God' (1972). He delivered the Edgar Mittelholzer lectures in Georgetown in 1969, entitled 'Image and idea in the arts of Guyana'. In 1974 he moved to Georgetown as Guyana's first director of art. He quickly established key institutions: the Burrowes School of Art, of which he was first principal, the Walter Roth Museum, of which he was director, and the Museum of African Heritage. He co-ordinated the national art collection and pressed for a national gallery, opened at Castellani House in 1993, and curated art exhibitions in Guyana and elsewhere in the region, writing authoritative catalogue essays. His support for individual artists was legendary. Several national monuments were commissioned at his instigation, most notably Philip Moore's '1763 Monument'; his own contribution to public art was the vast mural 'Memorabilia II', in the National Cultural Centre in Georgetown. 
Alongside his work in art, and with little financial help, Williams conducted archaeological surveys and excavations and published his findings, mainly in the journal 'Archaeology and Anthropology', which he founded and edited. Jennifer Wishart ('b'. 1947), his secretary as director of art, was his first field assistant, his companion for many years and mother of his youngest child. An MA in prehistory at the University of Guyana led to his appointment (in 1980) as visiting research scholar at the department of anthropology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC; he was awarded an honorary DLitt by the University of the West Indies in 1989, and in Guyana the Cacique crown of honour. He was able to bring to completion his important book 'Prehistoric Guiana' (2003) by the time of his death from cancer at his house in Thorns Drive, Durban Backlands, Georgetown, on 28 June 1998. He was buried at St Sidwell's churchyard, Georgetown, on 4 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 70207


Speight, John (1920-1998), comedy writer, was born on 2 June 1920 at 111 Dale Road, Canning Town, east London, the eldest of the three children (two sons and one daughter) of John Speight, a boiler scaler, and his wife, Johanna, 'nee' Sullivan. Educated locally at St Helen's Roman Catholic School, he left, aged fourteen, without any formal qualifications. 
A succession of menial jobs followed at several East End factories along the Silvertown Way, but what enthusiasm Speight exhibited during this period was reserved for his fledgeling career as a jazz musician, playing drums in two minor London-based bands before forming his own outfit, Johnny Speight and His Hot Shots. When the Second World War intervened he joined the Royal Corps of Signals, serving as a cook, and then, following demobilization, he tried and failed to forge a full-time career as a drummer, and had to settle instead for spells as a milkman and an insurance salesman. 
The idea of writing as a vocation came to Speight through his regular visits to Canning Town Public Library. John Steinbeck was an early influence, because Speight felt he wrote of real, believable worlds, but it was a novel by George Bernard Shaw, 'Immaturity', which had an impact that the stocky, stammering, but sharp-witted Speight likened to a 'divine revelation', acting as if 'a light had been turned on and every dark recess lit by sweet reason' (Speight). He proceeded to devour all things Shavian, as well as works by Strindberg, Chekhov, and Ibsen, and he joined the Unity Theatre, where he wrote several overtly left-wing plays which he later dismissed as 'a load of crap' (ibid.). 
Speight's move into comedy came in the mid-1950s, when in a jazz club one of his sardonic remarks was overheard by Spike Milligan and Eric Sykes. With their encouragement he started developing more humorous material. After meeting Frankie Howerd, a great patron of comic writers, Speight committed himself to his new craft. His work was first heard on a 1955 BBC radio show entitled 'Mr Ross -- and Mr Ray', starring bandleaders Edmundo Ross and Ray Ellington, and at the end of that year he began contributing scripts to 'The Frankie Howerd Show'. 
Speight married a secretary from Dagenham, Constance Beatrice Barrett ('b'. 1929/30), the daughter of Edward Barrett, a bus conductor, on 3 April 1956. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Speight's writing career started to advance in 1957 when he began a nine-year engagement as principal scriptwriter of ITV's 'The Arthur Haynes Show'. Haynes came to television without an established comic persona, so Speight created one for him: an aggressive, argumentative, know-all tramp by the name of Hobo Haynes. It was also during this period that Speight wrote several class-conscious plays for television, including 'The Compartment' (1961), for which he won the first of his four Screen Writers' Guild awards, and 'Playmates' (1962). On 22 July 1965 Speight's half-hour satire, 'Till Death Us Do Part', about a white, working-class, ill-educated, tory-voting East End bigot named Alf Ramsay (played by Warren Mitchell) and his stoical wife, saucy daughter, and left-wing Liverpudlian son-in-law, was broadcast on BBC1 as part of its 'Comedy Playhouse' season. It struck a chord, and a series (the first of seven) was commissioned. 

'Till Death Us Do Part', which ran from 1966 to 1975, brought social commentary to the genre of situation comedy. Each week Alf Garnett (the surname was changed in deference to England's football manager) would swear (although the BBC limited him to twenty 'bloodys' per episode), and shout as he said the unsayable about liberal modern Britain's sacred cows. Some viewers failed to see Speight's satirical intention, but the writer remained unrepentant: 'I didn't create Alf Garnett', he protested. 'Society did. I just grassed on him' (Speight). 
The show, which Speight described as 'the longest play I have written' (Speight), spawned two movies -- 'Till Death Us Do Part' (1969) and 'The Alf Garnett Saga' (1972) -- and served as the basis for milder versions in Holland, Germany, and, most notably, America, where 'All in the Family' ran from 1971 to 1992. It made Speight a wealthy man, but he never came close to equalling its success. 'Curry and Chips' (1969), a racial-conflict comedy co-written with Sykes and Milligan, was dropped by London Weekend Television after six episodes, while two other sitcoms, 'Spooner's Patch' (1979-82), set in a police station, and 'The Nineteenth Hole' (1989), set in a golf club, failed to catch on. In 1985 Speight brought back the characters from 'Till Death Us Do Part' for 'In Sickness and in Health', which ran for seven years without recapturing its old bite. 
Johnny Speight died on 5 July 1998 of pancreatic cancer, at his home, Four Acres, Nottingham Road, South Heronsgate, Chorleywood, Hertfordshire. His achievement was in encouraging television comedy to develop sharper eyes, as well as a sharper tongue. 


@@@@@


doc= 70213


Harrop, Joseph (bap. 1727, d. 1804), newspaper proprietor and printer, was baptized on 1 October 1727 at Manchester Cathedral, the second of the eight children of James Harrop ('c'.1700-1754), joiner, of Manchester, and his wife, Sarah Dickons (died 1763). He was admitted to Manchester grammar school on 15 November 1736 and later served an apprenticeship with Robert Whitworth, proprietor and publisher of the 'Manchester Magazine'. On 11 April 1749 he married Ellen Williamson ('c'.1727-1772) at Manchester Cathedral; they had one child, Harrop's successor, James. Ellen died from consumption on 12 January 1772. Two years later, on 5 July 1774, Harrop married, as his second wife, Mary Bury ('c'.1745-1801), daughter of John Bury (died 1785), brewer and timber merchant of Salford, and his wife, Frances Hanford (died 1788), at St Anne's, Soho. The couple had six children: Frances, John Bury, Sarah Ann, Mary, William Bury, and Joseph; only the two youngest daughters survived into adulthood. Their mother died from dropsy on Christmas day 1801. 
Whitworth's whig-orientated 'Manchester Magazine' had enjoyed a monopoly in Manchester for several years. In 1752, however, with the assistance of the Revd John Clayton and others, Harrop established a formidable rival. The first number of 'Harrop's Manchester Mercury' was issued on 3 March 1752. With the ninth number the title changed to 'Harrop's Manchester Mercury and General Advertiser'; later it was called the 'Manchester Mercury and Harrop's General Advertiser'. Published every Tuesday -- Manchester's main market day -- at the sign of the printing press, opposite the exchange, the 'Mercury' was to become the longest-running venture of its type in the eighteenth century. The final number, 3672, was issued on 28 December 1830, seventy-eight years after its first publication. A loyal and patriotic paper, advocating tory politics, it supported the government during the period of the American War of Independence. Occasionally Harrop issued supplementary sheets containing war news, noted for their 'expressiveness' of language (Swindells, 'Harrop's 'Manchester Mercury'', 201). The popularity of Harrop's paper owed much to his individual enterprise. By meeting the mail at Derby he brought London and foreign news express to Manchester, thereby increasing circulation. He also published various weekly instalments, most notably a 'New History of England', which extended to 778 pages, at a personal cost of 100 guineas. 
Harrop was the most prolific Manchester printer and publisher of his day, producing numerous books, tracts, sermons, and bills. He also sold books and patent medicines. Among his most famous imprints are the large paper copies of John Byrom's 'Miscellaneous Poems' (1773) and Elizabeth Raffald's 'The Experienced English Housekeeper' (1769). He retired from business in 1788 in favour of his son James, although he did serve as borough reeve of Salford in 1792. Harrop died at his home, 1 Bury Street, Salford, on Friday morning, 20 January 1804. The 'Manchester Mercury' (24 January 1804) paid tribute to its former proprietor, a man 'highly esteemed among an extensive circle of acquaintance'. He was buried, with his first and second wives, at St John's churchyard, Byrom Street, Deansgate, Manchester, on 23 January 1804. Harrop's will included cash bequests in excess of $8000; his son James inherited the remainder of the estate. Chetham's Library, Manchester, holds a selection of correspondence relating to the 'Manchester Mercury'. 


@@@@@


doc= 70215


Bryden, Beryl Audrey (1920-1998), jazz singer and washboard player, was born on 11 May 1920 at 17 Rowington Road, Norwich, Norfolk, the only child of Amos Wilfred Bertram Bryden, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Elsie Maud Tyler Reeves Jones. She was educated at Norwich high school, and while still a teenager started collecting records. At seventeen she joined the local branch of the national Rhythm Club movement. These were social forums where jazz records were played and analysed and 'live' music sessions held, and she was the Norwich club's secretary by 1941, when members travelled to London to attend the first English public jam session. On this visit, she also heard black musicians playing at the raffish Jigs Club in Soho, an experience that changed her life. 
In 1942 Bryden moved to Cambridge, where she ran that city's Rhythm Club and began singing Billie Holiday's songs. She settled in London when the war ended, determined to become part of the jazz world. She did secretarial work for the Entertainments National Service Association, and visited nightclubs where she got to know the small community of black musicians as well as members of the burgeoning 'revivalist' movement which was seeking to rekindle interest in early New Orleans jazz. Among these was Humphrey Lyttelton, whom she met as an employee at Selmer's instrument shop in Charing Cross Road when he came to purchase his first cornet; subsequently she sang with his band. She also worked at 'Doc' Hunt's percussion centre, where she encountered the leading drummers, and thus formed a relationship with the Jamaican percussionist Clinton Maxwell. As interest grew in the revival of traditional jazz, Bryden sang with its leading exponents in a semi-professional capacity. She worked as a record company secretary and appeared with the pianist George Webb, the clarinettist Cy Laurie, and the cornettist John Haim's Jelly Roll Kings, before making her recording debut in 1948 with the trumpeter Freddy Randall (whose business affairs she conducted). At Rudy Evans's Caribbean Club she admired the French guitarist Django Reinhardt and the American singer Lena Horne, but it was typical of Bryden that, while gaining musical inspiration from so eclectic a range of models, she herself performed material from a jazz repertoire that was simple and basic. She sang early songs by the likes of Bessie Smith and accompanied herself by strumming with thimble-tipped fingers on a metal washboard, a rhythm instrument with a history predating jazz that Smith herself, even in the 1920s, would probably have scorned. 
In May 1949 Bryden formed Beryl's Back-Room Boys, with whom she broadcast before joining the trumpeter Mike Daniels as commere and singer at his Delta Jazz Club in Soho. It was there, in 1952, that she met the French clarinettist Maxime Saury; he engaged her to sing with his band at the Vieux Colombier in Paris, her first professional engagement. That city became a second home, and there she formed friendships with notable American expatriates, among them the trumpeter Bill Coleman, the singer Billie Holiday, and the pianist Mary Lou Williams, with whom she recorded. These associations inspired her and gave her the impetus to sit in at 'jam' sessions with such distinguished jazz artists as the saxophonist Sidney Bechet. As European re-creations of pre-war traditional jazz grew in popularity in the 1950s, Bryden sang and recorded with the trombonist Chris Barber and played the washboard with his guitarist Lonnie Donegan; their record of 'Rock Island Line' (1956) sold 2 million copies and entered the British and United States hit parades. She continued to travel in Europe, where she worked with the Dutch Swing College Band and then, as the 'trad boom' became big business in Britain, was heard with the genre's more sophisticated representatives such as the trumpeter Alex Welsh. 
Away from the jazz scene, Bryden filled lengthy residencies at the elegant Blue Angel nightclub in Mayfair, where she appeared opposite the Grenada-born entertainer Leslie Hutchinson. To outsiders she remained indelibly identified with the raucous milieu of white 'trad' and its music-hall trappings, yet she enjoyed contact with a sophisticated artist such as 'Hutch', for he had once played the piano in Harlem and was connected to the source of the black music she loved. She maintained her early links with Caribbean settlers, and when the American vibraphonist Lionel Hampton arrived in London in 1957 she took him to the Sunset Club to 'jam' with the newly arrived musicians. In later years she became a confidante of the singer Adelaide Hall, who had settled in London before the war. 
Although her talent was modest, Bryden became a fixture of the British jazz scene. It was impossible to overlook her, a larger-than-life figure who dressed in dramatic zebra-striped gowns, wore sculptured blonde wigs, and strummed on a star-spangled washboard. She seldom deviated from a repertoire of songs taken from the lighter side of jazz, and sang these with little variation or rhythmic finesse, yet she earned respect for her sincerity in a male-dominated world that routinely showed hostility to women. She fashioned a carefree, unpoliticized image for herself, but her fascination with authenticity never abated. She continued to travel widely and to practise her hobbies of photography and deep-sea diving, and lived for many years at 166 Gloucester Terrace, Paddington, London, where her walls were covered with jazz memorabilia and her bathroom filled with shells, coral, and other souvenirs brought back directly from the depths of the sea. She was unmarried. Bryden died from cancer on 14 July 1998 at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 70216


Baskett, John (1664/5-1742), stationer and printer, was the son of Roger Baskett, gentleman of Salisbury. On 4 December 1682 he was apprenticed to the London stationer Edward Darrell or Dorrell, who supplied stationery to various government offices; he was released from his indentures on 5 May 1690, after which he appears to have worked as a stationer with his former master and another stationer, Godfrey Richards. On 15 June 1691, aged twenty-six, Baskett married Sarah Briscoe ('b'. 1669/70), of Mortlake, Surrey, at St Faith's under St Paul's Church, London. He was noted as supplying paper to the university press at Oxford from 1693. About 1694 he petitioned the Admiralty, offering to save several thousand pounds by supplying the navy with parchment cartridges, following the imposition of paper duty, and from 1695 until 1717 he appears frequently in the Treasury books as John Baskett of Paternoster Row, a supplier of paper. He even applied for the post of commissioner for collecting paper duty. By 1700 Baskett was in partnership with Richards to supply stationery to the customs, and from 1702 (the year of Richards's death), he was also active in the printing trade with Oliver Elliston, a former fellow apprentice under Darrell, and Thomas Simpson, who had married Sarah Bacott, probably Baskett's sister, on 23 December 1693. Elliston's death in late 1706 or early 1707 resulted in the formation in 1708 of a new lucrative ten-year partnership with Simpson and Samuel Ashurst, a former Elliston apprentice who married Baskett's daughter Sarah on 7 December 1710. In 1706-7 Baskett financed the printing of a folio edition of Clarendon's 'History' at Oxford. 
As R. J. Goulden has noted, 'the year 1710 divides Baskett's career neatly', as it was on 10 January 1710 that the old patent for the office of king's printer expired (Goulden, 'John Baskett', 20). The old patentees owed Baskett and his partners at least $8000; in resolving the debt Baskett was able to acquire a half-share in the new thirty-year patent (which covered the printing of bibles and official publications), and from 1711 his name began to appear on the imprints of books printed under the patent at the printing house in Blackfriars. About April 1712 he was formally appointed as queen's printer, a position confirmed by George I about November 1714. (From 1719 he exercised the right as king's printer to publish colonial acts in London, printing the 'Acts of the Assembly' of New York that year, of Maryland in 1723, and of Massachusetts in 1724.) In 1711 Baskett also gained a third-share in Robert Freebairn's new patent as queen's printer in Scotland, and on 2 January 1712, Oxford University agreed to allow Baskett, Ashurst, and John Williams (who managed the king's printing house in London) a twenty-one-year monopoly (from 1713) on the printing of books at the university from the following year, much to the surprise of the Stationers' Company, which had been in dispute with the university over the printing of psalters and almanacs. Little wonder that Baskett was described in a 1712 petition by 'poor paper-makers and printers' as 'one particular man, who, having the press at Oxford in his hands, the Queen's printing-house in London, the patent for printing 'Bibles', &c. in England, and being now by a new grant made Her Majesty's printer in Scotland, is making a monopoly of the greatest and best part of the printing trade in Britain. (ibid., 21)' In 1716 Baskett also bought the reversionary interest of Benjamin Tooke and John Barber as queen's printers, thereby extending the life of his share in the patent to sixty years. However, in that same year he received a setback concerning his share as queen's printer in Scotland, as the right of one of the other two partners, James Watson, to print bibles in Scotland and sell them throughout Britain was confirmed by the Scottish courts. Watson duly printed bibles in 1715, 1716, 1719, and 1722. Finally Lord Mansfield in London ruled in favour of Baskett, and in 1725 Baskett, who had not previously published in Scotland, set up a printing house in Edinburgh in partnership with Freebairn and published four editions of the 'Bible' between 1725 and 1729; from 1734 Edinburgh bibles were published with only Freebairn's name in their imprints. The extent of Baskett's printing privileges required a prodigious vigilance but he nevertheless managed to bring almost forty law cases against infringements, such as when he prosecuted William Dicey, the printer of the 'Northampton Mercury', in 1721 for including accounts of the king's speech. 
In 1714 and 1715 Baskett served as master of the Stationers' Company, and over his working life he bound twenty-seven apprentices with the company, including the typefounder William Caslon the younger. He also employed William Norris as corrector to his press. In 1713 he published the 'Book of Common Prayer' in three different formats, and two years later published four editions of the 'Bible'. A condition of his lease of the university press at Oxford was the contribution of $2000 towards the building of a new university printing house; the move into Clarendon House took place in October 1713, from where, during 1716 and 1717, he printed an ambitious two-volume imperial folio bible decorated with engravings by Hoffman, Du Bosc, and Vendergulcht, later described by the bibliophile Thomas Dibdin as a magnificent work. However, it contained numerous errors and was nicknamed the Vinegar 'Bible' from a mistranscription of the parable of the vineyard. Three special luxurious vellum copies were made, of which two remain in the British Library and the Bodleian Library. Even loose sheets of this work, described as 'shining examples of paper and print' by Daniel Price, were much sought (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 708). Baskett published a total of twelve distinct editions of the 'Bible' during his tenure at Oxford. 
Baskett had faced a cash-flow problem as soon as he took up his share of the queen's printing office, and in January 1713 had borrowed $2000 from a London fishmonger, offering his share as security. The Vinegar 'Bible' also over-extended his resources. Between then and 1718 he borrowed further sums from James Brooks, a stationer, and John Eyre, a kinsman and London grocer. In the latter year he mortgaged his leasehold of the Oxford University Press for $4500. In 1720 he received a loan of $2000 from Ashurst, while in January 1722 Eyre agreed to take over Baskett's 1713 debt in exchange for whatever profit and goods Baskett could produce as king's printer. Nevertheless at this time Baskett's printing house contained the largest fount of double pica in England. Eyre also repaid the remaining part of the Ashurst loan, gaining further rights in the printing office as a result. In April 1723 Baskett leased out his share of the Oxford patent in return for two-thirds of the profits; however, by December, Eyre was the direct recipient for this sum. In the same month Baskett formally acknowledged a debt of nearly $25,000 to Eyre. In 1724 he sold his reversion of the office of king's printer to Eyre for $10,000. However, on 22 June 1726 Baskett sued Eyre, claiming that Eyre had misrepresented the extent of the debt. Eyre responded by seizing as many of Baskett's assets as he could, prompting a series of law cases over Baskett's privileges. In 1727 Baskett was insolvent, and within two years had gone bankrupt. He stopped attending meetings of the Stationers' Company governing body. His estate was assigned to three trustees in November 1728 while the courts continued to decide on the extent of his debts to Eyre and Ashurst. The eventual sum, almost $12,000, was repaid in June 1731 by an attorney in exchange for interest on the capital, and rights to the king's printing house. In the same year the University of Cambridge press syndics leased their right to print bibles to William Ged, the first printer in Britain to use stereotypes. Baskett challenged Ged's right to bible printing; the suit was long and protracted, reaching a conclusion only some sixteen years after Baskett's own death when king's bench found for the university, but it did succeed in restricting Ged's publication of the 'Bible'. In 1732 he secured the renewal of the lease for the Oxford press upon its expiry in 1734. By April 1736 Baskett was able to discharge his bankruptcy and to recover some of his original assets, including the printing house itself. He was still in the process of paying off other sizeable creditors (he offered to sell the Oxford lease to the Stationers' Company in September 1737) when, on 13 January 1738, the printing office was destroyed by fire. All that survived were leaves of the 'Bible' currently being printed; the damage was estimated at $5000. However, Baskett's business survived, owing to insurance and the loan of presses from fellow printers. Soon after, Baskett petitioned the king and was granted a forty-year monopoly for the supply of stationery to parliament. 
Baskett's last publication was a duodecimo 'New Testament', published before he died at Blackfriars, London on 22 June 1742. His will was proved a day later, and he was buried in St Anne's Blackfriars, London. He left legacies totalling $5000, including that of his printing house to his son Thomas Baskett (bap. 1701, d. 1761), an annuity to his sons Robert and John (the latter predeceased Baskett by a month), 10's'. each to his compositors and pressmen, and 5's'. to each boy he employed. He also went to some lengths in his will to ensure that his remaining patents stayed in the family. 
Of John's and Sarah's surviving children, Thomas and Robert followed their father's profession. Thomas was baptized in the parish of St Faith's under St Paul's on 3 July 1701; he was freed by patrimony as a member of the Stationers' Company by his father on 4 July 1732. He married Elizabeth, with whom he had a son, Mark, who was baptized in St Anne's Blackfriars on 20 October 1737. Thomas and Robert (who had served an apprenticeship with the Oxford printer Charles Combes) succeeded to the office of king's printer and the lease of the press at Oxford following their father's death, publishing bibles under their names from 1743 to 1745. In 1743 they instigated a court case against the university press at Cambridge over the right to print statutes. From 1745 only Thomas's name appears in imprints as Robert retired to Epsom in 1744, where he died at some point between 2 August 1766 when he made his will and 15 July 1767 when the will was proved. Following Robert's sale of his interest in the Oxford press in 1744, Thomas secured a new twenty-one-year lease, and it was at Oxford that, during 1756-61, he printed the important second edition of Edmund Gibson's 'Codex juris ecclesiae Anglicane' (1761), which coincided with the reform of the university press under William Blackstone. 
Thomas Baskett died on 30 March 1761, leaving Mark as his sole heir to the office of king's printer and the university press at Oxford. Mark printed bibles in 1761, 1763, and 1768 and a prayer book in 1766, but he was not interested in printing and allowed his premises to become, in one contemporary view, 'more like an Ale House than a Printing Room', with drunken and idle employees (Carter, 353). In 1766 he relinquished his lease of the Oxford press, and in 1784 sold the Blackfriars printing house to John Walters. 


@@@@@


doc= 70217


Carpenter, John Archibald Boyd-, Baron Boyd-Carpenter (1908-1998), politician, was born on 2 June 1908 at 22 Park Avenue, Harrogate, Yorkshire, the only son (there was one daughter) of Sir Archibald Boyd Boyd-Carpenter (1873-1937), politician, and his wife, Annie, second daughter of Thomas Dugdale, of Cross Hill, Blackburn, Lancashire. His father was Unionist MP for North Bradford (1918-23) and Coventry (1924-9), and was briefly financial secretary to the Treasury and then paymaster-general in the Conservative government of 1922-4. His grandfather was William Boyd Carpenter, bishop of Ripon and canon of Westminster, reputedly Queen Victoria's favourite bishop. 
Boyd-Carpenter was educated at Stowe School and Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated with a second-class degree in modern history in 1930, and a diploma in economic and political science in 1931. He was elected president of the Oxford Union in 1930 and then studied at the Middle Temple, where he was made Harmsworth law scholar in 1933 and won the Council of Legal Education prize for constitutional law the same year. He was called to the bar in 1934, and practised on the London and south-eastern circuit until the outbreak of the Second World War. In 1934 he engaged in his first political campaign when he stood as the Municipal Reform candidate for Limehouse in the London county council elections. On 25 June 1937 he married Margaret Mary Hall ('b'. 1909/10), daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel George Leslie Hall, officer in the Royal Engineers. They had one son and two daughters. During the Second World War he served in the Scots Guards and rose to the rank of major. His legal experience was deployed when he served from 1943 to 1945 with the allied military government in Italy, for whom he acted as a president of military courts. 
Boyd-Carpenter entered parliament at the general election of 1945 as MP for the safe Conservative seat of Kingston upon Thames, a constituency which he represented until 1972. In opposition from 1945 to 1951 he established a reputation as an effective and pugnacious debater in the Commons and attracted the attention of the Conservative leadership. When the Conservatives were returned to power in October 1951 he was appointed financial secretary to the Treasury, and in July 1954 he was promoted to the (non-cabinet) position of minister of transport and civil aviation. While holding the latter post he set in motion the building of Britain's first major length of motorway, the M1, which was completed under his successor Ernest Marples. In December 1955 he was moved to the (non-cabinet) position of minister of pensions and national insurance, which he occupied until July 1962. In this post he was responsible for the pensions legislation of 1959, which broke from Beveridge's principle of flat-rate contributions for flat-rate benefits as it introduced earnings-related pensions for earnings-related contributions, and gave individuals the opportunity to 'contract out' of the state pension scheme into private occupational pensions. From 1960 to 1962 he also made important contributions to the Conservative Party's internal policy committee on the future of the social services, which discussed in detail the structure and funding of the welfare state and examined the possibility of introducing radical reforms. When he was pensions minister he also oversaw the appointment of Margaret Thatcher to her first ministerial position, which was in his department. In July 1962 he entered the cabinet as chief secretary to the Treasury and paymaster-general, which at the time was only the second occasion on which cabinet rank had been granted to that position. At the Treasury he participated in the establishment of the National Economic Development Council and the National Incomes Commission, and he played an important role in approving funding for the Concorde project. In 1963 Harold Macmillan's successor as prime minister and leader of the Conservative Party, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, offered Boyd-Carpenter the position of chairman of the Conservative Party, but he declined. 
After the Conservative defeat in October 1964 Boyd-Carpenter was made shadow cabinet spokesman on housing. In 1965 he was one of the few senior figures in the party who opposed the introduction of the new electoral procedure for choosing the Conservative leader. He was dropped from the shadow cabinet in 1966 by the first Conservative leader chosen under the new process, Edward Heath, and he remained a back-bencher until he left the Commons in 1972. He was an active back-bencher. He extended his reputation as an aggressive parliamentary debater, and he held the post of chairman of the House of Commons' public accounts committee from 1964 to 1970. He hoped in 1972 to become speaker of the House of Commons, but the Labour opposition supported the election of Selwyn Lloyd. Disappointed, Boyd-Carpenter resigned his seat to take up the position of chairman of the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), and he was made a life peer, as Baron Boyd-Carpenter. 
As chairman of the CAA Boyd-Carpenter was responsible for granting the certificate of airworthiness to Concorde, and he was a passenger on its first commercial flight to Bahrain in 1976. He left the CAA in 1977, having in 1976 taken the post of chairman of Rugby-Portland Cement, of which he had been a director since 1970. He held this position until 1984. He also held directorships of two financial institutions, the Orion insurance company from 1969 to 1972, and the CLRP investment trust from 1970 to 1972. Although business was his primary interest after he left the Commons, he remained politically active. From 1977 to 1980 he was president of the Wessex National Union of Conservative and Unionist Associations, from 1979 to 1986 he was chairman of the Carlton Club, and from 1985 to 1990 he was chairman, and then from 1991 to 1998 president, of the Association of Conservative Peers. His children's careers reinforced his continued political ties. His son Sir Thomas Boyd-Carpenter was chairman of Kensington, Chelsea, and Westminster Health Authority after a distinguished career in the army, and his younger daughter, Sarah, Baroness Hogg, was head of the prime minister's policy unit from 1990 to 1995. 
Although he never reached the highest levels in politics, Boyd-Carpenter was a substantial political figure. He enjoyed a reputation as a tough Commons debater, a reputation which in part helped to explain why the Labour Party was not supportive of his claim to the speakership in 1972. As a minister his colleagues, both senior and junior, always found him competent, well informed, and thorough, and Thatcher referred to his 'grasp of detail, and capacity for lucid exposition of a complex case' (Thatcher, 119). Both his political longevity and his failure to advance to the front rank perhaps reflected the fact that he did not take up a strong ideological position and excited little in the way of strong praise or opprobrium from either side of politics. In the late 1940s he described 'The Industrial Charter' as occupying 'a central position between Manchester and Moscow', and he seemed content to take a moderate, central position himself. In 1968 Arthur Seldon, writing in the 'Swinton Journal', saw Boyd-Carpenter as a supporter of state intervention, yet at the Ministry of Pensions he had greatly extended the scope of private pensions. In his memoirs, 'Way of Life' (1980), he noted that 'When I was young I was a long distance runner -- not fast but I could go on for ever' (p. 204), and used this as a metaphor for his career. As a description of a solid but unexciting political career it was very apt. He died at his home, Crux Easton House, Crux Easton, Highclere, near Newbury, Berkshire, on 11 July 1998, of cancer, and was survived by his wife and their three children. A memorial service was held at St Margaret by Westminster Abbey, on 3 November 1998, at which Lady Thatcher gave the address. 


@@@@@


doc= 70218


Motte, Benjamin (1693-1738), bookseller and printer, was born in November 1693 in St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, the eldest son of Benjamin Motte (d. 1710), printer, and his wife, Anne Clarke (1670/71-1737); he was baptized in the parish on 14 November. The family name presumably indicates a French ancestry. Benjamin Motte was the son of a glover from St Albans and was apprenticed to the London printer Eleanor Cotes on 8 July 1668; he was freed on 2 August 1675. He found work as an overseer to the Aldersgate printing house of Mary Clarke, the widow of the printer Andrew Clarke. His business relationship with the Clarke firm was cemented on 5 April 1692, with his marriage to Mary's 21-year-old daughter, Anne, in Westminster Abbey, with whom he had at least three children: Benjamin, Andrew Motte, and Charles. The family were living in St Botolph, Aldersgate parish, from at least 1693. He apparently began printing under his own name in 1687, but really began printing in earnest only in the 1690s. He was the official printer to the Parish Clerks' Company from 1694 until 1709, printing bills of mortality and 'The Parish-Clerk's Guide'. He was also contracted to print many official church documents. 
Benjamin (I) Motte's printing house was relatively large and prosperous, and he printed a variety of works, including Samuel Wesley's heroic epic poem 'The Life of Christ' (1693), his elegies on Queen Mary and Archbishop Tillotson (1695), and several textbooks. He also produced, often in collaboration with the engraver John Sturt, a number of illustrated books, ranging from grand folios on architecture to more modest emblem books. He was known as the learned printer owing to his command of Latin, and he published a number of classical works; two translations -- of Pufendorf and the Lord's prayer -- have also been attributed to him. Motte died in December 1710 and was buried in St Botolph's on Christmas eve. His library was sold by auction in 1711. Anne carried on the printing business and even when Benjamin took over the family firm in 1715, she remained active in the trade until at least 1731. She was buried in St Botolph parish on 6 March 1737. 
The younger Benjamin Motte was freed by patrimony on 7 February 1715, although his name first appears on an imprint in 1714. He printed only a few titles each year, but he began to function as bookseller from 1719. A long-standing professional connection with the Tooke family of booksellers (which began with Robert Tooke being apprenticed to the elder Motte in 1692) was consolidated when, on the death of Benjamin Tooke, Benjamin was offered a partnership in the Tooke firm in either late 1723 or early 1724; following the death of Samuel Tooke in December 1724, Motte became the only active partner in the firm. On 21 December 1725 he married Elizabeth Brian, the daughter of a minister, Thomas Brian (or Bryan), in the Charterhouse chapel, Finsbury, London; they had two children. The following year Motte became a partner with his brother Charles ('bap'. 1698, died 1731). Between 1731 and 1734 Motte was active on his own, but from 1735 he was again in partnership, this time with his apprentice Charles Bathurst. 
Motte's output was large and varied. Alongside many Anglican works, including numerous sermons, he published Restoration literature, instructional manuals, historical studies, scientific treatises, and, following his father's footsteps, classical editions. He also produced a two-volume abridgement of the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1700-20, in 1721. However, he is most famous for his association with Jonathan Swift, who chose Motte as his publisher following the death of Benjamin Tooke. In October 1726 Motte published the first edition of 'Gulliver's Travels', but his political timidity and caution led him to make a number of changes to the text without Swift's knowledge. An amended second edition restored some of Swift's original text, but it was only with the publication of a Dublin edition by George Faulkner in 1735 that Swift was able to see through the press a text with which he was satisfied. 

'Gulliver's Travels' remained a lucrative work for Motte: it 'hath made a bookseller almost rich enough to be an alderman' ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 3.198). Despite Swift's misgivings about Motte's handling of the text, he remained loyal to the London bookseller for the rest of the latter's career. In 1732 Swift wrote to Motte promising that he would be the publisher for 'any thing that shall be published with my consent while I am alive or after my death' (ibid., 4.41). Accordingly, Motte published a number of further works by Swift, including the anonymous 'An Epistle to a Lady' which led to Motte's arrest in 1734. Motte was also involved in an altercation with Faulkner over the publication of an Irish edition of Swift's works in 1735. However, despite Swift's advocacy, Motte attracted the disapprobation of Pope, following the careless printing of 'Miscellanies in Prose and Verse' (1727-32), which included work by Swift, Pope, and others. Pope labelled the publisher 'a common Bookseller' (ibid., 4.65). 
Motte died intestate on 12 March 1738, and his estate was administered by his brother-in-law, Thomas Brian. His stock and copyrights were auctioned at a trade sale on 9 December 1740, with a second sale being organized by his former apprentice Bathurst on 15 December 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 70221


Gray, Dulcie (1915-2011), actress, was born Dulcie Winifred Catherine Savage Bailey in Kuala Lumpur, Malaya, on 20 November 1915 (though she often gave her birth year as 1919, and the exact date in November is uncertain), the younger daughter and youngest of three children of Arnold Savage Bailey (1881-1935), lawyer and member of the federal council of the Federated Malay States, and his wife, Kate Edith, 'nee' Clulow Gray (1887-1942), who died when the SS 'Rooseboom' was torpedoed off Sumatra, having unwisely delayed her departure before the fall of Singapore. 
Dulcie Savage Bailey was educated first at St Anthony's School in Wallingford, and became a boarder there from the age of four to eleven, while her parents were still in Malaya. Subsequently she was sent to Luckley School at Wokingham and finally to Leeson House, Swanage, where her sister was a student. Back home in Malaya at the age of fifteen, to a difficult family situation and at St Mary's School, Kuala Lumpur, she found some solace in games, painting, and writing short stories. This latter occupation stood her in good stead when she obtained a job writing for the 'Malaya Tribune', as the anonymous author of 'Our Fraser's Hill notes': she was by then teaching at Fraser's Hill School in Pahang. In 1936, having decided on an acting career, she worked her way back to London as governess to the child of a more affluent passenger. In 1937 she was accepted at the Webber-Douglas School of Singing and Dramatic Art, where she met her future husband, the actor Michael Denison ['see below'], whom she married on 29 April 1939 at St Saviour's Church, Chelsea. They had no children but remained happily married until his death nearly sixty years later. 
While war service claimed Denison, Dulcie Gray (she took her mother's family name for her professional career) pursued her career on stage in repertory at Aberdeen, having her first professional role there in 'Hay Fever', and in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Harrogate. She had a continuing role in a long-running radio serial, 'Front Line Family', which touched a responsive chord for wartime listeners. In London she played Shakespearean heroines at the Open Air Theatre, Regent's Park, and came to serious critical notice as the pathetic Rose in 'Brighton Rock' in 1943. When the film was made several years later she was, at thirty-two, deemed too old for the camera's scrutiny, but by this time she had appeared successfully in several popular melodramas for Gainsborough Studios. 
After an uncredited 'bit' part in 'Banana Ridge' (1942) and the propaganda short 'Victory Wedding' (1944) with John Mills, Gray made her feature debut as one of '2000 Women' (1944), in which she and Thora Hird, in very roomy working clothes, wandered a woman's internment site with brooms and pails. In 1945 she played the maid in 'A Place of One's Own' without resort to caricature or patronage, but her major chances in cinema came with a batch of movies that followed. In 'They Were Sisters' (1945) as the gentle wife of a sadistic husband (James Mason), driven to dipsomania, she more than held her own with the experienced Phyllis Calvert and Anne Crawford as the other sisters. In this domestic drama of contrasting aspirations and outcomes she moved convincingly from pretty vulnerability to poignant dependence and untimely death. 
Success in this film led to a gallery of variously long-suffering and plucky wives in Gray's ensuing films. She was a wholesome partner to Peter Murray-Hill in the wildly popular 'Madonna of the Seven Moons' (1945), contrasting with Calvert's split-personality type and Jean Kent's sexy temptress; was nearly killed by a mentally disturbed Eric Portman in 'Wanted for Murder' (1946); was the gentler-mannered sister who does not succumb to Italy and passion in 'A Man About the House' (1947); and was endlessly understanding, first as a psychiatrist's troubled wife in 'Mine Own Executioner' (1947), and, across generations, even more so in 'My Brother Jonathan' (1948). To all of these roles she brought not only an engaging oval-faced sweetness of expression, but also a touching freshness and sympathy that stopped them from being mere stereotypes. She and Denison co-starred in 'Jonathan' and appeared together in her remaining films of this period, including the romantic melodrama 'The Glass Mountain' (1949, as another forbearing wife) and the neat thriller 'The Franchise Affair' (1951). In the last scenes of 'A Man Could Get Killed' (1966), she revealed a comic flair that films rarely tapped, but her subsequent long career on stage and television gave her more diverse opportunities. 
Film roles dried up in the 1950s, but Gray was so busy on stage, and later on television, that she can scarcely have noticed. She appeared in about seventy plays, in London and elsewhere, frequently touring, and starring with her husband in twenty-six. The last such was 'An Ideal Husband', in which she played Lady Markby to great comic effect, in 1992, subsequently touring with this and making her Broadway debut in it in 1996, aged eighty. Her theatrical range included Noel Coward ('Hay Fever'), Ibsen ('The Wild Duck'), a Shakespeare recital with Denison in Berlin, Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal', Priestley's 'Time and the Conways', Agatha Christie's 'A Murder Is Announced', and many more. A list can barely hint at how busy and versatile she was. She also toured in the Middle East (in 'Relatively Speaking', 1981) and much earlier in Australia starred to notable acclaim in the then daring 'Tea and Sympathy' (1956). She became a household name on television in her seventies for her role in the long-running series 'Howards' Way' (1985-90). 
Gray wrote (and starred in) one play, 'Love Affair' (1956), was the author of over twenty popular crime novels, beginning with 'Murder on the Stairs' (1957) and ending with 'Mirror Image' (1987), and co-author with Denison of 'The Actor and His World' (1964). She was also an authority on butterflies, winning a 'Times Educational Supplement' information award for her book about them, 'Butterflies on My Mind' (1978). She and Michael Denison were both appointed CBE in 1983. She lived latterly at Denville Hall, the actor's retirement home in Northwood, Middlesex, where she died of bronchopneumonia on 16 November 2011. 
Gray's husband, (John) Michael Terence Wellesley Denison (1915-1998), actor, was born on 1 November 1915 at Rylstone, Town Field, Doncaster, the son of Gilbert Dixon Denison (1888-1959), paint manufacturer, and his wife, Marie Louise, 'nee' Bain (1888-1915). His mother died when he was three weeks old, and he was brought up by a paternal aunt and her husband. He was educated at Harrow School and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he read modern languages and acted with the Oxford University Dramatic Society. Graduating with a second-class degree in French and German in 1937, he went to the Webber-Douglas School of Singing and Dramatic Art, where he met Dulcie Gray, and after appearing in Frinton made his West End debut in 1938, playing a variety of roles with J. B. Priestley's London Mask Theatre, at the Westminster Theatre. During the Second World War he served in the Royal Signals and then the intelligence corps. By the time of his demobilization his wife was a famous film star, and he initially found it difficult to be taken seriously as an actor himself, but his roles with her in 'My Brother Jonathan' and 'The Glass Mountain' helped establish his reputation. Tall, elegant, and charming, he appeared most frequently as English gentlemen of various sorts, seemingly embodying the values of a particular class and time, especially as Algernon in Anthony Asquith's benchmark production of 'The Importance of Being Earnest', which Denison regarded as his most memorable screen role. Like his wife, he seemed in constant demand on stage and on television, though he did make one last notable big-screen appearance in 'Shadowlands' (1993). He was probably best known in the title role of 'Boyd QC', which ran on ITV from 1956 to 1964, but he appeared in countless other television roles and continued acting in the West End, particularly in light comedy, almost until his death; his last appearance was with his wife in 'An Ideal Husband' (1996), on Broadway. He wrote two volumes of memoirs, 'Overture and Beginners' (1973) and 'Double Act' (1985), as well as four entries for the 'Dictionary of National Biography' (including that on Noel Coward). He was a keen watercolourist and golfer, and an avid fan of cricket. In the acting world he was much loved for his courtesy, modesty, and kindness. For many years he was active in the actors' trade union, Equity. He was working on a biography of J. B. Priestley (completed by his wife and published in 2000) when he died at his home with Dulcie Gray, 1 Shardeloes, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, on 22 July 1998, of cancer, after a short illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 70225


Andrew Strahan (1750-1831), born at 10 Little New Street, London, on 15 January 1750, inherited the businesses. He sold some properties, consolidated others, finally lost the law patent, but carried on a flourishing business and received renewal of the patent as king's printer. A member of parliament between 1796 and 1820, he retired from formal management of the businesses in 1819. Strahan was unmarried and after his death on 25 August 1831, at New Street, the business passed to the family of John Spottiswoode, who had married William Strahan's youngest daughter, Margaret Penelope. In the mid-nineteenth century the King's House became Eyre and Spottiswoode Ltd, and the private business continued as Spottiswoode, Ballantyne & Co. Ltd. 


@@@@@


doc= 70226


Foskett, Daphne (1911-1998), art connoisseur and writer, was born on 23 December 1911 at Shoddesden, Kimpton, Hampshire, the daughter of John William Carnegie Kirk, a captain in the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry, and his wife, Agnes Maud Haynes. Her paternal grandfather was Sir John Kirk, the noted botanist and physician, who was David Livingstone's chief assistant and photographer on his second Zambesi expedition (1858-63). Proud of this Scottish ancestry, in the early 1980s Foskett arranged for her grandfather's archive to be placed on long-term loan at the National Library of Scotland (which has since acquired it). 
Daphne Kirk had a peripatetic childhood centred mainly on Sevenoaks in Kent. She was educated at St Ives School in Bexhill, Sussex, but left with no formal qualifications. After a period in the mid-1930s as matron at a Kent preparatory school, she married on 7 April 1937 Reginald Foskett (1908/9-1973), then a curate, the son of Albert Ernest Foskett, a technical engineer. Daphne was the driving force behind her husband's career as curate and as vicar in the Nottinghamshire parishes of Rainworth (1937-43) and Ordsall (1943-7), and then at Ilkeston in Derbyshire (1948-56). In 1956 Reginald Foskett was appointed provost to St Mary's Cathedral in Edinburgh, where the couple stayed for the next eleven years. 
It was during this period that Daphne Foskett developed her love for and expertise in portrait miniatures. For several years she assisted Arthur Tite, a dealer in miniatures, at the annual Grosvenor House art fair. As her immense knowledge of the subject increased, she was encouraged to publish her research. Her first book was published in 1963, the lavishly illustrated 'British Portrait Miniatures: a History'. In the following year she produced the first ever monograph on the outstanding but hitherto under-appreciated eighteenth-century miniaturist John Smart. For this book she was able to draw on Arthur Jaffe's extensive unpublished research on Smart. In 1965 Foskett was invited by the Scottish committee of the Arts Council for Great Britain to curate a major exhibition, 'British Portrait Miniatures', to coincide with the Edinburgh international festival. Held at the Arts Council gallery in Rothesay Terrace, this major exhibition presented more than 400 miniatures from public and private collections across the world. 
In 1967 Reginald Foskett was appointed bishop of Penrith, a suffragan bishopric in the diocese of Carlisle. The Fosketts lived at Brathay, near Ambleside, but after Reginald retired on account of ill health in 1970 they moved to Field Broughton, also in Westmorland. Daphne became a governor of St Ann's School in Windermere. 
In 1972 Foskett published her massive research in the two-volume 'A Dictionary of British Miniature Painters', which recorded biographical information on more than 4500 portrait miniaturists. This publication superseded and expanded Basil Long's landmark dictionary 'British Miniaturists' (1929). Foskett's dictionary has been in print since 1987, when it was republished together with a new edition of her book 'Collecting Miniatures' (1979) to form the one-volume 'Miniatures: Dictionary and Guide'. 
Reginald Foskett's death at Field Broughton in 1973 was a considerable blow to Daphne, but she had two monographs and an exhibition catalogue published in the following year. Her book on the greatest of all British miniaturists, Samuel Cooper, was accompanied by her catalogue to the exhibition 'Samuel Cooper and his Contemporaries', which she curated for the National Portrait Gallery, drawing together nearly 250 outstanding seventeenth-century miniatures from across the world. In addition she produced her significant monograph on the Lakeland artist John Harden of Brathay Hall. In 1983 Foskett was involved as a consultant on the ground-breaking exhibition 'Artists of the Tudor Court', held at the Victoria and Albert Museum. She left an unpublished but completed manuscript on this key period of the portrait miniature. Foskett published numerous articles on miniatures and portrait miniaturists throughout her career. 
Arguably more than anybody since the end of the Second World War, Foskett succeeded in bringing the art of the portrait miniaturist closer to collectors and connoisseurs, as well as to the wider public. Her prolific and popular output of writings compares well with the major scholarly contributions made by a series of curators and conservators who worked at the Victoria and Albert Museum, principally Graham Reynolds, Roy Strong, Jim Murrell, and John Murdoch. Foskett's knowledge was generously shared across the world with museum curators and private collectors, as well as with dealers and auctioneers. On her regular visits to London or elsewhere, such as during two punishing tours of the United States, she would leave behind a re-enthused curator or a budding cataloguer much the wiser and the keener. She conducted a very wide international correspondence and built up a substantial photographic archive; these were the building blocks of her painstaking research. 
Foskett also received numerous visitors and students at her home in Field Broughton. There her razor-sharp memory was deployed in honing the eyes of younger specialists. This was often in discussion over some of her own exquisite collections. Apart from portrait miniatures, these included ivories, porcelain, and pottery, as well as Georgian furniture. Such close training in minute connoisseurship was a bracing experience, but it was mediated by her twinkling sense of humour. She was indefatigable, sometimes formidable, but always generous. After her death her photographic archive and a major part of her collection of portrait miniatures were placed on long-term loan at the Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Edinburgh, where the miniatures were catalogued and exhibited in 2003. 
Daphne Foskett died on 15 June 1998 in the Solihull Parkway Hospital. She had moved to Solihull ten years earlier to be closer to some of her family, and is buried there. She was survived by her two daughters. Foskett's numerous publications and significant exhibitions reached a wide audience, while her writing was driven by a keen eye and by a desire to make miniature painting more accessible to amateurs and specialists alike, while also furthering existing knowledge. She did a great deal to popularize this much-loved but often hidden mode of portraiture. 


@@@@@


doc= 70231


Harrison, John Heslop- (1920-1998), botanist, was born on 10 February 1920 at 181 Abingdon Road, Middlesbrough, North Riding of Yorkshire, one of the three children of John William Heslop Harrison (1881-1967), a distinguished scientist who held posts variously at the universities of Newcastle upon Tyne and Durham in both zoology and botany, and his wife, Christian Watson ('nee' Henderson). 
Heslop-Harrison was educated at Chester-le-Street grammar school and King's College, University of Durham, where he read botany, zoology, and chemistry. In 1941, before being able to embark on an academic career, he was called up for war service in the army. He spent time on Orkney working on the development of radar, and later was attached to the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, where he helped in the evaluation of the technical capabilities of the German armed forces. In 1945, at the end of the war, he returned to King's College as lecturer in agricultural botany, and then a year later moved as lecturer in botany to the Queen's University of Belfast, with a special interest in the reproductive physiology of plants; he obtained his PhD degree there. On 23 September 1950 he married Yolande Massey ('b'. 1918/19), a university lecturer in botany at Newcastle. 
A move to University College, London, allowed Heslop-Harrison to develop research interests in modern plant systematics, and he became reader in taxonomy in 1953. In the following year he returned to Belfast to take up the chair of botany, where he remained until 1960. He was then appointed to the Mason chair of botany at Birmingham, where he was active in the establishment of the school of biological sciences, the first of its type in the country, with the integration of teaching and research across several biological disciplines. At Birmingham, too, he developed the then relatively new technique of electron microscopy, especially its application to plant reproductive studies. 
Between 1967 and 1971 Heslop-Harrison was based at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. He took whatever opportunities were open to him within the United States and internationally to promote his concerns about the erosion of biological diversity, and the importance of fostering environmentally sensitive agriculture. 
In 1971 Heslop-Harrison returned to Britain as director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, a remarkable and significant appointment in many ways. Kew had long been a pre-eminent centre of taxonomic studies, albeit largely traditional, but with Heslop-Harrison as director it was suddenly at the forefront of the 'new taxonomy'. At Kew he worked closely with his wife. He gradually found central government, then responsible for the funding of Kew, frustratingly unwilling to support fully his plans for the new direction in which he wished the Royal Botanic Gardens to go. Uniquely for a Kew director, therefore, he resigned in 1976 to become Royal Society research professor at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, based at the Welsh Plant Breeding Station. Freed of much administrative labour, there the Heslop-Harrisons made important and extensive studies of the fertilization process in plants and the interaction of the pollen tube with the female floral parts, work that was technically exacting as well as significant. Heslop-Harrison remained there until his formal retirement in 1985, when he continued his studies, at first in Aberystwyth and later from the basement of his home in Leominster. 
Heslop-Harrison's legacy in the understanding of the flowering process and reproductive physiology in plants is immense, his publication list voluminous, and his students legion; many subsequently progressed to senior professional posts themselves. He had an immense grasp of the entire subject of botany, both modern and historic. He possessed the rare attributes of being a brilliant lecturer and highly gifted technically. His contributions were formally recognized in many ways, most notably with his election to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1970 and receipt of its Darwin medal in 1976 and its royal medal in 1996. Among other awards were the Linnean medal for botany from the Linnean Society in 1976, the Navashin medal of the Komarov Institute of the USSR Academy in 1991, the Erdtman international medal for palynology in 1971, and honorary doctorates from the universities of Belfast, Bath, Edinburgh, and Hull. 
Heslop-Harrison was a big man, tall and physically very imposing, and in his company there was never any doubt that one was in the presence of a powerful and forceful intellect. Notwithstanding this, he was a man of much humour, who always had time for students, no matter how junior or inexperienced, and was always willing to listen carefully to the other's argument before making a decision or reaching a conclusion. John Heslop-Harrison died on 7 May 1998 following a heart attack at his home, The Pleasaunce, 137 Bargates, Leominster, Herefordshire; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 70232


Hunt, Sir David Wathen Stather (1913-1998), diplomatist, was born on 25 September 1913 at Rose Acre, Shincliffe, co. Durham, the son of the Revd Bernard Patteson Wathen Stather Hunt, curate of St Nicholas's, Durham, and his wife, Elizabeth Graham, 'nee' Milner. Stather was added to his and his father's names after his birth. His education began at home: with typical precocity he was able by the age of three to read and write. His formal education was at St Laurence College, Ramsgate, and at Wadham College, Oxford, where he took firsts in both moderations (1934) and Greats (1936). 
Hunt was destined for the home civil service. But, with war on the horizon, he decided it would be more amusing to spend the interim in an Oxford senior commonroom than in the corridors of power. He took up a suggestion of Maurice Bowra and in 1937 (having obtained a diploma in classical archaeology) tried successfully for Magdalen College, where he remained a don until 1947. His deep love of Greece dated to those years before the war when his archaeological pursuits twice took him on visits there. It was appropriate therefore that he should have been transferred from the Welch regiment in 1940 to serve as an intelligence officer in Greece. He remained in intelligence for the rest of the Second World War -- in the Middle East, north Africa, and Italy, for much of the time on the staff of Field Marshal Alexander. His war service was chronicled in his most considerable book, 'A Don at War' (1966). The book was remarkable for its scrupulous military history, Hunt's deep loyalty to Viscount Alexander, and his occasional flashes of impish humour over, for example, his war injury, sustained when the ball from a lavatory cistern fell on his head. He finished the war with the rank of colonel, three mentions in dispatches, OBE, and the American bronze star. He spent a further year in the army helping Lord Alexander (now governor-general of Canada) to complete his official war dispatches. 
The year 1947 marked a turning point in Hunt's career. His second volume of autobiography, 'On the Spot', published in 1975, reveals his conclusion that he could not return to Oxford and his taste for the service of the crown. The option of staying in the army was rejected in favour of the Dominions Office (shortly to be renamed the Commonwealth Relations Office) and Hunt joined as a principal. In 1948 he was posted to South Africa as first secretary. On 29 May the same year he married Pamela Muriel Medawar ('b'. 1920/21), daughter of Nami Medawar. They had two sons. 
In 1950 Hunt became foreign affairs private secretary to the prime minister, first Clement Attlee and, after the 1951 general election, Winston Churchill. His autobiography shows his affection and admiration for Attlee and his more distant though admiring relationship with Churchill. He became an assistant secretary in the Commonwealth Relations Office in 1952. Following a posting to Pakistan as deputy high commissioner in 1954, he returned to the Commonwealth Relations Office as head of the Central African department in 1956, and in 1959 was promoted assistant under-secretary of state, with responsibility for Africa. In that capacity he accompanied Harold Macmillan on his 'wind of change' tour of southern Africa in 1960. He was one of several officials who worked on the draft of Macmillan's speech, originally written by John Johnston, deputy high commissioner in South Africa. Between 1960 and 1962 Hunt served in Nigeria as deputy high commissioner under Viscount Head. 
Hunt then embarked on three major Commonwealth missions in a period of tumultuous transition. In 1962, as the first high commissioner in Kampala, he was involved in the suppression of a mutiny by the Ugandan army. He was knighted KCMG in 1963, having been made CMG in 1959. In 1965, as high commissioner in Cyprus, his knowledge of the Greek language and history enabled him to establish so firm a rapport with Archbishop Makarios as to achieve an element of stability in Anglo-Cypriot relations despite a situation of near civil war. After virtual civil war in Cyprus, he encountered on his return to Nigeria as high commissioner in 1967 the real thing. In the face of fierce parliamentary and press criticism he put his job on the line to convince Harold Wilson that Britain must not support rebellion against the established government of General Gowan. Meanwhile, Hunt's first marriage was dissolved in 1967, and he was granted custody of his two sons. In Nigeria he married in 1968 his second wife, Iro Myrianthousis. Together they established a tradition of superb hospitality. This was to serve them well during Hunt's last and only foreign posting, as ambassador to Brazil in 1969. Together with his mastery of Portuguese and his relish for travel in that vast country, it ensured that their mission there was remembered as a notably successful one. Hunt retired from the diplomatic service in 1973. 
Hunt's life in retirement might have been more tranquil but it was certainly full. As well as chairman of the board of governors of the Commonwealth Institute (1974-84) he was Montague Burton visiting professor of international relations at Edinburgh (1980), a director of Observer Newspapers (from 1982), and a consultant. His wife's Greek connections rekindled his interests in Greek culture and he was president of the Classical Association (1981-2) and of the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies (1986-90). His last book, published in 1989, was a biography, edited with Iro Hunt, of Caterina Cornaro, the last queen of Cyprus. 
Hunt acquired national celebrity as BBC Television's Mastermind in 1977 (answering questions on the Roman revolution as well as general knowledge questions) and then as Mastermind of Masterminds in 1982 (with Alexander the Great as his special subject). Success as Mastermind, he said, could be put down to reading and keeping your nerve. Certainly he read voraciously and his career showed no lack of nerve. But there was more to Hunt than that. He had a marvellously alert mind, a lively interest in everything, a prodigious memory, and instant recall. This ensured an impressive mastery of languages and a capacity to complete the 'Times' crossword in about nine minutes, to identify a few bars of music and fine claret with accuracy, and ensure no misquotation passed him by. He loved life and lived it to the full. 
Hunt died at the Princess Royal Hospital, Haywards Heath, Sussex, on 30 July 1998, having lived in Lindfield, Sussex, throughout his retirement. He was survived by his wife, Iro, and the two sons from his first marriage. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 12 November 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 70238


Marsden, Betty (1919-1998), actress and comedian, was born on 24 February 1919 at 12 Southall Street, Walton, Liverpool, the daughter of John Marsden, a bombardier in the Royal Garrison Artillery, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Atkinson. Her parents were too poor to raise her and when she was six she left home for Somerset, where a music teacher, Betty Allen, became her guardian and mentor. She saw the child's potential as an entertainer, as did Betty herself who, aged seven, told her sister: 'One day I will be an actress in London with my name in lights and people will know about me' ('The Guardian'). After meeting the upper-crust mother of a schoolfellow in Fortt's teashop in Milsom Street, Bath, she started giving recitations at fetes and local Conservative clubs; when she was eleven she was the First Fairy in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' at Bath's Pavilion Theatre. She made her London debut on 26 December 1931 in a musical fairy tale, 'The Windmill Man', as the Prince. At the age of twelve she won a scholarship to the Italia Conti Stage School, where she studied for six years. 
Marsden's first big West End role came in 1935, when she played Pamela in 'Closing at Sunrise' at the Royalty, followed by roles in Basil Dean's production of 'Autumn' (1937), in Ivor Novello's 'Comedienne' (1938), and in a revival of J. B. Priestley's 'Johnson over Jordan' (1939). She also appeared at the Malvern festival. She joined the Entertainments National Service Association for the duration of the Second World War, entertaining the troops in productions including 'Gaslight' and 'In Good King Charles' Golden Days'. During the war she married, in a Nigerian bamboo hut, Dr James Wilson Muggoch (died 1975), a consultant anaesthetist whom she had met on a troopship. Theirs was a happy marriage, and they had a son and daughter and grandchildren to whom she was devoted. 
After the war Marsden won critical praise as an amorous lady in James Bridie's 'Doctor Angelus' (1947) with Alistair Sim, and in Sacha Guitry's 'Don't Listen, Ladies' (1948). For years colleagues had been greatly amused by her off-stage sense of the ridiculous and gift for mimicry, but it was only when she entered the world of intimate revue that these qualities surfaced professionally. She started at the tiny Irving Club (1950-51) and went to the Edinburgh festival with 'After the Show', but was dropped from the London production. Noel Coward, meeting her at the first night, was indignant. He swore he would go and see her whenever she was in a play, and he did. She was in 'Airs on a Shoestring' (1953-5), its successor 'From Here and There', and 'On the Brighter Side' with Stanley Baxter. Her versatility and wicked sense of burlesque in these shows led to the radio work for which she became nationally famous. 
Marsden continued to work in the theatre through the 1970s to the 1990s, playing Lady Bracknell at the Shaw Theatre and the nymphomaniac wife in Lindsay Anderson's revival of 'What the Butler Saw'. At the Oxford festival (1979) she gave two renditions of Wildean dowagers in 'An Ideal Husband' and 'Lady Windermere's Fan', parts in which her slow basso profundo delivery and daring pauses produced laughs which might even have surprised Wilde himself. She was also a hilariously stupid, snobbish, yet not wholly unlikeable Mrs Hardcastle in 'She Stoops to Conquer' (1983). Towards the end she played some effective National Theatre roles. 
Marsden never much enjoyed film work, which included 'The Young Lovers' (1954) and 'Carry on Camping' (1969) -- feeling uneasy before a camera and without an audience. Her television work was rather more distinguished, and included parts in such series as 'The Bill', 'Inspector Morse', and 'The Darling Buds of May', but a restrained Betty Marsden was almost a contradiction in terms. 
Although her audience missed seeing her round eyes and cheeks, expressive mouth, and robust figure, Marsden, with her inimitable vocal range, was a consummate broadcaster. The two series 'Beyond our Ken' (1958-64) and 'Round the Horne' (1965-8) gave superlative entertainment -- combining the anarchy of the Goons (better controlled), the wit and satire of 'Take it From Here', and an outrageous line in camp innuendo which was part risque revue, part sixties permissiveness. The benign, ultra-respectable Kenneth Horne was an inspired anchor man, off whom the hysterical Kenneth Williams, the more slyly camp Hugh Paddick, and the astonishingly versatile Betty Marsden -- the show's only female -- could play to perfection. Among her characterizations were the reminiscing ex-Gaiety girl, Lady Counterblast ('nee' Bea Clissold), with her near-salacious catchphrase 'Many times, many, 'many', times'; Dame Celia Molestrangler, who with ageing juvenile Binkie Huckaback (Paddick) played wonderfully hushed 'Brief Encounter' burlesques; Daphne Whitethigh, the husky-voiced domestic adviser; ingenues, vamps, and a hilariously sex-obsessed Australian, Judy Koolibar. As Barry Took, one of the writers, said, 'Nothing was beyond her, nothing escaped her' ('The Independent'). Behind the caricature there was always a recognizable person -- sometimes almost poignantly so. 
Marsden had a mischievous, raucous sense of humour and also a profound seriousness about her craft. Playing in the theatre night after night, she never stopped exploring the possibilities of a scene. A mistress of timing, she made superb exits, drawing applause from the thinnest of houses. She was extraordinarily generous in giving advice to fellow players -- especially young ones -- provided she thought them talented. Ninety per cent of her suggestions were excellent; just occasionally she encouraged people to overplay. She was endearingly aware of this tendency in her own work: 'Tell me darling -- am I going too far?', she would say (personal knowledge). At times overbearing, she was generous-hearted, bringing enormous pleasure to friends and public alike. For many years she, her family, and dogs lived on an 80 foot converted coal barge, 'Chilham', moored in Brentford; there she entertained lavishly. She died on 18 July 1998 at Denville Hall, 62 Duck's Hill Road, Northwood, of a heart attack, while enjoying a drink and a laugh with friends. She was survived by her son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 70246


Russell, Katherine Frances (1909-1998), social worker and university teacher, was born at 20 Southwell Gardens, Kensington, London, on 6 April 1909, the eldest of the four daughters and second of the seven children of Sir Francis Hugh (Frank) Stewart (1869-1921), a partner in Gladstone, Wyllie & Co., merchants, of London and Calcutta, and his wife, Frances Henrietta (1885-1962), eldest daughter of Arthur George Rickards, barrister. Sent home at the age of five from India in 1914, Kit Stewart did not see her parents again for five years. In 1921, and only eight months after he had retired, her father died. Widowed at thirty-seven with seven children under fourteen to support, Lady Stewart worked as the organizing secretary of the St Pancras Housing Association. Her connection with this and other voluntary organizations proved an important influence on the path in life her eldest daughter was to follow, as also was Olive Willis, founder and first headmistress of Downe House, the independent girls' boarding-school Kit Stewart attended. On leaving the school at the age of seventeen, she at first combined running the family household with voluntary work outside the home. This early work in the impoverished dockside area of Bermondsey, in Southwark, was at Time and Talents, a settlement started in 1887 by Christian society ladies. In 1931 she went to the London School of Economics (LSE) and in 1933, having gained the certificate in social science, she became the warden of the Time and Talents club house in Dockhead. She remained a devoted supporter of the settlement and admirer of Bermondsey people until the very end of her life. 
In 1937 Kit Stewart was recruited by the London Council of Social Service to organize community activities on the new Honor Oak housing estate in Lewisham, but following the outbreak of the Second World War she moved in 1940 to become warden of a youth centre in Southampton, a city by then suffering heavily under the blitz. Three years later she joined her former LSE tutor and great friend Eileen Younghusband, with whom for some years she shared a flat, in work for the British Council. Their task was to train 'allied nationals' for the social welfare work that would be needed in shattered western Europe, then still occupied. In 1945, the war over, she took charge of five emergency courses run by the Institute of Almoners to ease the shortage of hospital social workers in Britain that the war had engendered, and in 1949 moved on to the social science department at the LSE, first as practical work organizer, later as senior lecturer. She retired from the LSE in 1973, but continued as president of the LSE Society for many years. She was appointed OBE in 1976, and made an honorary fellow of the LSE in 1978. Although more interested in people than in research, after her retirement in 1973 she drafted and sent a detailed questionnaire to 2000 past LSE social administration students, and largely by personal follow-up got a 90 per cent response. The book from the study, 'Changing Course' (1981), was described by Ralf Dahrendorf as 'a story of professionalisation, a story of social mobility, a story of career patterns, a story of the role of women, and a story of the imprint of individuals and their initiative' (Russell and Barnes, 255). 
Tall, slim, and with silky golden hair always worn in a loose bun, Kit Stewart was classically beautiful, and remained so into old age. At forty-eight she married Sheridan Russell, described 'as a bright-eyed elfin figure of warmth and wit' ('The Guardian', 17 July 1998). Recruited in 1945 to the first emergency course as the first male student in an entirely female profession, he soon became a close friend, but they did not marry until 1 June 1957. Commenting on marriage ten years earlier, she had written to one of her students about to marry, 'I do 'so' believe in marriage. It must be the perfect maximum giving and receiving' (personal knowledge). So it proved to be with her own marriage, which led to a remarkable partnership that Dame Eileen Younghusband described as 'proving that one and one sometimes adds up to much more than two' (Russell and Barnes, 241). 
Born on 23 March 1900 at 61a Curzon Street, Mayfair, London, 
Until late old age Sheridan Russell never abandoned his cello playing, and in their drawing room at 100 Cheyne Walk the Russells held nearly 300 soirees of chamber music. They called on Russell's many professional musician friends to take part, and 'entertained thousands of LSE students and staff and an eclectic circle of friends from social services and government, the arts and the sciences' ('The Guardian', 17 July 1998). Sheridan Russell died at home on 9 April 1991. After his death Kit organized the preparation and private publication of a book, 'Sheridan's Story' (1993). All 1800 copies were sold. Kit Russell's warmth and kindness were legendary and underpinned by her profound Christian belief; but she could be exacting on behalf of the commitments she cared for and put so much into. She died on 9 July 1998 at St George's Nursing Home, Westminster, of old age and was buried at Christ Church, Flood Street, Chelsea. 


@@@@@


doc= 70248


Smith, (Edwin) Rodney, Baron Smith (1914-1998), surgeon, was born at 224 Balham High Road, London, on 10 May 1914, the eldest son of Edwin Smith (1870-1937), a medical practitioner and coroner, and Edith Catherine ('nee' Dyer), a professional violinist. He enjoyed his time at Westminster School (1927-31), where he excelled academically (he was king's scholar in 1928), became a good cricketer, and was an exceptionally good violinist. 'He contemplated music as a profession but stayed with surgery because, he was wont to remark, a surgeon could enjoy music, but a musician could hardly undertake surgery as a hobby' ('The Independent', 28 July 1998). He became a medical student at St Thomas's Hospital where he distinguished himself academically both as the William Tite and Peacock scholar and Grainger prizewinner and athletically at cricket, scoring a double century at the Oval in the Surrey county second eleven. He passed the MB BS London examinations in 1937 but was precluded by the death of his father from securing the honorary house officer posts at his hospital. Smith went into general practice in south London; on 26 March 1938 he married Mary ('b'. 1916/17), daughter of Edward Rodwell, a schoolmaster, and, soon after, secured the FRCS at the earliest possible time. In 1939 he became surgical registrar at the Middlesex Hospital where he came under the influence of Webb Johnson, who was president of the Royal College of Surgeons for six years and was only the third surgeon to be created a peer. In 1941, after joining the Royal Army Medical Corps, Smith obtained the MS (London) and saw active service as a surgical specialist in north Africa, Palestine, Italy, and Yugoslavia. He distinguished himself as a skilled, efficient surgeon but was wounded at the Anzio beachhead. 
After the war, Smith was appointed in 1946 consultant surgeon to St George's Hospital, where he soon made a great reputation for pancreatic and biliary surgery. He worked extraordinarily hard and published many articles and books. He was awarded a Hunterian professorship in 1947, the Jacksonian prize of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1951 and another Hunterian professorship in 1952. He was appointed to the Penrose May tutorship of the college in 1957, continuing in this post for six years, until his election to the council of the college where he became the dean of the Institute of Basic Medical Sciences in 1966. He succeeded in modernizing the institute, which was no small task. His multi-volume 'Operative Surgery' was published in 1956; he edited this 'magnum opus' with Charles Robb of St Mary's Hospital. In 1962 he joined the court of examiners. 
Following the failure of his marriage, which was dissolved in 1971, Smith married on 20 May 1971 Susan Fry ('b'. 1931/2), a medical photographer, with whom he had worked. He was elected president of the Royal College of Surgeons on the sudden death in office of Sir Edward Muir in 1973. From the point of view of the profession, his election could not have occurred at a better time because no sooner had he assumed the office than the profession was plunged into conflict with the Labour government. Through his skilful and non-confrontational approach, peace was restored and Barbara Castle, the secretary of state, was relieved of her office. Smith was knighted in 1975. He was a great success as president of the Royal College of Surgeons and enjoyed every moment of his four years in office. 
One of Smith's many ambitions was to follow in the footsteps of his great mentor and hero, Lord Webb Johnson, who was president for six years. Although he did not succeed in this, he was raised to the peerage as Baron Smith in 1978, in recognition not only of his outstanding presidency but also of his vital role in defusing the conflict between the secretary of state for health and the medical profession. Again, his expertise at bridge-playing proved an asset as he partnered prominent members of the Labour cabinet, allowing him easy access to the corridors of power which he used surreptitiously and to excellent effect; he had a close liaison with Lord Goodman. 'His quip that he had been created a peer in order to strengthen the bridge team in the House of Lords may have been modestly meant but the incidental self-congratulation about his bridge prowess was characteristic' ('The Times', 22 July 1998). Lord Smith continued to show his skill at solving complicated problems when he became president of the Royal Society of Medicine and he soon established peace among the warring factions. Sadly, his presidency of the British Medical Association was cut short by a stroke which occurred while he was operating; he suddenly found himself completely unable to speak. His second wife, Susan, discovered that the area of his brain concerned with chess and bridge was unimpaired and she methodically tutored him so effectively that he recovered his ability to speak remarkably well. Although the House of Lords is tolerant and courteous, reading from a script at question time is not acceptable and is usually accompanied by shouts of disapproval, and this unfortunately precluded Lord Smith from making many comments in the house, as he found it difficult to speak without a script. 
Lord Smith's recovery from this devastating stroke was in no small measure due to his wife, and it came as no surprise that he accepted the presidency of the Stroke Association and fought on their behalf with great enthusiasm. He was able to return to the operating theatre where his expertise in pancreatic and biliary surgery was unrivalled in his day. His achievements were more than recognized by the gold medals and honorary fellowships which were showered upon him. Only Lord Porritt equalled his achievements in receiving honorary fellowships from all the colleges of surgeons in the English-speaking world. He was an excellent golfer, an accomplished chess player, and played bridge for England. Among his hobbies were numismatics and opera and after he retired he took up painting with his usual enthusiasm and skill. 
Lord Smith was clearly an ambitious, determined man who took infinite trouble to have things in good order, be it his surgical skills in biliary and pancreatic surgery, his bridge playing, or his diplomacy in the medical hierarchy and among the Labour politicians. His life at the top seemed to preclude many close friends. Lord Smith died on 1 July 1998 at Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, Westminster. He was survived by his second wife, Susan, and three sons and a daughter by his previous marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 70253


Rowland, Roland Walter (1917-1998), financier, was born on 27 November 1917 at the Belgaum detention camp, Simla, India, an internment centre for enemy aliens, the third and youngest son of Wilhelm Fuhrhop, later William Frederick Rowland (1885-1974), a Hamburg-born merchant, and his Anglo-Dutch wife, Muriel, 'nee' Kauenhoven (1883-1944). After the war his family was initially refused entry to Britain, and instead settled in Hamburg. 
Fuhrhop was educated at Heinrich Herz Real Gymnasium, Hamburg. A big blond sportsman of robust charm, he enlisted in the Hitler Youth during the early 1930s, and served as a troop leader. Nevertheless his father's anti-Nazi sentiments led the family to leave Germany, and this time they were successful in settling in England. Roland Fuhrhop was then educated at Churchers College, Petersfield, for a year. He developed a cut-glass English accent and governing-class mannerisms, although his first employer was a haulage company in Bethnal Green Road specializing in freight to and from Germany. Even in this period his dress-sense was immaculate. He repudiated his German passport and changed his name by deed poll to Roland Walter Rowland in October 1939. From boyhood he had been nicknamed Tiny, and he always preferred to use this sobriquet, even in official business correspondence. 
Rowland was conscripted into the British army in December 1939 and assigned to the Royal Army Medical Corps in Scotland. His devotion to his mother had always been pronounced, and after she became seriously ill he went absent without leave to visit her. As a result, in 1941 he spent twenty-seven days in Glasgow's Barlinnie prison, where he was brutally treated. His parents were interned on the Isle of Man during the war and, being suspected of pro-German sympathies, Rowland was discharged from the army in 1942. Subsequently he was detained under regulation 18B on the Isle of Man, where he remained until after his mother's death. These harsh experiences, including his mother's treatment when she was dying of cancer, may have contributed to his contempt for British financial and political institutions. The prejudice against his background was persistent. Margaret Thatcher, explaining in 1987 the mutual antipathy between them, said, 'Of course, he's not English' (Wyatt, 1.306). 
After leaving the Isle of Man Rowland was compelled to accept work ordained by the labour exchange as a porter at Paddington railway station. Soon he was living in Mayfair, working as a taxi driver, and operating as a spiv supplying scarce luxuries including lipstick and oranges. In 1946 he began trading in army surplus material, chiefly iron and scissors, and in 1947 started a company producing domestic refrigerators. After an initially profitable phase the business collapsed with heavy tax liabilities. 
Rowland moved to Southern Rhodesia in 1948, and bought a tobacco farm and truck store at Eiffel Flats, on the main road between Salisbury and Bulawayo. Although he had the accoutrements of a prosperous man, these were frustrating years. From 1952 he lived with Irene Smith ('b'. 1912?), the wife of his business partner; it was a difficult relationship, which he left in 1963. Farming in Rhodesia did not stretch him, and he acquired the Rhodesian franchise for Mercedes Benz cars, two dubious goldmines, and an option to build an oil pipeline from the Mozambique port of Beira to Umtali in Rhodesia. These were consolidated in a holding company, Shepton Estates. 
In 1961 a Scottish nobleman, Angus Ogilvy, was sent to Salisbury to revive the London and Rhodesia Mining and Land Company (L & R); formed in 1909, it had once been the most valuable company in Rhodesia. After a long decline it had come under the control of the London financier Harley Drayton. Rowland, a beguiling negotiator, convinced Ogilvy that L & R should acquire Shepton Estates. He was lavishly rewarded with 1.5 million L & R shares plus an option on a further 2 million. Rowland also became joint managing director of L & R, which subsequently changed its name to Lonrho. This arrangement was a personal masterstroke for Rowland, who in the next thirty years earned over $100 million from Lonrho in salary and dividends. 
The company began building Rowland's pipeline from Beira to Umtali in 1962. Mistrusting the racial and economic policies of Southern Rhodesia well before its unilateral declaration of independence in 1965, Rowland extended Lonrho's ramifications. At a time when other white investors could see only uncertainties in post-colonial Africa, he realized that Lonrho could acquire promising assets at discounted prices. Its campaign of diversified investments began in Nyasaland in 1962. During the mid-1960s Zambia became crucial to the company's expansion. Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, Daniel arap Moi of Kenya, and Hastings Banda of Malawi were among the African presidents who became Rowland's business allies. A major step in Lonrho's accumulating value was its acquisition in 1968 of a fifty-year lease on the Asante goldmines in Ghana. By 1970 Lonrho had assets of $198 million, with over 100,000 employees in twenty-nine countries, but debts of $117 million. Pre-tax profits were nearly $20 million by 1973 and $180 million by 1980. Its diverse interests included mines, factories, motor-car distributorships throughout Africa, hotels, trading businesses, and farms. Lonrho became the biggest food producer in Africa. Rowland travelled the continent in the company's own jet aircraft seeking or clinching deals. The hectic schedules did not seem to weary him. His fastidiousness about his own clothes, food, and drink did not extend into the corrupt, menacing, and volatile world of African business. Huge bribes were paid. Latterly he was said always to have travelled with a locked case containing $100,000 in cash for immediate expenses. 
On 1 July 1968 Rowland married Josie Taylor ('b'. 1944), daughter of Lionel Taylor, who had been his farm manager in Rhodesia. He had met her when she was a little child, and had been a protective presence throughout her girlhood: reputedly he partly paid for her education. Despite unconventional elements in his courtship, he proved an exemplary husband. They had a son and three daughters. 
The oil embargo imposed by the Wilson government on Rhodesia was a sham, and Tiny Rowland's remonstrations on the subject led to friction between Lonrho and the Foreign Office from 1967. He regarded United Nations sanctions against Rhodesia as both hypocritical and unenforceable: Lonrho circumvented them. The company's reputation was further injured when several of its executives were accused in South Africa of fraud over the Inyati copper mine in Rhodesia (1971-3). However, he retained the respect of black African leaders, including Nelson Mandela, while Lonrho developed large mining investments in South Africa under the Afrikaner regime. 
A secretive, ruthless, and self-confident man, Rowland's consultations of board colleagues before taking big decisions were desultory or non-existent. Non-executive directors he likened to Christmas-tree decorations. He was a deal-maker, with a compelling desire to expand the business, who scoffed at the disciplined precision of accountants. The management, financial controls, and return on investment of some of the company's African interests were shoddy. In 1971, when the speed of Lonrho's expansion had strained its finances, Rowland acquired the rights to the Wankel rotary engine for the equivalent of $12 million. Most of his directors were unaware of the negotiations, and Sir Siegmund Warburg instructed his merchant bank to resign as Lonrho's financial advisers. Two directors resigned in protest, too. One of them subsequently described Rowland to Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) inspectors as: 'a man who had completely converted what was a sleep dozy company into something dynamic and who was a sort of tyrant and part madman to boot, but a brilliant one, and whose tyranny and madness had not become completely evident, and who was extremely persuasive. (Bower, 281)' In 1972 the accountants Peat Marwick delivered a 1566 page report on Lonrho which revealed the company's poor performance. Rowland was obliged to accept outside directors, including a deputy chairman suggested by the Bank of England, Sir Basil Smallpeice. The views of Rowland and Smallpeice quickly proved irreconcilable, and after much unpleasantness, during a period when Lonrho's debts were escalating, a crisis occurred after the revelation of covert financial arrangements to benefit the chairman, Duncan Sandys. In 1973 eight directors led by Smallpeice struggled to remove Rowland as chief executive. Heavily publicized litigation revealed the payments to Sandys, which had been channelled through the Cayman Islands. This tax avoidance device was denounced in May 1973 by the prime minister, Edward Heath, who had long shown animosity against Sandys, in a phrase which forever tarnished Rowland's reputation, as the 'unpleasant and unacceptable face of capitalism' (Bower, 252). However, Rowland outmanoeuvred his critics and ultimately vanquished them at Lonrho's annual general meeting. The company's managerial idiosyncrasies and commitments in Africa meant that institutional investors had shunned it since 1971. Consequently, aside from Rowland's 20 per cent holding, the shares belonged to small investors, who showed ardent loyalty to him. He rallied them to defeat his critics, and thereafter ensured that Lonrho's directors were unable to challenge his prerogatives or question his obsessions. He was fiercely loyal to friends, but unforgiving if they failed him. 
In the aftermath of the crisis of 1972-3 Kuwaiti and other groups invested in Lonrho. DTI inspectors began a long investigation of the company, paying undue attention to Lonrho's subsidies of Rowland's domestic life. In 1967, shortly before his marriage, the company bought a house for him at Hedsor Wharf on the Thames: Bourne End was a gabled brick eighteenth-century cottage which had been enlarged by Lord Boston in 1925. At Rowland's instructions the building was extended and remodelled in undistinguished neo-Georgian style in 1969-71, and the grounds extensively improved, at a total cost of $323,589. The DTI report, which was published in 1976, unsurprisingly proved hostile to Lonrho's methods. This official condemnation caused Rowland anguish, and in 1977 he began a mischievous correspondence with government departments to show up their humbug in conniving with other companies flouting its oil sanctions against Rhodesia. Subsequently he circulated a damning, authoritative dossier on the subject. His interventions forced the appointment of a government inquiry into his allegations conducted by Thomas Bingham QC. Bingham's report (issued in 1978) vindicated Rowland's claims, and exposed the worthlessness of the costly naval 'blockade' of oil to Rhodesia instituted by the Wilson government. 
In the 1970s Rowland was urged to repair Lonrho's relations with the Conservative Party leadership by making donations to its funds. This he refused to do. His relations with its leaders remained poor, and he met obstacles during the 1980s that were not presented to his contemporaries. He was also urged to reduce Lonrho's dependence on Africa for its earnings. Consequently, in 1977, the company began buying shares in Scottish and Universal Trusts, the holding company of Sir Hugh Fraser's interests, which controlled 29 per cent of the House of Fraser store group, owners of Harrods. In 1979 Lonrho acquired Scottish and Universal for $56.6 million. However, the Monopolies and Mergers Commission used Lonrho's ownership of the textile firm Brentford Nylons as a pretext to stop Lonrho bidding for the House of Fraser in 1981. The commission's recommendations were obtrusively flawed and prejudiced, but Lonrho's attempts to gain control of Harrods continued to be foiled by Whitehall. In 1984 Rowland determined to lodge Lonrho's Fraser shares with an Egyptian, Mohamed Al Fayed, before making a renewed bid: 46.1 million shares were transferred to Fayed for $138 million (a profit for Lonrho of $80 million). Rowland's confidence that Fayed could not afford to buy Fraser was misplaced: Fayed raised $615 million, persuaded the government to approve his acquisition of the House of Fraser, and took over Harrods in 1985. 
Rowland was justifiably aggrieved at the government's handling of the affair, and made grave allegations against Fayed. He paid for a robust campaign publicizing the anomalies and enlisted 'The Observer' (which Lonrho had bought in 1981 for $6 million) in his cause. He succeeded in forcing a Department of Trade inquiry, which in 1987 vindicated many of his allegations, but the Thatcher government regarded him as an enemy and would take no steps to redress the injustice. The government's refusal to publish this report, or to refer it to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, was unreasonable but was ultimately upheld by the judiciary. When 'The Observer' published the contents of the report in a special edition issued on the day of Lonrho's annual general meeting in 1989, the attorney-general obtained an injunction against its distribution. This did not prevent widespread circulation of the report, which indicted ministers, officials, bankers, and lawyers for lax or disreputable conduct. 
Revenge against the Thatcher government became a fixation for Rowland. He had no qualms about his methods: 'The Observer', for example, published offensive allegations about the financial interests of the prime minister's son. In 1986 Lonrho bought 'Today' newspaper for $10 million. The newspaper was relaunched as a supporter of David Owen's Social Democratic Party, which Rowland began bank-rolling just as it went into electoral oblivion. 'Tiny Rowland had no idea what he was doing commercially when he bought 'Today'', Woodrow Wyatt concluded after a discussion with Rupert Murdoch in 1987. 'He got it only as another vengeful weapon to use against Mrs. Thatcher whom he hates beyond reason' (Wyatt, 1.373). 
Rowland was a dangerous adversary. During 1988 the Australian tycoon Alan Bond spent $300 million buying a 21 per cent holding in Lonrho and boasted that he was Rowland's natural successor. His 164 foot yacht 'Southern Cross III' was moored in Adnan Khashoggi's marina at Antibes next to Rowland's beloved 164 foot 'Hansa', which he had bought in 1987. Bond's captain enquired of his counterpart on 'Hansa' when the latter would be moving so that Bond's yacht could take the mooring. The implication was that Rowland should accommodate Lonrho's biggest shareholder. 'It was so embarrassing', Rowland supposedly said. 'It was then that I decided to destroy him' (Bower, 540). He published a ninety-three page document demonstrating in the most trenchant terms that Bond's businesses were technically insolvent and sustained only by a fragile pyramid of borrowings. Bond's bankers called in their loans, his companies collapsed, and he was briefly imprisoned. 
Rowland was a formidable presence. A visitor described him in 1989: 'He sits in the boardroom of Lonrho after lunch, immobile except for the occasional movements necessary to place a grape in his mouth and chew it. He is like a crocodile, steadily watching and waiting. He looks you straight in the eye. At any moment he may dismiss you as ill-informed or stupid. The jaws may snap. Meanwhile he listens and tells you without hesitation or doubt what the facts are and how they should be interpreted. ('The Spectator')' But he became too obsessed by his feud with Fayed to protect his business. Lonrho's dividend was cut in 1991, and debts of about $1 billion necessitated the sale of various assets. Controversially, in 1992, Lonrho sold some hotels for $177.5 million to the Libyan government while the United Nations was considering sanctions against Colonel Gaddafi's regime. This deal revived doubts about Rowland's judgement and integrity. In December 1992 he arranged for the eventual sale of his 15 per cent holding in Lonrho to a German property developer, Dieter Bock, at a price substantially higher than that which small investors could hope to obtain. This raised a further outcry. Bock and Rowland shared the responsibilities of chief executive for a period, but the older man was enraged as parts of the group were sold lucratively. Among other dispersals, 'The Observer' was sold in 1993 to 'The Guardian'. Rowland was isolated in the titular post of president of Lonrho in 1994. 
Rowland was tall, handsome, and had an authoritative (even mesmeric) presence even in old age. His names and mannerisms were somewhat artificial self-inventions, and he was blazingly intolerant of any challenges to his versions of reality. Ostentatious living or brash manners bored and repelled him. He disliked accepting hospitality from others. From the 1960s his use of the telephone was perhaps more profuse, and the political altitude of his callers more elevated, than those of any man alive. He was devious, inscrutable, manipulative, and intimidating. Cruel amusement was central to his outlook. His humour was mordant and his invective could be overpowering. He had few interests outside Lonrho, although he adored sun-bathing, liked Siamese cats, and collected African and German expressionist art. He was a superbly accomplished opportunist who was too headstrong and angry to sustain his successes. He died of cancer at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Westminster, on 25 July 1998. He was survived by his wife, Josie, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 70254


Edward Julius Detmold (1883-1957), also a painter and printmaker, were raised as orphans and entrusted into the care of an uncle, Dr E. B. Shuldham, who lived in Hampstead. From the age of five both boys showed an interest in drawing animals in the zoological gardens and in the British Museum (Natural History) in London, and shortly after this time they spent six months drawing at the Hampstead Conservatoire, thereby receiving what is likely to have been their only formal artistic training. They showed a precocious artistic talent, being deeply influenced in their work by both Shuldham's knowledge of natural history and his collection of Japanese prints. In 1897, aged thirteen, the pair exhibited at the Royal Academy, attracting the attention of Edward Burne-Jones who advised them to abandon any future plans for artistic training. They then went on to exhibit at the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colour and began to experiment with etching. 


@@@@@


doc= 70257


Essex witches (act. 1566-1589) are known from four surviving pamphlets published between 1566 and 1589 describing the lives, and in some cases deaths, of one man and thirty women who were accused of witchcraft in Essex and prosecuted under the 'Witchcraft Act' of 1563. In this period witchcraft was punishable by hanging if a witch was convicted of killing a person, or if he or she committed a second witchcraft offence of any kind. Witches were not burnt in England, and lesser witchcraft offences were punished by imprisonment and the pillory. Because survivals of early modern Essex trial records are among the most numerous in England, and because of the higher than average number of contemporary pamphlets published on Essex cases, the county's witchcraft prosecutions have received more attention than those of most other areas and statistical analysis as well as individual biography is possible. 
Over the period covered by the pamphlets some 430 people were prosecuted for witchcraft offences in the home counties, which formed the home circuit for judicial purposes, with a peak between 1580 and 1589. Essex, one of these five counties, accounted for nearly 60 per cent of home circuit prosecutions for witchcraft and between 1570 and 1609 fifty-three Essex witches were hanged as against a total of sixty-four executions across all the home counties. This was a high proportion, even allowing for the fact that only about a quarter of the total indicted were actually found guilty and hanged. Accusations were most common in eastern and central Essex, although local episodes of witch accusation could occur anywhere. Many Essex people clearly believed strongly in witchcraft as a threat to them, as a source of healing or divining magic, or as a power which they themselves had come to possess. Women were particularly likely to be accused, often of inheriting their powers or sharing them with other female family members or friends (nearly 90 per cent of all indicted Essex witches were women), and many confessed the accusations to be true. Some may have been convinced that they could and did curse their neighbours, others said they practised only healing magic, while a third group denied all involvement. Some people seem likely -- from the pattern of their narratives -- to have invented confessions and denials out of mixed motives including, sometimes, a belief that producing any kind of coherent narrative would lead to clemency. Their accusers were equally likely to create an unnaturally neat fiction about the witches out of a combination of incoherent events and unverifiable beliefs about their lives. It is therefore hard to decide, or to find a reliable methodology for assessing, which elements of their stories represent factual and verifiable life events and which are retrospective rationalizations based on fantasy or fiction confabulated under pressure. Both these types of experience represent, however, a biographical reality for the pamphleteers who immortalized these Essex people. 
All the villagers are shown in the pamphlets as ordinary people who have been tempted into the felony of maleficent witchcraft for a variety of reasons. In 1566 


@@@@@


doc= 70258


Elizabeth Bennett (d. 1582), Annis Glascock, and Alice Hunt of witchcraft. She was in turn accused by other informants, including her brother, who said that Kempe had killed his wife for calling her a whore and a witch. Kempe's illegitimate son told the magistrate that she kept spirits, and Newman was described as working in partnership with her, using the same spirits, although she refused to confess anything. Although convicted of the same three offences of murder, Kempe was hanged at Chelmsford in April 1582 while Newman was imprisoned until released by general pardon in 1588 -- an unusual punishment. After Brian Darcy falsely promised favour to those who confessed, Bennett pleaded guilty to keeping spirits and using them to kill her abusive neighbour and his wife, and was hanged at Chelmsford in April 1582. Glascock apparently confessed nothing, but died in prison (inquest date 11 November 1582) after being convicted of three murders and reprieved. Hunt was acquitted of murder and of killing cows, despite the evidence of her eight-year-old stepdaughter that she kept spirits. Meanwhile her sister, Margery Sammon or Barnes, confessed to the keeping of spirits and incriminated Hunt's next door neighbour, Joan Pechey, saying that she had killed John Johnson, the collector for the poor, for giving her insufficient charity. Newman was also accused (by other informants) of his murder but nobody was formally charged. Pechey refused to confess but died in prison (inquest date 11 November 1582) despite supposedly being discharged without trial. Barnes apparently evaded trial, only to be indicted for keeping spirits in 1583. She was acquitted. 
Accusations were also taking place in adjacent villages. Cicely Selles and her husband, Henry Selles, of Little Clacton, were accused of witchcraft by a wealthy neighbour, Richard Ross, and by their own children. Ross also accused them of damaging property and of arson. Henry Selles was not tried, while his wife was acquitted of arson. She was, however, convicted of murdering the son of a neighbour whose daughter had also suffered mysterious illness, supposedly at her hands. Both Selleses died in gaol (inquest dates 31 January and 8 March 1583) after being tried again, with their son Robert Selles, for arson against Ross. This makes it likely that Ross was the force behind their prosecution, especially as they were also accused of, but not charged with, attacking his maid and farm, and killing a child of one of his workers (despite the reluctance of the child's mother to accuse Cicely Selles). Witchcraft accusation could be a way of expressing a more deep-seated hatred -- even a feud -- here. Alice Manfielde of Thorpe and 55-year-old Margaret Grevell were accused of various offences: impeding farm work by magic, arson, and murder. Manfielde, despite a fulsome confession and further incrimination of existing suspects, was charged only with arson, and was acquitted, while Grevell was acquitted of killing a man whose wife had refused her charity. Elizabeth Ewstace, aged fifty-three, was accused of murder and of causing illness in animals and humans, but was not brought to trial. In Little Oakley, Annis Herd was accused of murder by the parson of Beaumont, but, being charged only with harming animals, was acquitted. Her illegitimate daughter accused her of keeping spirits, and other neighbours described misfortunes which had struck after they refused her charity. Finally, in Walton various accusations of harming animals and causing wind damage were made against Joan Robinson, a comparatively wealthy woman, but were apparently dismissed. The prosecution petered out as accusations became less and less grave, the assize of March 1583 approached and prosecutions were surprisingly unsuccessful in a number of cases. 
The desire to publish accounts of witchcraft cases did not, however, fade. In 1589 material from the pre-trial examinations of three more Essex women was published as 'The Apprehension and Confession of Three Notorious Witches'. 


@@@@@


doc= 70259


Joan Cunny (c.1508/9-1589), of Stisted, was accused of harming and killing her neighbours and causing a damaging storm. She confessed that she had learned her 'art' from a woman who had told her to make a circle on the ground and pray to Satan, at which invocation spirits would appear. She said she had done this twenty years previously, had given her soul to the spirits, taken them home and fed them, and afterwards used them to do various harmful acts. The pamphleteer said that Cunny had two daughters, Margaret and Avis, and two illegitimate grandsons. It was from one of these boys that some of the accusations against Cunny and her daughters came. Cunny was hanged at Chelmsford on 5 July 1589, while Margaret was imprisoned and Avis was sentenced to death, but was reprieved because she was pregnant. Joan Upney of Dagenham was similarly accused with her daughters. She too confessed to learning her witchcraft from a woman who had, this time, brought familiar spirits to her. This woman, named Whitecote, is probably Cecilia Glasenberye (also known as Arnold or Whitecote), a Barking woman executed for witchcraft in 1574, whose story featured in a lost pamphlet of that year and was reprinted in 1595 in 'A World of Wonders, a Masse of Murthers, a Covie of Cosonages'. Upney blamed the spirits which Whitecote had given her for harming her neighbours, but was herself convicted of two murders and hanged. Alice Upney, presumably Upney's daughter, was discharged without trial. The pamphlet's final account is of 


@@@@@


doc= 70260


Elizabeth Frauncis (c.1529-1579), from Hatfield Peverel, told pre-trial questioners that, aged twelve (at least twenty-five years earlier, the narrative suggests) she was given a white-spotted cat named Satan by her grandmother, Eve. She renounced God and his word and was told to give her blood to the cat. Later she asked the cat for sheep, and to procure her a rich husband. Unfortunately, when the cat prevailed upon her to have sex with the favoured man, he had not married her, and she told the cat to kill him. Fearing pregnancy, she asked the cat for help with abortifacient herbs, and then at its insistence attempted once again to win a husband by what the pamphlet labels 'fornication'. In this attempt she succeeded, but later marital unhappiness prompted her to kill the resultant child, and to lame her husband, whom trial records name as Christopher Frauncis. Her story was printed in 'The Examination and Confession of Certaine Wytches at Chensforde in the Countie of Essex' (1566). It suggests that Elizabeth Frauncis felt guilty about sexual events in her younger life, and that, when interrogated on suspicion of witchcraft, she confessed those matters which were on her conscience, rather than the expected punishable acts of harmful magic against neighbours. Equally, the fact that one of her questioners was a churchman may mean that the focus on sin rather than crime in Frauncis's story was his rather than exclusively hers. Assize records suggest that she was not formally charged with any of the matters she confessed -- the trial at Chelmsford concentrated on the bewitchment of a child, to which Frauncis pleaded guilty. She was sentenced in July to a year's imprisonment, with four pillory appearances, as the penalty for a first, non-fatal offence. In August 1572 Frauncis was tried again as a witch, for what is rightly described in the assize records as her second offence. However, the indictment had to be redrafted: when tried in March 1573 for the same offence and found guilty she escaped death (the penalty for a second offence) and was imprisoned and pilloried again (the penalty for a first offence). In April 1579, however, her luck ran out and she was tried, convicted, and hanged for killing a neighbour, Alice Poole, by witchcraft. She pleaded not guilty, but had confessed to the offence in a pre-trial examination which appears in the second Essex pamphlet 'A detection of damnable driftes practized by three '[actually four]' witches arraigned at Chelmisforde in Essex' (1579). Frauncis said that she killed Poole, with the help of a dog spirit, because Poole refused to give her yeast -- a far more petty motivation than the grand lusts of her first confession thirteen years before. 



@@@@@


doc= 70261


Ursley Kempe (d. 1582), had killed one of her children and made herself and another child ill. Kempe confessed several attacks on villagers and accused neighbours Alice Newman, 


@@@@@


doc= 70262


Joan Prentice (d. 1589), who lived in the almshouse at Sible Hedingham, and confessed that she had a familiar in the shape of a ferret named Satan. She tried to resist his overtures, but let him suck her blood and then used him to harm her neighbours. She said that the ferret disobeyed her instructions to hurt a child and instead killed it, but this excuse did not save her from execution. Prentice was hanged at Chelmsford on 5 July 1589. She named two other women, Elizabeth Whale and Elizabeth Mott, whom she said used the same spirit, but they were discharged without trial. 
Each 'witch's' story is subtly different, although there are linking themes, most of which became standard in witchcraft accusations and confessions. In some stories sexual motives meet malice to produce a potent and incredible village Medea: a woman who uses devil-inspired magic to enchant and kill in furtherance of her desires -- or feels guilty because she wishes she had. In others poverty leads to begging, which, when refused, prompts designs of revenge on the uncharitable neighbour. Unneighbourly refusal to trade with the witch or less obvious economic or social injuries might equally be revenged. Some cases say more about the alleged victim than the witch: a strong imagination, mental illness, or unexplained disease, combined with naughtiness, teenage crises, or fear, produce a story of peculiar afflictions visited on the innocent by the malignant. Finally, questioners have a great influence over confessions by witches: leading questions were common, and the temptation to say what was expected in the hope of pleasing the magistrate or churchman must have been great. 
There are exemplars of each of these life stories in all the pamphlets. Frauncis's sexual adventures are echoed in the fact that a number of the Essex witches had illegitimate children or were accused of causing harm to those who stood in their way sexually. In 1582 Pechey was accused of incest, while Cicely Selles's husband was alleged to have described his wife as a 'stinking whore'. The 1589 pamphleteer described Cunny and her daughters as 'living very lewdly... no better than naughty packs'. The most common story is, however, that of revenge for uncharity, or economic unneighbourliness such as theft or refusal to trade. At least two thirds of the Essex witches were involved in disputes with neighbours over such matters, and almost all had been insulted, attacked by or had quarrelled abusively with alleged victims. Most were relatively poor; where occupations are known, Henry Selles was an agricultural labourer, Sammon a servant, Bennett the wife of a husbandman, Hunt a mason's wife, and Glascock married to a sawyer. Many of the women were apparently single or widowed (although the convenient legal definition 'spinster' can be misleading here), and the witches accused in these pamphlets are almost exclusively female, mirroring (if exaggerating) the national male : female percentages, where 90 per cent of suspects might be expected to be women. 


@@@@@


doc= 70263


Elleine Smith (d. 1579), of Maldon, tried and hanged at Chelmsford in April 1579 for killing a child. She had quarrelled with a number of people, including her stepfather, John Chaundeler, when he asked her for money which her mother had given her. Smith's mother, Alice Chaundeler, had been executed for murder by witchcraft in 1574 and her daughter was probably assumed to have inherited her witchcraft as well as her money, especially since John Chaundeler died strangely after their quarrel. Smith was also believed to have hit the child who died and sent a dog spirit to attack her, and to have attacked with a toad spirit a neighbour who refused charity to her son. Her son, as was often the case, also accused his mother of keeping familiar spirits. Margery Staunton of Wimbish, described in the same pamphlet, was refused charity by nine households and was seen to resent this -- after which misfortune overtook the households. She escaped punishment because her indictment was wrongly drafted. Finally, Alice Nokes of Lambourne allegedly injured a man who stole gloves from her daughter, and attacked a horse because the ploughman would not speak to her. She was hanged for murder by witchcraft, an accusation not mentioned in the pamphlet. 
Individual and inter-household quarrels, but also the dynamics of spiralling accusations and ruthless questioning, played a major part in the biggest English witchcraft case of the period, described in W. W.'s 'A true and just recorde of the information, examination and confession of all the witches, taken at S. Oses in the countie of Essex' (1582). In February and March 1582 Brian Darcy, an Essex JP and witch-hunter, questioned thirteen women and a man from the villages of St Osyth, Little Clacton, Thorpe, Little Oakley, and Walton and sent them for trial at Chelmsford. The process began modestly enough when a St Osyth servant of Darcy's relative Thomas Darcy, third Baron Darcy of Chiche, complained that a woman whom she had been consulting as a magical healer, 


@@@@@


doc= 70264


Agnes Waterhouse (1501/2-1566), Frauncis's neighbour and probably her sister, confessed far more conventional witchcraft offences in 1566 than she did. Waterhouse received the cat, Satan, from Frauncis in exchange for a cake, she said, and used him against neighbours who had angered her, asking him to kill hogs, a cow, and geese, to harm brewing and dairying, to kill a neighbour, and, nine years previously, her own husband. She turned the cat familiar into a toad because poverty forced her to use the wool on which he slept. In July 1566 Waterhouse pleaded guilty in court to killing William Fynee (no mention was made of the more sensational murder of her husband, or the confessed property offences) and she was hanged at Chelmsford on 29 July. She said at her death that she had been a witch for fifteen years, and added that she had always prayed in Latin. The pamphlet emphasized the illegality and ungodliness of this activity, suggesting again the influence of churchmen on some of the confessions of witches, and the thin lines between residual Catholicism, deliberate recusancy, and the practice of secret magical rites with a perceived Satanic tint. 
The third witch to be tried at Chelmsford in July 1566 was 


@@@@@


doc= 70358


Charles Cooke (1759/60-1816), publisher, was bound to the stationer Henry Cooke on 4 April 1775. He was freed on 9 April 1782, and was made a liveryman of the Stationers' Company the following month. He succeeded to his father's business about 1789, and further refined the art of serial publication. Illustrations had been made integral to a series of pocket editions by John Bell in his 'Poets of Great Britain' (109 vols., 1776-82). Cooke's innovation was to apply this formula to several genres in a co-ordinated fashion. By marketing parallel series of novelists, poets, essayists, historians, and devotional authors -- in uniform pocket editions, all 'Superbly Embellished' -- and by adding plays to his list (he bought up 'Bell's British Theatre'), Cooke became the first purveyor of a full range of English classics. One series alone, the 'Select British Poets' (56 vols., 1794-1805), included more than 200 engravings. Commissions on this scale lend credibility to the claim that, in the annals of book illustration, Cooke helped to provide 'the first steady market for the work of English engravers and artists' (Amory, 140). The engraver Abraham Raimbach thought him a 'rather pompous gentleman publisher', inclined to 'dispense his patronage among the hungry artists, with an air of conscious superiority' ('Memoirs and Recollections', 25). For 2's'. Cooke offered deluxe imprints on vellum paper with hand-coloured stipple engravings, and for 1's'. a 'superior edition', but the 'cheap edition' was his stock-in-trade. 'How I loved those little sixpenny numbers', testified Leigh Hunt about his boyhood enthusiasm; 'I doted on their size; I doted on their type, on their ornaments, on their wrappers, containing lists of other poets, and on the engravings from Kirk. I bought them over and over again, and used to get up select sets, which disappeared like buttered crumpets; for I could resist neither giving them away, nor possessing them. (Hunt, 77)' By 1803 Cooke had amassed a fortune sufficient to build at Walthamstow 'a sort of baronial mansion', as the bibliographer T. F. Dibdin called it (Dibdin, 749), overlooking the countryside -- whence its name, Belle Vue. A description of the house, dubbed Cooke's Folly by locals, is given along with a picture in Bosworth's 'Some Walthamstow Houses' (pp. 31-8). Between 1805 and 1816, like his father, Cooke was a member of the common council for the ward of Farringdon Within. He died on 16 April 1816, aged fifty-six, leaving a widow, Sarah. 


@@@@@


doc= 70367


Mary Overton (fl. 1646-1647), Leveller, in this period. Nothing is known of her background or parentage and she was first mentioned by her husband in 1646. There is no evidence to support the identification of Overton and his wife with the Richard and Mary who were married at St George the Martyr, Southwark, in March 1643, but the fact that the couple had three young children and a six-month-old baby in 1647 would suggest a marriage some time in the early 1640s. A pamphlet of 1643 protesting against imprisonment for debt has been attributed to Overton; the evidence for Overton's authorship is not compelling, but if this attribution is sound he himself was in prison for debt at this time. 


@@@@@


doc= 70520


Yvonne Claire Rudellat (1897-1945) was one of the first SOE F section women to go to France, in July 1942. An apparently frail grandmother of chameleon personality, she helped to create a network allied to the unfortunate Prosper network in Paris. Her success was instrumental in convincing SOE to continue using women agents in France. She was shot in the head in a car chase in June 1943, convinced the Gestapo of her loss of memory, but died, unrecognized, from typhus, about 24 April 1945 in Belsen after its liberation. She too was appointed MBE, and received the Croix de Guerre. 
Of the eleven women agents who arrived in France down the short ladder of the Lysander aircraft, eight were captured, often within months of landing. Many of the arrivals were masterminded by Henri Dericourt, a very suspect agent. The Germans too, of course, may have found such landings more easily traceable. 


@@@@@


doc= 70528


James Bandinel (1814-1893), Church of England clergyman and theologian, graduated from Wadham College, Oxford, and worked under the supervision of William Palmer of Worcester, the high-church theologian, whose extreme views came to stand in the way of Bandinel's preferment. He published many theological works of a high-church sort. He held livings in Oxfordshire and Yorkshire. His marriage to his first cousin, Julia Le Mesurier of the Guernsey family, ended in separation, which caused a breach between the Bandinels, father and son. Of their children, James Julius Frederick Bandinel was a merchant's clerk in Newchwang (Yingkou), China, in the 1890s. 


@@@@@


doc= 70590


Peter Arnold Lienhardt (1928-1986), anthropologist, followed in his elder brother's footsteps. After taking a first in English and oriental languages at Downing College, Cambridge (1946-9), he did two years' national service (1950-52) in the Royal Air Force. He went up to Lincoln College, Oxford, as a graduate student in 1952, did fieldwork in the Gulf states, and obtained his doctorate in 1957. In 1957-60 he was senior research fellow at the East African Institute for Social Research at Makerere College, Uganda, during which time he carried out research in Zanzibar. During 1960-62 he was a research fellow at St Antony's College, Oxford (and briefly adviser to the ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheikh Shakhbut bin Sultan), and in the latter year was appointed to a faculty lecturership in Middle Eastern sociology at Oxford's Institute of Social Anthropology. He undertook a further period of field research in Iran in 1965-6. He died, unmarried, on 17 March 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 70730


Joan Denny, Lady Denny (d. 1553), was the daughter of Sir Philip Champernon of Modbury, Devon, and his wife, Katherine Carew. She married Anthony Denny on 9 February 1538, and with him had five sons, including Sir Edward Denny (1547-1600), and four daughters. She herself had a position in the households of queens Anne of Cleves and Katherine Parr, while her sister-in-law Lady Berkeley was governess to Princess Elizabeth. A committed protestant, with her sister Katherine Raleigh she is reported to have protected the persecuted reformers in Devon. In the summer of 1546 Lady Denny (and by extension her husband) was one of the court protestants whom religious conservatives tried to incriminate through accusations wrung from Anne Askew, a distant relative of Joan's uncle Sir Gawain Carew; Anne would admit only that Lady Denny's servant had brought her money, and Sir Anthony survived as a leading figure among Seymour's associates at the close of the reign. It is a sign of his personal intimacy with Henry VIII that according to John Foxe it was Denny who at the very end advised the dying king 'to prepare himself to death... and to call upon God... for grace and mercy' (Sil, 'Sir Anthony Denny', 196). An executor of Henry's will, he also received a substantial bequest, quite possibly arranged by Denny himself after the king's death. During Henry's funeral procession 'then were set at the head and feet of the said corpse Sir Anthony Denny and Sir William Herbert, two of the chief of his privy chamber', and six months later a royal patent recognized Denny as 'the most intimate of Henry VIII's council and chamber' (ibid., 197-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 70739


Anne Herbert (b. before 1514, d. 1552) was the younger daughter of Sir Thomas Parr (1478-1517) of Kendal ['see under 'Parr family] and his wife, Maud Green (died 'c'.1531). The date of her marriage to Herbert is not recorded, but it may well have been to her that John Husee referred when he told Lady Lisle on 3 August 1537 that 'it is thought Mrs Parre will shortly marry' ('LP Henry VIII', 12/2, no. 424). Like her sister she was well educated, though her Latin seems to have become rusty later -- when Roger Ascham entered Princess Elizabeth's household in 1548, he urged Anne to improve it, and lent her a copy of Cicero's 'De officiis' for the purpose. When Katherine became queen, she made Anne her maid-in-waiting and the keeper of her jewels, and the two sisters remained close. According to Foxe, when the religious conservatives struck at the queen in 1546, 'they thought it best, at first, to begin with some of those ladies, whom they knew to be great with her, and of her blood; the chiefest whereof, as most of estimation and privy to all her doings, were these: the lady Herbert, afterward countess of Pembroke, and sister to the queen, and chief of her privy chamber' ('Acts and Monuments', 5.557). Then, when Katherine saved herself by a timely submission to the king, she went to him 'waited upon only by the lady Herbert her sister, and the lady Lane, who carried the candle before her' (ibid., 559). Like the queen, Anne Herbert patronized the Flemish miniaturist Levina Teerlinc, who became another member of Katherine's privy chamber. 


@@@@@


doc= 70797


John Poyntz (c.1485-1544), courtier and landowner, was Sir Robert Poyntz's second son. He was returned to the parliament of 1529 as a representative of the Wiltshire borough of Marlborough, which belonged to Katherine as queen consort. He cut a figure in the parliament early in 1533 when he expressed reservations about the important bill in restraint of appeals to Rome. His alignment with other Aragonese supporters evidently did not harm his advancement to the Gloucestershire bench or his marriage prospects, which led to his acquisition of an estate in Surrey. His first marriage, by 1528, to Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Matthew Browne of Betchworth in Surrey, linked him distantly with Sir Henry Guildford (1489-1532), comptroller of the royal household. The couple had four sons, including Matthew Poyntz ('b'. after 1528, died 1605), and three daughters. He later married Margaret (died 1563/4), daughter of Nicholas Saunders of Charlwood, Surrey, and Alice Hungate. The date of their marriage is unknown but probably occurred in the early 1530s; the couple had two sons, Robert Poyntz (b. c.1535, d. in or after 1568), later a Catholic theologian, and William, and two daughters, Alice and Elizabeth. The brother of Poyntz's first wife, Richard, married Margaret's sister, Anne. An indenture between Poyntz and his father-in-law, Nicholas Saunders, possibly resolving his wife's dower rights prior to John's departure on campaign, is dated 1 May 1544 (Maclean, 115). Poyntz's modern fame rests not on his political activity but on a surviving drawing of him by Hans Holbein the younger and an epistolary satire addressed to him by Sir Thomas Wyatt the elder, in which the poet extols the virtues of country living away from 'the press of courts'. He fought in the military campaign of 1544, which culminated in the capture of Boulogne. He died on 19 November 1544, either during the final stages of his service abroad or shortly after his return. His eldest son, Henry Poyntz, then aged sixteen, was unable to inherit because he was mentally handicapped, leading to Matthew Poyntz's recognition as heir. His widow later married James Skinner (died 1558), who was twice elected MP for Reigate, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 70798


Sir Nicholas Poyntz (b. in or before 1510, d. 1556), courtier and landowner, was the eldest son of Sir Anthony Poyntz, naval commander, and his first wife, Elizabeth (died in or before 1527), daughter of Sir William Huddesfield of Shillingford, Devon. On 24 June 1527 he married Joan (died in or after 1556), daughter of Thomas Berkeley, 'de jure' fifth Baron Berkeley. The couple had five or six sons, including Sir Nicholas Poyntz ('c'.1528-1585), and three daughters. The Berkeley family was staunchly Catholic and the connection strengthened Poyntz's local connections in Gloucestershire, but disputes arising out of which properties had been settled on his wife soured his dealings with her kin as well as with his neighbours. These disputes prompted an official investigation by the privy council in October 1541, together with a report on him by the king's council in the marches of Wales. Pending their outcome he was committed to the Fleet prison, but early in 1542 he was released on condition that he resided within 40 miles of London, only to be re-committed several months later. He was finally released following his wife's appearance to plead on his behalf. Although instructed to make amends over two of the properties concerned, he failed to do so, and the matter went to litigation during Edward VI's reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 70844


Thomas Randall (1711-1780), Church of Scotland minister and religious writer, was minister first at Inchture and then at Stirling. He compiled an important collection of tracts on the subject of ecclesiastical patronage, and wrote a significant pamphlet on church communion and a noted sermon (1763) on Christian benevolence, all major subjects of discussion within the popular or evangelical party within the church. Through his father, the younger Thomas thus inherited a considerable standing among leading ministers of the popular party. He was educated at the University of Leiden, and on 14 June 1769 he was licensed at Rotterdam, where his maternal uncle William Davidson was a prominent merchant within the large Scots commercial community. When his father was translated to Stirling, Thomas the younger succeeded him at Inchture on 21 February 1771. He was translated to the Outer High Church of Glasgow on 18 November 1773, to Lady Yester's in Edinburgh on 26 November 1778, and to the Tolbooth Church in Edinburgh on 9 June 1785, where he remained for the rest of his career. Upon the death of William Davidson in 1794, he inherited his uncle's property of Muirhouse in Cramond, near Edinburgh, and assumed his surname. 


@@@@@


doc= 70845


Patrick Crichton (1762-1823) and his wife, Margaret Lambie, was born in Gayfield Square, Edinburgh, on 10 April 1791. His father, a well-known figure, distinguished himself with the army in America during the American War of Independence before returning to partner his father, Alexander Crichton (1721-1808), in the family's coachbuilding firm. Elected an Edinburgh city councillor and treasurer, he also commanded the Royal Edinburgh volunteers' first regiment from 1794 to 1796, as featured in John Kay's 'Original Portraits', and an Edinburgh militia regiment, besides publicizing his inventions for conveying troops and sick or wounded personnel. 


@@@@@


doc= 70897


Celia Mary Rooke (1902-1998), wood-engraver and painter, was born on 10 March 1902 at 10 Denbigh Road, Ealing, Middlesex, the daughter of Alberic Arthur Twistleton-Wykeham-Fiennes (1865-1919), Bank of England clerk, and his wife, Gertrude Theodesia (died 1923), a daughter of Commander George Francis Colley, naval officer. She was a direct descendant of the traveller Celia Fiennes (1662-1741). From 1924 she trained at the London county council Central School of Arts and Crafts, sharing lodgings with Joyce Clissold. Noel Rooke then found her employment at the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society offices, Queen Square, London, and she was largely responsible for the Society's exhibitions in 1928 and 1931. Her output was small, but her wood-engravings included sprightly black silhouette illustrations for the Golden Cockerel Press edition of 'The Fables of Aesop' (1926). In 1960 she retired to Culworth, Oxfordshire, where she resumed painting and occasionally returned to the family seat, Broughton Castle, as a guide. She died on 17 September 1998 at her home, Amaryllis Cottage, The Green, Culworth. Her adopted daughter Phyllida predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 70900


(Walter) Bryce Gallie (1912-1998), philosopher, who was born at Fernville, Lenzie, Dunbartonshire, on 5 October 1912, the third son of Walter Smith Gallie (died 1944), structural engineer, and his wife, (Martha) Alice, 'nee' Wormald (died 1939). After Sedbergh School, which was later the subject of his first book, 'An English School' (1949), he entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1931, graduated with a first in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1934, and took the research degree of BLitt in 1937. He was a lecturer in philosophy at University College, Swansea, from 1935 to 1950, his tenure interrupted by war service between 1940 and 1945. At Balliol he had been a protege of the master, A. D. Lindsay, who in 1950 appointed him the first professor of philosophy at the University College of North Staffordshire (later Keele University, of which Lindsay became vice-chancellor). There he wrote about the American logician C. S. Peirce: 'Peirce and Pragmatism' (1952). After Lindsay's death he published 'A New University: A. D. Lindsay and the Keele Experiment' (1960). In 1954 he became professor of logic and metaphysics at Queen's College, Belfast. His most important work emanated from Belfast, where he developed his ideas about 'essentially contested concepts' ('Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society', 1956) and published 'Philosophy and the Historical Understanding' (1964). From 1967 until his retirement in 1978 he was professor of political science at Cambridge University, and a fellow of Peterhouse. He died in Cardigan on 31 August 1998. His last books, 'Philosophers of Peace and War' (1978) and 'Understanding War' (1990), reflected his and Menna Gallie's interest in peace, one of many concerns that this creative couple shared. 


@@@@@


doc= 70962


Richard Arne (bap. 1719, d. in or after 1736), singer and actor, was baptized on 15 February 1719 at St Paul's, Covent Garden. Billed as 'Master Arne', he sang the compositions of his distinguished brother, Thomas Augustine Arne, at the Haymarket and Drury Lane theatres, and appeared as Cupid to his celebrated sister's Venus in the 'Impromptu Revel Masque, on the Joyous Occasion of the Royal Nuptuals' on 24 November 1733 at the Haymarket. 'Master Arne' disappeared from the playbills after the 1735-6 season. His death is not noted in the register of St Paul's. 



@@@@@


doc= 70963


Thomas Arne (bap. 1682, d. 1736), upholsterer and theatre servant, who was baptized on 30 December 1682 at St Paul's, Covent Garden, London, the eldest of the six children of Thomas Arne ('c'.1654-1713) and Mary, 'nee' Thursfield (1660/61-1693). He married Mary Sharpe (died 1703) before the baptism of their daughter Mary (died 1704) at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 22 February 1703. In April 1707, at the Mercers' Chapel, London, he married his second wife, Anne Wheeler (died 1757). They had seven children, of whom Thomas Augustine Arne (1710-1778), Susannah Maria ['see 'Cibber, Susannah Maria (1714-1766)], and Richard ['see below'] reached adulthood. The children of this second marriage were brought up in their mother's Roman Catholic faith. During the reign of Queen Anne, Thomas Arne provided lodging for North American chieftains at his home and place of business, the Crown and Cushion, King Street, Covent Garden (now no. 34), as chronicled in 'The Spectator' (no. 50) and 'The Tatler' (no. 171). In 1715 Arne upholstered some seats in the Drury Lane Theatre. In 1732 he was connected with the season of 'English operas' presented by Henry Carey and John Frederick Lampe at the Haymarket theatre, but it is not certain whether his involvement extended beyond taking in subscriptions. His daughter Susannah Maria sang in Handel's 'Acis and Galatea' in the season. In 1735, testifying at the trial of Charles Macklin for the killing of Thomas Hallam, he identified himself as 'the numberer of the boxes, of Drury Lane playhouse' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Thomas Arne was buried at the age of fifty-three at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 17 June 1736. 
Arne's children extended the family's influence in the theatre, not only through their talent but also by their marriages. Susannah Maria married Theophilus Cibber (1703-1758) in 1734, and Thomas Augustine married Cecilia Young (1712-1789) ['see under 'Young family (per. c.1700-1799)], known professionally after her marriage as Mrs Arne, in 1737. The elder Thomas Arne's youngest child, 


@@@@@


doc= 70986


Anne Mary Celestine Asquith, countess of Oxford and Asquith (1916-1998), was born on 14 November 1916 in Paris and educated in Bucharest, Paris, and elsewhere, and at St Anne's College, Oxford (1936-9), though she did not take her final examinations. During the Second World War she worked at Bletchley Park, then joined the WAAF and tracked German air raids. In 1945 she was posted to Palestine and narrowly escaped death when the King David Hotel in Jerusalem was blown up. She married on 28 August 1947 Julian Edward George Asquith, second earl of Oxford and Asquith ('b'. 1916), colonial official, the eldest son of Raymond Asquith (1878-1916); they had two sons and three daughters. She accompanied her husband on postings to Libya, Zanzibar, St Lucia, and finally the Seychelles, where Asquith was governor (1962-7), before they retired to the Manor House, Mells, Frome, Somerset. Lady Oxford was described by contemporaries as beautiful, intelligent, enthusiastic, and interested in the arts. She died on 19 August 1998 at Frome, Somerset, survived by her husband and their five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 71004


Janet Seymour-Smith (1930-1998), translator and scholar, was a tall blonde woman of striking appearance but retiring personality. She was born on 25 August 1930 at Eastnor, Rolle Road, Littleham, Exmouth, Devon, the daughter of Lionel Richard Gethin de Glanville, a doctor, and his wife, Hilda St Hilary Edith Everard, 'nee' Mayne. Apart from her work for Graves, she was an active supporter of and collaborator in her husband's later literary activities. After her death, their friend Robert Nye wrote, 'Her mind was his mind in such matters. And what a mind it was -- as incandescent as it was delicate and particular' (Nye, 'The Independent'). Their first child was born on Mallorca; a second daughter was born in England. The American poet Robert Creeley, who knew Seymour-Smith on Mallorca, depicted him as Artie in his autobiographical novel 'The Island': 'In the night he thought of Artie, tired, worn, smiling man. The shuffling gesture, the sidewise manner, the edged, confidential voice' (Creeley, 59). The impression seems authentic to those who knew Seymour-Smith at that time. In Mallorca Creeley set up the Divers Press, which published Seymour-Smith's 'All Devils Fading' in 1954 (though dated 1953), an elegant hand-printed collection of eleven poems. Graves's influence is strong in themes and idiom, though not to the extent of extinguishing Seymour-Smith's personal poetic voice; it was to remain strong in the later poetry, where it is combined with that of Hardy, whom Seymour-Smith regarded as the greatest of twentieth-century poets. Like Graves, Seymour-Smith saw human relations in mythic terms, where the beloved woman is both muse and tormentor. His poetry, from the first collection onwards, is peopled by ghosts, devils, revenants, doppelgangers. The eponymous female figures of his second and third collections, 'Tea with Miss Stockport' (1961) and 'Reminiscences of Norma' (1970), embody the duality of love and suffering. Like Graves, Seymour-Smith was a poet of formal precision and a delicate, occasionally exquisite, music. But his poetry was often obscure, perhaps because of the pressure of emotions that evaded direct expression. In his last collection, 'Wilderness' (1994), there are poems of more direct feeling, such as 'To my wife in hospital' and 'To my daughter'. Seymour-Smith wanted to be seen primarily as a poet; in 1970 he wrote, 'all my critical work stems primarily from poetic experience, and from what I describe as poetic thinking' (Murphy, 982). But his poetry remained a thin stream compared to the vast output of his prose writing. 


@@@@@


doc= 71104


Clara Jane Cattell (1860-1923), who trained at the Brownlow Hill Infirmary, Liverpool, from 1883 to 1886. She worked abroad as a private nurse, mainly in Switzerland, becoming a registered nurse in 1890, when she joined the Mission Hospital, and became a deaconess. She was sister of the men's ward from November 1892 until 1907, when she left to care for her parents. Tougher than Maud, she 'gave herself unreservedly and whole heartedly to the task of nursing, teaching, and soul-winning in the wards with marked success' (Mildmay Mission Hospital, annual report, 1907, 7). She died on 23 January 1923 at Sheldon, and was buried there three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 71166


Teresa Maria Blount (1688-1759), born on 15 October 1688 in Paris, was the eldest of the surviving children. Both sisters were educated principally at the English Benedictine convent in Paris. Their father's death in 1710 revealed that the estate was in financial crisis, and resources were concentrated on the heir, their younger brother Michael. On his marriage in 1715 they and their mother left Mapledurham for accommodation in London. Although they received letters of elaborately teasing gallantry from other members of the young Catholic elite (Teresa as Zephalinda and Martha as Parthenissa), the loss of their financial prospects effectively disqualified them from marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 71219


Mubarak ud-Daula (1757/8-1793), aged eleven or twelve, the son of Mir Jafar by Babbu Begam. 


@@@@@


doc= 71410


Samuel Hey (1815-1888), surgeon, was born on 22 August 1815 and was baptized on 22 September at Ockbrook, Derbyshire. He was the second son of the Revd Samuel Hey, vicar of Ockbrook, and Margaret Hey ('nee' Gray) of York. The Revd Samuel Hey was the youngest and second surviving son of William Hey (1736-1819). Samuel junior attended Cox's School in Gainsborough. When he was sixteen he became an apprentice dresser at the Leeds Infirmary to his paternal uncle William Hey (1772-1844), and was one of the first group of students to join the Leeds medical school in 1831, attending the very first lecture, given by Mr Teale. On 3 September 1836 Samuel became a pupil at both the North London Hospital (later University College Hospital) and St George's Hospital in London. He then had three years' medical training in Paris and Germany before returning to Leeds in 1841, when he entered into partnership with his uncle William Hey and his cousin William Hey (1796-1875) in the family medical surgical and midwifery practice in Albion Street, Leeds. Hey became a lecturer in anatomy and surgery at the Leeds medical school in 1841, a post he retained until his resignation in August 1870. He was also president of the Leeds school of medicine in 1848-9 and was treasurer for twelve years up to 1865. He married, in 1842, Martha Jane Jowett, who died childless. He married, in 1868, Sarah Jane Pratt (1836-1874); the couple had four children. Samuel Hey was a talented musician and frequently played the organ of St Paul's Church, Park Square, Leeds. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1838 and a fellow in 1855. In 1850 he was elected surgeon to the Leeds Infirmary, holding the post until his resignation in 1872. Hey died at his home in North Hill Road, Headingley, Leeds, on 22 January 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 71425


Sir John Talbot Dillon, first baronet (1740?-1805), of Lismullen, co. Meath, Ireland, was the son of Arthur Dillon (whose own father was Sir John Dillon of Lismullen, MP for County Meath) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Dr Ralph Lambert, bishop of Meath. In 1767 he married Millicent (died 1788), daughter of George Drake of Fernhill, Berkshire, and they had six sons and three daughters. Dillon sat in the Irish parliament representing co. Wicklow from 1771 and then Blessington, 1776-83. He seems to have resided for some time at Vienna, and in 1782 Emperor Joseph II created Dillon and his heirs free barons of the Holy Roman empire in recognition of his 'exertions in Parliament to serve his country, by granting liberty to Roman Catholics to realize property in their native land' ('GM', 75, 1805, 878). He was a member of the Royal Irish Academy and was created a baronet on 31 July 1801. He died in Dublin in August 1805, 'much lamented by his acquaintance and numerous tenantry' (ibid.). He was succeeded as baronet by his eldest son, Sir Charles Drake Dillon (1770-1840). 


@@@@@


doc= 71440


John Huniades (1620/21-1696), according to his acquaintance Aubrey, studied mathematics under William Oughtred, came from 'the familie of the King of Hungrie', and was chemist to the fifth earl of Pembroke, who gave him a pension of $100. Aubrey's 'Faber fortunae' has notes of his chemistry operations in the 1680s applied to industrial processes, activities which brought him into contact with fellows of the Royal Society such as Robert Hooke, Joseph Moxon, and Peter Perkins. Chancery proceedings documents reveal a commercial interest in Portugal (early 1660s) and substantial money made from securing property loans (1660-95). In 1697 Adam Frank, a Hungarian Unitarian minister in London, informed a correspondent that Huniades's sister Elizabeth (1620-1710) had inherited $50,000 from her brother which she spent mostly on founding a hospital for the poor and on a monument to him. Elizabeth Stevenson, as she was when granted the administration of her brother's property on 31 December 1696, married Samuel Benson of Shoreditch soon afterwards. The inscription on the magnificent crypt monumental tomb she raised to her brother gives his age as seventy-five at his death on 15 November 1696; both it and her own striking memorial by Francis Bird in St Leonard's Church, Shoreditch, assert royal Hungarian descent and display the arms of the Benson family impaling the Hunyadi regal device of the black raven, but no evidence has been found to support this claim. 


@@@@@


doc= 71625


Thomas [iii] Bowles (1712?-1762), designer and engraver, is said to have been born in 1712 and was trained as an engraver, producing competent botanical plates for 'Pomona, or, The Fruit-Garden Illustrated' (1729) and numerous topographical engravings, some of which were after his own design. His death on 23 December 1762 was recorded four days later in the 'Public Advertiser'; his wife, Margaret, survived him. 
Most of Thomas [ii] Bowles's ventures were undertaken in partnership with his younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 71665


Samuel Thomas George Evans (1829-1904), son of William Evans, was born in Wales on 26 May 1829. He attended Eton (1842-8) and a Paris art school before assisting his father at Eton from 1849 to 1853; he succeeded him as drawing-master in 1854. When in 1888 art became part of the school curriculum, he ran the first drawing schools. In 1899 he published a manual on elementary drawing. He had sketched alongside his father, and even completed exhibition work for him. Similar compositions were chosen by both artists, especially popular Eton and Windsor views. Having trained at the Royal Academy Schools in 1849 he showed his first works there. On 8 February 1858 he was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, but although a regular exhibitor, he had to wait until 1894 for full membership. Anne, duchess of Atholl, befriended him bringing him royal patronage: he taught Princess Beatrice and Prince Leopold in 1867-8, and Queen Victoria commissioned 'In the Woods Near Balmoral' from him in 1874. On 1 August 1863 he married Susan Bros and they had four children. After his honeymoon Evans built a chalet and boathouse by Lake Hallstadt, and the Austrian Tyrol inspired many of his watercolours. In his last decade he painted seascapes from the south coast. He died on 1 November 1904 at the Old Watercolour Society's galleries in Pall Mall, London, and was buried at Eton. His son, William Sidney Vernon Evans (1869-1943), assisted him after 1893, and became the last Evans to be drawing-master at Eton (1904-22). 


@@@@@


doc= 71687


Austin (fl. 1613) remains a shadowy figure, and there remains no evidence to reveal his first name, or to link him to the otherwise unknown H. A. of 'The Scourge of Venus'. 


@@@@@


doc= 71703


Sir Francis Colborne (1817-1895), army officer, Colborne's second son, was born at Florence on 23 April 1817. He was educated at Elizabeth College, Guernsey (1824-9), became an infantry officer (ensign 15th foot, October 1836), served in the Crimea, commanded the troops at Hong Kong (1874-8), commanded the Perak expedition (1875-6), was promoted general in April 1882, and retired in April 1883 (CB July 1855, KCB March 1876). He died unmarried at Hembury fort, Buckerell, near Honiton, on 26 November 1895. 


@@@@@


doc= 71704


John Colborne (1830-1890), army officer, Colborne's fifth son, was educated at Eton College, became an infantry officer (ensign 30th foot, August 1848), served in the Crimea, and sold out in June 1872. He became a colonel in the Egyptian army, served on Hicks Pasha's staff in the Sudan in 1883, published 'With Hicks Pasha in the Soudan' (1884), and died unmarried at Cairo on 13 February 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 71776


Thomas [i] Agnew (1794-1871) in Market Street, Manchester, in 1817. Thomas Agnew was born in Liverpool on 16 December 1794, the posthumous son of John Agnew of Culhorn, Wigtownshire, and his wife, Jane Glover. His father was descended from the Sheuchan branch of the Agnew of Lochnaw family. After studying drawing and modelling in Liverpool, Thomas Agnew moved to Manchester, where he was apprenticed in 1810 to Vittore Zanetti, an Italian printseller and dealer in clocks and optical instruments. He became Zanetti's partner in September 1817; Zanetti retired in 1828, and Thomas became sole proprietor in 1835. Under his direction, Zanetti and Agnew increasingly dealt in works of art, print publishing, and picture frame carving and gilding. 
On 19 February 1823 Thomas Agnew married Jane Garnet Lockett (died 1864), daughter and coheir of William Lockett (died 1856), a wealthy businessman and first mayor of Salford. Their son 


@@@@@


doc= 71777


(William) Lockett Agnew (1858-1918), son of Thomas [ii] and his wife, Anne Kenworthy, born on 20 April 1858 at Hope, Eccles Road, Pendleton, Salford, joined in 1881. Between 1880 and his retirement in 1895 William formed two great collections: those of Sir Charles Tennant and Sir Edward Guinness (later first earl of Iveagh). The most famous of the Tennant pictures, Constable's 'The Opening of Waterloo Bridge' (1832), bought from Agnew in 1891, entered the Tate Gallery in 1987. Lord Iveagh began collecting in June 1887, and by April 1891 had bought from Agnews some 223 pictures and drawings. Sixty-two of the choice collection he left to the nation with his beautiful Adam house at Kenwood had come from Agnews. 
In 1870 William Agnew and his two brothers Thomas [ii] and John Henry joined their brother-in-law William Bradbury (who had married William's sister Laura) in the London printing firm of Bradbury and Evans (the proprietors of 'Punch'), now renamed Bradbury and Agnew. William Agnew became chairman in 1890 and took a keen interest in 'Punch' and its illustrators. 
A staunch Liberal and close friend of Gladstone, William Agnew became MP for South-East Lancashire in 1880-85, and for the Stretford division of Lancashire in 1885-6. In 1885 he spoke in the House of Commons in support of the purchase for the nation at $83,250 of Raphael's 'Ansidei Madonna' and Van Dyck's portrait of Charles I from the duke of Marlborough's collection. He supported Gladstone's 'Home Rule Bill' in the spring of 1886 and was defeated at the general election held that summer. He unsuccessfully contested the Prestwich division in 1892. Deeply involved in philanthropic enterprises, especially in Manchester, he was also a music patron. On Lord Rosebery's recommendation he was created a baronet on 2 September 1895; he died at his London home, 11 Great Stanhope Street, Mayfair, on 31 October 1910, and his body was cremated at Golders Green. His son George William succeeded him in the baronetcy; he became Liberal MP for Salford, and was an expert on eighteenth-century English mezzotints. 
Morland and Lockett Agnew, assisted by Sir George's second son, (George) Colin Agnew (1882-1975), who, after Sir George's retirement in 1902, joined in 1906, continued the business successfully until the outbreak of war in 1914. Morland (who retired in 1913) and Colin were connoisseurs, Lockett, who was highly sociable, the superb salesman. Agnews had become internationally known, and many of the leading American collectors were among its clients. Morland's son (Charles) Gerald (1882-1954) joined in 1904, and was put in charge of the Manchester branch until 1914. In addition to a Paris branch, Colin opened a branch in Berlin in 1908. A New York branch, opened in 1925, was closed in 1932. One of Morland's coups was the purchase in 1905 of Velazquez's 'Rokeby Venus' (its beauty hidden under grime), which he sold for $45,000 to the National Gallery. Hugh Ladas (Tim) Agnew (1894-1975), Gerald's younger brother, who joined in 1920, reorganized the finances and administration of the firm. Lockett died at his home, 10 Chesterfield Street, Mayfair, on 15 February 1918; Morland died on 23 May 1931 at his home, Durrants, Croxley Green, Rickmansworth. 
The 1920s boom years were followed by the severe slump of the early 1930s, and in October 1931 


@@@@@


doc= 71778


(Charles) Morland Agnew (1855-1931), born in Salford on 14 December 1855, joined the firm in 1874 and 1878 respectively; a nephew, 


@@@@@


doc= 71804


Henry Stevens (1843-1925) was old enough to continue the succession. Samuel became a well-known commercial entomologist and collector, and through his agency sold all the Amazonian and other treasures collected by the naturalists Alfred R. Wallace (1823-1913) and Henry W. Bates (1825-1892). His nephew, J. S. Stevens, assisted him in his business for many years. In 1867 he sold his agency to Edmund Thomas Higgins ('c'.1816-1891), and devoted himself to insect-collecting, fishing, and watercolour painting. He married late in life, but his wife predeceased him and they had no children. 
Henry Stevens, born on 8 February 1843 above the Great Rooms of 38 King Street, was the third child of John Crace Stevens and Mary Blockley, who had married in 1837. A born collector, Henry became a good amateur conchologist and horticulturalist and a noted photographer, as well as the doyen of natural history auctioneers. Although it was his father's wish that he become an architect, John's premature death precipitated his son into the auctioneer's world. He lived above the auction rooms until he married in 1869 Jessie Baily. She died in 1879, leaving him with a son and six daughters, the eldest aged nine, the youngest a baby. 
Henry took out his first auctioneer's licence in 1863, and under his ownership Stevens remained the major British clearing house for natural history collections for the rest of the century and beyond. His first sale was the collection of Paul Du Chaillu, which included several gorillas. Every collectible thing passed over Stevens' tables: minerals, fossils, shells (including most of the finest private collections to come to the hammer), plants (especially orchids), birds' eggs (Stevens' telegraphic address -- Auk, London -- says it all), ethnographia and archaeologia, and an astonishing variety of curiosities and antiquities offered at his famous Friday miscellaneous sales and Tuesday curio sales. Curios had been a feature since Paterson's day, where once a 'bit of the Holy Cross' fetched $13. The most gruesome offerings were shrunken human heads, sold by Stevens on several occasions, the most remarkable being, in 1902, the collection of thirty-three tattooed Maori heads, the property of General Robley, who, it is said, decorated his bedroom wall with these relics and 'when unable to sleep at night... would rise and comb his Maoris' hair, and felt himself soothed' (Allingham, 204-5). In 1900 Henry auctioned his late uncle Samuel's wonderful collection of butterflies and moths, the result of sixty years of collecting. It was noted for its 'amplitude of rarities, extraordinary varieties and numerous Haworthian types' (Chalmers-Hunt, 10) and realized record prices for British lepidoptera (Allingham, 130-31). 
So many famous natural history collections came under the hammer during the Stevens' time at the auctioneer's rostrum that it takes a whole book to enumerate them all (Chalmers-Hunt, 1976), let alone the who's who of scientists, collectors, and curators who frequented the saleroom floor and made many an auction as much a social and scientific gathering as a commercial event. Stevens' Great Rooms were the scene of many a triumph and tragedy, lovingly described by Emily Allingham in her excellent anecdotal history of the company. Perhaps the most telling tale of the collector's obsession is that of the conchologist who owned a unique shell. One day another such shell appeared at Stevens' rooms: 'He bid for it, he won it, and then -- before them all there, he dropped it on the floor, and he stamped on it, and 'Now', said he, 'I 'still' have the unique specimen'' (Allingham, 57). Henry died suddenly of pneumonia, at his home, Addlestone Lodge, Addlestone, Surrey, on 11 June 1925. The company carried on, but the popularity of natural history sales dwindled in the early twentieth century and the business closed down in the 1940s. 


@@@@@


doc= 71827


Thomas Gerard (1592-1634), who married Anne, daughter of Robert Coker of Mappowder. Through his own and his wife's family he was connected to many of the leading gentry families of Dorset. He wrote his 'General description' of the county in the 1620s, and it was the first systematic description of the history and topography of the county and the genealogy of its prominent families. On Gerard's death the manuscript passed into the hands of the Coker family and was published in 1732 as John Coker's work. A facsimile version of the survey was published in 1980, and the authoritative afterword by Rodney Legg established its true authorship. 


@@@@@


doc= 71828


Emma Sillett (bap. 1802, d. 1880) was herself a highly competent flower painter. Taught by her father, she is said to have been his nearest rival and began to assist him with his teaching in 1817. She exhibited forty-eight paintings at the Norwich Society of Artists between 1813 and 1833. There is no record of her having married. She died in 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 71921


Greta Mary Valentine (1907-1998), the adopted daughter of James Henry Sequeira, dermatologist, and his wife, Nellie Adams. Educated in England and on the continent, Greta was studying anthroposophy when she met Crowley in 1936. Although she did not share his interest in drugs or magic, he was fascinated by her flirtations, and soon became her close friend and confidant, while both had other lovers. Crowley declared his love for her, and in 1938 followed her to Cornwall where she was on holiday with Lamorna Birch, the landscape painter. Birch introduced Greta to Ranald Valentine (died 1956), who ran a company in Dundee making greetings cards and calendars. When he and Greta decided to marry, Crowley declared himself desolated, but the marriage endured until Ranald's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 71951


Sir William [i] Vernon (c.1420-1467). Saddled with his father's debts, especially those arising from the latter's treasurership of Calais, William's position was gravely weakened by the loss of duchy offices and also by the rapid rise to local prominence of Walter Blount, who used his association with Queen Margaret to obtain the stewardship of the High Peak, which was part of her dower, and replaced the Vernons in parliament as the near permanent knight of the shire for Derbyshire. It was as a consequence of their rivalry with Blount that in May 1454 Sir William and three other Vernons joined in the coalition of forces responsible for one of the period's most memorable acts of gentry disorder, the assault on Blount's property and servants at Derby and Elvaston. 
The violence, which was part of an escalating feud between Sir Nicholas Longford, an associate of the Vernons, and the Blounts and their relatives, the Shirleys, was accompanied by acts of defiance against the sheriff of Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, Sir John Gresley, another adversary of the Vernons. This was also a direct challenge to the authority of the duke of York, recently installed as protector of the realm during Henry VI's insanity. York led a commission of oyer and terminer to investigate the affray, whereupon the duke of Buckingham, who in spite of his ostensible regional pre-eminence had hitherto generally failed to exercise effective leadership in the north midlands, now resumed his links with the Vernons. In August Sir William was retained for life by Buckingham and the latter's eldest son, Humphrey, Lord Stafford (died 1458); perhaps as a result Vernon was returned to parliament in 1455 as a knight of the shire for Staffordshire, and later (May 1460) was appointed a JP in that county after serving two terms (1455-6 and 1457-8) on the Derbyshire bench. Not surprisingly, by the late 1450s Vernon had followed Buckingham into the ranks of York's enemies, while Blount committed himself to York and the Nevilles. 
It is not clear whether the Vernons took part in any of the battles of 1459-61, but William was nominated to two anti-Yorkist commissions, along with Buckingham and John Talbot, second earl of Shrewsbury, both among the Lancastrians killed at Northampton in 1460. In the months following Edward IV's victory at Towton, Walter Blount (ennobled as Lord Mountjoy in 1465) headed commissions to arrest two of Sir William's brothers and bring them to Westminster. In December 1461, however, Vernon received a general pardon, and made his peace with the new regime. He strove to shore up his family's damaged fortunes, feeing fellow gentry in Warwickshire and Staffordshire, while resuming a militant defence of his rights in Derbyshire against real or imagined wrongs. Violence followed by arbitration enabled him to regain the stewardship of the Mowbray lands. But a series of confrontations with the followers of Henry, Lord Grey of Codnor (himself a retainer of William, Lord Hastings), culminated in November 1467, five months after William Vernon's death, in the murder of his brother Roger at the hands of Grey's men -- a notorious crime which probably inspired the statute of 1468 against retaining. 
William [i] Vernon had gone some way towards recovering his family's position, retaining some disputed estates and purchasing additional properties. In 1467 he secured a Derbyshire seat in parliament for his son William [ii]. And while his second wife, Margaret Pipe, like his mother, was of gentry stock, his son and heir, 


@@@@@


doc= 71952


Sir Henry Vernon (c.1445-1515), made an aristocratic marriage to Anne, sister of John Talbot, third earl of Shrewsbury. Henry did not become a knight for another twenty years, but he showed an unmistakable appreciation of his wife's status when he instructed his executors to build a sumptuous tomb at Tong for his wife and himself, 'the better and the more honorable for the bloode that my wyff is comyn of' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/18, fol. 66'r'). In the meantime the Vernons obtained Shrewsbury's support against Grey during the judicial inquiry occasioned by Roger's murder. They also formed links with the duke of Clarence, who was granted the honours of Tutbury and the High Peak in 1464, and who restored the stewardship of the latter to Henry Vernon. 
But although Vernon followed Shrewsbury in supporting Clarence and the earl of Warwick in the rebellion that led to the readeption of Henry VI in 1470, and was a member of the Derbyshire and Staffordshire peace commissions of 1469-71, his support fell short of a willingness to take up arms. When Edward IV landed in Yorkshire to reclaim the crown in March 1471, Vernon was prepared to provide Clarence with information concerning the king's movements, but otherwise played a waiting game. Orders and appeals from both Clarence and Warwick -- the latter in the oft-quoted plaintive postscript, 'Henry I pray you fayle not now as ever I may do for you' ('Rutland MSS', 1, 4) -- alike fell on deaf ears. Vernon's wariness paid off when Clarence made peace with the king, and the battles of Barnet and Tewkesbury restored Edward to the throne. Presumably Vernon then answered Edward's peremptory summons, to bring his forces to meet the king at Coventry. 
Having secured a general pardon in 1472, Henry Vernon was reinstated on the Derbyshire bench, remaining a member almost continuously for the rest of his life. This did not prevent his and his family's continuing to engage in bouts of violent self-help. As Clarence began his fall from grace, Vernon forged increasingly close ties both with the king (by 1474 he had become a member of the royal household as an esquire of the body) and with Lord Hastings, increasingly the dominant power in the north midlands on the king's behalf. He attended the parliament of 1478 as MP for Derbyshire, and there assented to Clarence's condemnation. In June 1483 he was summoned to the planned coronation of Edward V, there to receive knighthood. When Richard III's usurpation put paid to both ceremonies, Vernon nevertheless retained his household position, served on commissions, and even received a life annuity from the Tutbury revenues from the beleaguered monarch. In August 1485, however, he ignored Richard's demand for support against Henry Tudor, and was subsequently quick to establish links with the new dynasty. Sir Henry fought for Henry VII at Stoke in 1487, and against the Cornish rising of 1497. 
Once more an esquire of the body, Henry Vernon was at last knighted in November 1489, when the king's first-born, Arthur, was created prince of Wales. In 1492 he became the prince's governor and controller of his household. A JP in six counties besides Derbyshire, he represented that county in the parliament of 1491-2, and doubtless on other occasions. He was frequently appointed to commissions in the midlands and west country. By 1500, now a knight of the body, Vernon had become a member of an influential midlands circle of courtiers that included George Talbot, fourth earl of Shrewsbury, William Blount, second Lord Mountjoy, and Sir Henry Willoughby of Wollaton. The Vernon-Talbot connection was especially close, for Sir Henry's brother Ralph had married Margaret, another daughter of John Talbot, the second earl. The Vernons made peace with families that had once been their foes, with the Gresleys and Shirleys as well as the Blounts. The marriage of Anne Vernon to Sir Ralph Shirley provided a link to Lady Margaret Beaufort -- there survives a book of hours that Lady Margaret gave to Anne, with a signed inscription. Other marriages were less exalted but no less profitable. The double marriage of Sir Henry's sons Thomas and Humphrey to their cousins, the granddaughters of Sir Richard Ludlow of Stokesay, brought extensive Shropshire properties to the Vernons. 
The Vernons benefited from the economic upswing of the later fifteenth century. It has been calculated that by 1500 the annual value of their estates was over $600. Once more, however, they faced a challenge to their position in their 'home country', above all from the Savages of Cheshire, members of which family held the stewardship of the High Peak for much of Henry VII's reign ['see 'Savage family (per. c.1369-1528)]. When the Vernons and the Savages took opposite sides in a series of interlocking conflicts in the north midlands and north-west, the judicial powers of the stewardship were employed in 1494 to harass Vernon tenants. The Vernons themselves continued to employ physical and legal intimidation, the most spectacular example of which was the abduction in 1502 of the heiress Margaret Kebell, and her forced marriage to Roger Vernon, Sir Henry's heir apparent. Although Roger may have already joined his father in the royal household, this did not prevent Henry VII from employing his accustomed fiscal tyranny to control a regional elite. He forced the Vernons to sue for expensive pardons, backed by performance bonds. Roger's pardon in 1503 cost 400 marks, while Sir Henry only obtained his pardon in 1507 for the sum of $900. In his will of 1515 he complained about this fine, and called for the restitution of the $500 he had so far paid. He specifically referred to the testimony of Sir Edmund Dudley, the king's financial agent, who had confessed that Vernon 'was to sore delt wthall' (Harrison, 88). 
Sir Henry nevertheless continued to receive signs of royal favour. Sheriff of Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire in 1503-4, he was chosen as a member of the escort that accompanied the king's daughter to her Scottish marriage in 1503, while in 1507 he finally received a life grant of the Peak stewardship and related offices. Still a knight of the body under the young Henry VIII, he seems to have retired to the midlands, his service on the peace commissions reduced to a permanent place on those of Derbyshire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire. Indeed, his attention was increasingly given to his interests in the latter county, where he rebuilt Tong Castle in brick, and planned the construction of the Vernon chapel in the college there. Roger Vernon was dead by 1509, and when Sir Henry died in 1515 his heir was his second son, Richard, who outlived his father by only two years. Richard's son George Vernon (died 1565) was the last member of this powerful gentry family, now fittingly commemorated by the chapel at Tong and the splendours of Haddon Hall. The Vernon arms were argent fretty sable. 


@@@@@


doc= 71958


Joan Elizabeth Curran, Lady Curran (1916-1999)], daughter of Charles William Strothers, an optician, and his wife, Margaret Beatrice, 'nee' Millington. Joan was born in Swansea on 26 February 1916, and was educated at Swansea Girls' High School before entering Newnham College, Cambridge, with an open scholarship in 1934. Encouraged by her Newnham tutor A. C. Davies, she joined the Cavendish Laboratory after graduation in 1937. It was said of her that 'she had the scientific equivalent of gardening green fingers', and 'had the reputation of extreme dexterity and being outstandingly neat and skilful in the deployment of equipment' ('Independent', 19 Feb 1999). 


@@@@@


doc= 72003


(Alice) Marjorie Sherlock (1891-1973), artist, was born at Fir Tree Cottage, George Lane, Wanstead, Essex, on 3 February 1891, daughter of Henry Alexander George Sherlock, a civil engineer, and Alice Mary Sherlock, 'nee' Platts. She came into Sickert's orbit during the First World War, when she studied at the Westminster Technical Institute as a pupil of Sickert and of Harold Gilman. A woman of distinct and forceful character, she married in 1918 -- and later divorced -- her first cousin, Major Wilfrid Kenyon Tufnell Barrett (1897-1975). She lived the last thirty years of her life in an isolated rambling house near Ottery St Mary in Devon. There she carried on working to a rigorous routine and managed to live on a meagre income by making her own clothes and growing her own vegetables. 


