@@@@@


doc= 7411


Emanuel de Critz (1608-1665) was the youngest son of John de Critz and his English first wife, Helen. At the restoration of Charles II in 1660 he was among the first to seek recompense for loss of royal earnings during the Commonwealth, but from the state papers it is clear that he never became serjeant-painter, although it is often assumed that he did. When Charles I's art treasures were dispersed in 1649-51 he made strenuous but largely unsuccessful attempts to buy many of them. At some point he moved to the parish of St Margaret, Westminster, where he succumbed to the great plague of 1665. 'Mr Emannewell Decreets' was buried there that year on 2 November. There is no consensus about works to be attributed to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7412


John de Critz the younger (d. 1642x5) was the eldest son of John de Critz, who in 1610 had paid to ensure him the office of serjeant-painter after his own death. In fact the son never succeeded to the office: his father was buried on 14 March 1642 and he was sworn in four days later, but civil war broke out in August and he soon joined Charles I at Oxford and lost his life. He may have helped his father during his long career, but there is no substantial evidence of this. 


@@@@@


doc= 7413


Critz, John de, the elder (d. 1642), serjeant-painter, was a son of Troilus de Critz (died 1582), a broker of Antwerp, and his wife, Sara (died 1590), the daughter of Jacob van Meteren of Breda, a printer, and Ottilia Ortels, a relative of the cartographer Abraham Ortelius, whose family had moved to Antwerp from Augsburg. His parents were granted the right of denization in England in 1552, perhaps indicating that they had arrived somewhat earlier to establish their credentials. The only evidence about their family is in a few ambiguously worded aliens' returns of dubious accuracy -- probably because of language difficulties and misunderstandings between English assessors and foreign-born immigrants. The first return, dated 1568, lists Troilus and Sara and five children, Susan (Susanna), Oliver, John, Sara, and Magdalen, who must have been born in England. Returns of 1571 show that the sons were apprenticed, to an immigrant merchant and painter respectively, and lodged with them in the customary manner. John appears to have completed four years of his service with the immigrant painter Lucas de Heere in the parish of St Benet Fink. His parents, living in the parish of St Mary Staining, near Cripplegate, were now 'of the Englishe churche', not the Dutch -- thoroughly assimilated. Troilus was buried at St Andrew Undershaft in 1582 and Sara in 1590. 
In the 1580s and 1590s ministers sometimes recruited foreign-born residents in London to revisit the continent as couriers of official letters. One was John de Critz, who in the 1580s enjoyed the patronage of Sir Francis Walsingham. In 1582 he was in Paris, and three letters from him to the secretary of state survive (quoted in 'DNB' and Edmond, 47). In the third, dated 14 October, he says he is thinking of spending the winter in France and then, if Walsingham agrees, going on to Italy. It is not known whether he did so. That he was in Paris again several times between 1583 and 1588 is evident from fees noted in the accounts of the treasurer of the chamber. There is only one known portrait type of Walsingham (died 1590), and de Critz may well have been responsible for the unsigned likenesses of his former patron. No signed portraits commonly attributed to de Critz survive: a few manuscripts show that he wrote his 'de' with a small letter, not a capital as supposed hitherto. 
Portraits of Robert Cecil also seem to be confined to one face pattern, with de Critz probably the 'purveyor' or provider (Strong, 'Tudor and Jacobean Portraits', 273-5). Cecil was a small and slightly deformed man (Queen Elizabeth sometimes called him her 'elf'). He was understandably sensitive about his appearance and ensured that only a carefully edited image was circulated. A bill of 1607 from de Critz to Cecil (since 1605 earl of Salisbury) includes a charge of $4 each for 'making' five 'pictures' (Cecil papers, Box U/81, Hatfield House, Hertfordshire). One was given to the constable of Castile, one was for Lady Elizabeth Guildford, one for Sir Henry Wotton, ambassador at Venice, and two were given to the French ambassador in London -- one of Cecil, the other of his father, Lord Burghley. It has been assumed that de Critz was producing 'his standard three-quarter length portrait of Robert Cecil', of which a version at Hatfield House measures 35 by 27 inches. Salisbury, approving payment in his fluent hand at the bottom, writes 'pay this byll so farr', implying that there were more to come: de Critz's signed receipt is dated 16 October. (Some orders from less exalted men may have been copies.) 
For some time there had been much intermarrying within the protestant artistic community in London, immigrants 'for religion' from France and the Spanish Netherlands. The complexities, as set out in Edmond, in particular in the pedigree, show the importance of the marriages of de Critz's sisters Susanna and Magdalen (which he probably promoted). In 1571 Susanna became the second wife of Marcus Gheeraerts the elder, a widower who had arrived from Bruges with his young son Marcus Gheeraerts the younger. The boy later became the most fashionable portrait painter of his day and in 1590 married de Critz's sister Magdalen, becoming his stepmother's brother-in-law. Marcus Gheeraerts the elder and Susanna had two surviving daughters -- here correctly identified as de Critz's nieces -- Sara, who became the second wife of the miniaturist Isaac Oliver in 1602 but died in 1605, and Susanna (called after her mother), who in 1604 was married to Maximilian Colt, a sculptor, of a French family from Arras. He and de Critz became close colleagues at court. 
De Critz's main importance was as serjeant-painter, a court appointment to James I from his accession in 1603, and then to his son Charles I until his death in 1642. After the death of his predecessor, Leonard Fryer, in 1605, and the appointment of Robert Peake as portrait painter to the short-lived Prince Henry, heir to the throne, de Critz formally achieved his goal, becoming the sovereign's sole serjeant-painter for life. The word serjeant, as used in de Critz's case, then prefixed the titles of heads of some specific departments within the royal household. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries portrait painters were usually called picturemakers, or variants of this; the word painter was generally used for men who used paint to embellish surfaces of all objects, sizes, and descriptions, and often made of wood or stone. De Critz and his men worked, not only in London, embellishing objects from garden seats, royal barges, ships, and road vehicles to 'dials' and interiors of palaces, the last involving much gilding and use of 'rich colours'. Horace Walpole was surely right in concluding that de Critz's life could be better traced 'from office-books [the office of works accounts] than from his works or his reputation' (Walpole, 2.15; see also Edmond, 162-74). There he appears repeatedly but never as a painter in the sense of portrait painter. 
In 1606 Colt and de Critz were given a commission of prime importance, to complete the great tomb of Elizabeth I in the Henry VII chapel at Westminster Abbey. Colt is presumed to have been recommended by Lord Salisbury, by whom he was employed at Hatfield House, and received an initial contract of $600 for carving the stone (very much higher than supposed earlier) and further payments later, the work to be completed by 1607. De Critz received $100 for painting the stonework. Nicholas Hilliard sought the stone-painting commission, but ruefully reported to Salisbury that de Critz had told him the task was his responsibility 'within the Patent' -- as Hilliard put it (letter, 1606, Hatfield House, CP 119/8). This supports the present assessment of the serjeant-painter's full-time court responsibilities. A fine full-length portrait of James I, shown at the Tate Gallery exhibition 'Dynasties' (1995, catalogue no. 125), was there tentatively dated 'c'.1606 and attributed to John de Critz. This would not have been within his patent, and attribution to the admired portrait painter Marcus Gheeraerts the younger would surely have been more appropriate (see Edmond, 137-8). 
John de Critz married three times and had sixteen children in all. His first wife, Helen Bower, was English and of a wealthy City family called Woodcock; dates and places of marriage and baptisms of the first four children are unknown -- the family was probably living in the parish of St Sepulchre without Newgate, of which early registers were lost in the great fire of London. From 1607 they appear in the neighbouring parish of St Andrew, Holborn, where they remained for thirty years, living at the north end of Shoe Lane, which links Holborn to Fleet Street. The last three baptisms were of Thomas (1607), Emanuel ['see below'] (1608), and a short-lived Elizabeth. Their English mother was buried on 4 April 1609, and on 14 May de Critz married a widow and mother of painters, Sara de Neve. She and John had four children. Sara died in 1618, and about 1621 de Critz married Grace Palmes of Hampshire (who was probably English) and fathered his last five children. In 1637 the family moved to the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, where de Critz, a wealthy man now 'sick and full of yeares', died in 1642 and his widow in 1648: both had expensive funerals and were buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields, John de Critz on 14 March 1642. His will opens with the resounding words 'I John Decretts Esquire Serjeant Paynter to our Soveraigne lord king Charles' -- underlining his pride in his long-standing court appointment. 






@@@@@


doc= 7414


Decuman (fl. 6th cent.), holy man, is the patron of St Decumans, Watchet, Somerset, and of Rhoscrowther (Llanddegyman), Pembrokeshire. The earliest record of him is the Welsh martyrology in BL, Cotton MS Vespasian A.XIV ('c'.1175-1200), recording the feast of 'St Decumannus confessor' for 30 August, and he occurs in later medieval calendars from Muchelney Abbey and Wells Cathedral as 'martyr'. A very late and brief 'Vita sancti Decumani', composed in the fifteenth or early sixteenth century, probably at Wells or Muchelney, describes his alleged origin 'of illustrious stock' in west Wales and his journey over the Bristol Channel on a makeshift raft, alighting near Dunster Castle. Establishing himself as a hermit at a suitably isolated location (Watchet) and being fed milk daily by a cow, he is eventually beheaded by a pagan, but his decapitated body carries the head to a nearby fountain, probably St Decuman's Well near the present church. Of his dedications in Wales, Rhoscrowther was the senior: about 900 it was the main church of the cantref of Penfro and was accordingly considered one of the 'bishop-houses' of Dyfed. His cult is also linked to the churches at Pwllcrochan (also in Penfro) and Llanfihangel Cwm Du in Brecknockshire. In the west country his original church at Watchet was probably located near Dawes Castle (perhaps the site of the Alfredian 'burh') but was moved across the Washford River to the present site before the thirteenth century. Decuman's cult also penetrated Cornwall, perhaps being associated with that of St Petroc, as reflected in Degibma (in Wendron parish) and Decon Downs. Some calendars place his feast day at 27 August. The tradition that he was killed in 706 is probably no earlier than the seventeenth century in origin. 


@@@@@


doc= 7415


Dee, Arthur (1579-1651), physician and writer on alchemy, was born on 13 July 1579 at Mortlake, Surrey, the eldest son of the mathematician and astrologer John Dee (1527-1609) and his second wife, Jane (1555-1605), daughter of Bartholomew Fromonds or Fromond. From 1583 until 1589 he accompanied his father on his travels to Poland and Bohemia; his early initiation into the hermetic sciences and alchemical projection influenced the course of his life. In May 1592 he was placed under the tuition of Edward Grant and William Camden, successive headmasters at Westminster School, and then possibly studied at St Mary's Hall, Oxford, but without taking a degree. 
In June 1600 Dee went to Manchester with his father, who assumed the wardenship of Christ's College; Arthur Dee was granted the clerkship of the collegiate church in December. During his time in Manchester Dee began practising medicine. In 1602 he married Isabella (1583-1634), daughter of Edward Prestwich, a Manchester JP. Several of their thirteen children (seven sons and six daughters) were baptized in Manchester. Shortly after his mother died of the plague in March 1605, his father retired to Mortlake, while Dee settled in London. 
At Manchester, Dee had apparently become acquainted with the mathematician Thomas Harriot, who in June 1602 gave him a manuscript by his father's pupil Benjamin Lock, comprising a commentary on John Dee's 'Compound of Alchemy' (1591). In London he kept the company of a number of unorthodox medical practitioners, astrologers, and alchemists; among his acquaintances were John Woodall, Francis Anthony, Timothy Willis, and Richard Napier. He was well versed in medical astrology. Between April 1606 and October 1612 he was repeatedly summoned by the College of Physicians for advertising medicines and practising illicitly; in February 1614 he showed the censors his doctoral letters patent of 4 May 1609 from the University of Basel, attesting his linguistic proficiency in German, French, Hungarian, and Polish. By May 1615 he was physician to Queen Anne, James I's wife, having declined a post in July 1614 at Thomas Sutton's newly founded Charterhouse Hospital. 
Dee was appointed chief physician by royal recommendation to Tsar Michael Romanov, arriving at Moscow in the autumn of 1621. He received a generous salary, many gifts, and a large house from the tsar, who valued his skill, learning, and practical abilities. He translated for the tsar the notes from his father's 'angelic conversations', as 'Divers Curious Narrations of John Dee', anticipating by four years the execution of Mary, queen of Scots, and the Spanish armada's defeat. On leave in England in December 1626 he recruited, at the tsar's request, John Martin, a jeweller, for the silver chancery, and John Gilbert, chief engraver to the royal mint, as a mining expert and metallurgist, and he arranged for the Society of Apothecaries to supply the Russian court with regular consignments of medicines. Dee's mercantile activities were facilitated by his membership of the Mercers' Company (from 1605) and, with two sons-in-law, of the Muscovy Company. John Dee's characterization of his son Arthur to Camden in 1592 as 'of an exceding great and hauty mynd naturally, ready to revendge rashly' (BL, Cotton MS Julius C.v, art. 41) is borne out by a servant's testimony that, following a heated quarrel at a Moscow supper in 1633, 'Docr Dee did in a great rage take upp his knife from the table and with much furie and passion flung it outreight' (TNA: PRO, C 24/610/36, fols. 7-8) at his son-in-law Francis Glover, who ducked in time. 
Arthur Dee's wife died at Moscow on 24 July 1634. A year later he left Russia to take up the appointment on 13 November 1635 of physician-extraordinary to Charles I. This was mediated by his friend Sir Theodore Mayerne. He still held this post in 1641. 
By his own testimony Dee devoted most of his Russian leisure time to alchemical literature, resulting in his compilation of alchemical writings, 'Fasciculus chemicus, abstrusae hermeticae scientiae ingressum', with the preface dated Moscow, March 1629. While on leave he obtained a pass, in June 1629, from England to France, presumably to negotiate the book's publication by Nicholas de la Vigne (Paris, 1631). The 'Fasciculus chemicus' is unusual in that it consists of quotations selected from alchemical authors to form ten short chapters, arranged in the exact order of the operations required to produce the philosopher's stone. Each chapter is summarized by a 'Corollary', and twenty-one 'Observanda' offer general advice at the end. Identification of the sources reveals that Dee would have needed direct access to only fifteen books and two or three manuscripts in order to compile his 'opus'. The preface of another edition, dating from 1631, is addressed to the Rosicrucian fraternity. A presentation copy with an additional handwritten title-page displaying alchemical symbols, and inscribed to John Winthrop jun., the first governor of Connecticut, is also extant. Elias Ashmole, under the anagram James Hassolle, made a translation of Dee's work which was published in May 1650 by Richard Mynne as 'Fasciculus chemicus, or, Chymical Collections'. A revised, unpublished edition of this work is entitled 'Arca arcanorum, abstrusae hermeticae scientiae' (BL, Sloane MS 1876). Its preface (dated Moscow, 10 August 1634) contains a new dedication to the Bodleian Library (Dee was related to Thomas Bodley). A supplementary title-page depicts hand-coloured symbols, and there are fourteen completely new and informative 'Observanda'. 
According to the 'Arca arcanorum', Dee had extracted 2 lb of 'prima materia' from ore brought back to him in May 1618 by the Hungarian Johannes Banfi Hunyades who performed chemical operations at Gresham College. Dee planned to travel to Hungary in 1646 with Hunyades as his operator, but Hunyades died at Amsterdam before he could join him. At about this time Dee moved to Norwich. John Aubrey, whose grandfather William was John Dee's cousin, relays a local man's remarks that Dee 'was a man of very pleasant conversation and had good practice in Norwich: a great acquaintance of Dr Browne's' ('Brief Lives', 1.210). Sir Thomas Browne, a literary exponent of the occult philosophy followed by the Dees, wrote to Elias Ashmole on 25 January 1659 that Arthur Dee had 'seen [alchemical] projection made', and had confirmed 'with the highest asseverations... unto his death that hee had ocularly, undeceavably & frequently beheld it in Bohemia' ('Elias Ashmole', 2.755). Dee died at Norwich towards the end of September 1651 and was buried at St George Tombland's Church, near Norwich Cathedral. Somewhat overshadowed by his father, Arthur Dee emerges as a fine hermetic philosopher and alchemist, in the Rosicrucian tradition, whose writings have exercised considerable influence. 


@@@@@


doc= 7416


Dee, Duncan (1657-1720), lawyer, was born on 3 November 1657, a younger son of Rowland Dee (1613-1687), London merchant, and his wife, Jane (died 'c'.1698), and a grandson of Arthur Dee, physician to Charles I. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School (1672-3), and went thence in 1673 to St John's College, Oxford. It does not appear that he graduated. He married Mary Everard at St Dionis Backchurch, London, on 4 July 1682 and in the same year was called to the bar at the Inner Temple. He was a common pleader of the City of London (1682-90), a judge of the sheriff's court (1690-1700), and common serjeant of the City of London from 1700 until he died. He was also commissioner of appeals in the excise in 1713-14. Dee defended Dr Sacheverell in his trial before the House of Lords in 1710, speaking on four successive days. He lived in the parish of St Mary Aldermanbury from at least 1684 -- he and his wife had eight children baptized in the parish church between 1684 and 1696. Dee died in 1720, and was buried on 8 June next to his son Duncan in the great vault in St Mary Aldermanbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 7417


Dee, Francis (d. 1638), bishop of Peterborough, was born in London, the eldest son of David Dee and Marcia Roper, who had been licensed to marry on 8 February 1578. A native of Shropshire, David Dee had graduated from Oxford in 1568; he was vicar of Sherborne, Dorset, from 1580 and rector of St Bartholomew-the-Great, London, from 1587 until he was deprived in 1605. Francis was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1591 until 1596, when he won a Billingsley scholarship at St John's College, Cambridge, where a conformist style of divinity was developing. He graduated BA in 1600, was ordained a priest on 1 May 1602, proceeded MA in 1603, and became a fellow of St John's. Within a few years Dee married Susan le Poreque; they had two children, Adrian ('b'. 1 December 1606, died 1638) and Mary. The dean (Thomas Neville) and chapter of Canterbury appointed him on 31 January 1607 rector of Holy Trinity-the-Less, Knightrider Street, London, which he resigned in 1620; and on 5 April 1615 of All Hallows, Lombard Street, which he resigned in 1634. He proceeded BD in 1610 and DD in 1617. In 1618 he rose to the chancellorship of Salisbury Cathedral, which he held until 1634, and about 1621-2 he held the living of Sutton-at-Hone, Kent, through the patronage of the dean (Godfrey Goodman) and chapter of Rochester. 
In 1629 Dee was chaplain to the English ambassador in Paris and passed to Bishop William Laud a petition from an Englishman imprisoned in the Bastille. In the following year his name appears as one of the founders of Sion College, and on 30 April he became dean of Chichester; he was more assiduous than his predecessors in disciplining the cathedral clergy, and two absentee vicars were forced to resign. Dee was nominated in September 1633 for an anticipated vacancy of the see of Gloucester, but when Bishop Goodman decided not to move he was elevated instead to Peterborough through the influence of Archbishop Laud, who (assisted by Bishop Juxon) carried out the consecration at Lambeth on 18 May 1634. As bishop Dee contributed to a series of Lenten lectures at court. On the death of his first wife he married Elizabeth Winter, who survived him; they did not have children. 
By 1634 Dee had evolved into the Laudian prelate 'par excellence'. His project was to replace the word-centred piety of the Jacobeans with one which emphasized the necessity of uniform worship and aesthetic, ceremonialized sacraments dominated by the altar. His primary visitation articles were the first episcopal set yet found (Samuel Clarke had done this for the archdeaconry of Derby in 1630) to stipulate the railing-in of communion tables at the east end of the chancel; this insistence even predated the archbishop's own visitation of 1635. Dee's visitation sermon was preached by the zealot Peter Hausted, curate to Laud's chaplain, and in the same year Dee co-operated with Laud's prosecution of Charles Chauncy's resistance to the altar policy. The regime at Peterborough provoked loud opposition and in 1636 the popular Kettering lecture was abolished. Aware of the need to placate moderate opinion, the bishop contacted the influential moderate puritan Edward, Lord Montagu, eschewing responsibility for this act and claiming to have been a regular preacher himself since 1603. However, his deputies continued to harass the crucial Northampton lecture. 
Renewing the drive for conformity in 1637 Dee used the canonical church survey to enforce liturgical practice -- the creation of railed, east-end altars and the full Laudian communion in which the priest administered the communion from within the rails to the clergy and laity, who received theirs kneeling. A whole raft of other orders altered the arrangement of parish churches to accommodate the new altar-focused worship, enforced the use of silver communion vessels, promoted the notion of the material church as holy, and even sought to revive the pre-Reformation practice of confession. Dee's friend John Pocklington published apologetic works defending altars and the anti-sabbatarianism of the 'Book of Sports' (enjoined by the bishop in 1633), but Dee still thought it necessary to mollify the moderates, so Edward Reynolds was employed to exhort conscientious waverers to sideline their objections and conform. 
Owing primarily to government support and the unusual zeal of his deputies, Sibthorpe and Clarke, Dee achieved a degree of formal conformity and silenced the more vocal opposition, although his report to Laud in 1637 that only three lectures remained in the diocese was hopelessly optimistic. However, he did not live to witness the explosion of resentment which was the consequence of his policies. He died at his bishop's palace on 8 October 1638 and was buried on 12 October close to his throne in the cathedral. By his will he founded two fellowships at St John's and two scholarships for pupils from Merchant Taylors' or Peterborough schools; to the college chapel he bequeathed his library and a gilt communion service. Other beneficiaries included John Towers who, as his successor, was even more draconian. 


@@@@@


doc= 7418


Dee, John (1527-1609), mathematician, astrologer, and antiquary, was born on 13 July 1527 in London, the only child of Rowland Dee and his wife, Joan or Joanna (1508/9-1580), daughter of William Wild. 
The Dee family was Welsh and there exist three pedigrees, two of which are heavily annotated by John Dee and are perhaps based on information supplied to him by his cousin Lewis ap Howell Dee in 1567. There he describes his father as 'antesignanus dapiferorum' ('chief sewer') to Henry VIII. Rowland Dee was later a merchant and was admitted to the Mercers' Company of London in 1536. He does not seem to have been a prominent member of the company, and apart from the fact that he was excluded from the pardon issued to those who had taken part in Wyatt's rebellion in 1554 (but was later none the less pardoned), little is known of him; his son does not record his death. The pedigrees, which trace Dee's ancestry through the Lord Rhys (Rhys ap Gruffudd) to Rhodri Mawr and Coel Hen, are unlikely to be accurate for more than three or four generations back. His mother owned houses and land in Mortlake which were surrendered to her son in 1579, and it is possible that her family originated there. 
Dee was educated at Chelmsford grammar school, and entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1542, where he claimed to have studied for up to eighteen hours a day. In 1546 he was elected a fellow and under-reader in Greek at the newly founded Trinity College, and he received his MA in 1548. He is normally styled Doctor Dee, but his only claim to this title seems to be his receiving a doctorate of medicine from the University of Prague in 1584 or 1585. John Chamberlain refers to him as Dr Dee in 1599, and this usage seems to have become accepted after Dee's death. 
The date of Dee's first marriage, to Katherine, widow of Thomas Constable, a London grocer with whom he had been in some way associated as early as 1558, is unknown but probably took place in 1565 or 1566, after his return from his third continental journey, and his settling at Mortlake. There were no children of this marriage, and Katherine Dee died in 1575; her burial coincided with a visit by the queen to Mortlake. Dee married for a second time, on 5 February 1578; his new wife was Jane Fromond or Fromonds (1555-1605), daughter of Bartholomew Fromonds of Cheam, Surrey. (In Dee's diary his wife's name is always Fromonds; elsewhere it appears as Fromond.) There were eight children of this marriage, though only Arthur Dee (1579-1651) and Katherine ('b'. 1581) seem to have survived their father. 
Dee made his first visit to the continent shortly after his election to Trinity College. His own account of his early travels is contained within the 'Compendious rehearsal' which he prepared for the queen's commissioners in 1592 and revised in 1594. This document, supported by written evidence displayed at the time, was designed to emphasize his services to the state, and, though rhetorical in tone, is accurate in detail. He also made personal entries in printed volumes of ephemerides, though apart from a few entries copied by Elias Ashmole the early volumes have perished. Two volumes, from which J. O. Halliwell published Dee's notes as his 'Diary' (1842), are Joannes Stadius's 'Ephemerides novae ab anno 1554 usque ad annum 1600' (1570) and Joannes Antonius Maginus's 'Ephemerides coelestium motuum ad annos XL' (1582), both in the Bodleian Library. Dee himself normally followed the practice of these works in reckoning the year as beginning on 1 January. The chronological framework is confirmed by Dee's notes of ownership in many of his books. 
Dee recorded that he visited the Southern Netherlands in May 1547 'to speake and conferr with some learned men, and chiefly mathematicians' ('Compendious rehearsal', ed. Hearne, 500-01), whom he names as Gemma Frisius, Gerardus Mercator, Gaspar a Mirica, and Antonio Gogava. He returned to Cambridge after a few months, bearing mathematical instruments designed by Gemma and Mercator which were later presented to the college. His only recorded academic achievement at Trinity was a production of Aristophanes' 'Pax' in which Trygaeus rode up to the roof of the college hall upon a scarab beetle. This early use of stage machinery caused by his own account 'great wondring' and, combined with his interest in the animation of statues and in mechanical toys, contributed to his enduring (though to him highly unwelcome) reputation as a conjuror. 
Dee's return to the Southern Netherlands in the following year may be connected both with his own dissatisfaction with the state of mathematical learning in England and with proposed curricular changes, favouring mathematics, at Cambridge. He may have been sent by a patron: Sir William Pickering proved to be such in 1549. Dee entered the University of Louvain on 24 June 1548, continuing the studies that he had begun in the previous year, which included mathematics, geography, astrology, astronomical observation, and 'for recreation' civil law. His presence in both Louvain and Antwerp is attested by inscriptions in his growing library. He left Louvain on 15 July 1550, without receiving any further degree, and five days later arrived in Paris. Rheims College was the scene of his lecturing upon Euclid's 'Elements', 'Mathematice, Physice, & Pythagorice', to a vast and eager audience. He also relates that he refused the offer of a professorship of mathematics in the University of Paris at a salary of 200 crowns. 
Dee returned to England at the end of 1551 and was so well commended to Edward VI by Sir William Cecil and Sir John Cheke that the king granted him an annual pension of 100 crowns, which was commuted into the rectory of Upton upon Severn, Worcestershire, in May 1553, an income which was later augmented with the rectory of Long Leadenham, Lincolnshire. In 1552 he entered into the service of the earl of Pembroke, and later into that of the duke of Northumberland, to whose son, John, earl of Warwick, he seems to have acted as tutor, and of whose aptitude he later spoke with unusual warmth. 
With the accession of Queen Mary in 1553 the Dudleys fell from power; Northumberland was executed in 1553, and Warwick died in 1554. Dee then resorted to the teaching of mathematics in London, but declined an invitation in 1554 from Richard Bruern and Richard Smith to read the mathematical sciences at Oxford; notes in his books show that he was in Oxford in April of that year, and may have acquired his first recorded pupil, Christopher Carye, there. He was in London in the following year, and was admitted by patrimony to the Mercers' Company, thus gaining access to merchants, such as Sir Lionel Duckett and the Loks, who were to make use of his mathematical and navigational skills in trading ventures such as the Russia Company, and in the quest for the north-east and north-west passages. 
In May 1555 Dee was arrested on the order of the privy council, together with John Feild (another teacher of mathematics, to whose 'Ephemeris' for 1557 he contributed a preface), Sir Thomas Benger, auditor to Princess Elizabeth (and from 1561 her master of the revels), and Christopher Carye who had graduated from Oxford. Their accusers were George Ferrers and John Prideaux, and the charge seems in the first place to have been that of calculating the nativities of the king, the queen, and the Princess Elizabeth, and only later of conjuring and witchcraft. When, immediately upon the accusation, one of Ferrers's children died and a second was stricken with blindness, there were rumours of a familiar spirit. Dee later summed up the charges as 'magic' or conspiring 'by enchantments to destroy Queen Mary' ('Compendious rehearsal', ed. Hearne, 520). But Ferrers, like Dee, had been involved in theatrical displays, and the antagonism may have originated there. After examination by the lord chief justice of the court of common pleas, they were released on 19 August, Dee into the custody of Edmund Bonner, bishop of London, for enquiry into his religion. He was imprisoned for a while with Barthlet Green, who was burned in 1556, but unlike Green he convinced Bonner of his orthodoxy, and his fate was quite different; a note in one of his books reveals that he was in the house of his 'singularis amicus' ('very good friend') the bishop, at Fulham, by the end of the year. This privileged and assured position is confirmed by John Foxe in the earlier editions of the 'Acts and Monuments', where Dee is named as Bonner's chaplain during the examination of John Philpot on 19 November 1556. Foxe also records Bonner's indignation that Philpot had called his chaplain 'a great conjurer' (J. Foxe, 'Acts and Monuments'). 
By this time, Dee's unusually positive response to Copernicus's new astronomical system was evident; his preface to Feild's 'Ephemeris', dated 3 July 1556, included lavish praise of Copernicus. Two copies of Copernicus's 'De revolutionibus' (1543) were early in his library. There is evidence from his notebooks that at this time he was also reading alchemical books, though there is no record of any alchemical practices at this stage. 
In 1558 Dee published his first significant work in natural philosophy, 'Propaideumata aphoristica' (2nd edn, 1568). The book brought together two of his long-standing interests, for it consists of a series of propositions in astrological physics. According to one commentator, N. H. Clulee (1988), the propositions set out a naturalistic causality that is constant and uniform, as well as a mathematical method of studying the operation of this causality. All this is informed by a strong commitment to astrology, a belief in the real and natural influence of the heavenly bodies upon terrestrial affairs. 
At about this time, Dee also made a brief list of his library, and suffered an illness which caused him to name the Portuguese geographer Pedro Nunes as his heir. On the accession of Queen Elizabeth in November 1558, Dee's Cambridge connections and the favour of the Dudleys eased for him the transition to a protestant regime, and Robert Dudley, later earl of Leicester, sought his astrological advice upon a propitious day for the coronation. Introduction to the royal presence by Dudley and by another former patron, William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, secured for Dee the first of many, if mostly vain, promises of favour from the queen: 'where my brother hath given him a crown I will give him a noble' ('Compendious rehearsal', ed. Hearne, 509). He was also promised the mastership of the hospital of St Katharine by the Tower; this went eventually to Dr Thomas Wilson. 
Dee's adherence to Bonner may well have made him enemies, and little is known of his activities before the end of 1562, though notes in books suggest that he may have travelled in search of manuscripts. In his 'Supplication' to Queen Mary of 1556 and the accompanying 'Articles concerning the recovery and preservation of ancient monuments and old excellent writers' he had called for a national effort for the recovery of dispersed manuscripts. It may therefore be significant evidence of animosity towards him that, although Archbishop Matthew Parker and his circle were engaged in just such a recovery of manuscripts as he had advocated, and may have been influenced by his programme, they seem to have been unaware of his own collection. At the end of 1562 he went abroad, evidently with the knowledge and approval of Sir William Cecil. A letter to Cecil from Antwerp on 16 February 1563 seeks approval for his remaining abroad, and recounts his copying of a manuscript version of Trithemius's 'Steganographia' (a work which remained unprinted until 1606). 
Cecil's support is further indicated by a certificate he issued in May 1563 testifying that Dee's time abroad had been well spent. In April Dee visited Conrad Gesner at Zurich, and went on to cross the Alps into Italy. In May he was in Padua, in June in Venice, and in July in Rome. A meeting with the mathematician Federigo Commandino at Urbino led ultimately to his joint publication with Commandino of the 'De superficierum divisionibus' of Machometus Bagdedinus (Pesaro, 1570) from a manuscript copy made by Dee in 1559. He was present at the coronation of Maximilian II as king of Hungary at Pressburg (Bratislava) in September 1563, and it was to Maximilian that his 'Monas Hieroglyphica', printed by Gulielmus Silvius at Antwerp, was dedicated on 14 February 1564. A number of book purchases attest his presence in Antwerp until June, when he escorted Elizabeth Brooke, marchioness of Northampton (1526-1565), from Antwerp to London. The 'Monas', written as Dee claimed in twelve days, is an explication in twenty-four theorems of the symbol of the Monas, a sign which had already appeared on the title-page of the 'Propaideumata aphoristica' in 1558. For Dee it was a powerful symbol both of creation and of the unity of the sciences. He was permitted to expound the work to Queen Elizabeth on his return. 
Dee, who had been living in London before his travels of 1562-4, now settled at Mortlake in Surrey, only a short distance from the royal residence at Richmond. He was there by September 1566, by which time he was probably already married. The substantial buildings he acquired enabled him both to assemble his extensive and still growing library and to commence the practice of alchemy. Both required financial resources, and he was constantly soliciting preferment, notably the provostship of Eton College. None of these attempts was successful -- he made it clear that he did not wish to have a cure of souls -- though he was granted dispensations by archbishops Parker and Grindal to hold his two rectories. There is no record that he resided at either, though a now vanished inscription once recorded his presence at Long Leadenham. 
The period from his settling in Mortlake about 1565 to his departure for Poland in 1583 was the most prosperous and productive of Dee's life, and the various strands of his activity are intertwined with some complexity. Mathematics remained his most visible interest, though his teaching of the subject must have been interrupted by his continental journey of 1562-4, and the move to Mortlake no doubt entailed the residence there of his students. The first of many editions by Dee (sixteen survive up to 1607) of Robert Recorde's 'Ground of Arts' was published in 1561, though the fact that he lists no copy in his own library suggests that he regarded it as an elementary textbook. His pupil Christopher Carye died in 1563 or 1564, and the only other early recorded pupil is Thomas Digges, to whom he passed a copy of Archimedes in 1559. 
The most influential of all Dee's published works was his 'Mathematicall praeface' to Henry Billingsley's English translation of Euclid, 'Elements of Geometrie', printed by John Daye in 1570. The preface is firstly a long encomium of the study of 'thynges mathematicall' as partaking both of the supernatural and of the natural, and of geometry in particular. He goes on to enumerate the practical arts (proper to 'mechanicians') which derive from mathematics, and under one of the last of these, 'thaumaturgike', exculpates himself with some passion from the charge of conjuring. He also defends the use of the vernacular, as not encroaching on the rights of the universities. His concept of 'Archemastrie', which 'procedeth by Experiences' (J. Dee, 'Mathematicall praeface', H. Billingsley, 'Elements of Geometrie', 1570), has been seen by some as foreshadowing the experimental science of the next century, but he also hints at magical interests and practices under this very heading. In general the 'Praeface' is now seen as a retrospective view of his own practice and teaching after his return to England in 1551, but the interest in magic, and possibly in skrying (seeing, or conversing with, spirits), may be a development of the late 1560s. 
As a result of his move to Mortlake Dee had more space for the practice of alchemy, and in 1571 he travelled into the duchy of Lorraine to furnish his laboratories (he had three by 1583), bringing back a great cartload of specially made vessels. An inscription in a book shows that he was also in Paris on 31 May. He fell seriously ill on his return, and later recorded it as a mark of royal favour that the queen sent to him two of her physicians, Dr Apsloo (Edward Atslowe) and Mr Balthrop. In November 1572 a supernova appeared in the constellation of Cassiopeia. Dee seems to have concluded that the 'blazing star' was located in the region of the fixed stars, where Aristotelian doctrine taught that nothing might change. The event occasioned many treatises, among them Thomas Digges's 'Alae seu scalae mathematicae' of 1573, and Dee's own 'Parallaticae commentationis praxeosque nucleus quidam'. The two tracts refer to one another, and often survive bound together. Nevertheless, as an inscription in his copy of Manilius's 'Astronomica' shows, the event portended for him the finding of a great treasure or of the philosopher's stone, and quests for gold and silver, whether deliberately buried, to be mined or created by projection, underlay much of his involvement in discovery in the New World, in alchemical pursuits, and ultimately in the 'angelic conversations' with Edward Kelley from 1582. Dee also had, according to his 'Diary', some rights in mining for silver in Devon. His astronomical skills were invoked in reassuring the court about the comet which appeared in 1577, and, more terrestrially, in calming fears about an image of the queen with a pin stuck in its breast, found in Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Dee had taken little part in the programme initiated by Archbishop Matthew Parker for the recovery of early English, and particularly Anglo-Saxon, manuscripts. He owned, and often annotated, copies of most of the antiquarian books that resulted from this movement, though with one possible exception, he had no Anglo-Saxon manuscript, and no copy of the Anglo-Saxon gospels printed in 1571. The annotations show that his antiquarian interests were strong, and moreover that he was developing an interest in British (that is Welsh) antiquities, and that this interest was stimulated by an awareness, well documented in his pedigrees, of his Welsh ancestry. In 1574 he undertook a tour of the marches from Chester to Hereford, which also took in some places in eastern Wales. His quest was for 'monuments', a term which embraced both antiquities and manuscripts. He saw some of the latter in the hands of Welsh owners, and may have copied some then, and acquired a few from the family of Sir John Prise (to whom he believed himself related) in Hereford. Some documents were rescued from a decayed chapel at Wigmore. 
Like Prise, Dee was a firm believer in the historicity of the 'British history' deriving from Geoffrey of Monmouth, and owned several Brut chronicles in English and Welsh (a language of which he had some reading knowledge and in which he owned several printed books). Arthur (after whom he named his first son) is a frequent subject of annotation in his books and manuscripts. He embroidered upon the British history, adding further realms to King Arthur's conquests, and also interested himself in the story of the voyage of Madog ab Owain Gwynedd to North America, and some of his notes show him seeking evidence for an early 'British' presence in the New World. From these dubious sources he derived not only his own role as a British gentleman, philosopher, and navigator, but also the titles of Queen Elizabeth to large parts of North America. 
Although Dee claimed, no doubt with justification, early acquaintance with navigators such as Richard and Nicholas Chancellor and Stephen and William Borough who were initiating trade with Russia and seeking a north-east passage to Cathay, precise evidence for his involvement is lacking. From about 1570, however, he emerges, both in manuscript and print, as the advocate of a policy for strengthening England politically and economically, and for imperial expansion into the New World. The first survivor of these manuscript tracts, 'Brytannicae reipublicae synopsis' (1570), perhaps a schematic digest of a larger work requested by Dee's friend and patron Edward Dyer, concerns itself with trade, ethics, and national strength. Six years later he began a much more ambitious project, 'The Brytish Monarchy', of which only the first part, 'General and Rare Memorials Pertaining to the Perfect Art of Navigation' (1577), achieved print, albeit in a limited edition. Another volume of great bulk was to consist of 'Queen Elizabeth's Tables Gubernautik', but has not survived; a third volume was destroyed, perhaps by its author, while a fourth, 'Of Famous and Rich Discoveries', remains only in Dee's now very imperfect manuscript. Concurrently with these writings Dee was producing another work, the 'Brytanici imperii limites' of 1576-8 (extant only in a manuscript by another hand). 
Dee was the first to use the term 'British Impire' (in the 'General and Rare Memorials' in English). The 'Limites' formed the basis of his 1577 declaration to the queen of her rights in the northern realms, based upon his reconstruction of Arthur's conquests (and in the next year, in a meeting with Daniel Rogers, the conquests of King Malgo were added to the imperial precedents). These rights were further set out in two great rolls presented to the queen and Burghley in October 1580. 
English expansion into the New World was supported by a range of motives, including a crudely economic greed for the gold which the Spanish and Portuguese had seized in southern America, and by the desire, both political and religious, to weaken those states. Dee's contribution was not only that of his writings, though the precedent of 'British' conquest was powerful. He also acted as an adviser on navigation to the three voyages of Martin Frobisher in 1576-7, evidently had a financial interest in them, and took some part in the assaying of the ore which Frobisher brought back in the mistaken belief that it was gold. 
In the following decade the pace of maritime discovery quickened and there were further calls upon Dee's navigational knowledge. The search for a north-east passage was renewed, and he was among those present at Muscovy House on 17 May 1580 when the intended voyage of Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman was discussed. He provided them with instructions. He was also consulted in July 1582 by Sir George Peckham about the title to Norombega, as the American Indians termed the area roughly covered by Massachusetts and Maine. Peckham had devised a scheme for settling English Catholics in North America, and was naturally concerned about the rights already conferred by the pope upon Spain and Portugal. Dee, assuring Peckham of the priority of Madog's voyage, was promised a generous estate in this new conquest. There was a further meeting with Peckham's men, Clement and David Ingram, in October, but the scheme came to nothing. 
More significant than either of these ventures was the initiation of another attempt to discover a north-west passage, with a visit on 23 January 1583 by Sir Francis Walsingham to Dee's house, where Adrian Gilbert, Sir Humphrey Gilbert's younger brother, was already present. The discussions continued on the following day at Robert Beale's house, and now involved John Davys, whom Dee had known since 1579 (and perhaps earlier), and who is thought to have owed much of his theoretical knowledge of navigation to Dee. Adrian Gilbert, Davys, and Dee were subsequently linked in a proposed 'Fellowshippe of New Navigations, Atlanticall and Septentrionall', but in a later draft of the proposal Dee's name was dropped in favour of that of Walter Ralegh. 
During this same period Dee was also involved in the debate over the calendar. By the bull 'Inter gravissimas' of 24 February 1582, Pope Gregory XIII introduced the reform of the calendar, the main effect of which was the loss of ten days. Dee was consulted, and delivered to Burghley on 26 February 1583 his 'Playne discourse... as concerning the needful reformation of the vulgar kalender for the civile yeres and daies accompting'. He recommended the excision of eleven rather than ten days. Harmonization with the Gregorian system was acceptable to him and to the secular authorities, but opposition from Archbishop Grindal and other bishops ensured that England retained the Julian reckoning until 1752. 
Dee had given some hints about magical practice in the 'Mathematicall praeface' of 1570, and these have been plausibly interpreted as 'divination by mirrors, crystals, gems, and other reflecting surfaces' (Clulee, 169). He possessed a number of such objects, such as the distorting mirror (inherited from Sir William Pickering) in which Queen Elizabeth viewed herself in 1575, and the black obsidian mirror and the crystal ball now in the British Museum. Since he was himself unable to see anything in these -- except on 25 May 1581 when 'I had sight in 'Chrystallo' offerd me, and I sawe' -- he employed a series of mediums. Although previous attempts had probably been made, the first recorded session was with Barnabas Saul on 22 December 1581; however, Saul was discredited by March 1582, and was supplanted by 'Mr Talbot', as Dee first knew Edward Kelley. 
Dee had seen the nova of 1572 as the augury of some great revelation, and this was realized for him on 10 March 1582, when sessions with Kelley as medium began. The records of the sessions, which ran from May 1583 to May 1587, with some later sessions also recorded, were published in 1659, long after Dee's death, by Meric Casaubon as 'A True & Faithful Relation of what Passed for Many Yeers between Dr. John Dee and some Spirits'. Attempts have been made to interpret these writings as the practice of cabbala or even as confidential diplomatic messages. The sessions evidently began with prayer and petitions, and the participants then waited until the medium could see something in the stone; it seems safest to regard them as exercises in crystallomancy. Dee usually records in full the prayer, in Latin or English, with which the action closed. 
The ultimate significance of these conversations is of two men linked in mutual dependence on forms of self-deceit: the one, Dee, was led by his own learning to a belief in the possibility of intercourse with a benevolent supernatural world and in the transmutation of baser metals into gold; the other, Kelley, drew upon Dee's learning and substance to feed, perhaps in all sincerity, what must ultimately be judged to be a delusion. As a private record the 'True & Faithful Relation' contains not only details of the sessions, but biographical notes supplanting those in the two series of ephemerides, from the time of Dee's departure for Poland to the parting from Kelley. The existence of the sessions must indeed have been known to Dee's contemporaries, since others than he and Kelley were involved, and the angels were at first questioned about the north-west passage, and on 26 March on Adrian Gilbert's task of converting the heathen. When Albrecht Laski, palatine of Sieradz in Poland, arrived in England and established close relations with Dee, he was admitted to the sessions and occasionally took part in them during the journey to Poland and afterwards. 
It is probable that Laski knew of Dee's fame as an alchemist through Philip Sidney, and that acquaintance with Dee was his principal motive in travelling to England. Laski arrived on 1 May 1583, and Dee met him on 13 May in Leicester's chambers at Greenwich, and again at Mortlake on 18 May. Laski returned in greater state to Mortlake in the queen's barge and in the company of Sidney, Lord Russell, and others on 15 June. His acquaintance with Dee was thus being fostered by the more aggressively protestant party at court, which may have seen in Laski, enriched by alchemical practice and reconverted to protestantism, a counterweight to Catholic and Habsburg power in Europe. Dee's entertainment of Laski was subsidized by the queen, and his departure with him was no doubt facilitated. The preoccupation with Laski and with angelic conversations drew Dee away from the planning of the north-west voyage, and the anger that this occasioned among his associates probably lay behind the raid upon his house and library after his departure for Poland. He made over his house to his brother-in-law Nicholas Fromonds, and had his library catalogued (making two fair copies of the catalogue himself) by 6 September. He selected about 800 of his books for the journey. 
The party which left Mortlake on 21 September 1583 consisted of Dee, his wife, their three children, Edward Kelley and his wife, Joan, and his stepchildren, and a retinue of servants. Although Dee took with him his copy of Stadius's 'Ephemerides' (one of the two sources of the 'Diary'), he made no entries in it until November 1590, some time after his return to England, and evidence for his movements has to be disentangled from the record of 'actions' (as the angelic conversations are normally termed) in the 'True & Faithful Relation'. He acquired Maginus's 'Ephemerides', perhaps at the Leipzig fair in 1586; this volume is heavily annotated from September 1586, while the 'True & Faithful Relation' provides no biographical information after May 1587. 
The party's crossing to the Dutch coast and beyond was hazardous, and once on land its progress in winter was painfully slow. Dee and his family did not reach Lask (near Sieradz) until February 1584. Actions were held (sometimes involving Laski) on shipboard and at various north German and Polish towns through which Dee and Kelley passed. There were actions at Lask, and many at Cracow, to which Dee and his family moved in March 1584. There he took a house for a year; this probably completed the period of a year and eight months for which he had originally intended to be absent from England, but if his plans had also included the practice of alchemy, nothing of this appears in the actions. Laski had meanwhile left for Kesmark in Slovakia and seems largely to have lost interest in his guests, though contact and perhaps even payments seem to have been maintained, and Dee records that 'A. L.' (presumably Laski) was briefly at Trebon at the end of 1588. 
Dee and Kelley, having received angelic bidding to go to the emperor Rudolf, set out for Prague, which they reached on 9 August 1584. Dee wrote to the emperor by Guillermo de San Clemente, the Spanish ambassador, and obtained an hour's audience with Rudolf on 3 September -- the only meeting between the two men. Meanwhile Dee received letters from England, dispatched in April, from which he learned of the disasters which had befallen his house and library. The audience with Rudolf had little result, and Dee's contact thereafter was with one of the emperor's counsellors, Jakob Kurtz, though San Clemente proved hospitable, and later acted as godfather to one of Dee's children, Michael. The angel Uriel then instructed Dee to write to the emperor saying he could make the philosopher's stone. 
In April 1585 Dee and Kelley (and their families) returned to Cracow and Laski obtained for Dee audiences with King Stefan Batory. On returning to Prague, Dee and Kelley resumed their angelic conversations, admitting to them Francesco Pucci, a renegade (though ultimately conforming) Catholic. In May 1586 Dee met the Bohemian nobleman Vilem Rozmberk, and at this point Dee's concern with alchemy seems to have revived, and he made a journey to 'Valkenaw glasse-house' and to Leipzig mart. From there he wrote a letter to Walsingham complaining that he had had no answers to his earlier letters, and asking for justice for his house, library, goods, and revenues. Dee and Kelley were banished from the emperor's domains at the instance of the papal nuncio on 29 May, but Rozmberk obtained permission for them to remain on his estates at Trebon, where, after a confused journey to Erfurt and Kassel, Dee, Kelley, and their families arrived in September 1586. 
In December Dee received through Edward Garland an offer of employment from the tsar of Russia. He nevertheless remained with Rozmberk, devoting more time to alchemy, though Kelley increasingly dominated the practice, and even produced what passed for gold. The actions were also resumed, and Dee attempted to 'translate' Kelley's office to his seven-year-old son Arthur. The final recorded actions were in April 1587, during which Kelley received from the spirit Madimi the doctrine that he, Dee, and their wives should hold all things in common. 'It was agreed by us to move the question, whether the sense were of Carnal use (contrary to the law of the Commandment) or of Spiritual love'. The covenant of cross-matching was drawn up and acted upon. Theodore Dee (the name may be significant) was born on 28 February 1588. Although Rozmberk's patronage ensured that the Dees lived in comfort and security at Trebon, he wrote to Queen Elizabeth in November 1588 to announce the return of himself and Kelley to England. But Kelley did not return, and Dee made over to him his alchemical materials. For Dee the break was not final; he received letters from Kelley, and continued to hope that he too would return. They parted in February 1589, and Dee left Trebon at the beginning of a long and occasionally dangerous journey through central Europe to land in England on 23 November 1589. 
The building up of a large library was a theme that ran through Dee's whole career, and the subject matter of the books in it -- insofar as their acquisition can be dated -- reflects the themes that preoccupied him throughout his life. At its greatest extent, when the catalogue was compiled immediately before his departure in 1583 for Poland and Bohemia, it was one of the greatest private libraries of sixteenth-century England, rivalled only by those of Andrew Perne and John, Lord Lumley, and it far exceeded in size the libraries in the universities and colleges of Oxford and Cambridge, and such ecclesiastical libraries as had survived the Reformation. There is, however, little evidence for Dee's acquisition of books in the last twenty-five years of his life, and it is also probable that even the 1583 catalogue does not fully record the extent of his collections, particularly of manuscripts. 
Dee began to buy books as an undergraduate, and the frequency of the annotations in some of the Latin classical authors which can be attributed to his Cambridge days attest the systematic care with which he read them. The nature of his annotations has in itself been a subject of study; they have been compared to a dialogue between the reader and the text before him. The notes most frequently take the form of underlinings, or of repetition of the words which particularly interested him. These are usually written very neatly in varieties of the elegant italic hand which he developed at Cambridge. Some of the most significant notes, either in the text or on flyleaves, are autobiographical, and are sometimes, to use W. H. Sherman's word, validated with Dee's initials, or with the Greek delta which he used to signify himself. A number of books are recorded in the catalogue in multiple copies, and it has been suggested that, like some university tutors of the time, Dee maintained additional copies for the use of his pupils. A note of exceptional importance records that the book was read in Edmund Bonner's household, and confirms the close association with the bishop which is apparent from a hostile source, the earlier editions of Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments'. 
Although it was possible to find a wide range of scholarly books in the stock of the Cambridge stationers, the greater range and number of books Dee was able to acquire in Louvain, Antwerp, and Paris is very apparent from the survivors from the years 1548 to 1551. The income he derived from the patronage of Cheke and of Edward VI, and from his aristocratic employers, facilitated the flow of books into his library, until this was halted by the disasters of the Dudleys and his own imprisonment. The introduction to Bonner's household may or may not represent a sincere move to the Catholic position, but the 'Supplication' to Queen Mary of 1556 reveals a view common to Catholics and to many protestants, particularly later ones, that the dispersal of the monastic libraries had been a tragedy for learning and a national disgrace. The views that Dee expressed informed the building of his own library for the rest of his life. Most of the recommendations made in the 'Supplication' for a royal or national library relate to the rescue, borrowing, and copying of manuscripts from the monasteries, but Dee also envisaged the copying of books in foreign libraries, and the acquisition of large numbers of printed books. In these aims he enjoyed the support of Bonner, but the death of Queen Mary in 1558 and the ejection of Bonner from his see diverted Dee's energy from a national library into the creation of his own, while the books borrowed, sometimes upon Bonner's security, were not returned. A hastily compiled and possibly incomplete list of his library can also be dated to his time in Bonner's household. 
Dee's European travels of 1562-4 ranged more widely than his earlier journeys, and the sources of his books, often the best evidence for his movements, span from Antwerp to Venice; he seems to have employed a copyist in Rome. The dates of publication of his Hebrew books are clustered in these years. Though they survive in relatively large numbers, they are sparsely annotated, which suggests that Dee was not a fluent Hebraist. Although he discussed Paracelsus with Conrad Gesner in 1563, his huge Paracelsian collection seems to be of later date. 
For his journey to Poland Dee packed about 800 of his books, and entrusted the care of those remaining at Mortlake to his wife's brother. Within months of his departure the house was raided and many of his books and instruments were stolen or damaged. The culprits can be identified as former associates of Dee -- John Davys the navigator and Nicholas Saunder (perhaps a former pupil) -- impelled perhaps by Dee's defection from the planning for the north-west passage. It is possible that Adrian Gilbert and Thomas Harriot also received books or instruments. There is no firm evidence for Dee's acquisition of books during his six years of travel in continental Europe. On his return in 1589 he was able, after a dispute, to recover his house and books from Fromonds, and regained some books from Davys, though not from Saunder. During his later years at Mortlake and Manchester there is little evidence for addition to the library, but more for losses, loans, and even sales to alleviate his growing poverty. At some time before his death he seems to have made over his books to John Pontois (1565-1624), a merchant whom he had perhaps met in northern Europe, who retained them until his own death, though both Sir Robert Cotton and John Selden benefited from Pontois's generosity by gift or loan. Since John Woodall and Dee's servant Patrick Saunders were Pontois's heirs, they must have been responsible for the final dispersal of Dee's belongings in 1626 or 1627. 
Dee claimed in 1592 that he had owned three thousand books and a thousand manuscripts. The catalogue of 1583, compiled by Andreas Fremonsheim, factor to Birkmanns of Cologne, records a smaller total, though it is possible that in the haste of departure Dee or Fremonsheim under-recorded the collections, particularly those of manuscripts. Though the library is now widely dispersed, the interests of antiquaries, notably Cotton and Brian Twyne, are responsible for the substantial holdings of manuscripts once owned by Dee now in the British Library and the library of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. The largest single accumulation of his printed books is in the library of the Royal College of Physicians; it derives ultimately from the depredations of Nicholas Saunder in 1583. 
The five years after Dee's return from Poland in 1589 were spent in attempts to recover his losses and to obtain a place that would provide for the needs of his large and growing household. (Madimi Newton Dee was born in 1590, Frances in 1592, and Margaret in 1595; Michael, however, died in 1594.) He came to an agreement with Nicholas Fromonds about the reoccupation of his house, united the books he had taken abroad with those which still remained at Mortlake, and recovered some of his missing volumes. By a legal oversight he had lost the income from his two rectories, and accordingly petitioned the queen for relief. The 'Compendious rehearsal' laid before the commissioners, Sir Thomas Gorges and Sir John Wolley, on 22 November (and previously before the queen by the countess of Warwick on 9 November) is the most reliable and comprehensive account of his life and works (eight printed and thirty-six in manuscript), and it was updated in 1594. It brought some financial relief from the queen but little redress, and Dee relied for a livelihood on these grants, on loans, and on fees from students. The quest for preferment recommenced, and Dee had hopes of the mastership of St Cross at Winchester, the chancellorship of St Paul's, and, as in 1564, the deanery of Gloucester. 
In May 1595 Dee obtained the wardenship of the collegiate church at Manchester, and took up the office in February 1596. He did not, however relinquish his Mortlake house, and seems to have left many of his books there, perhaps under the care of one Bartholomew Hickman, who had been sent to Dee in 1579 by Sir Christopher Hatton. The affairs of the college were in some disorder, and attempts to resolve them caused conflict with the fellows, notably with Oliver Carter, whose conduct was a frequent source of complaint in the 'Diary' and in Dee's letters. 
Dee was visited by Christopher Saxton in 1596, and in May 1597 conducted a survey of the parish of Manchester. In the latter year Dee gave advice in the case of 'demonic possession' known as the 'Seven in Lancashire', lending books to the justice involved. This is also the year of the last of Dee's political and maritime tracts, the 'Thalattokratia Brettanike', a treatise on the sea-limits of the British empire written in response to a request in September by Sir Edward Dyer. Dee and his family were hard-pressed for money, and perhaps for food also during the famines of the 1590s. Help came in the form of cattle from Dee's Welsh cousins, and in barrels of rye from Pontois, who was to become his final support and his heir. There are no entries in the 'Diary' between March 1598 and 18 June 1600; Dee was probably in London, busied about the affairs of the college, since he was able on his return to show the fellows 'the most part of the things that I had browght to pass at London for the College good' ('Private Diary'). He also visited the grammar school on 5 August 1590, finding 'great imperfections' (ibid.) in the scholars. Since the entries cease altogether on 6 April 1601, few details of Dee's later life are known, but the mention of Roger Cook suggests that his old assistant had set up alchemical practice at Manchester. 
Dee's poverty was certainly deepening, since he was forced to borrow money from Edmund Chetham in Manchester, and books and manuscripts seem to have been passing into and out of the earl of Northumberland's library at Sion, apparently by the agency of Dee's servant Patrick Saunders. He was presumably also in London for the printing by Peter Short of 'A Letter Containing a most Briefe Discourse Apologeticall', an expanded version of the sixth chapter of the 'Compendious rehearsal' of 1592-4 (in which the list of manuscript works has grown to forty-eight), but addressed to the archbishop of Canterbury. (This tract was reprinted by Short's widow in 1603 as 'A Letter, Nine Yeeres since, Written and First Published'.) 
After the accession of James I, Dee claims to have become the new king's 'sworne servant' on 9 August 1603, but was nevertheless alarmed by his published opinions on witchcraft. The tract addressed to the archbishop is usually found with a printed petition to the king, and a verse address to the Commons (both dated June 1604) protesting passionately against the slanderous epithet of 'conjurer', and calling for a special act to restrain the slander. Where Dee was at this time is unclear, but his family must have remained in Manchester, since his wife, Jane Dee, died of the plague and was buried there on 23 March 1605. The younger children, and perhaps an older son, Rowland, who had been baptized in 1583, must have perished then, since nothing is known of them thereafter. 
Probably some time after 1605, Dee returned to Mortlake with his surviving daughter, Katherine (Arthur had married in 1602), and resumed the angelic actions with Bartholomew Hickman as skryer. An action appended to the 'True & Faithful Relation' is dated 9 July 1607, and reveals that he was contemplating another foreign journey, and that he intended, or perhaps had been persuaded, to make Pontois his heir. Dee is traditionally said to have died at Mortlake in December 1608, but Pontois, who inherited Maginus's 'Ephemerides' with the other books, noted against the date 26 March 1609 a death's head and 'Jno greekLetterDelta hor.3.a.m.'. This is confirmed by a note of Anthony Wood to Ashmole that Dee had died in Bishopsgate Street, where Pontois lived. 1609 is also the date given in a letter from Arthur Dee. Neither Pontois nor another informant of Ashmole, John Aubrey, could find a will, but Aubrey was shown the site of Dee's grave in Mortlake church. 
Aubrey, enquiring on behalf of Ashmole, was told by Goody Faldo of Mortlake, who had as a child known the aged Dee, that 'he was tall (or of good stature & slender) wore a black gowne still with long sleeves, with slitts but without Buttons & loopes & tufts' (J. Aubrey, 'Brief Lives', ed. O. L. Dick, 1949, 89). He was 'a very handsome man', 'a mighty good man: a great Peacemaker'. The course of his life suggests also that he had great charm and persuasiveness. It is hard to categorize his religious views. His profound piety stands out from every page of the 'True & Faithful Relation'. 'Protestant humanist' adequately describes the position of his early years, yet in Queen Mary's reign he was able so to persuade Bonner of his Catholic conformity that he was admitted to the bishop's household, and acted as his chaplain. Under Elizabeth he seems to have been aligned with the more militantly protestant party of Leicester, Sidney, and Walsingham, yet in Prague he cultivated the Spanish ambassador, who stood godfather to Michael Dee. He prudently declined Pucci's invitation to Rome. He was certainly perplexed by the angelic teaching on transubstantiation, which emerged from Kelley's mouth as markedly Catholic, at an action of 28 January 1585. There is no ground for supposing that his 'mission' of 1583-9 was in any way ecumenical, nor that his ability to adapt to different religious usages owed anything to the familist doctrine of Hendrik Niclaes. 
Dee died in poverty, and in an obscurity perhaps contrived by friends and by his surviving family. Pontois guarded his library, though giving or lending books to scholars such as Selden or Cotton, but his generosity was limited by long absences in Virginia (he was vice-admiral of the colony at the time of his death). Cotton sought older manuscripts, while other collectors were interested in Dee as a mathematician, and it is this aspect of his reputation, based upon the 'Mathematicall praeface', which endured into the seventeenth century. Casaubon's publication of the angelic conversations in 1659, in revealing a 'private' aspect of Dee, in fact distorted the latter's reputation. (There is no better illustration of this than the 'Dictionary of National Biography' article on Dee.) If the nadir of Dee's reputation was reached with William Godwin's 'Lives of the Necromancers' (1834), serious interest revived with Halliwell's imperfect edition (1842) of the 'Diary' and of that part of the library catalogue which listed the manuscripts which he owned. 
With M. R. James's 'List of Manuscripts Formerly Owned by Dr. John Dee' (1921), the great importance of Dee's part in the preservation of dispersed monastic books began to emerge, and was confirmed by Roberts and Watson's edition of 'John Dee's Library Catalogue' (1990), which also listed in full for the first time Dee's printed books. Charlotte Fell Smith's full-length biography, 'John Dee' (1909), was a scholarly and sympathetic counter to earlier biographical accounts. Dee's significant part in the education and instructing of Tudor navigators was brought out in E. G. R. Taylor's 'Tudor Geography, 1485-1583' (1930), and led to the recognition of his role in planning, and providing precedent for, British settlement in North America. 
I. R. F. Calder's London PhD thesis 'John Dee studied as an English Neoplatonist' (1952) was perhaps the first serious study of Dee's thought and led to a revaluation of Dee's place in the English Renaissance by Dame Frances Yates and her colleagues. His influence on the later scientific revolution, his function as a mathematical instructor of artisans, and the strength of his undoubted interest in Neoplatonism and hermeticism were stressed, perhaps to excess. Peter J. French's 'John Dee: the World of an Elizabethan Magus' (1972) was the fullest statement of this 'Warburg interpretation'. Subsequent studies concentrated on the elucidation of Dee's (not necessarily consistent) natural philosophy (Nicholas H. Clulee, 1988) and on his relationship with the texts in his library, and his political writings (W. H. Sherman, 1995). 'The Diaries of John Dee', edited by Edward Fenton (1998), includes the early records transcribed by Ashmole and biographical entries from the 'True & Faithful Relation' of 1659. A full-length biography, 'The Queen's Conjuror: the Science and Magic of Dr Dee', was published in 2001 by Benjamin Woolley. 


@@@@@


doc= 7419


Deering, George Charles (1695?-1749), botanist, was born in Saxony and educated at the Hamburg Gymnasium and the University of Leiden (1708-10), where he studied under Boerhaave but did not proceed to a degree. After extensive travel in Europe he moved to London in 1713 as secretary to Baron Schach, envoy-extraordinary from Peter the Great to Queen Anne. He decided to stay on in Britain and obtained a series of posts as a tutor until he married, in November 1718; his wife's name is not known. Three days after the wedding he returned to the continent to qualify in medicine. He acquired a degree at Rheims, then proceeded to Paris, where he studied midwifery, anatomy, and botany. He then returned to England in 1719 and set up in medical practice in a poor part of London. Having developed a keenness for field botany while in Paris, he joined a small botanical society, established by John Martyn, which existed from 1721 to 1726. 
By 1736 Deering was no longer married (his wife having died or parted from him), and he thought to improve his position by moving to Nottingham, with a letter of recommendation from Sloane. After two years there he published a list of plants which he had observed in the neighbourhood, one of the earliest British local floras. For some of the cryptogamic coverage in this he was aided by his fellow countryman Dillenius, whose acquaintance he had made in Martyn's botanical society and who afterwards acknowledged the help received from Deering in the preface to his classic work, 'Historia muscorum'. 
At first Deering was successful in his new practice in Nottingham, especially in treating smallpox, on which he published a small tract setting out his method; but an unfortunate temper seems to have been his undoing and reduced him to something like poverty. Friends bought him 'an electrical machine' (doubtless a Leyden jar, for the treatment of rheumatic conditions) by which he was able to earn a little money, but service as an ensign in 1745 in a company of foot raised in Nottingham to counter the Young Pretender's advance proved more expense to him than profit. Then, again by the good offices of friends, the materials collected by John Plumptre for a history of Nottingham were placed in his hands; these he prepared for publication, and the work appeared posthumously in 1751 as 'Nottinghamia vetus et nova'. Through much of his life Deering suffered from gout, and in later life he became asthmatic. He died on 12 April 1749. He was saved at the last minute from a pauper's burial and laid to rest in St Peter's churchyard, Nottingham, opposite the house he lived in. He is commemorated by a genus of Indo-Malaysian plants, 'Deeringia', named in his honour in 1810 by Robert Brown. 


@@@@@


doc= 7420


Deering, John Peter (1787-1850), architect, was the youngest child in the family of six sons and four daughters of Thomas Gandy (died 1814), who worked at White's Club, St James's, London, and his wife, Sophia, 'nee' Adams. His older brothers included the painter Joseph Michael Gandy ARA (1771-1843) and the architect Michael Gandy (bap. 1773, d. 1862). John Peter Gandy was a pupil of James Wyatt from 1805 to 1808. In 1805 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools. He exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1805 and 1833, and was awarded the silver medal in 1806. His early exhibits included 'A Design for the Royal Academy' (1807) and two drawings, 'An Ancient City' and 'The Environs of an Ancient City' (1810). In 1810 he won first prize in a competition for a design for the new Bethlem Hospital, but it was never carried out. 
When he left James Wyatt's office, Gandy took a job at the barrack office, from which he was granted leave from 1811 to 1813, when he accompanied Sir William Gell on an expedition to Greece on behalf of the Society of Dilettanti, acting as architectural draughtsman. This trip was written up in 1817 as 'The Unedited Antiquities of Attica', and in 1840 as the third volume of 'Antiquities of Ionia', edited by William Wilkins. With Sir William Gell, Gandy also published 'Pompeiana' (1817-19), which became the standard work on the excavations at Pompeii. He was elected a member of the Society of Dilettanti in 1830. He then began to establish himself as an architect. To begin with he collaborated with William Wilkins, and together in 1817 they designed a 280 foot tower to commemorate the battle of Waterloo, to be erected in Portland Place, but the project fell through because of the economic recession. He worked with Wilkins on the University Club, Pall Mall (1822-6), and was runner-up to Wilkins in the competition for a design for University College, London, and then acted as Wilkins's assistant in its construction. Other buildings in London included St Mark's Church, North Audley Street (1825-8), a Greek revival church, and Exeter Hall, in the Strand (1830-31). He also remodelled the courtyard of Burghley House, Northamptonshire (1828), and made alterations at Shrubland Park, Suffolk (1831-3). Most of his designs were neo-classical in style, and he was regarded as an authority on Greek architecture, although there were exceptions, such as the hospital at Stamford, in Tudor Gothic style. 
In 1828 Gandy inherited the Lee estate, near Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, from his friend Henry Deering, and took the name of Deering. With the support of Wilkins, he had been elected ARA in 1826 and RA in 1838, an honour scarcely justified by his subsequent professional inactivity. Deering gradually gave up his profession as an architect, and spent the rest of his life as a country gentleman. He was elected MP for Aylesbury in 1847, and high sheriff of Buckinghamshire in 1840. He died in Hanover Square, London, on 2 March 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 7421


Defoe, Daniel (1660?-1731), writer and businessman, was the youngest of the three children of James Foe (died 1706), a prosperous tallow chandler in the parish of Cripplegate and a freeman of the City of London, and Alice Foe, who died some time between 1668 and 1671. His sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, were born on 13 November 1657 and 19 June 1659. Defoe was probably born in London or just outside the city during autumn 1660. During this time of political unrest many citizens' lives were disrupted and records were lost. Carefully educated at the Revd Charles Morton's dissenting academy in Newington Green, Defoe was intended for the nonconformist ministry, but in 1681 he chose to follow his father in trade and the political life of the city. As he said, 'the pulpit is none of my office'. 
After leaving Morton's academy, Defoe established a home and business in Freeman's Yard, Cornhill, and became a wholesale hosier. On 1 January 1684 he married Mary Tuffley (1665-1732), who brought him a dowry of $3700; they had six daughters (Mary, Maria, Hannah, Henrietta, Sophia, and Martha) and two sons (Benjamin and Daniel), all but two of whom, Mary and Martha, lived into adulthood. Defoe shared the persecution of the nonconformists and was a lifelong supporter of freedom of religion and the press. He had joined Monmouth's revolt in June 1685, fought at Sedgemoor under the banner 'Fear nothing but God', and managed to escape capture after the defeat. In January 1686 he made bail for two widows arrested at a conventicle meeting and soon began to write political essays. He was pardoned for taking part in the uprising in May 1687. 
In the late 1680s Defoe began investing in ships and expanding into the export-import business with tobacco, logwood, wine, spirits, and cloth goods. He opened a brick and pantile factory on land in Tilbury that he had leased years before. In the early 1690s he invested in highly speculative ventures such as civet cats and a diving bell. Ruined by misfortunes in shipping, risk taking, and overextension, Defoe went bankrupt in 1692 for an astonishing $17,000, approximately $680,000 in modern money, and was committed to Fleet prison and transferred immediately to king's bench prison on 29 October. He found recognizances, appeared to answer the charges in court, and was discharged. More creditors came forward, and he was committed to king's bench prison again on 12 February 1693. Some of his creditors never bothered to add their debts to the charges against him, and once again men willing to be recognizants stepped forward. Defoe negotiated terms with his prosecutors and received employment as an accountant from men with connections to King William; he worked with a lottery and as an accountant for the commissioner for the glass duty, among other things. His brick and pantile factory continued to clear about $600 per year, and he had contracts with such prestigious projects as the building of the Greenwich Hospital for sailors and mariners. Defoe also began to write for money and to submit 'projects' to the government and private investors. His 'Essay upon Projects' (1697) included the kinds of ideas that were making other men rich. One of them, on naval recruitment and maintenance, eventually helped lead to his invitation to speak to a parliamentary committee. Several show an early, acute understanding of banks, the new credit economy, and the transportation system necessary for increasing trade. Others reveal an acute awareness of social problems and groups of needy human beings, among them widows and 'idiots'. 
Not only did Defoe write political pamphlets and poetry in support of his hero King William, but he began to exhibit some signs of literary ambition. His poem 'The Pacificator' joins the ancient/modern controversy and engages such then respected poets as Samuel Garth and Richard Blackmore. His timely satiric poem 'The True-Born Englishman' required fifty editions by mid-century, and about 1701 he embarked on what he intended to be the great defence of the revolution settlement of 1688 and the poem to establish his reputation as an important poet. 'Jure divino' is a philosophical verse essay in 12 books, running to 375 pages of heroic couplets. According to Defoe, he never published most of the part composed before his arrest for seditious libel in 1703 because he feared it would give dangerous offence; what has survived was mostly written in prison and was completed during the time of insecurity and distress immediately thereafter. Published in 1706 after delays during which he tried to secure more subscribers and waited out political situations that might have embroiled his poem in new and threatening controversy, it was immediately pirated by a former printer of Defoe's and was even abridged into a chapbook; Defoe claimed that he lost $1500 because of the piracy. His hopes for poetic fame were not quite spent, however. His 'Caledonia', a sixty-page poem published in 1706 with a grant from the Scottish privy council, celebrates Scottish history and a number of its most illustrious and historically important families. 
Between 1688 and 1706 Defoe often wrote about and questioned the practice of occasional conformity, the dissenters' 'occasional' taking of communion in the Church of England, which qualified them for employment and government office. In fact, both Defoe's contemporaries and modern historians sometimes blame Defoe for beginning the controversy over occasional conformity. Roger Thomas, for instance, credits Defoe with 'the earliest shot in the agitation' (R. Thomas, 'The English Presbyterians', 1968, 124). When the nonconformist lord mayor Sir Humphrey Edwin attended St Paul's in the morning and the Pinners' Hall conventicle in the afternoon in his official robes and with his sword of office, Defoe published 'An Inquiry into Occasional Conformity' (1698) that included inflammatory phrases such as 'playing Bo-peep with God Almighty'. When the next lord mayor, Sir Thomas Abney, also a dissenter, repeated the act, Defoe reissued his pamphlet and added a preface in which he demanded that John How, the prominent minister whose meeting-house Abney attended, either defend occasional conformity or declare against it. How responded with a personal admonition, reminding Defoe that the heart of dissent was the individual conscience and that he was not to set up as 'the Conscience-general of Mankind' (Backscheider, 'Defoe', 89). 
A full-scale controversy over occasional conformity broke out, during which the moderate King William died unexpectedly. The proposal of the bill to prevent occasional conformity at the beginning of Queen Anne's reign seriously threatened the nonconformists. Even bailiffs, foresters, and scavengers would have to conform, lose their offices, or pay heavy, escalating fines. Nonconformists would be banned from supplying hospitals, workhouses, and prisons with such necessities as bread and firewood. There was general agreement that the intent of the bill was to 'incapacitate'. Although Defoe continued to oppose occasional conformity, he recognized the prejudice and extreme desire to oppress that the bill represented and began a print campaign to hold a mirror to the faces of those supporting the bill. The result, his 'Shortest Way with the Dissenters' (December 1702), collected the key phrases and major arguments of the high-church party and used them in a mock recommendation to 'root out this cursed Race from the World'. Defoe was already one of the best-known men in London because of his 'The True-Born Englishman' and his address to parliament demanding the freeing of the Kentish petitioners, 'Legion's Memorial' (1701). 'The Original Power of the Collective Body of the People of England' (1702) is one of the most eloquent defences of the rights of the people and most militant about their relationship to government written in the century. Actually written before King William dismissed parliament in November 1701, it portrayed the king as listening to the people, attacked hereditary monarchy, and with great rhetorical power asserted many of Locke's arguments for contract theory and the supreme power of the people. It 'vindicates' the 'original right' of 'all men' to live under a government dedicated to their benefit: 'the People remain... Original Power endures to the same Eternity the World endures to... Nor have I advanced any new Doctrine, nothing but what is ancient as Nature, and born into the world with our Reason' (dedication). 
When Defoe's authorship of 'The Shortest Way' was finally discovered, he hid and attempted to negotiate with the government but was arrested for seditious libel in May and brought before the secretary of state for the southern region, the earl of Nottingham, and then imprisoned in Newgate until 5 June, when he made the $1500 bail. He was sentenced to a large fine, to stand in the pillory three times, and to remain in Newgate until he could find 'sureties of good behaviour' for seven years. After a delay of the original sentence to stand in the pillory beginning on 19 July during which Nottingham tried to get Defoe to reveal his 'Accomplices' and Defoe was brought before the queen, he stood in the pillory on 29, 30, and 31 July. The pillory was ringed with Defoe's protective supporters, and he appeared as Alexander Pope described him, 'unabashed on high'. His 'Hymn to the Pillory' was sold in the streets and declared defiantly that he was 'an Example made,/To make Men of their Honesty afraid'. He spent the next four months in Newgate. 
Imprisoned during the critical season for brick making, responsible for a large, mostly female family, and run into greater debt because unable to work, Defoe left Newgate in November with his finances and his reputation -- critical for businessmen, who must have credit -- severely damaged. By summer 1706 he was in trouble again. He owed over $2000, feared imprisonment for debt again, and chose to submit to a commission of bankrupts. A settlement was reached in August. Defoe was seldom entirely free from debt, and future claims came from all over Great Britain. For instance, in 1713 a Yarmouth man renewed a suit of 1706, and in 1728 some of his London debts were prosecuted anew. 
Although Defoe's release from Newgate was arranged by Lord Treasurer Sidney Godolphin and Speaker Robert Harley and he was later pardoned by the queen on 31 July 1704, for the rest of his life Defoe was a marked political agitator, best-known as the writer who was pilloried, and was subject to whimsical, politically motivated arrests. He was often threatened with arrest in 1705 and 1706 for violating the 'good behaviour' terms of his conviction and occasionally had to rush to London to defend himself. Immediately after Queen Anne's death in 1714 Defoe was indicted for seditious libel again and arrested on 28 August. Brought before a friendly judge, Defoe accepted a plea bargain in 1715 that secretly pledged him to work for the new secretary of state Charles Townshend, specifically to begin a new moderate tory paper, 'Mercurius Politicus', and to infiltrate as many tory presses and periodicals as he could. 
After his release from Newgate in 1703 Defoe published 'A True Collection of the Author of the True Born English-Man', which attempted to set the record of his writing straight, to remind people of his popular 'True-Born Englishman', and to make money from his notoriety, and 'The Second Volume of the Writings of the Author of the True-Born Englishman', both important in establishing the canon of Defoe's writing. 'The Consolidator', 'The Storm', and 'A True Relation of the Apparition of Mrs. Veal' were also commercial enterprises, although each has important spiritual and political elements. His great achievement of 1704 was to launch 'The Review', the ground-breaking periodical that moved English journalism in new directions. Before Defoe, what news was printed was without elaboration, interpretation, or even context. 'The Review' demonstrated the possibilities of using history and news for propaganda purposes, and pointed out the advantages of a sense of discrete audiences. His first great biographer, James Sutherland, wrote, 'If 'Robinson Crusoe' is indisputably Defoe's greatest work, the 'Review' can at least claim to be his most astonishing performance' (Sutherland, 106). Defoe wrote nearly every word of it, regardless of where he was or his personal situation, from the first number on 19 February 1704 to the last on 11 June 1713. As Maximillian E. Novak has said: 'There were a number of one-man editorial sheets that ran for a while, but Defoe raises the level of debate over politics, foreign affairs, and economics. In a sense, he places the 'Review' in the 'public sphere' of the coffee house where ideas that will ultimately transform the politics of a nation may be debated -- and all of this five to six years before the 'Tatler' and 'Spectator'. (private communication)' Charles Leslie, a rival journalist, complained that 'the greatest part of the 'people'... cannot read at all, but they will gather about one that can 'read', and listen to... [a] 'Review' (as I have seen them in the streets)' (C. Leslie, preface, 'The Rehearsal', 1704-8, iv). In March 1705, 'The Review' began appearing three rather than two times a week. The popularity of the Scandal Club section led first to a monthly supplement, which began in October 1704 and lasted for five numbers, and then to the 'Little Review', which he began in June 1705 and of which he wrote twenty-three numbers before he tired of it. Dialogue, satires of the press, dramatic irony, and families of characters became regular features of the Club, and both political parties began to take notice of the popularity and influence of the news commentaries. 
From the beginning, the paper criticized the press, morals, manners, and the government, especially its conduct of the war with the French. On 29 June 1704 Godolphin demanded that Harley, by then one of the secretaries of state, 'find out the author' ('Bath MSS', 1.58-9). Early in July 'The Review' changed direction, and Defoe defended himself against charges of being pro-France and began to write about Charles XII of Sweden, a subject related to Harley's responsibilities as secretary of state for the northern region. Letters show that Defoe and Harley had been meeting since at least mid-April, that the specifics of what Defoe would do were being discussed but had not been decided, but by late June they were taking firm shape. 
Defoe became one of Harley's agents and an opinion sampler. Over the next three years he extended the possibilities of counter-insurgency, invented practices that survive to the present day, and earned the reputation of master spy. A modern historian has called him 'one of the great professionals in all these centuries of secret service... in himself almost a complete secret service' (R. Rowan, 'Thirty-Three Centuries of Espionage', completed R. Deindorfer, 1967, 102). He set up an unrivalled intelligence network and through his journalistic and pamphlet writing became, in the words of a rival journalist, 'the Goliath of his party' (anonymous tory writer, 'The Moderator', 2 June 1710). In summer 1704 he took two trips that covered most of England, taking note of opinions, reporting objections and reservations about the ministry's actions, infiltrating groups, identifying influential men and faction leaders, and writing essays designed to win over the suspicious or uncommitted. His network of acquaintances and friends began sending him information and distributing his political poems, pamphlets, and individual issues of 'The Review'. Some numbers, such as that for 17 April 1705, were also bought and distributed by other political leaders and agents. Scattered records survive: for instance, of individuals asking for 100 copies of each 'Review' and lists of men responsible for delivering nearly 2000 copies of one of Defoe's pamphlets. In this time of ferocious political party activity, Harley had embarked on a campaign summarized by the word 'Moderation', and, although Defoe was certainly motivated by his extravagant gratitude to Harley, he believed in moderation and the ministry's domestic and foreign policies and propagated them wholeheartedly. 
In autumn 1706 Defoe was one of the agents sent to Scotland to work for the union, and his service there was energetic. He infiltrated some of the most influential groups in Edinburgh and came to control all of the newspapers. As a cover and also as speculation to provide for the future, he invested in the linen and weaving industries and explored the salt trade, among others. He soon had sources in the Scottish parliament, the Church of Scotland, and major business and civic groups. Exposed to numerous dangers in the volatile city, Defoe acted with discretion, courage, and resolution and left a variety of moving, important records of the time. In addition to 'The Review', a little over half his letters giving reports to Harley survive, as do his series of pamphlets, all but one beginning with the title 'An Essay at Removing National Prejudices Against a Union with Scotland'; other occasional essays were designed to explain, persuade, and address what today seem ephemeral details of the treaty of union, and his 'History of the Union of Great Britain' (1709) was on-the-scene description, commentary, and propaganda. After fifteen months Defoe returned to London, but Godolphin sent him back at the end of March 1708, shortly after the Pretender attempted to land in Scotland and just before the first Scottish elections. Defoe described his job as to provide 'plain, naked, and unbyasst accounts both of persons and things' ('Letters', 256) and sent reports to both Godolphin and the earl of Sunderland, now secretary of state for the southern region. Defoe continued to sample opinion, discuss issues eloquently with his Edinburgh friends, write often impassioned propaganda, and attempt to avoid the danger from random mobs and personal enemies. 
His work completed, Defoe returned to London in December 1708, but decided to go back to try to develop his business and newspaper interests in autumn 1709. He took his son Benjamin to study at the University of Edinburgh. The renewed attacks on the dissenters, often seen to have been triggered by the Revd Henry Sacheverell's sermon 'The Perils of False Brethren', brought Defoe back to London. Defoe once called Sacheverell the 'Foundation of my Destruction' ('The Review', 6.462), and his joining the battle with such vigour was personal, religious, and political. He saw Sacheverell's arguments as being aimed not only at the dissenters but at the revolution settlement, and he used extreme rhetoric to alarm people about Sacheverell and his opinions and to urge Sacheverell's conviction for seditious libel. On 23 March, however, Sacheverell received what was widely described as a 'derisory sentence' of having two of his sermons burnt by the common hangman and being forbidden to preach for three years. Riotous celebrations that included the burning of dissenting chapels all over the country broke out, and Sacheverell enjoyed a royal procession to his new living (clerical appointment) in Selattyn, just inside the English border in Shropshire. Defoe recognized this as the outbreak of long hidden, deep prejudices, and his response was a return to tempered essays on moderation and satires of party extremism that he had hoped the country had repudiated. 
Harley returned to power, becoming chancellor of the exchequer in August 1710, and Defoe began to work for him again. Through the next few years of political turmoil Defoe continued his journalistic and other propagandistic writing, and from at least 1707 until the accession of George I he received an income of between $400 and $500 per year from the government. His final trip to Scotland was in autumn 1712, another time of severe Scottish discontent over the imposition of oaths, a bill to tolerate episcopal communion in Scotland, and the decision to extend the malt tax to Scotland when the peace with France was made. His reports were largely optimistic. On 20 September he reports, 'An Inclination to Moderation Appeares Among the best men Every where' ('Letters', 386-7). 
During this time and in the aftermath of the dismissal by George I of Harley and his ministry, Defoe expanded his writing strategies. He began to create increasingly distinctive voices and to hone his ability to reach specific groups of readers. In his campaign to explain the new credit economy and to make ending the War of the Spanish Succession acceptable, he designed essays for general readers and for the range of political stances from moderate tory to opposition whig. For instance, a pamphlet of his published by John Morphew, publisher of the tory 'Examiner', treated England's separate negotiations with France more favourably than those printed by the whig bookseller John Baker. Some of them, such as 'Some Thoughts upon the Subject of Commerce with France' (1713), carried an identification of his authorship, 'By the Author of the Review', and, therefore, the assurance that the same point of view and expertise that many readers appreciated would reward their purchase. Others, such as his series on the articles of the treaty with France, are of a piece with his earlier publications for the ministry, some of which are known to have been suggested to him by Harley or other insiders. His writings kept up a running commentary on domestic and foreign events, an evaluation of the performance of the government, and almost unbelievably cocksure advice to his fellow Britons. In his first publication after George's landing, 'Advice to the People of Great Britain', for example, he urges everyone to 'ease... foolish strife, forget the Wrongs done to one another, and bury... Resentment'. He encourages them to have faith in harmonious happy times and never forgets to assess and admonish the Scots. 
Defoe is usually described as an unprincipled man who would write on any side of any question for money. As P. N. Furbank and W. R. Owens have written, 'It was a favourite theme of his enemies that he was a mercenary hack... and he was frequently provoked into complaining both at specific attributions to him and at the general tendency to father all ownerless pamphlets on him' (Furbank and Owens, xiv). Although over his long life he certainly contradicted himself now and then and changed his mind, he is not guilty of these charges. All serious Defoe scholars agree that a set of core principles and opinions runs through all his works regardless of the reader being addressed. The general opinion is that he was a whig and a moderate by nature, a thorough supporter of the revolution of 1688, and, like most of the people of his generation, suspicious of political parties and reluctant to be identified entirely with one. Unfortunately there is no standard edition of Defoe's works; indeed, fewer than a quarter are in print. Recent biographies that are 'full' rather than 'critical' (devoted primarily to his 'literary' writings) have begun slowly to correct this misconception with scholars, if not with the general public. But several factors continue to obscure the principles for which he stood and sacrificed much: his gift for assuming voices in order to address different groups of people; his ability to select different aspects of an issue to discuss; the untidy, inflated canon that included works that contradicted a great deal that Defoe stood for; his periods of acute economic distress; and the unexamined acceptance of the often heated words of his contemporaries. 
Since at least Procopius, political writers had used scandalous memoirs, fake journals and letters, and other forms borrowed from prose fiction to stigmatize the people and actions on the opposite side, and Defoe began to use these forms more frequently. Although Delariviere Manley is the best-known of these writers during Defoe's lifetime, almost all journalists and propagandists resorted to them at some time or another. Although there were anecdotes, some exaggerated and some fictional, in some of Defoe's pamphlets and 'The Review', his 'Memoirs of Count Tariff' published in 1713 is the most important sign of the novelist to come. J. Paul Hunter and Geoffrey Sill have located this political satire in the puritan allegorical and emblematic traditions in which characters are social types and representatives of ideologies that reveal dangerous social and moral truths obscured by appearances and complacent thinking. The characters in 'Memoirs' are the parts Defoe saw behind the parliamentary vote on the 'Bill of Commerce', and he tells a story of groups, such as merchants represented by Alderman Traffick and manufacturers represented by Harry Woolpack, who share interests being set against each other. The characters act in a well-developed fictional structure, and the text is particularly interesting for the ways Defoe illustrates the dynamic relationship among individuals, public opinions, and events, a theme that is especially obvious in his 'Col. Jack'. 
In the year after Queen Anne's death Defoe wrote secret histories, fictional memoirs, histories, and epistles and called his works 'accounts', 'reflections', 'expostulations', 'appeals', 'rebukes', 'apologies', and half a dozen other forms of address. Fully realized dialogues between friends, husbands and wives, and parents and children were used to dramatize his arguments but sometimes also to create individualized, lively mini-personalities existing in a world of intrigue and self-interest. Maximillian Novak characterizes the period between 1715 and 1724 as 'the great creative period' of Defoe's life that 'produced a literal explosion of fiction' (Novak, 42). 
The 'Minutes of the Negotiations of Monsr. Mesnager' (1717) is one of Defoe's cleverest and most informed secret histories. Defoe makes his narrator the lowly under-secretary to Louis XIV who has worked his way up to become an important agent in the negotiation of the 'separate peace' that ended the War of the Spanish Succession. One of the earliest French contacts with the Harley ministry, Mesnager was well known to Harley, and the 'Minutes' exhibit Defoe's inside knowledge. This devastating critique of the treaty of Utrecht (a treaty universally acknowledged to be unworthy of England's military achievement), of a queen determined to have peace at any price, and of a set of ministers doing Mesnager's work by calling the war too costly in men and money supported Robert Harley by portraying him as the only minister who could not be manipulated by the French. The 325-page book was reprinted in 1736 as fiction, and Defoe indeed included many unusual fictional elements. For example, Mesnager is made to react to some English customs and events as though he were as foreign as 'The Spectator''s Indians or Oliver Goldsmith's commentator in his 'Chinese letters'. Defoe's sense of humour is also in evidence, as he has Mesnager comment on things that Defoe had found enormously frustrating, such as: 'I have heard of some who have waited upon him [Harley], by his own appointment, on Business of the Greatest Consequence, and have been entertained by him, from one Hour to another, on some Trifle, 'till at last the main Affair has been confin'd to a Minute or two, or perhaps deferred to another Occasion. (D. Defoe, 'Minutes of the Negotiations of Monsr. Mesnager', 1717, 183)' With the publication of 'The Family Instructor' in 1715 Defoe began a series of practical divinity or domestic conduct books that eventually covered every stage of life and all classes. These books, especially the first, were enormously popular. Defoe had 'The Family Instructor' printed by his Newcastle printer John Button to avoid having his reputation as an immoral, hack political writer tarnish its reception; it went through eight editions in five years and twenty by the end of the century. Although the dialogue form had been used in conduct books before, Defoe's was highly original in its leisurely creation of characters, relationships, and stories. Most conduct books were composed of brief essays, summary 'morals', and lists of maxims; Defoe's relatively long, developed narratives with commentary broke new ground. He divided the book in ways that emphasized the form's concentration on marriage, moral relationships, and household governance: 'I. Relating to fathers and children. II. To masters and servants. III. To husbands and wives'. Within each, however, are developed characters and suspenseful stories, and in the third part Defoe traces the rebellion, fall, death, and presumed damnation of part one's eldest brother. 
The prefatory letter written by the Revd Samuel Wright claimed for the three dialogues what came to be the commonplace claim for the truth of the English novel: 'The Substance of each Narrative is 'Real'. And there are some whole Dialogues which, with very little Alteration, I my self could put 'Names' and 'Families''. This conduct book (and many of the political essays written about the same time) explores 'temper and constitution' -- what might now be called personality -- and their effect on people and their relationships, especially as they affect how people respond to situations. Defoe also broke new ground in directing his conduct book to mature readers rather than to the usual audience, those on the brink of adulthood. The conduct books that followed continued to concentrate on mature married people, although children and even black servants are important, often morally superior and reforming characters. In the second volume of 'The Family Instructor' (1718) Defoe turned to the adjustments newly married people must make, the establishment of virtuous households, and the behaviour of fathers, especially in their responsibility for the spiritual guidance in their extended households and for learning to balance business and domestic obligations. 'Religious Courtship' (1722) is a lively set of stories advising young couples on avoiding cheats and selecting virtuous partners. In it a father formerly 'hurried in the world' has retired to his home with his three unmarried daughters, and his business is to marry them well. Defoe develops a list of questions that young women should ask, because, as he says in most of the conduct books and several novels, the 'hazard' is chiefly on the woman's side. This word and his plots highlight the gamble that marriage is, and Defoe's questions are an attempt to increase the rationality of the decision. Published a month after 'Moll Flanders' and eleven months before 'Col. Jack', it outlines marriage themes and recommendations that the novels dramatize. Also extremely popular, it was serialized in 1729 in the Philadelphia 'Universal Instructor and Family Gazette'. 'Conjugal Lewdness' (1727) explains the purposes of marriage and condemns such things as intercourse during pregnancy. 

'The Complete English Tradesman' (1726) is a highly original conduct book, one that offered 'useful instructions for a young Tradesman', and prefigured the better-known 'Apprentice's Vade Mecum' (1734) by Samuel Richardson. Defoe defines the complete tradesman as one who understands all the inland trade, knows where raw materials and manufactured items come from, and knows all 'methods' of correspondence, payment, shipping, and other transactions. One of Defoe's most passionate and personal books, it describes trade as a 'calling' in which hands, head, and heart must be applied to business. He covers in detail everything from the diligent, patient, personable demeanour required of the 'tradesman behind his counter' to the maintaining of credit and keeping of good accounts. The description of the feelings of the failed bankrupt tradesman is justly famous, but his reflective passages on the growing taste for luxuries and show without substance are even more important social history. About a pastry shop set up for $300, he broods that: 'the gilding and painting may go a little way, but 'tis the having a shop well fill'd with goods, having good choice to sell, and selling reasonable, these are the things that bring a trade, and a trade thus brought will stand by you and last. (D. Defoe, 'The Complete English Tradesman', 1726, 1.317)' Tradesmen, their families, and customers take the stage, are given feelings and personalities, and exit.More and more Defoe gave free rein to the creation of fictional worlds, and the flow into fantasy in whatever he wrote became more common. Swept away into a family's tensions, a palace intrigue, a battle, or a person's vexed musings, he published longer and longer works of a more dramatic nature, and he increasingly depicted the flow between the private and public spheres that the scandalous memoirs had always argued and the conduct books allegorized. 
Defoe's first novel, 'Robinson Crusoe', published in 1719 when he was about fifty-nine, brings all his interests together. Crusoe is a disobedient son, arguing with his father, representing opinions of a new world -- one where life in England is uncertain but global opportunity beckons, and children are increasingly torn between traditional obedience to family and individual self-satisfaction. Drawn to the sea regardless of parental and what appear to be providential warnings of catastrophe, he finds unbounded economic opportunity in Brazil. Defoe's fascination with travel narratives and with Great Britain as an international trading nation shapes the book and especially its sequel. Defoe also writes out of his engagement with religious controversies of the time, especially the Bangorian and Salters' Hall controversies. When Crusoe instructs Friday in the Christian faith, he is demonstrating the adequacy of scripture and revelation alone. Also inscribed are Defoe's theories of government and of colonization. Crusoe sets himself up as monarch, prince, generalissimo, and finally colonial governor, and perhaps ironically his abandonment of his island is emblematic of the neglect of which Great Britain was often guilty with its Caribbean colonies. In fact, this novel can be placed within Defoe's propaganda for the settlement of the New World and especially his writings about the doctrinal controversies splitting and embarrassing dissenters as well as Anglicans. Above all, however, it is the greatest mythic fantasy ever written of the solitary survivor who will never succumb. He will not starve, and he will not give in to his paralysing fear or extended isolation. Physically, mentally, and spiritually he survives and grows stronger. 
Defoe's work always displayed a keen understanding of the reading public, and 'Robinson Crusoe' is no exception. The best-selling books of this time were sermons and travel literature, and Defoe probably conceived 'Robinson Crusoe' along the lines of travel books. Peace and optimism about open seas inspired new books like Daniel Beeckman's 'Voyage to and from the Island of Borneo' and new editions of a number of earlier works such as Woodes Rogers's 'Cruising Voyage Round the World' (both 1718). Travel books often began with a restless son and gave prominence to religious elements. Defoe's special contributions to travel literature were the power of his protagonist's personality and the previously unmatched evocation of states of mind -- the extended presentations of a person reasoning, choosing, struggling for, if not understanding, acceptance of his fate. 
An initial edition of 1000 was printed near the end of April 1719, followed by a second edition on 9 May, a third about 6 June, and a fourth shortly before the publication of the sequel, 'Farther Adventures of Robinson Crusoe', in August 1719. By the end of the year, the two parts were published together with a map and six plates. The 'Original London Post' serialized it in 164 parts. Within a year the book had been translated into French, German, and Dutch. Other writers took note, and books such as Ambrose Evans's 'The Adventures and Surprizing Deliverances of James Dubourdieu and his Wife' and William Chetwood's 'The Voyages, Dangerous Adventures and Imminent Escapes of Captain Richard Falconer' began to appear. Six months after 'Crusoe' was published novels such as 'The Adventures... of Dubourdieu and his Wife' were being advertised as 'very proper to be bound up with 'Robinson Crusoe'' ('Daily Post', 8 Oct 1719). By 1820 at least two different masters of children's schools had translated it into simple Latin with fake words such as ''tormenta'' for 'guns' when modern inventions required them, and in 1869 Lucy Aikin published the ghastly 'Robinson Crusoe in Words of one Syllable', which was so popular that it enjoyed a second edition in that same year. Penelope Aubin specifically related her travel adventure and island fiction 'The Adventures of the Count de Vinevil and his Family' to 'Robinson Crusoe' in her preface and recognized it as a new way to instruct and delight. By 1724 there were at least three more female Robinsonades: Aubin's 'The Life of Charlotta Du Pont' and the anonymous 'Jungfer Robinsone, oder, Die verschmitzte Junge-Magd' and 'Madame Robunse mit ihrer Tochter, Jungfer Robinsgen'. In 1731 the first of the great German Robinsonades, Johann Gottfried Schnabel's 'Die Insel Felsenberg', appeared. 
Defoe gave free rein to his imagination and exulted in the evidence that his analysis of 'the modern Vice of the reading Palate' was correct. He believed that novelty sold books, and he provided it. In a time when, as Crusoe said, 'The whole World is in Motion', Defoe's travel books captured his readers' imaginations. In the preface to 'Farther Adventures' Defoe claimed that the success of 'Robinson Crusoe' came from 'the surprising variety of the subject' and 'the agreeable manner of the performance'. He promised more 'novel' incidents than those in 'Robinson Crusoe', and he did indeed provide more 'incidents'. Within the first hundred pages Crusoe's ship had rescued another ship (with a passenger who had stayed alive partly by eating gloves), Crusoe had heard the stories of battles among the survivors on his island, of wars between cannibal bands, and of an invasion of the island by cannibals. In the last hundred pages Crusoe went by land from the coast of China, through Peking (Beijing) to Archangel where he took a ship to Hamburg, travelled by land to The Hague, and finally arrived in London. During this odyssey he saw the Great Wall, battled Tartar raiders, burnt an idol before the eyes of enraged priests, and rescued a royal political prisoner. Drawn-out tales of elaborate ruses stood next to brief, funny descriptions of people met on the road. Defoe described two 'amazing' houses (one of wicker and one of china), defined irony as 'speaking in colours', and had a boatload of natives defiantly bare their bottoms at the English seamen. 

'The Life, Adventures, and Pyracies, of the Famous Captain Singleton' was published in June 1720 and covers the part of the known world that Crusoe missed. The idea for 'Singleton' may have been in the back of Defoe's mind as he wrote 'Robinson Crusoe' because he has Crusoe list among his blessings: 'But I am cast on an Island, where I see no wild Beasts to hurt me, as I saw on the Coast of Africa: And what if I had been Shipwreck'd there?' Singleton sails to Newfoundland and the East Indies before he is marooned on Madagascar for his part in a mutiny. He and his fellow conspirators then walk across the wide part of Africa from Mozambique to Guinea. Lions, tigers, leopards, crocodiles, and elephants appear, and Defoe is artful enough to make them both beautiful and menacing. The waterfalls, jungles, and deserts amaze and horrify the men, and Defoe again renders extreme states of mind. At one point Singleton says: 'Having with infinite Labour mounted these Hills [we saw] a vast howling Wilderness, not a Tree, a River, or a Green thing to be seen, for as far as the Eye could look; nothing but a scalding Sand, which as the Wind blew, drove about in Clouds, enough to overwhelm Man and Beast.' The last half of the book traces Singleton's career as a pirate in the West Indies, along the coast of South America, on Madagascar, in the Red Sea, Persian Gulf, Moluccas, the Philippines, and then below Australia and concludes with his retirement in England. 

'Captain Singleton' is a transition to Defoe's writing about crime and the development of criminal minds. When he wrote 'Captain Singleton' pirates were a national concern, for they discouraged trade and colonization and put individuals at risk. Defoe's 'Col. Jack' records the booty taken by a French privateer and comments in the words of many of his creator's contemporaries, 'This was a Terrible Loss among the 'English' Merchants'. The state papers include numerous petitions from merchants, shipmasters, traders, and planters for military protection. In 1718 Captain Woodes Rogers had defeated a huge pirate colony in the Bahamas and, in the aftermath, some 2000 had surrendered and received the royal pardon. As Defoe noticed, the centre of pirate operations shifted to Madagascar, and by 1721 the English dispatched navy squadrons to protect the East India Company ships. Reports of the capture and subsequent trials of pirates appeared almost daily in the papers. 
In 'Mercurius Politicus' (1716-20) and 'A Plan for the English Commerce' (1728), Defoe had argued that the destruction of the pirates on the coasts of Africa would be a worthy work for a great, far-sighted king like George I; he had envisioned the European nations joining together to make the seas safe and open to merchants of every nation. Because of the War of the Quadruple Alliance privateers were again being licensed in large numbers and joined the hoard of pirates already in the sea lanes. Moreover, some of the Madagascan pirates were negotiating with the Hanoverian enemy Sweden to become their privateers. In contrast to the opinions he expressed in his non-fiction, Defoe gives a more complex and sympathetic portrayal of pirates in the novels. Crusoe is in danger of being mistaken for a pirate simply because of the ship he has bought. Singleton has nowhere to go and no way of making a living and seems a drifter more than a predator. Descriptions of sailing 'up and down', chasing ships, and deciding more on whim than anything else to try another part of the world alternate with brief and often bloody fights and lists of prizes that give the men wealth they seem unable to enjoy. Quaker William, the witty resourceful Quaker who becomes Singleton's friend, lightens the novel's tone and distracts the reader from the pirates' cruelty and destructiveness so much that even the multiple violent deaths of men who sail with Singleton and Singleton's suicidal despair and paranoid retirement in England make little impression. 
Although not his next published novel, 'Col. Jack' (1722) is the natural extension of these travel novels, as is his 'A New Voyage Round the World' (1724). Jack, like Crusoe and Singleton, is a citizen of the world and a man on the make in a predatory economy. Like Singleton, he is left on his own in childhood. Over his long life he is a thief, a soldier in northern England, a kidnapped bondservant, a plantation owner and colonial trader, a gentleman traveller, a soldier in France and Italy on the side of France and Spain, a Jacobite who witnesses the battle at Preston (and is, therefore, a rebel), a captive of privateers, and a smuggler. As violent a novel as any written by Tobias Smollett, 'Col. Jack' depicts a society in which only the legal system works efficiently, and all Jack's occupations seem to be based on warfare, military or economic. His ships are sunk, captured, and confiscated, and in this crazy, evil world he fights for France and is robbed by French privateers, is a traitor because he prefers a former king over a present king, and experiences brutality in the streets, in London, in Edinburgh, on ships, on the plantations, and even in private homes regardless of his wealth, status, or citizenship. Something of a romantic in his individuality and especially in his yearnings for a home, a country, and happiness, Jack is never truly at home in the sombre violent societies in which he tries to operate. Defoe once called gangs, which proliferated as vigorously as pirates in the 1720s, 'land pirates', and Jack briefly belonged to one. Here, as in 'Moll Flanders' (1722) and 'Captain Singleton', Defoe's fascination with the formation of criminal minds is evident. Denied a calling, religious or familial, Jack is a vehicle for new psychological and historical variations on Defoe's religious and economic themes. 
The first part of 'Col. Jack' shows how the homeless boys in London become gangs of 'naked, ragged Rogues' who progress to adult gangs that terrorize travellers and then come to threaten inland trade to the extent that pirates did the import-export business. Their random crimes and their willingness to commit violence, their youth and lack of principles, and the number of men like them in the population made them especially frightening. In 'Moll Flanders', the novel often paired with 'Col. Jack', the first part shows Moll trying to succeed in the occupation that religion and society told her was her destiny and calling -- marriage. What she learns, of course, is that: '
What makes a homely Woman fair? 

About Five Hundred Pounds a Year 
('The Commentator', 1 Aug 1720)' She happens to be 'fair', compliant, and talented in all the arts, such as music, dancing, and conversation, that made women pleasing, but she has no money and no family. What the reader learns is that the marriage market and the thieves' underworld are mirror images -- deceit, opportunism, economic motives, and even the class system are the same. Of these novels a contemporary newspaper ('Flying Post', 1 March 1729) reported on their immediate and continuing popularity: '
Down in the kitchen, honest Dick and Doll 

Are studying Colonel Jack and Flanders Moll 
(Sutherland)' In this novel Defoe's belief that he should 'contribute... to the publick Welfare' is especially clear. Both in his exposure of the abuses inherent in the marriage market mentality of his time and in his warnings about underworld practices and their roots he exhibited the same keen interest and almost compulsive imagining of policy making apparent in his 'Essay upon Projects'. In a small way he used 'Moll Flanders' to serve national policy, specifically the somewhat controversial 'Transportation Act' of 1718, which allowed courts to sentence even clergied felons to transportation to America. On a very limited scale transportation had been used since before the Restoration as an alternative to capital punishment, and by 1700 had become a fairly common form of conditional pardon. The judge could pronounce it or the criminal could petition as Moll Flanders did for transportation. By 1722, the year 'Moll Flanders' was published, about 60 per cent of the convicted male clergiable felons and 46 per cent of the women were transported. As resistance began to form on both sides of the Atlantic, Defoe presents transportation as opportunity for the nation and individual criminals who can start afresh and prosper. 
Of 'Moll Flanders' James Joyce wrote, 'The first English author to write without imitating or adapting foreign works,... to devise for himself an artistic form which is perhaps without precedent... is Daniel Defoe, father of the English novel' (J. Joyce, 'Daniel Defoe', ed. and trans. J. Prescott, 'Buffalo Studies', 1, 1964, 7). In 'The Rise of the Novel' Ian Watt concluded of 'Moll Flanders': 'Very few writers have created for themselves both a new subject and a new literary form to embody it' (Watt, 134). Holding both literary and mass appeal, the novel is one of the most popular of all eighteenth-century novels. Its resilient optimistic heroine with her myriad adventures, griefs, and escapes and the story's happy ending appeal to all kinds of readers. An important portrayal of Defoe's time, the novel continues to challenge readers to confront enduring moral, economic, and social questions. Like all Defoe's novels, it is haunted by questions about evil: What is evil? What is its source? Of what are humans capable? Is a person good or evil, or just the person's words or actions? Is evil part of human nature, as basic as hunger or thirst? How does evil grow in the human heart? Why do the 'evils' in a society, such as ignorance and want, result in moral evil for the ignorant and wanting? Is Moll guilty or her society? 

'Journal of the Plague Year', published in the same year as 'Moll Flanders' and 'Col. Jack', may be Defoe's most under-appreciated great novel. H. F., the protagonist, lives in London throughout the plague, and he is torn between fleeing and staying, between pragmatic, even crass economic motives, and spiritual impulses, and, even more importantly, is obsessed with determining the reasons individuals get the plague. Very much a man of the time when the world was poised between the religious certainties of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and modern scepticism and secularism, H. F. collects evidence, ponders, sorts, and entertains or rejects hypotheses about the cause of the plague even as he seeks to understand God's will and occasionally succumbs to superstitions such as bibliomancy. That H. F.'s research is hopeless (the cause of plague was not identified until 1894 as the bacillus 'Yersinia pestis', which is primarily an internal parasite of rodents and carried initially by fleas) does nothing to detract from the energy of his mind and the questions Defoe raises about ethical conduct, public policy, and human limits. In this new way to cast the questions of the nature of the universe and the individual's relationship to God and his world, Defoe has, in the words of Maximillian Novak, created an innovative character distinguished by his 'general sympathy for the human condition' (M. Novak, 'Defoe and the disordered city', 'Publications of the Modern Language Association of America', 92, 1977). 
Absorbing contemporary concerns about society can easily be located as major themes or even motivating forces in all Defoe's novels. Just as the plague in Marseilles and the ways it had been used in the debates over restricting the import of calicoes as well as over the 'Quarantine Act' of 1721 helped shape 'Due Preparations for the Plague' and 'A Journal of the Plague Year', so the South Sea and stock company schemes and his reports of crimes and trials contributed to 'Moll Flanders' and 'Col. Jack'. Always the critical and independent thinker, Defoe could support the ship quarantine in the 'Quarantine Act' but oppose shutting up houses and point relentlessly at the possible consequences of quarantining entire towns. Defoe's novels demonstrate new ways for literature to participate in immediate debates and to become an instrument of social persuasion but also portray the eternal struggle of the individual against the 'wilderness of this world'. Every novel not only records but contributes to the thinking of his contemporaries, and some influenced public policy, as did 'Plague Year', which contributed to the repeal of the 'Quarantine Act' (1721) and to the reshaped act of 1722. The issues, large and small -- 'Robinson Crusoe' and Salters' Hall, 'Roxana' and the increase in fashionable gambling houses, 'Moll Flanders' and transportation, and 'Col. Jack' and the need for schools for the Blackguard boys -- are too numerous to identify. And yet the novels also explore the most enduring themes of life and literature: survival; the search for happiness; man against nature; the desire to escape urban complexity. Defoe's fictions gave literary history the defining characteristics of the novel, those characteristics that set it apart from, for instance, poetry and drama: its 'loose and baggy shape' and its 'obsession' with the mind, with identity. In fact, the form serves this kind of exploration of character and becomes a source of radical power because it is the structure of the mind and experiences of the character. 
With the profits from his novels and his daughter Hannah's profits from her South Sea stock, Defoe paid $1000 to the corporation of the city of Colchester in August 1722 for a ninety-nine-year lease on hundreds of acres of land that belonged to the city and for the timber rights which had never been granted to previous leaseholders. The beautiful healthy oak, ash, and elm trees, if carefully managed, were worth thousands of pounds. Located in the parish of St Michael, Mile End (now Myland), Essex, the land included Kingswood, the Severalls Brinkley farms (sometimes called Kingswood Heath), Tubswick in Lexden Hundred, and Pound Marsh. About the same time Defoe leased Broomfield in nearby Earlscolne parish. Also known as Pound Farm, it was located on the Colne River and had rich clay soil -- brick and tile clay soil. These properties already had buildings, fences, houses, and cultivated fields. Defoe reverted to the ambitions of his young manhood. He believed, as he said in 'Roxana', that a merchant was: 'the best Gentleman in the Nation; that in Knowledge, Manners, in Judgment of things... out-did many of the Nobility... able to spend more Money than a Gentleman of 5000 l. a Year Estate... [for] an Estate is a Pond; but... Trade was a Spring.' He bred cattle and raised corn, sold some of the corn as well as cheese, butter, veal, and beef, all established Colchester products. Over the next few years Defoe added honey and oysters to the commodities he sold from Colchester and even began to sell metal buttons, tanned leather, cloth, and imported anchovies in London, St Neots, Lichfield, Coventry, and other Cambridgeshire towns. So intent was Defoe on a second chance that he began to plan a tile factory on the Colchester land. Late in 1723 or early in 1724, he began to try to persuade John Ward, a Nuneaton mercer and linen draper, to become his partner. 
Also in 1722 Defoe began writing a series of respected books that changed his reputation again. He began 'Atlas maritimus', a huge economic geography with maps protected by a royal patent, and 'A Tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain', the only book written by Defoe that has consistently been described as approaching 'belles-lettres'. As Pat Rogers says, 'A Tour' 'has been lauded by the most eminent historians as a prime source of understanding for Britain', both in the eighteenth century and in 'the birth of the modern on a global scale' (Rogers, 11). As Defoe said in 'The Great Law of Subordination Consider'd', 'I made myself Master of the History, and 'ancient State of' 'England', I resolv'd in the next Place, to make my self Master of its 'Present State' also' (P. Rogers, introduction to D. Defoe, 'A Tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain', 1971, 34). Defoe's love for his country is everywhere in this survey of the entire nation. He begins his 'Tour' with the statement that his subject is 'the most flourishing and opulent Country in the World', and exults, '
Like 'Eden' Fruitful, like 'Arabia' Gay, 

So blest, they scarcely know for what to pray: 

ENGLAND in native Glory springs. 
(D. Defoe, 'A Tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain', 1724, 1.1)' Alive to landscape as he had seldom shown himself to be before 'Captain Singleton', he described scene after scene in books written in this period and invested these descriptions with the expansiveness and harmony of his vision for his country. He remarked on 'the glorious interspersing of capital Cities', the 'safe and capacious Havens', 'magnificent Buildings', 'innumerable Beauties [that] render the... View desirable and pleasant, and that in the most solid and significant manner'. He was simultaneously alive to history, to commercial produce and possibilities, and to the new tourist industry. The result was that he was the first to compose a book equally useful for those who wanted to view historical antiquities, to tour stately homes, to study agricultural and estate improvements, and to take a picturesque tour (in Rogers's words, 'a kind of aesthetic adventure' for persons of sensibility; Rogers, 40). 
Defoe began to invent an astonishingly detailed, carefully ordered construct towards which Great Britain might aspire. This construct is worked out primarily in 'A Tour', 'The Royal Progress' (both 1724), 'The Complete English Tradesman', 'A General History of Discoveries and Improvements' (both 1726), 'Plan of the English Commerce', 'Atlas maritimus and commercialis' (both 1728), and several shorter works such as 'An humble proposal to the people of England, for the encrease of their trade, and encouragement of their manufactures' (1729). In these books Defoe characterized the English people, identified their strengths and advantages, and charted their course to greatness. Typically, he began with surveys -- of the present state of England ('A Tour') and of their place in worldwide commercial history ('A General History of Discoveries and Improvements') -- and with guides for the most basic cogs in the machine ('The Great Law of Subordination Consider'd' and 'The Complete English Tradesman'). All of them have the spoke and wheel model that made London the centre -- goods flowing in to this great port from all over the world and all over Great Britain and then being redistributed throughout the world from this great collection centre. He insisted that London was the only port in the world on which every sea captain could depend to buy his cargo and then reload his ship, and he used homely examples to prove how dependent the country and the world were on the exchange of goods. For example, in a series of lists in 'Complete English Tradesman', Defoe shows how ordinary household furnishings and daily attire prove his point; he counts, for instance, eleven regions that contributed to a man's everyday outfit. 
Defoe's plan for his country was nothing less than world domination. Trade, not military might, would make this conquest. In 'Plan of the English Commerce' he wrote, 'Trade is the Foundation of Wealth, and Wealth of Power' and in 'The Advantages of Peace and Commerce' (1729) he said, 'if any one Nation could govern Trade, that Nation would govern the World'. He challenged his countrymen to duplicate the pattern of English commerce in their foreign trade. 'A Plan of the English Commerce' and 'Atlas maritimus' target countries and products and urge Englishmen to develop trade with them. His plan included establishing England's independence; very high on his list of priorities, therefore, is getting timber, hemp, turpentine, resin, and masts from the American colonies rather than from the Baltic and Scandinavian countries. That shipbuilding and repair had to depend on these fractious countries alarmed him. Another part of the plan was to identify the imports which worked against a favourable balance of trade or were, in his opinion, exorbitantly expensive. He argued that by studying climate as Crusoe had done Englishmen could plant more effectively and, for example, bring the price of coffee and spices down. He saw Africa as the most promising place for this endeavour. England's west coast territory, the part he called 'Guinea', was but two weeks away from London; in contrast, Jamaica with its similar climate was six to ten weeks over the treacherous open sea of the Atlantic. Defoe compared such things as latitude and chided the British for letting 'fruitful Soil [lie] waste'. He reminded them that even the slothful Portuguese now grew coffee in Brazil and their arch-rivals the Dutch in Java. 
Defoe's last years were not happy. By 1728 he was being sued for debt by John Ward, his tenant and manager of some of the Colchester property, and by Elizabeth Stancliffe and Mary Brooke, who were claiming $800 that Defoe had allegedly owed since 1692. In order to save the Colchester property, Defoe transferred it to his son Daniel, who was forced to mortgage it rapidly and repeatedly. His son Benjamin had quit studying for the law, become a journalist and hack writer, and had already been arrested and sent to Newgate for seditious writing. In October 1729 Defoe lost the Stancliffe-Brooke case in the court of exchequer. Were he not to pay, he could be prosecuted and gaoled for debt. Brooke, who survived Stancliffe, pursued her money until she was granted administration of Defoe's estate in 1733. By that time he had given his daughter Sophia's husband, Henry Baker, a 34 and a half year mortgage on his Stoke Newington house as pledge for her $500 dowry, and on 30 May 1730 Baker took possession. In the final year of his life Defoe moved among various London lodgings and a village in Kent. In his last surviving letter he describes himself as 'sinking under the Weight' of 'Insupportable Sorrows'. He writes about missing his family and being unable even to have them visit and the special pain from his (correct) belief that he would never see Sophia's first baby. 
On 24 April 1731 Defoe died in lodgings on Rope Makers' Alley, a winding street in the heart of the old City of London, and his death was recorded in the St Giles Cripplegate general registry, the registry holding his sisters' baptismal records. The cause of death was listed as a lethargy, what would now be called a stroke. He was buried in Bunhill Fields, the great cemetery for nonconformists, on 26 April 1731. His wife, Mary, was buried beside him on 19 December 1732. 
Even the most conservative lists of Defoe's works include 318 titles, and most Defoe scholars would credit him with at least 50 more. His greatest contributions to his contemporaries were his conception of what Great Britain could become and a style of writing effective for its propagation. His late economic writings offered England the most detailed description of what became England's vision of herself for 150 years and drove her imperial ambitions -- championing the settlement of North America when European attention was on South America and the Caribbean, for example. At the time he wrote, Walpole and Bolingbroke debated domestic economic policies, but Defoe made the globe his study. A protectionist like Walpole, Defoe differed from the prime minister in casting a critical eye on the great companies' monopolies and in defending high wages. An enemy like Bolingbroke of stockjobbing and the political liaison with the great companies, he had no patience with Bolingbroke's idealized picture of 'laissez-faire' or with his complaints about the rising power of the Commons. Even as Defoe applauded the measures Walpole took to lessen manufacturers' costs, encourage exports of manufactured goods, and raise the prices of imported goods not used as raw materials, he chafed over the lack of colonial investment and encouragement. None of these men was an original economist and each in his own way was conservative, but Defoe grasped the global reverberations of historical and contemporary actions and saw how symbiotic world trade was better than either of them. 
Defoe's immortality will always rest on a few of his novels, and especially on 'Robinson Crusoe', that immensely subtle, complex book with its simple plot and a character of compelling reality who appears in one archetypal incident after another. Embedded in world cultural consciousness, 'Robinson Crusoe' has never been out of print. Most people still encounter Crusoe in childhood and never forget him. Only the 'Bible' has been printed in more languages. From the very beginning Defoe's impact was international, as was the recognition that 'Robinson Crusoe' was a new 'literary' form with revolutionary power to 'instruct and delight'. The earliest experts celebrate it as such, as did Ludwig Vischer, who wrote the preface to the 1721 German translation. 'Moll Flanders', once considered coarse and low, now rivals 'Crusoe' in classrooms, and 'Roxana', whose title character was described by Charles Lamb as 'harlot and something worse', has attracted some of the most sophisticated criticism of the eighteenth-century novel. Students in a range of courses and programmes, including humanities in medicine, are reading 'The Journal of the Plague Year', and scholars study 'Col. Jack' for early attitudes towards slavery and even alcoholism. 
Defoe's novels have always led a double life. The greatest writers and thinkers of the eighteenth century praised him, and his novels were notoriously read in kitchens and hovels. Samuel Johnson named 'Robinson Crusoe' as one of only three books readers ever wished longer, and Charles Gildon noted, 'Not an old Woman that can go the Price of it, but buys thy Life and Adventures' (C. Gildon, 'The Life and Strange Surprizing Adventures of Mr. D -- De F -- ', 1917, ix-x). The same bifurcation continues today. Critics and students study the art of 'Moll Flanders', and movies and television films have fixed its reputation as 'a novel of lust, survival and protofeminist spirit' ('Newsweek', 14 Nov 1996, 83). Whether readers emphasize Defoe's intelligent brooding over the problem of crime or over women's situation in the world, see Moll as an example of capitalism run amok or of woman in a man's world, or simply celebrate her resilient spirit, the novel speaks eloquently to every generation. Important theorists indicate why. For instance, Pierre Machery finds Moll 'the eloquent, simple critic of love, commerce and marriage, those basic categories of... society' (P. Machery, 'A Theory of Literary Production', 1978, 247). Hubert Damish says of 'Robinson Crusoe' what is also true of 'Moll Flanders', that Defoe forces us 'to judge our needs, our productions, our values, our cultural heritage, by the sole light of necessity' (H. Damish, 'Robinsonnades I: the Allegory', 'October', 85, 1998, 19). 'Roxana' is universally described as 'disturbing'. Its technical and psychological mastery heightens portrayals of the situation of individuals, especially women, in modern society and themes such as the enquiry into the nature of evil. 
In the television production of 'Moll Flanders' (1996), Moll occasionally turns full face to the camera and asks the audience directly, 'What would you do?' 'Roxana' asks that question in even more complex troubling situations. Indisputably Defoe has created two of the strongest and most important women characters in the history of literature. Both are compelling individuals but they are also 'sites' that reveal the forces of history and society. John Richetti points out that Roxana 'aspires to a new category and actually declares that her ultimate ambition lies in a powerful androgyny' (J. Richetti, 'Defoe's Narratives', 1975, 195). Critics have turned the most powerful tools of modern theory -- psychoanalytic, Foucauldian, feminist -- on the novel. And yet 'Roxana' sells in airports with cover illustrations depicting Roxana gazing in a mirror or emerging from a curtain in her Turkish costume. 
Critical interest in 'Robinson Crusoe' has never diminished, and sophisticated work on the novel can be found in chapters in wide-ranging thematic studies and at special conferences. No history or discussion of the English novel is now written without considerable space devoted to Defoe's work. And the novel continues to inspire countless Robinsonade novels, stories, movies, and even television series, and some of the greatest writers, producers, and directors in dozens of countries have adapted it to their times. In the twentieth century Michael Tournier's 'Vendredi' (1985) and J. M. Coetzee's 'Foe' (1986) earned critical acclaim, and they indicate the international appeal of the story. Unlike Defoe's novel, many Robinsonades are utopian fictions, such as the influential 'Der schweizerische Robinson' (1812-13) by Johann David Wyss. Each author reaccentuates different parts of the novel to meet cultural needs and immediate concerns, as 'Castaway' (2000) did. In this film Friday is a volleyball, and he has also been depicted as robots, fairies, and almost anything imaginable. Directed by Robert Zemeckis and starring Tom Hanks, 'Castaway' was the top film in January 2001, and, like all good Robinsonades, it captured a nation's obsessions, once again testing an Everyman within the myth. Luis Bunuel's 'The Adventures of Robinson Crusoe' (1952) features Crusoe alone for seven of the ten reels of the film, a daring experiment that 'Castaway' repeats. Bunuel, the master of horror and surrealism, explained that he was attracted to Crusoe's struggle with despair, a theme in a number of his best-known films (A. Corvin, 'The celluloid Crusoe', PhD diss., University of Wisconsin, 1989, 20-21). 'Robinson Crusoe' has inspired a line of science-fiction films, again written, directed, or produced by the most distinguished people in the field. For instance, Byron Haskin, who directed 'The War of the Worlds' and Disney's first live-action film, maintained that 'Robinson Crusoe on Mars' (1964) was the best film he ever directed, and it has been named one of the twenty best science-fiction films ever produced (ibid., 132-3, 141-2). Dozens of intriguing movies not of this calibre have been made -- 'Little Robinson Corkscrew' (1924), 'Mr Robinson Crusoe' (1931; Crusoe, Douglas Fairbanks, swings through trees like Tarzan and is rescued by a boatload of pin-up girls), 'Sex Family Robinson' (1968), and 'Mickey Mouse: Mickey's Man Friday' (1935), one of six Robinsonade movies Walt Disney made. Movies and made-for-television films are shown frequently, and the 1960 television series 'Gilligan's Island' is still shown in America. Cartoons such as 'Molly Moo Cow and Robinson Crusoe' adapt the story creatively. Molly washes up on Crusoe's island and wants to be his friend. He is rude and finally manages to drive her away, but when some stereotypical savages land and Crusoe calls for help Molly returns, rescues him, and becomes his Friday -- a bizarre twist to 'girl Friday'. 
In a time when fewer and fewer eighteenth-century novels are being read or even taught, most of Defoe's have become fashionable and significant again as they speak to modern post-colonial concerns and contribute to an understanding of public-health decisions, crime, cities, the family, and political economy. Again and again Defoe seems not just timely, but prescient. 
Defoe's greatest bequests to posterity are his contributions to modern journalism and his place in the development of the English novel and novelistic discourse. From the beginning of his career he worked to design a prose style that would communicate clearly. He wanted to write so that he could not be misunderstood; he wrote 'the best Rule in all Tongues (viz) to make the Language plain, artless, and honest, suitable to the Story, and in a Stile easie and free... that the meanest Reader may meet with no Difficulty in the Reading and may have no Obstruction to his searching the History of things by their being obscurely represented. (Backscheider, 'Defoe', 532)' Although Defoe's style is not praised as often as that of Addison, Swift, or Johnson, it has far more versatility and has always attracted admirers. James Joyce described the style of 'A Journal of the Plague Year' as 'masterly' and even 'orchestral', and countless other novelists have cited Defoe's influence. That Joyce would select for special praise what is perhaps Defoe's most journalistic novel is fitting. The energetic combination of fact, narrative, and editorial commentary that Defoe developed in 'The Review' serves the novel well. Writing at a time when novels by William Chetwood, Penelope Aubin, Charles Gildon, Eliza Haywood, and Jane Barker wavered wildly among the prose styles of the pastoral romance, the southern European novella, Renaissance euphuism, and 'plain' English discourse, Defoe calmly developed a narrative voice that did more to establish the perimeters of novelistic discourse than any other writer. The idea that the phrase 'immethodical homespun garrulity' characterizes his writing and that he wrote without much self-consciousness, art, or revision has long been discredited. The manuscript of 'The Compleat English Gentleman' (first published in 1890, ed. K. D. Bulbring) shows many corrections, additions, deletions, and revisions as well as a substantial number of the tricks of an experienced, confident, voluminous, and somewhat repetitious writer (abbreviations, sketched or shorthand sections). One of the few novelists who has consistently appealed to the intellectual and the masses, Defoe has never lost his appeal. Several of his novels have never been out of print, and understanding of his importance to the history of the novel continues to grow. 


@@@@@


doc= 7422


Gex, Sir John Peter De (1809-1887), legal writer, was born in London, the eldest son of John De Gex, hotel-keeper, of Leicester Place, London, who came from Switzerland but settled in England about the beginning of the century. He matriculated from Jesus College, Cambridge in 1827, graduated BA in 1831, and proceeded MA in 1834, when he also became a fellow of his college. In 1874 he was elected to an honorary fellowship. Having entered Lincoln's Inn on 4 November 1831, he was called to the bar there in January 1835. His name first appears in the 'Law List' in 1837. For many years he had next to no practice, and devoted himself to reporting. He collaborated with Basil Montagu and Edward Deacon to produce three volumes of 'Cases in Bankruptcy' (1842-5). In 1852 he published a further volume of cases in bankruptcy, reported by himself alone. At the same time he was reporting cases in chancery, in conjunction with John Smale, which were published in five volumes (1849-53). With Steuart Macnaghten he wrote reports of 'Cases in the Court of Appeal in Chancery', known as 'De Gex, Macnaghten, and Gordon's reports' (1851-7). Subsequently he wrote on the same subject in collaboration with H. Cadman Jones, F. Fisher, and R. Horton Smith. 
De Gex took silk in 1865, in company with Joshua Williams and George Jessel, afterwards master of the rolls. On 19 April following he was elected a bencher of his inn. In 1867 in conjunction with R. Horton Smith he published 'Arrangements between Debtors and Creditors under the Bankruptcy Act, 1861', which consisted of a collection of precedents of deeds of arrangement, with an introduction and notes, and a digest of cases. Supplements appeared in 1868 and 1869. In 1871 De Gex became a director of the Legal and General Insurance Office, of which he had been appointed auditor in 1867. 
For many years De Gex had an extensive practice in bankruptcy. However in 1869 he played a leading part in the case of the duke of Newcastle against Morris, which belongs as much to constitutional as to private law. The question was whether the duke of Newcastle, not being engaged in trade, was exempt from the operation of the law of bankruptcy on the ground of his being a peer. The bankruptcy court held that he was exempt. The case was elaborately argued before the Court of Appeal, De Gex being the leading counsel for the appellant, and Sir Roundell Palmer representing the duke. Lord Justice Giffard decided in favour of the appeal. In 1882 De Gex was elected treasurer of Lincoln's Inn, and in December of the same year he was knighted on the occasion of the opening of the new lawcourts. He had then recently retired from practice. In 1880 he married Alice Emma, eldest daughter of Sir John Henry Briggs. De Gex died on 14 May 1887 at his residence, 20 Hyde Park Square, London, and was buried on 19 May at Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7423


Degge, Sir Simon (1612?-1703), judge, was probably born on 5 January 1612, the eldest son of Thomas Degge (died 1628) of Strangsall, Uttoxeter, Staffordshire, and Dorothy, daughter of George Crichlow of Wolscote, Staffordshire. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1639, but the civil war interrupted his studies. As a royalist he was present at the siege of Lichfield in 1643 and was captured at Stafford. Eventually he received a licence from the Stafford county committee to reside at home in Callowhill, Kingston. He compounded for delinquency in November 1645. Degge had married Jane (1609/10-1652), daughter of Thomas Orrell, but following her death in July 1652, on 7 December 1652 he married Alice Oldfield (1614-1696), relict of James Trollope (died 1649), of Spalding, Lincolnshire. 
Degge resumed his legal studies and was called to the bar on 24 November 1653. He practised as a civilian lawyer in Doctors' Commons. In 1660 he became puisne judge of Carmarthen circuit and two years later a justice of the Welsh marches. Both places he retained until 1674. In 1661 he became recorder of Derby and in 1662 steward of the court of the manor of Peverel. He was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple on 7 November 1668, but he was 'disbenched' in 1674 for refusing to read at the next Lent vacation. He was knighted on 2 March 1670. Degge served as high sheriff of Derbyshire in 1674-5 and the following year published 'The Parson's Counsellor, with Law of Tithes or Tithing', a leading textbook on the subject for many years. Degge was a committed tory and during the reign of James II freely consented to the 'three questions' posed by the king's agents. This led to some royal support for a parliamentary candidature in 1688, but it did not lead to Degge having any truck with dissenters as he refused to let Derby's dissenters meet despite the declaration of indulgence. 
In his later years Degge seems to have pursued his antiquarian interests, providing William Woolley with information for his 'History of Derbyshire'. Degge's 'Observations upon the possessions of monastery-lands in Staffordshire' was included in Sampson Erdeswick's 'A Survey of Staffordshire' (1717). Degge died on 10 February 1703, having recently made his will in which he declared his wish to be buried in the 'little chapel I lately built adjoining to the parish church of Kingston'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7424


Heere, Lucas de (1534-1584), painter and poet, was born in Ghent, the second son of Jan de Heere, a sculptor, and Anna Smijters, a miniaturist. Having presumably received some training at home, he was apprenticed to Frans Floris. The painter and biographer Karel van Mander was subsequently de Heere's pupil and the biography written by the former provides much information. Only one signed work survives by de Heere: 'Solomon and Sheba' (1559; cathedral church of St Bavo, Ghent), in which the face of Solomon is recognizably that of Philip II of Spain. Both de Heere and his father were employed in July 1559 on the decorations for the final chapter of the order of the Golden Fleece in Ghent Cathedral, with which this painting may be connected. A 'View of the Estate of St Bavo' (Rijksuniversiteit, Ghent) and a 'Crucifixion' (St Pauwels, near St Niklaas, Oost-Vlaanderen) have been ascribed to de Heere on the basis of documents. 'The Liberal Arts Slumbering in Time of War' (Galleria Sabauda, Turin) has also been attributed to him, by comparison with the signed drawing of the 'Three Virtues Asleep' (1564; Staatliche Graphische Sammlung, Munich), but this attribution remains inconclusive. 
De Heere was a member of the chamber of rhetoric known as Jesus with the Balsam Flower and wrote numerous poems, of which the best known today are included in the anthology of his poetic works 'De hof en boemgaerd der poesien' ('The Garden and Orchard of Poetry'), compiled in 1561. This volume refers to the status of art and artists and to the pre-eminence of painting among the liberal and mechanical arts, and includes a mythical contest in which Apollo decides in favour of art (then regarded as a manual and not an intellectual activity) over the accepted liberal art categories of the 'trivium' and 'quadrivium', by reference to the book of 'Exodus'. It also contains a defence of his old master, Floris, against an anonymous attack. Van Mander stated that during the iconoclasm that swept the Low Countries in 1566 de Heere hid some of Floris's works. Van Mander also recorded that de Heere wrote biographies of artists, but that he (van Mander) did not succeed in obtaining them; presumably they were inspirational to him. In a letter of September 1582 to the duc d'Anjou, de Heere referred to his employment by d'Anjou's mother, Catherine de' Medici, queen of France, in 1559-60. The designs for the Valois tapestries, 1582-5 (Uffizi, Florence), long considered to have been made by a Netherlandish artist with a connection to d'Anjou, have plausibly been attributed on stylistic grounds to de Heere, who is recorded by van Mander as travelling to France at an unspecified date, where he made tapestry designs. As members of the reformed religion, de Heere and his wife, Eleanora Carboniers, were proscribed by name in 1568, but may have fled to London as early as 1566. They are recorded there in 1571 and 1576. While in England, de Heere painted a gallery with the costumes of all nations for Edward Fiennes Clinton, earl of Lincoln (destr.). This included an Englishman unable to choose which clothes to wear, an image said to have amused Elizabeth I and to be typical of the nation. Drawings of costumes of the British Isles are also included in his 'Beschriving der Britsche Eilanden' (1573-5; BL) and 'Theatre de tous le peuples et nations de la terre' (1568 and later; Ghent University Library). The attribution to de Heere of 'The Family of Henry VIII: an Allegory of the Tudor Succession' ('c'.1572; National Museum and Gallery, Cardiff), an image intended to reinforce Elizabeth I's right to the throne, is probably correct. This work belonged to Francis Walsingham whose contacts with de Heere are referred to in a letter dated July 1576 from William of Orange ('Proceedings of the Huguenot Society', 4, 1891-3, 39). Portraits formerly attributed to de Heere on the basis of the monogram HE have been reattributed to Hans Eworth; consequently, the extent of de Heere's 'oeuvre' during his English period has been much reduced. He contributed drawings and poetry to the friendship books of his fellow exiles Abraham Ortelius (Pembroke College, Cambridge), Emanuel van Meteren (Bodl. Oxf.), and the merchant Jan Radermacher (Ghent University Library). The device of the 'Siren Luring Sailors to their Doom', which he drew in a fictive oval frame with accompanying verses on 2 August 1576 in the book belonging to the painter Joris Hoefnagel (Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam), bears his punning motto 'Schade Leer U' ('Misfortune teaches you') which van Mander stated that he adopted as an anagram of his name. While in London de Heere took John de Critz the elder, sergeant-painter 1605-42, as a pupil. De Heere and his wife returned to Ghent after the pacification in 1576 and he was subsequently involved in the celebrations that took place on the announcement of an engagement between Elizabeth I and the duc d'Anjou in 1581, and the triumphal entries into Ghent of William of Orange in 1577 and the duc d'Anjou in 1582. De Heere died on 29 August 1584, possibly in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 7425


Deicolus (d. c.625), Benedictine monk and hermit, was allegedly a companion of St Columbanus of Luxeuil and Bobbio (died 615), and a half-brother of Gall of St Gallen. His feast day is 18 January. 
According to his life, written about 965, sickness prevented Deicolus from following Columbanus when the Irish missionary and his followers were expelled from Burgundy about 611 by King Theuderic II and his grandmother, Queen Brunechildis. Since the departing Columbanus forbade Deicolus to return to the former's foundation of Luxeuil (north of Besancon, in what is now eastern France), he founded a hermitage nearby at a church dedicated to St Martin. After some initial resistance, Deicolus obtained royal privileges and, during a visit to Rome, the protection of the pope. Thus the foundation was laid for what was later to become the monastery of Lure, a few miles south of Luxeuil. At the end of his life Deicolus retreated to a little oratory and died there on 18 January, about 625. He was buried at Lure. 
Although he is not in the list of companions of Columbanus known by name, claims to Deicolus's historicity may have some justification. He is mentioned as a disciple of Colman in the martyrology of Donegal on the same feast day as in continental documents. The life of Germanus, monk of Luxeuil and first abbot of the neighbouring monastery of Granfelden (Grandval), is dedicated to a Deicolus, who may be identical with the one of Lure. The name appears repeatedly in Irish texts, and is also borne by the Carolingian teacher and astronomer Dicuil, who flourished at the beginning of the ninth century. 
Some episodes of Deicolus's biography, however, seem to derive from the earlier life of his alleged half-brother St Gall. The visit to Rome in order to obtain privileges from the pope also indicates the late date of Deicolus's life. The fact that 'Dicuill' is also the name of one of the companions of Fursa, whose feast day occurs on 16 January, may point to some confusion between the two. But some credence may be given to the statement that Deicolus handed over his monastery at Lure to a 'Columbinus' ('sic'), as a 'Columbanus' is also mentioned as one of the disciples of the St Columbanus in Jonas's contemporary life of the latter. 


@@@@@


doc= 7426


Deios, Laurence (d. 1618), Church of England clergyman, was a native of Shropshire. He matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, in Easter 1571, graduated BA in January 1573, became a fellow in March 1573, and proceeded MA in 1576 and BD in 1583. Deios won preferments from the Elizabethan episcopate, being a chaplain to both John Aylmer, bishop of London, and John Whitgift, archbishop of Canterbury, and was collated by the latter to the rectory of Chiddingstone, Kent, on 16 April 1585, to the rectory of East Horsley, Surrey, on 14 June 1590, and to the rectory of Brasted, Kent, on 13 November 1591. The series of records collected under the heading of the 'Remembrancia' relate how in 1581 Deios had demonstrated both his sacerdotalism and his anti-puritanism when clashing with the aldermen of London over the scheme to increase the number of preachers in the city: according to them he had asserted in a sermon 'that if the appointing of preachers was committed to them, they would [appoint] such as would defend usury, the family of love and puritanism' (Overall and Overall, 355-6). Deios was loyal to the Church of England as by law established and defended its doctrine and discipline in his chief printed work, published in 1591 and entitled 'That the pope is that Antichrist; and an answer to the objections of sectaries, which condemn this Church of England', which contained two sermons, one of which had been preached at Paul's Cross. It is likely that Deios resided at his Chiddingstone living in Kent, for he was buried there on 27 December 1618. 


@@@@@


doc= 7427


Keyser, William de (c.1647-c.1692), painter, was a native of Antwerp. He was a jeweller by profession, with a large and prosperous business in Antwerp, but occupied his leisure hours: 'early & late constantly studying the Art of Painting. in all kinds. in Water. in Oyl. in Enamel. in large & in Small. from one degree to another. till at lenght ['sic'] he wholly applyd himself to study Painting in Oyl painting as large as Nature. (Vertue, 'Note books', 102)' He executed several altarpieces for churches in Antwerp and one for the English nuns in Dunkirk while he was there 'upon some business relating to Jewelling' (ibid.). It pleased them so much that they persuaded him that he could make his fortune as a painter in England and provided him with an introduction to Lord Melfort, then a favourite at the court of James II. Prompted by this encouragement and his ambition to become a painter rather than a jeweller -- a profession that he had never liked, according to Vertue -- de Keyser, 'without giving the least notice to his wife & Family at home' (ibid., 103), availed himself of a fair wind and a ship returning to England with a 'Friend or two on board' and was soon in London. There he was well received by Lord Melfort and 'by many people of Quality who had known him a broad' and was introduced to James II, 'who promis'd him encouragement in his Art' (ibid.). He decided to settle in England and concentrate on history painting, and sent for his wife and family with instructions to dispose of his business and effects in Antwerp. His timing was unfortunate, for the revolution of 1688 began soon after their arrival and de Keyser was deprived of his best patrons. He continued to work but his finances were drained by 'hangers on' and his study of the philosopher's stone (ibid.). 
De Keyser died in reduced circumstances about 1692, aged forty-five. He left a daughter, whom he had educated as an artist. Her husband, a Mr Humble, 'woud not permitt her' to paint, but after his death she showed 'by her performances to have had a good genius. & paints. in Oyl in small, from the Life, & copys paintings very curiously. & neatly' (Vertue, 'Note books', 103). She died in December 1724. Vertue, who knew her personally, stated that she had several paintings by her father, including a self-portrait and an altarpiece of St Catherine commissioned by the queen for Somerset House chapel, and others that showed him to have studied carefully the style and colouring of the Italian masters. A 'St Jerome' after de Keyser is at Nottingham Castle Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 7428


Dekker, Thomas (c.1572-1632), playwright and pamphleteer, is of obscure origins, and his own words are often the only source for personal details. Nothing is known of his parents, though his name suggests that he was of Dutch descent. His date of birth is generally given as about 1572 from the epistle dedicatory to 'English Villainies' (1632) in which Dekker refers to 'my three-score years'. He had already hinted at his declining years in the dedication to 'Match mee in London' (1631), claiming: 'I have been a priest in Apollo's temple many years; my voice is decaying with my age'. In all probability he was born in London, where he lived all his life. Dekker consistently presented himself as the city's devoted and nurtured son. Writing about London in 'The Seven Deadly Sinnes' (1606), Dekker claimed that 'from thy womb received I my being, from thy brests my nourishment' (sig. A3'v'). Years later, in 'A Rod for Run-Awayes' (1625), he still presented himself as one of London's sons: 'O London! (thou Mother of my life, Nurse of my being)' (sig. B'v'). 
There is no evidence regarding Dekker's education; no reference that he attended university, or any sign that he had any special familiarity with the inns of court. However, his writing strongly suggests that he had a grammar school education. An accomplished Latin scholar, he translated Fredriech Dedekind's Latin poem 'Grobianus' as 'The Guls Horne-Book' (1609). Dekker had an extensive working knowledge of the classics, including Ovid, Horace, Virgil, and Martial. He was an avid reader of contemporary authors, and Stow, Holinshed, and Harrington were all sources for his writing. In 'A Knight's Conjuring' (1607) he writes of an authors' Elysium, where he pays special tribute to 'old Chaucer' and 'his son', 'grave Spenser'. Among the others who were there, but 'in another company', were Thomas Kyd, Christopher Marlowe, Robert Greene, George Peele, and his old friend and collaborator Henry Chettle, all of whom watch as Thomas Nashe arrives denouncing 'dry-fisted patrons'. Dekker's sole livelihood was writing. He was principally a playwright, though he later turned his hand to non-dramatic pamphlets, mayoral pageants and public entertainments, satires, commendatory verse, and other poetry. That Dekker, unlike many of his contemporary writers, had no consistent patron, no financial investments in either the theatre or the printing industry, and was not an actor, meant that he was constantly shadowed by debt. From topical and thematic issues in his writing to moments of personal crisis, debt had a marked effect upon his career. Sometimes it overwhelmed him. He was imprisoned for debt in 1598 and 1599, and he spent seven years from 1612 to 1619 in the king's bench prison, during which time his first wife, Mary, died. She was buried in St James, Clerkenwell, on 24 July 1616. The couple had three daughters whose baptisms are all recorded in the register of St Giles, Cripplegate: Dorcas, baptized on 27 October 1594; Elizabeth, on 29 November 1598; and Anne, on 24 October 1602. 
In January 1598 Dekker makes his first appearance in Henslowe's diary. The record shows that Philip Henslowe, on behalf of the Lord Admiral's Men, laid out $4 'to bye a boocke of mr dicker called fayeton' ('Henslowe's Diary', ed. Foakes and Rickert, 86), a play Dekker later revised for the court for a further 30's'. Henslowe's accounts reveal that between the beginning of 1598 and the end of 1602, Dekker had a hand in over forty plays, including script doctoring and revising both his own plays and those of other writers. All but a handful of these plays are lost. Involved in at least fifteen plays in 1598 alone -- the year in which Henslowe began keeping details of the dramatists responsible for each play -- Dekker may be considered an accomplished playwright at this stage. In his literary review published in that year, 'Palladis tamia', Francis Mere names Dekker alongside William Shakespeare, Michael Drayton, George Chapman, and Ben Jonson as 'our best for Tragedy'. The best evidence of Dekker's experience as a writer prior to 1598 is his involvement in the play 'Sir Thomas More', the manuscript of which is in the British Library. Never staged, the play was written about 1593-4 for the Lord Strange's Men and the Admiral's Men who acted together at that time. It seems likely that Anthony Munday wrote the lion's share of the original play, possibly with Chettle and Dekker (with Dekker writing the 'prentices scene'). The play then ran into problems with both the theatre company and the master of the revels, Edmund Tilney, who seemed unwilling to give it a licence. Dekker is among those brought in to revise the play, and thirty-one lines in his own handwriting have been identified. Other hands also distinguished are those of Shakespeare, Chettle, and, possibly, Thomas Heywood. 
According to Henslowe's diary, until the end of 1602 Dekker was sole author of just seven plays: 'Phaeton' (January 1598, and altered for the court in 1601); 'The Triplicity of Cuckolds' (March 1598); 'The Gentle Craft' (July 1599), published in 1600 as 'The Shomakers Holiday' after being played before Elizabeth I at court on new year's night; 'Bear a Brain' (August 1599); 'The Whole History of Fortunatus' (November 1599), published in 1600 as 'The Pleasant Comedie of Old Fortunatus' (which Dekker also altered for the court in December 1599); 'Medicine for a Curst Wife' (September 1602); and 'Fortune's Tennis' (September 1600). 'The Shoemaker's Holiday' has become Dekker's most famous play. Although the play concludes with a feast and the eponymous holiday, it carefully depicts some of the cultural tensions of contemporary London society. It combines much which marks Dekker's style, including a compassionate and sensitive presentation of lower-class characters and an intimate depiction of London. 
Writing for Henslowe was predominantly a collaborative business. During this period Dekker mainly worked with Drayton, Chettle, and Robert Wilson, in a variety of configurations, and in association with other playwrights. In just over two months, Dekker, Chettle, Drayton, and Wilson produced five plays: 'The Famous Wars of Henry I' (March 1598), 'Godwin and his Three Sons' (March 1598), 'Pierce of Exton' (April 1598), 'Black Batman of the North' (May 1598), and 'Godwin, part II' (June 1598). For the rest of 1598 Dekker worked with Drayton and Wilson, producing: 'Madman's Morris' (July 1598), 'Hannibal and Hermes' (July 1598), 'Pierce of Winchester' (August 1598), 'Hannibal and Hermes, part II', otherwise called, by Henslowe, 'Worse Afeared than Hurt' (September 1598). With Drayton alone, Dekker wrote: 'The First Civil Wars of France' (September 1598), 'Conan, Prince of Cornwall' (October 1598), 'The Civil Wars of France, part II' (November 1598), and 'The Civil Wars of France, part III' (December 1598). Early in the new year he joined Henry Chettle to write: 'Troilus and Cressida' (April 1599), of which a plot fragment survives; 'The Tragedy of Agamemnon, or, Orestes Furious' (May 1599); 'The Stepmother's Tragedy' (October 1599). Towards the end of 1599 Dekker and Chettle worked with Jonson '& other Jentellman' (probably John Marston) to produce 'Robert II, or, The Scot's tragedy' (September 1599); and with William Haughton for 'Patient Grissill' (November-December 1599), published in 1603. Amid the period with Chettle, Dekker co-authored 'The Lamentable Tragedy of Page of Plymouth' (August 1599) solely with Jonson. 
About this time Dekker's collaborations became more varied. In early 1600 he joined Haughton and John Day to write 'The Spanish Moor's tragedy' (February 1600), which possibly appeared later as 'Lusts Dominion', published in 1657. Chettle joined Haughton, Day, and Dekker for 'The Seven Wise Masters' (March 1600); and Dekker, Chettle, and Day wrote 'The Golden Ass, [or], Cupid and Psyche' (April-May 1600). A month later he worked with four other writers -- Drayton, Richard Hathway, Anthony Munday, and Wilson -- to produce 'The Fair Constance of Rome' (June 1600). After this play Dekker's prodigious output for Henslowe and the Admiral's Men tapered off; and the only play recorded in Henslowe's diary for the whole of 1601 is 'King Sebastion of Portugal' (May 1601), written with Chettle. Apart from those which were published, all of these plays are lost. 
Towards the end of 1600 Dekker's exclusive relationship with Henslowe and the Admiral's Men came to an end as his pen was employed by other companies. How much this change was a consequence of his involvement in the so-called 'war of the theatres' is difficult to say. The first play identified as Dekker's after his departure from Henslowe is 'Satiro-mastix' (entered in the Stationers' register, 11 November 1601), published in 1602. The play appears to be located on the cusp of the stage quarrel, being produced by both the Paul's Boys (boy actors were in vogue at the time) in a private theatre (Paul's), and by adult actors of the Chamberlain's Men at a traditional public theatre (Globe). Competition between public and private theatres, and rivalry between the companies, underpinned the 'war'. 

'Satiro-mastix' was, in part, a response to Jonson's attack on Marston and Dekker which seems to have begun in 'Every Man out of His Humour' (1599), and culminated in 'Cynthia's Revels' (1600) and 'Poetaster' (1601). In 'Poetaster', Marston is represented as Crispinus, a dilettante and impecunious poet who turns to writing for players, whereupon he encounters Demetrius Fannius, representing Dekker, a hack writer, 'a dresser of plays about the town', one who will slander any man for money -- not least the poet Horace, in whom Jonson thinly disguises himself. With possible assistance from Marston, Dekker's responding mockery in 'Satiro-mastix' recasts Crispinus and Demetrius as reputable young men who see Horace as a pompous, selfish, and sycophantic hypocrite. Although some of the mud stuck in this slanging match, Dekker's play was the last salvo in the writers' conflict and they became friends again soon after. 
Not directly part of the quarrel, Dekker wrote another play at this time for the Paul's Boys: 'Blurt Master-Constable' (1602), hitherto thought to have been the work of Thomas Middleton. This means that Dekker wrote only four plays between September 1600 and January 1602, whereupon he resumed working for Henslowe. And, although published in 1602, it is possible that his commendatory verses for Anthony Munday, 'The Third and Last Part of Palmerin of England', were written in 1601. Such little writing appears to be anomalous, and would have hardly constituted a living for the playwright. However, if Dekker wrote anything else for the Paul's Boys or another non-Henslowe company there are no records. 
Dekker's return to Henslowe was as a play dresser. He supplied the prologue and epilogue to 'Pontius Pilate' (January 1602); and provided alterations to 'Tasso's Melancholy' ('c'.1602) which had appeared previously in 1594. With Munday he wrote 'Jeptha' (May 1602); and in collaboration with Munday, Drayton, Middleton, and Webster, he produced 'Caesar's Fall, or, The Two Shapes' (May 1602). But his relationship with the company with whom he had worked for at least the last four years was starting to unravel. In July 1602 Dekker was paid $4 on behalf of the Admiral's Men in part payment for 'Medicine for a Curst Wife' (July-September 1602); Henslowe cancelled these payments, only to restore them later. By September, Dekker had been paid $6 in full for the play on behalf of the Lord Worcester's Men, in whose employ he remained for the rest of the year. For them he revamped the 1599 Admiral's Men's play 'Sir John Oldcastle' by writing additions to it for 'Sir John Oldcastle, Part II' (September 1602). With Webster, Chettle, Heywood, and Wentworth Smith, he wrote 'Lady Jane, or, The Overthrow of Rebels, part I' (October 1602); and a few weeks later he alone was contracted to write 'Lady Jane, part II' (October 1602). Whether the latter was completed is unclear; however, the 'Lady Jane' plays survive in an abridged and modified form as 'The Famous History of Sir Thomas Wyatt', published in 1607 with Dekker and Webster cited as the authors. Dekker's last play prior to Elizabeth's death was written with Webster, Chettle, and Heywood: 'Christmas Comes but Once a Year' (November 1602). Apart from 'Sir Thomas Wyatt', all his 1602 output is lost. 
Dekker's time as a prolific writer of plays within Henslowe's circle of playwrights was coming to a close. Only Chettle, his old friend and collaborator, appears in Henslowe's accounts to have been more productive. More than once Henslowe lent Dekker money to discharge his debts, though keeping his writers out of gaol was good business practice as much as beneficence. 
Until the end of 1602 Dekker could be considered the consummate Elizabethan playwright: writing popular plays for a broad audience across a range of topics and genres, often lacing them with the prosaic aspects of London life. Yet Elizabeth's passing, initially at least, appeared to provide increased opportunities for the versatile and established writer. In 1603 Dekker and his old rival Jonson were commissioned to write London's official greeting of the new king: 'The Magnificent Entertainment Given to King James', published in 1604. Following this Dekker wrote commendatory verses for Stephen Harrison's 'The Arches of Triumph Erected in Honour of James I' (1604). Unfortunately the virulent plague which delayed 'The Magnificent Entertainment' kept returning and closing the theatres; and it was the stage which provided Dekker's main source of income. In response Dekker turned to writing pamphlets for London's increasing book trade. His first was a eulogy for Elizabeth, written through images of the plague, entitled 'The Wonderfull Yeare' (1603). Plague as a topic proved to be surprisingly popular and this pamphlet was followed by 'Newes from Gravesend' (1604). 
But working for London's pamphlet publishers and booksellers did not pay as well as writing plays and as soon as the theatres reopened Dekker returned to producing for the stage. On the accession of James I, his old company came under new management: the Admiral's Men became Prince Henry's Men. For the new company Dekker joined Middleton to write 'The Honest Whore, Part I' (1604); this was followed by 'The Honest Whore, Part II' (1605) which he wrote alone. At the same time, with Webster, he also found employment with the Paul's Boys, producing 'Westward Hoe' (1604) and 'Northward Hoe' (1605), both published in 1607. It is likely that 'The Roaring Girle' (1605?), in collaboration with Middleton, was Dekker's last happy experience with playwriting for some time. 
About 1606 the Paul's Boys collapsed, and soon after Dekker fell out with Prince Henry's Men. 'The Whore of Babylon' (1607), an anti-papist jibe, was not a dramatic success, and he did not write another play for the next four years. In 1611 he wrote 'If this be not Good the Divel is in it' for Prince Henry's Men, but they turned it down. Bitter and upset, Dekker touted the play around until it was taken up by the Queen's Majesty's Company at the Red Bull Theatre. Many theatre companies were experiencing difficulties through plague and competition, and Dekker found it difficult to gauge the audiences' taste which seemed to prefer sharp satires and gory tragedies -- genres which, in the main, Dekker eschewed. 
As Dekker's dramatic production tapered off, so his pamphlet writing increased. He cast his literary net wide looking for a readership to sustain him. His non-dramatic writing of this period began with 'The Double PP' (1606) which, like 'The Whore of Babylon', attempted to cash in on anti-Catholic sentiment following the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot. More viable was 'The Seven Deadly Sinnes of London' (1606), a lively satire on city life. Dekker returned to writing plague texts in his homage to Thomas Nashe's 'Pierce Penilesse, his Supplication to the Divell' entitled 'Newes from Hell' (1606). Both tracts are predicated upon the precarious status of authorship at this time. Dekker expanded 'Newes from Hell' to produce 'A Knight's Conjuring' (1607). Not least of the pamphlet writer's discontent was the fact that, without copyright or royalties, authors got a one-off fee for their work. Consequently much of the writing was produced in haste, which often had deleterious effects on its literary merit. 'Jests to Make you Merie', with George Wilkins (1607), 'The Dead Tearme' (1607), and 'The Great Frost: Cold Doings in London, Except it be at the Lotterie' (1608) suffer from these effects to a certain degree. 
A more productive method, deployed by Dekker, consisted of reworking his own writing and that of others, to generate a 'new' pamphlet for the publisher and reader. In so doing Dekker drew upon and updated Elizabethan writers such as John Awdeley, Thomas Harman, Robert Greene, and Nashe, for his cony-catching and canting literature. The first of these was 'The Belman of London' (1608); a sequel, 'Lanthorn and Candle-Light, or, The Bell-Mans Second Nights Walke' (1608) became one of Dekker's most popular pamphlets, and went through at least nine editions in the next forty years. Notable among those editions are 'O per se O... being an Addition, or Lengthening, of the Bell-Mans Second Night-Walke' (1612) and 'Villainies Discovered... Being an Addition to the Bell-Mans Second Night-Walke' (1616). His best-known non-dramatic work, 'The Guls Horne-Book' (1608), was published in 1609, and remained popular into the Restoration. Also published about this time were 'The Ravens Almanacke' (1609), 'Worke for Armourers' (1609), and 'Foure Birds of Noahs Ark' (1609). 
Between 1610 and 1612 Dekker's output is very thin, and the reasons for this are not as clear as the consequences. Apart from the troubled 'If this be not Good' and a pamphlet, 'A Strange Horse-Race' (1613), Dekker's only other work was a commission for Sir John Swinerton's mayoral pageant: 'Troia-Nova triumphans' (October 1612). Whatever money he received for this, it was not enough to keep him from being arrested for debt later that year. He owed $40 to the coach maker John Webster (the playwright's father), who began a suit against him in the king's bench in 1613. Dekker spent the next seven years in the king's bench prison. 
If imprisonment effectively stopped Dekker's dramatic output, it did not arrest his writing altogether -- although it certainly hampered its quality. In 1615 he reworked an earlier tract, 'The Great Frost', to produce 'The Cold Yeare 1614'. About the same time he wrote 'The Artillery Garden', published in 1616, and commendatory verses for John Taylor's 'Taylor's Urania, or, His Heavenly Muse'. Attempting to profit as much as possible from his situation, Dekker looked to expand the writing on prisons and prisoners which he had begun in 'Villainies Discovered' (1616). He proceeded to add six 'prison characters' to those published under 'Sir Thomas Overburie his Wife' (1616), and in 1617 he contributed to Geoffrey Mynshull's 'Certain Characters and Essays of Prisons and Prisoners', published in 1618. Dekker was finally released some time in 1619, and in October that year he completed 'Dekker his Dreame' -- a disturbing and disjointed poem which bears the marks of his traumatic 'long sleep' in prison. He wrote that his hair had '
turn'd 'white'


More through the 'Ghastly Objects' of this 'Night', 

Then with the 'Snow' of 'Age'. 
('Dekker his Dreame', 1620, 37)' 

On release from gaol Dekker quickly re-established himself as a playwright by producing 'Match mee in London' (1620, published 1631), to be played at the Red Bull Theatre. The up-and-coming Philip Massinger joined him to write 'The Virgin Martyr' (1620). Based on current events, 'The Witch of Edmonton' (1621, published 1658), with William Rowley and John Ford, became one of his more popular works. Dekker joined John Day to write three plays: 'The Noble Spanish Souldier' (1622?); 'The Bellman of Paris' (1623), now lost; and 'The Wonder of a Kingdom' (1623?). 'A Moral Masque' was the subtitle of 'The Sun's-Darling' (1624, published 1656) which he co-wrote with Ford. The same team produced another 'masque', 'The Fairy Knight' (1624), and 'The Bristow Merchant' (1624), both lost. Dekker alone may have been responsible for reworking 'The Noble Spanish Souldier' into 'The Welsh Ambassador' (1624). With Ford, Rowley, and Webster, Dekker put together 'The Late Murder in Whitechapel, or, Keep the Widow Waking' (1624), now lost. The play was based on two notorious crimes which had caught the contemporary imagination. Records survive of Dekker's testimony, given when a relative of one depicted in the play brought the matter to court. 
London's 1625 plague took its toll on life, theatre, and, in all probability, Dekker's livelihood. Charges of recusancy brought against him in 1626 and 1628 are almost certainly due to the fact that he avoided church in order to escape arrest for debt. He did pick up some work at this time, writing the inaugural pageants for various incoming mayors of London: a pageant for Sir Hugh Hamersley (1627), now lost; 'Brittannia's Honour' (1628) for R. Deane; and 'Londons Tempe' (1629) for J. Campbell. In the second half of the 1620s Dekker turned to pamphleteering once again. His non-dramatic writing of this period includes: 'A Rod for Run-Awayes' (1625), 'Looke Up and See Wonders' (1628), 'Warres, Warres, Warres' (1628), 'London Looke Backe' (1630), 'The Blacke Rod: and the White Rod' (1630), and 'Penny-Wise, Pound-Foolish' (1630). The commendatory verses which Dekker wrote for Richard Brome's play 'The Northern Lasse' (1632) could well have been his last piece of work, although it is tempting to think that his last written words were those in the 1632 epistle to his most popular tract, 'The Belman of London' (now called 'English Villainies') in which he claimed to be sixty years old. 
Dekker's output ceased in 1632 and it seems probable that the 'Thomas Decker, householder' who was buried at St James, Clerkenwell, on 25 August that year is the author. His widow, Elizabeth, renounced the administration of his estate on 4 September 1632, a sure sign that Dekker died in debt. 
Jonson's accusation that Dekker was a hack, Charles Lamb's backhanded compliment that he had 'poetry enough for anything', and Swinburne's dislike of his carelessness, were all pointed at a someone whose writing was predominantly driven by financial pressure. From comments such as these a strand of criticism developed which depicted Dekker as a good-natured and versatile journeyman writer -- jack of all trades, master of none -- operating in the shadow of Shakespeare, Jonson, Middleton, and others. Often charged with being sentimental, Dekker's writing does reveal a sustained compassion for society's misfits and casualties. Perhaps Hazlitt had this in mind when he called him 'gentle-hearted' and 'honest'. More recent scholarship has been less condescending, seeing in Dekker's work an incisive commentary on the social, political, and religious structure of London. That Dekker's work encompasses such a wide range of views and genres bears testimony to a writer whose career spanned more than thirty-five years, who was continuously productive under three monarchs, and who survived poverty, plague, and prison. 


@@@@@


doc= 7429


Delamaine, Alexander (bap. 1631, d. 1685), Muggletonian, was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London, on 3 October 1631, the son of the mathematician Richard Delamain (d. 1644?) and his wife, Sarah (died in or after 1645). His name appears in the register of Merchant Taylors' School, London, in September 1642, alongside three of his brothers, including his elder brother Richard Delamaine. 
Delamaine's brother Edward became a Baptist preacher, and Alexander may at some point have shared his brother's beliefs. By June 1654 he had become a Quaker, and as an apprentice in London came into conflict with his master: when challenged as to why he failed to attend family prayers, Delamaine accused his employer of being a hypocrite. His master struck him and summoned a minister -- whom Delamaine called a hireling -- to reason with him. The master threatened to tear up his indentures and so forfeit Delamaine's right to become a freeman and citizen of the City. The master was further aggrieved with his spiritually rebellious apprentice because he was driving customers away by 'my not speaking to them, as to tell them of what they ask me, or bidding them welcome' (Barclay, 327). How this quarrel -- known through a letter Delamaine wrote to a fellow Quaker in the north -- ended is uncertain. However, Delamaine did in due course become free of the Salters' Company, establishing himself as a wealthy London tobacconist who carried on his business at the sign of the Three Tobacco Pipes on Bread Street Hill. Moreover Alexander, his son with his first wife, Martha, was baptized in the parish church of St James Garlickhithe on 12 December 1661. 
It may have been Delamaine's second marriage in 1667 to Anne Lowe, 'nee' Hall (died 1688), which served as the catalyst to Delamaine's conversion to Muggletonianism. On 5 July Lodowicke Muggleton wrote to Anne as 'now the wife of Alexander Delamaine, senior', giving her the formal blessing that she had requested from him; he wrote of the good influence upon her of her dead aunt. There was to be a more striking tribute to her from Muggleton on 3 February 1687, when he addressed her as Delamaine's widow. Even Muggleton's own daughter Sarah could not match her fidelity, prompting Sarah to say in a company of women that 'you, when your name was Anne Hall, were the beloved disciple of her father of all the women in London' (Delamaine, 'Spiritual Epistles', 223, 585). 
By 1668, the year after his marriage to Anne, Delamaine was clearly committed to her beliefs, to the extent that he passed on to his prophet a remonstrating letter to himself from his brother Edward, the Baptist preacher. Muggleton had urged Delamaine, on the receipt of his first letter, to damn his brother to eternity. Because of the closeness of their relation, Alexander could not bring himself to do it. In a long letter to Edward, Muggleton with some relish repaired the omission on 16 June 1668. Alexander Delamaine went on, however, to be one of the most trusted of Muggleton's confidants. It was to Delamaine that Muggleton turned for help in poor relief for a former servant of the dead co-prophet, John Reeve. And it was to Delamaine that he turned for transmitting the joyous news to believers in Ireland of his release from prison on 19 July 1677. Delamaine chose another way of marking the occasion by bursting into verse, including this couplet: '
This, this was the day (19th July) fate sparkled disdain 

That a dungeon should longer God's prophet detain. 
(Frost and Frost, 'Divine Songs', 268)' 19 July -- along with the February celebrations of the anniversary of God's commission to Reeve -- became the regular 'holidays' celebrated by the sect into the twentieth century. On one such dinner, at the Green Man in Holloway, Middlesex, on 19 July 1682, Delamaine, his wife, and daughter paid 5's'. each; the prophet and Mrs Muggleton went free. Delamaine's greatest contribution was to complete in 1682 the transcription of the letters of Muggleton (and a few by Reeve) into one large folio book (BL, Add. MS 60171). He began on 19 April 1682 a second volume of additional letters that 'would not goe into my grate book'. The importance of the 'Great book', as it came to be known to believers, cannot be underrated. The movement survived by letters; Muggleton was a gifted, as well as prolific, writer. Towards the end of his life a blessing entered into the 'Great book' from Muggleton counted more with followers than oral blessings from him (despite the prophet's gentle remonstrances to the contrary). There is a certain fitness in the fact that the last recorded of these unnecessary written supplements to the oral blessings previously conferred was from Muggleton to Delamaine's daughter Sarah and her husband, Robert, on 14 December 1691. There are two gaps in Delamaine's collection, where letters were later torn out, for the periods September 1673 to August 1676 and October 1680 to May 1681. 
Delamaine left behind no published writings; however, he and Thomas Greenhill from Harrow Weald celebrated their recent conversions to the faith in an exchange of letters in March 1669. He also contributed to an interesting debate with his fellow believer John Ladd in 1676 on how far 'Reason' (the bad seed, compared with the good seed 'Faith') should be denigrated. Delamaine scorned 'reasons wiles' categorically; Ladd sought 'a middle way' (BL, Add. MS 60138, fols. 26-32'v'). 
Delamaine died in the second half of December 1685: he made his will on 16 December and it was proved on the 30th. By it he requested to be interred in 'the Common buriall in Bethlehem burial place in Moorfields', where three years later his widow also requested to be buried. He left various small bequests to Muggleton and his wife, and to his own son Alexander, daughter Mary, and son-in-law Robert. To his wife, Anne -- Muggleton's favourite woman disciple -- Delamaine left a staggering bequest of $1685. Tobacco was a lucrative trade indeed. 


@@@@@


doc= 7430


Delamain, Richard, the elder (d. 1644?), mathematician, began his career as master of a writing-school in Drury Lane in the early 1620s, according to William Oughtred (Oughtred, sig. B2, recto). At the same time he attended lectures at Gresham College, thus gaining a knowledge of mathematics. He referred to Edmund Gunter (who resided in London from 1615 to his death in 1626) as his tutor, and was taught astronomy by Oughtred. He established himself as a mathematics teacher during the late 1620s. Nothing is known of his birth, origins, and early life. 
In 1629 Delamain sent the manuscript of 'Grammelogia, or, The Mathematical Ring' to Charles I, together with the instrument, a circular slide rule. The king granted him a monopoly on the instrument and the book was published in January 1631. In the same year Delamain produced 'The Making, Description and Use of... a Horizontall Quadrant', which described an instrument inscribed with a projection of the celestial sphere onto the plane of the horizon. These books involved him in a bitter dispute with Oughtred, who claimed both instruments as his invention, saying that Delamain had stolen the designs. 
On 4 March 1633 a royal warrant was issued granting Delamain the right to teach the use of his ring and all other mathematical instruments in London and elsewhere. He was also employed for $40 a year as quartermaster-general and tutor to the king. He worked on surveying forts and castles with Sir John Heydon, the master of the ordnance, but petitions for a position as royal engineer were unsuccessful. Delamain was commissioned by the king to oversee the making of a number of instruments, including a 'great Octans', and a 'great Universal Concave' (perhaps the concave dial at Whitehall), besides pieces for the king's bedchamber and the 'Great Ship'. It is probable that the silver sundial sent to the duke of York by the king just before his death was one of Delamain's horizontal quadrants. 
At some time in the early 1620s Delamain married Sarah (died in or after 1645); they had at least eleven children, of whom four attended the Merchant Taylors' School. The clergyman Richard Delamaine the younger (bap. 1627, d. 1657) and the Muggletonian Alexander Delamaine (bap. 1631, d. 1685) were his sons. Delamain was still working for the king early in 1644 but presumably died shortly thereafter, since his widow petitioned the House of Lords for relief the following year. 


@@@@@


doc= 7431


Delamaine, Richard, the younger (bap. 1627, d. 1657), clergyman, was baptized on 7 or 8 March 1627 at St Andrew's, Holborn, in London, the eldest son of Richard Delamain the elder (d. 1644?), mathematician, and his wife, Sarah (died in or after 1645). The Muggletonian Alexander Delamaine (bap. 1631, d. 1685) was his younger brother. He once reportedly claimed to have attended Oxford University, but there is no evidence for this, and confidence is not strengthened by the tale that when asked which college he attended, he replied Emmanuel. Delamaine made his first fleeting entrance on the public stage with the presentation to the House of Lords, early in 1642, of a tabulated ready-reckoner setting out the rates at which investments might be made in land in the respective provinces of Ireland, by the terms of the recently passed act for the Irish adventure. This the Lords authorized for publication. 
Like his father, who appears to have had a hand in the fortification of London during the civil war, Richard the younger supported the parliamentarians, but he made no real mark on affairs until 1648, whereafter he became established as a preacher in Herefordshire. In 1654 his behaviour there came under fire from an anonymous writer in a pamphlet entitled 'Impostor magnus: the legerdemain of Richard Delamain, now preacher in the city of Hereford. Being a narrative of his life and doctrine since his first coming into that county'. Its author lambasted Delamaine's ignorance of gospel, deriding his 'notional frenzy' and 'familistical carriages' ('Impostor magnus', 15). He also decried the dangers to which heretics such as Delamaine exposed government, property, and civil society itself. Much of the tract is taken up with allegations about moral incontinence, hypocrisy, and aggressive nest-feathering which were a commonplace of parliamentarian factional infighting in the period. Despite its full title, little is revealed concerning the details of Delamaine's life except that he had apparently undergone some sort of conversion experience, had been 'brought' to Herefordshire by one Mr Hill, whose religion the author considered heretical, and that he had then enjoyed the patronage of several godly women in Bredwardine. Mention is made of an interlude at Worcester. But it was in the city of Hereford itself that he came good. Becoming an intimate of the governor, Lieutenant-Colonel Wroth Rogers, Delamaine appears to have taken some sort of responsibility for the ordnance of the castle. He was also said to have won favour in the eyes of Major-General Thomas Harrison. He had promises of employment as muster-master and either clerk or trooper in the horse troop of the county, and may have seen action during the Worcester emergency. He made several attempts to secure himself ministerial livings around Herefordshire. In 1652 he got himself one of the three posts at Hereford Cathedral maintained by an ordinance of parliament since 1646. It was alleged that he had to be 'shamed' into surrendering the other parishes for which he was responsible. With the support of Wroth Rogers, Delamaine obtained the mastership of St Ethelbert's Hospital in Hereford and the control of a charitable foundation there in 1653. The same year, and possibly on the same account, he was also in receipt of a clerical augmentation. 
Whatever the truth of the various allegations levelled at him in 1654, there can be little doubt that Delamaine was deeply implicated in a vigorous struggle for dominance in Hereford during the 1650s. While there he married a woman called Mary, whom his detractor described as a serving woman to the wife of Wroth Rogers. Their son was christened Wroth. Delamaine made his will on 26 April 1657 and died some time between then and 14 August when the document was proved. He left a daughter, Elizabeth, as well as his son, neither of whom had attained majority by the time of their father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 7432


Mare, Sir Peter de la (fl. c.1365-1387), speaker of the House of Commons, was probably the son of Sir Reynold de la Mare, a Herefordshire knight. His brother Malcolm was also prominent in Herefordshire and in some parliaments. For some years before October 1371 Peter de la Mare had been collector of the tolls from the iron mines of the Forest of Dean. From December 1372 to July 1373 he was sheriff of Herefordshire. In 1373 he was a member of the commission to raise troops in Herefordshire, Worcestershire, and Shropshire to accompany Edmund (III) Mortimer, earl of March (died 1381), to Ireland, while in November 1374 he was one of the feoffees to whom March was licensed to enfeoff various estates on the Welsh border, which were later leased back to the earl for a nominal rent. The Mortimer link was no doubt the crucial factor behind de la Mare's political importance -- he was later said to have been retained for life to serve the earl in peace and war, and to be the earl's steward. 
Peter de la Mare came into prominence in the Good Parliament of April to July 1376, which he attended as knight of the shire for Herefordshire and in which he was appointed speaker of the Commons, the first named holder of this position. He probably owed this to his connection with Mortimer, who had become disaffected with the government in the 1370s, and consequently sympathized with the Commons' attack on the court, becoming a member of the council appointed as a result of demands made by the Commons. The Good Parliament was effective because it embodied a remarkable alliance of varied class interests against the corrupt court of the later years of Edward III: commons offended by the waste of taxpayers' money, merchants anxious to reassert the control of the staple over the wool trade, nobles and bishops critical of the crown's foreign policy, which had been managed by the duke of Lancaster rather than the king. De la Mare acted as spokesman for this collection of interests, and the detailed account of the parliament in the Anonimalle chronicle presents dramatically his forthright adoption of the role of spokesman, summing up the Commons' views to be presented to the Lords, as a critical moment in the whole evolution of parliamentary institutions. As speaker he was decidedly not a spokesman for the crown, but was partly responsible for the feast held at the end of the parliament to celebrate the success of the Commons in damaging the position of Alice Perrers (died 1400/01), Lord Latimer (died 1381), and others at court. 
The political tide, however, turned quickly in favour of the court in the next few weeks. De la Mare was summoned to appear before the council in November 1376, and then imprisoned in Nottingham Castle. During the so-called 'Bad Parliament' early in 1377, when the court was effectively in control, demands by the Commons and by Londoners that he should be released were rejected. His release eventually came immediately after the death of Edward III in June 1377. His return to London under the new king, Richard II, was much celebrated in the city. He was pardoned and later rewarded by the crown, and his expenses in prison compensated. In the parliament of October 1377 de la Mare was again knight of the shire for Herefordshire, and was once again elected speaker, presumably in accordance with the renewed ascendancy of the political wing with which he had been connected in the Good Parliament, and which revived the attack on Alice Perrers, the mistress of Edward III, who apparently regarded de la Mare as an enemy. 
In May 1379 de la Mare was appointed to the commission to assess the poll tax in Herefordshire. He was later pardoned for neglect of this duty, on the grounds that he had accompanied the earl of March, appointed lieutenant of Ireland in October 1379. In January 1380, however, he again became knight of the shire for Herefordshire. March crossed to Ireland in May 1380, after appointing de la Mare one of the attorneys for his absence, and also one of his executors. De la Mare was made justice of the peace for Herefordshire in May 1380, and then sat as knight of the shire for the fourth time in the parliament of November and December 1380. When the peasants' revolt broke out in 1381 he was appointed to commissions to resist rebels in Herefordshire. In the same year he appears to have been involved in the administration of the cathedral church of Hereford. After the death of the earl of March in December 1381 de la Mare was one of his executors, and also one of the trustees of the Mortimer estates in many counties; their position as trustees was confirmed by the crown on condition of their paying a rent to the exchequer. He represented Herefordshire in the parliaments of May 1382, October 1382, and February 1383. After the death of Sir Richard Burley in Spain with the duke of Lancaster in 1387 de la Mare was one of his feoffees. That is the last known mention of him. The date of his death is unknown and he may have been unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 7433


Freeman Gage Delamotte (1813/14-1862), born at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Berkshire, was a wood-engraver who published several works on alphabets and illumination. He was twice married: first, in 1843, to Louisa (1818/19-1854), with whom he had a son and two daughters; and second, in 1855, to Caroline (1829/30-1886), with whom he had a son and a daughter. He died at 15 Beaufort Buildings, Strand, Middlesex, on 16 July 1862, aged forty-eight. Another son, Alfred William, who is sometimes confused with his father, was also a watercolour artist. A cousin, Lieutenant-Colonel 


@@@@@


doc= 7434


Philip de la Motte (d. 1805), was the author of 'The principal historical and allusive arms borne by families of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland... collected by an antiquary, with biographical memoirs... and copper-plates', published in 1803. He died at Batsford, Gloucestershire, on 11 March 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 7435


Delamotte, William (1775-1863), landscape artist, was born at Weymouth, Dorset, on 2 August 1775, the eldest son of Peter De la Motte and his wife, Sarah, daughter of the Revd Digby Cotes of Abbey Dore, Herefordshire. His father was of Huguenot extraction and was postal agent at Weymouth, where he established a library with assembly rooms over it on the esplanade. William is said to have attracted the notice of George III, a frequent visitor to Weymouth, and to have been placed by him as a pupil of Benjamin West, president of the Royal Academy, the king's favourite artist. Delamotte entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1794, having first exhibited at the Royal Academy in the previous year. He continued to exhibit paintings and watercolours each year until 1805, and from 1809 at irregular intervals until 1850. In his early watercolours Delamotte was influenced by Thomas Girtin, but he soon established his own reputation, especially with his Welsh watercolours, and developed a more personal manner, in which the washes were very lightly applied over delicate pen or pencil outlines. He was an excellent architectural draughtsman, and also a sympathetic recorder of the landscape, at first in and around Oxford, on the Thames, in Wales, Cumberland, and Derbyshire, and later also on the continent. In the early years of the nineteenth century he was one of a group of pioneering younger British artists that included Constable and Turner, who sketched landscape in the open in oils. 
Delamotte lived in Oxford for a period from 1798, where he briefly took over J. B. Malchair's practice as a drawing-master, and where he restored the Streater ceiling decoration in the Sheldonian Theatre. In 1802, at the time of the peace of Amiens, he was one of the many British artists to visit Paris, where he spent ten weeks. In the following year he was appointed an assistant drawing-master at the Royal Military College at (first at Marlow, then from 1812 at Sandhurst), where he remained, ultimately as drawing-master, for some forty years. According to Joseph Farington, whose 'Diary' provides what little personal information there is about Delamotte, he was 'not liked' (8.2936). He married on 28 August 1804, Mary Anne, eldest daughter of Thomas Gage, with whom he had five sons and four daughters. Delamotte became an associate member of the newly formed Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1806, but exhibited only for three years and was never elected a full member. After 1815 he travelled more extensively on the continent, and he exhibited views of Belgium, France, and Switzerland. A few of his topographical drawings were engraved, and in 1816 he published 'Thirty Etchings of Rural Subjects'. His work is well represented in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and there are drawings in the print rooms of the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and elsewhere. A sale of William Delamotte's drawings and sketches took place at Sothebys in May 1864. 
Delamotte died of old age at his daughter's house, The Lawn, St Giles' Fields, near Oxford, on 13 March 1863. His youngest son, Philip Henry Delamotte (1821-1889), was a pioneer photographer and a successful drawing-master, who was appointed professor of fine art at King's College, London, in 1879. Another son, 


@@@@@


doc= 7436


Lancey, Oliver De (c.1749-1822), army officer and politician in America, was born in New York, the son of General Oliver De Lancey (1718-1785), an army officer who fought against the revolutionaries during the American War of Independence, and Phila Franks, daughter of Jacob and Abigail Franks of New York. His father's brother was James DeLancey, the celebrated New York lawyer, who was chief justice of that colony between 1733 and 1760 and lieutenant-governor from 1753 to 1760. De Lancey's father and uncle were sons of Etienne De Lancey, a wealthy Huguenot of Caen in Normandy, who had emigrated to America following the revocation of the edict of Nantes (1685), and bought large estates in New York, where the brothers ranked among the colony's wealthiest and most powerful citizens. 
Oliver De Lancey was educated in England and entered the British army as a cornet in the 14th dragoons on 1 October 1766. He was promoted to lieutenant on 12 December 1770 and to captain into the 17th dragoons on 16 May 1773. When the American War of Independence broke out in 1775 he was at once dispatched to New York to make arrangements for the accommodation and remounting of his own regiment. In the following year his father raised, equipped at his own expense, and commanded three battalions of American loyalists. De Lancey meanwhile accompanied his regiment to Nova Scotia and to Staten Island in June 1775. He participated in the expedition to Long Island, where he commanded the cavalry outposts in the action of 28 August, in which the American General Woodhull surrendered to him, but was unfortunately murdered by De Lancey's soldiers. At the battle of Brooklyn he commanded the advance of the right column of the British army under Sir Henry Clinton and Sir William Erskine, served at the capture of New York and the battle of White Plains, and was promoted major in his regiment on 3 July 1778. With this rank he covered the retreat of Knyphausen's column in Clinton's retreat from Philadelphia, was present at the battle of Monmouth court house, and was in temporary command of the 17th dragoons. He also commanded the outposts in front of the New York lines from mid-1778 to the end of 1779. De Lancey was then appointed as deputy quartermaster-general to the force sent to South Carolina, and after serving at the capture of Charles Town he became aide-de-camp to Lord Cornwallis, and eventually succeeded Major Andre as adjutant-general to the army at New York. 
On 3 October 1781 De Lancey was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 17th dragoons, and he retired to England with his father at the end of the war. The king appointed De Lancey, on Lord Sydney's recommendation, to settle the military claims of the American loyalists, and as head of a commission to settle all the army accounts connected with the war. On 18 November 1790 he was promoted colonel and made deputy adjutant-general at the Horse Guards. In 1792 he became superintendent-general of barracks and in 1794 received the post of barrack-master-general, with an income of $1500 a year. On 20 May of the following year George III appointed him colonel of the 17th dragoons. In September 1796 he entered parliament as MP for Maidstone, a seat which he held until June 1802. 
De Lancey was promoted lieutenant-general on 1 January 1801, but in November 1804 the commissioners of military inquiry found serious mistakes in his barrack accounts. He was removed from his post as barrack-master-general, but in spite of the violent attacks of the political opposition, headed by John Calcraft, he was not prosecuted, and was treated rather as having been culpably careless than actually fraudulent. He did not contest his seat in 1802, and in 1806 his property of Effingham Hill in Surrey was seized to meet his liabilities. He remained a member of the consolidated board of general officers, however, and was promoted general on 1 January 1812. He eventually retired to Edinburgh, where he died on 3 September 1822. He was survived by his only son, Oliver De Lancey (1803-1837), army officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 7437


Lancey, Oliver De (1803-1837), army officer, was born in Guernsey, the only son of General Oliver De Lancey (c.1749-1822), barrack-master-general from 1794 to 1804. He entered the army as a second lieutenant in the 60th rifles on 30 March 1818, and joined the 3rd battalion in India in the same year. He was promoted first lieutenant on 17 June 1821, and after serving as aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Colville, commander-in-chief at Bombay, was promoted captain on 7 August 1829, and joined the 3rd battalion at Gibraltar, where he learned Spanish and took a keen interest in Spanish politics. His battalion returned to England in 1832, but De Lancey still kept up his interest in Spain, and was one of the first English officers who volunteered to join the Spanish legion which was being raised to serve under the command of Major-General Sir De Lacy Evans against the Carlists. 
De Lancey sailed for Spain in 1835 with one of the first drafts from England, and on the way out showed his courage when his ship struck in a fog on the rocks off Ushant. On landing he was placed at the head of a regiment of the legion, and, after serving as acting adjutant-general at the action of Hernani, accompanied Lieutenant-Colonel Greville in command of the expedition to relieve Santander, which was then hard pressed by the Carlists. The expedition was successful, and De Lancey received the cross of San Fernando and was appointed deputy adjutant-general to the legion. He distinguished himself in the defence of San Sebastian, especially in the action of 1 October, and was sent on a delicate mission to Madrid, which he carried out to the satisfaction of his general. 
Not long after his return to San Sebastian the Carlists attacked the town, on 15 March 1837, and De Lancey was killed at the head of his regiment, just as his more famous cousin, Sir William Howe De Lancey, Wellington's quartermaster-general, was killed at Waterloo. His tomb is in the fort at San Sebastian. 


@@@@@


doc= 7438


Lancey, Sir William Howe De (c.1778-1815), army officer, probably born in New York, was the son of Stephen De Lancey (1747/8-1798), clerk of the city of Albany and later governor of Tobago, and his wife, Cornelia, daughter of the Revd H. Barclay of Trinity Church, New York. The scion of a wealthy and influential loyalist family, he is thought to have attended Harrow School (1789-91) before being commissioned a cornet in the 16th light dragoons in 1792. Despite his youth he did duty with his regiment and by October 1794 was a captain in the new raised 80th regiment, which he joined in Holland in December that year; he first saw action at Tuil on the 28th. On the way to India with the regiment in 1796, his youthful good looks and infectious high spirits caught the attention of General John St Leger who, in March 1797, took him to Calcutta as his aide-de-camp in readiness for an expedition to Manila, an enterprise in which the 33rd foot, under its young colonel, the future duke of Wellington, was also to take part. William Hickey records in his diary two lively occasions when the two men were among his guests. 
On returning to England in late 1798 as captain in the 17th light dragoons (a regiment of which his uncle, General Oliver De Lancey, was colonel), De Lancey spent some months in Canterbury before his uncle procured his promotion as major in the 45th, then serving in the West Indies. Granted leave to await its return, he put the interval to good use by entering the Royal Military College at High Wycombe that had been recently established for the education of staff officers. Although he possessed a facility for drawing, he probably took this step at the suggestion of his uncle by marriage, General Sir David Dundas, then quartermaster-general of the forces. He stayed for eighteen months until September 1802 and reached, as few did, the class of the chief instructor, General Francois Jarry, an achievement which, in the opinion of Dundas, qualified him to become in 1804 one of the half-dozen officers on the permanent staff of the quartermaster-general, the branch of the staff responsible for troop movements. As such he served in the Yorkshire district (1806) and Ireland (1807) before sailing in 1808 as the senior assistant quartermaster-general first to Sweden and then, in August, to the Iberian peninsula. In Sir John Moore's campaign he had to conduct Sir John Hope's division by a long detour to Salamanca, and he stayed with it during the retreat to Corunna. As lieutenant-colonel on the permanent staff, he returned to Portugal early in April 1809 and became deputy quartermaster-general under Colonel George Murray, a position he held for the remainder of the war. Murray reported to Major-General Alexander Hope on 6 October 1809 that he was: 'Intelligent, zealous and anxious to be employed in any way in which he can promote the service' (Luffness MSS), and a junior officer in the department found him 'everything I could wish as a commanding officer' (Captain Tryon Still to General Le Marchant, 30 June 1810, Le Marchant MSS). In 1812, during Murray's absence, he headed the department until the arrival in August of Colonel James Willoughby Gordon; he headed it again from December 1812 to March 1813. While unable to react to Wellington's wishes quite as Murray had done, De Lancey's operation orders nevertheless satisfactorily interpreted Wellington's memoranda for those bold initiatives that culminated in the battle of Salamanca. Later, after experiencing Gordon's meddlesome methods, Wellington was able to say that De Lancey did the job much better. Murray, upon his return, gave De Lancey in May 1813 the exacting but flattering task of conducting the powerful left wing of the army under Sir Thomas Graham for the advance into Spain, and he continued to act with this wing until the end of the war. He was promoted colonel in June 1813 and on 1 January 1815 he was rewarded with a knighthood in the Order of the Bath. 
At the peace De Lancey was appointed head of the department in Scotland. He married in Edinburgh on 4 April 1815 Magdalen, daughter of Sir James Hall of Dunglass, fourth baronet (1761-1832), and Lady Helen Douglas (1762-1837). A few days later he responded loyally to an appeal to rejoin Wellington who, on assuming command in the Southern Netherlands, had inherited in Sir Hudson Lowe a quartermaster-general whom he could not abide, and whom he succeeded in getting posted elsewhere. Though expressing disappointment at being no more than deputy pending Murray's return, De Lancey hastened to Brussels on 9 May and from 15 June onwards was occupied day and night. He conducted the retreat from Quatre Bras on 17 June and marked out the position the troops were to occupy at Waterloo on the 18th -- to the rear, apparently, of the ground originally chosen by the duke. Late in the battle of Waterloo, while talking to Wellington, he was struck in the back by a spent cannon-ball that broke eight ribs. Left for dead on the field for thirty-six hours, he was taken up and carried to a farmhouse in Mont-St Jean where, though devotedly nursed by his young wife, he died on 26 June 1815. His remains were buried on the 28th in the protestant cemetery of St Joost-ten-Node, from where they were removed in 1889 to nearby Evere. His widow, who married Henry Harvey in 1819, died in 1822. 
All who spoke of De Lancey testify to his engaging manner and cheerful temper, a character borne out in his letters. If he had a fault as a staff officer, it was in his failure sometimes to distance himself from those to whom he had to give orders, but this was a largely unavoidable consequence of his naturally easy-going disposition. 


@@@@@


doc= 7439


Delane, Dennis (1694/5?-1750), actor, was born in Ireland and educated at Trinity College, Dublin. Burtchaell and Sadleir identified him as the Dennis Delany who was the son of Solomon Delany, a clergyman, and who was educated at Mr Griffin's school, Elphin, before his matriculation at Trinity on 16 December 1711 at the age of sixteen. Originally intended for the bar, Delane made his acting debut in 1729 at the Smock Alley Theatre in Dublin, under Thomas Elrington's management. There he developed a sizeable repertory of mostly tragic major roles, his principal parts being Alexander in Nathaniel Lee's 'The Rival Queens' and Bevil in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers'. Delane negotiated for a London engagement at Drury Lane but the company was 'brimful' (Chetwood, 131) and he was employed instead by Henry Giffard at Goodman's Fields. He made his first appearance on 24 November 1731 as Chalmont in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan', and in his first three seasons he played at least thirty-five different roles, including Othello, Oroonoko, Richard III, Bevil, Alexander, Tamerlane, Aimwell in George Farquhar's 'The Stratagem', Hotspur, Manly in 'The Provok'd Husband' by John Vanbrugh and Colley Cibber, Brutus, Piercy in John Banks's 'Virtue Betray'd', Macbeth, Lear, and Cato. With his 'good person' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA') and rich repertory, Delane was an immediate and conspicuous success in London. 
Delane's first appearance at Covent Garden, where he had been recommended by James Quin, was as Alexander in 'The Rival Queens' on 25 October 1735, under the management of John Rich. Delane was one of the original twenty-four members of the Sublime Society of Beefsteaks, formed by Rich in 1735. At Covent Garden he reprised many of his old parts and added Antony, Lothario, Falstaff, King John, Richard II, Henry V, Volpone, and Herod. On 10 September 1741 he made his first appearance, as Othello, at Drury Lane, where he remained until the end of the 1747-8 season, creating the characters of Mahomet, King Henry, and Osmond in James Thomson's 'Tancred and Sigismunda', as well as adding Comus, Antonio in 'The Merchant of Venice', Silvio in John Fletcher's 'Women Pleased', and a number of other new roles to his repertory. 
Delane married Margaretta Horsington at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 9 November 1745, when both declared themselves residents of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, and buried a daughter there on 11 July 1746. Delane moved lodgings frequently in London, living at various addresses in the Strand and Covent Garden. He often returned to Ireland for summer seasons, where he inherited a small paternal estate. Upon his death 'Faulkner's Dublin Journal' described him as 'of Killinough in the County of Roscommon, a Gentleman of exceeding good character'. 
In the 'Apology for the Life of Mr. T[heophilus] C[ibber], Comedian', ascribed to Henry Fielding, Delane is compared favourably to James Quin, his mentor. While admitting that Delane 'has a Sameness of Tone and Expression, and drawls out his Lines to a displeasing Length' the author concedes that 'that loud Violence of Voice is useful to him when Anger, Indignation, or such enrag'd Passions are to be expres'd' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Not all critics, however, were impressed by Delane's loud voice, described by Thomas Gray in 1746 as 'deep-mouth'd' and 'like a Passing Bell' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 14.6). 
Delane's friendship with David Garrick ended irrevocably after the summer of 1748, when Delane recommended Mrs Ward to Rich at Covent Garden. Garrick resented this as disloyalty and was furious. Delane left Drury Lane and played at Covent Garden for the remainder of his career, beginning with Hotspur on 17 October 1748. Faced with the ridicule of Garrick, who mimicked his style when portraying Bayes in 'The Rehearsal', he turned to alcohol 'for relief to his hurt mind' and 'continued to use it with such excess that he was never himself again' (Wilkinson, 1.83). 
Delane, however, played a heavy schedule during his 1748-9 season, and for the first time in his career he acted with Quin. He put in a special appearance at Twickenham on 21 September 1749 as Manly in William Wycherley's 'The Plain Dealer', a part considered ideal for him due to his 'easy and polite' manner. John Hill suggested in 'The Actor', shortly after Delane's death, that his reputation would unquestionably have been much higher had he only played characters with 'strength of voice and dignity of figure' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'), such as Aimwell, rather than the heroic parts that brought him to prominence. It is commonly agreed that Delane achieved success before he had matured as an actor and that he simply couldn't compete with Garrick and Spranger Barry at Drury Lane, both of whom played similar lines. Delane gradually turned more to comedy and was given fewer opportunities to play good leading roles. According to Davies 'his attachment to the bottle prevented his rising to any degree of excellence' (Davies, 'Life of Garrick', 1.27). Delane was a well-built, good-looking, graceful man but, by 1749, 'inclining to the bulky' (Chetwood, 131). 
Delane's last appearance was at a benefit on 17 March 1750. He died on 31 March and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 6 April. He had written an undated will in which he bequeathed his entire estate, including land in co. Roscommon and co. Galway, to his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7440


Delane, John Thadeus (1817-1879), newspaper editor, was born on 11 October 1817 at South Molton Street, London, the second of the nine children of William Delane (1793-1857), barrister and treasurer of 'The Times', and his wife, Mary Ann White (died 1869), niece of Colonel John Babington. The family was descended from the Delaneys of Mountreth, Queen's county, Ireland. Delane's childhood was spent at his father's house at Easthampstead, Berkshire, within a united family. After early education at private schools, Delane attended King's College, London, from 1833 to 1835, and then received private tuition from Dr Jeremiah Bowles at Faringdon Hall, Oxfordshire, before entering Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1836. At Oxford Delane's exploitation of his natural talents, especially his quickness of apprehension and resourcefulness, compensated for some lack of application to his studies. He enjoyed many forms of sport, and once got the better of a former prizefighter, 'the Chicken of Wheatley', in a confrontation between students and quarrymen. At Oxford, as throughout his life, horse-riding was Delane's favourite exercise, to the extent that his tutor once remarked: 'We must remember that he, like the centaurs of old, is part and parcel of his horse' (Dasent, 1.18). Delane was attracted at this time to the Oxford Movement and, though he never discussed his religion, he was throughout his life a sincere and tolerant Anglican. 
Delane graduated BA in July 1840 and was immediately employed by 'The Times', for which his father had been treasurer since 1831. There was also social contact between the Delane and Walter families, who were neighbours in Berkshire. John Walter (1776-1847), chief proprietor of 'The Times', had recognized John Delane's potential and now took steps to develop it through experience in a range of reporting and editorial tasks under the direction of the editor, Thomas Barnes. Barnes was in failing health, and died in May 1841 without an obvious successor. Walter appointed Delane to the vacancy, causing an elated twenty-three year old to exclaim to his fellow lodger, the publisher John Blackwood, 'By Jove, John, what do you think has happened? I am editor of 'The Times'' (Dasent, 1.26). He was to retain the position for thirty-six years. 
At first Delane was merely the chief editorial lieutenant, supervising matters already defined by the chief proprietor. However, the title of 'editor' soon gained Delane's admission to circles where political intelligence could be gathered. Delane had superlative abilities in this regard, as well as a sharp eye for good news stories. He quickly won the confidence and loyalty of the old guard of reporters and established good working relationships with his leader writers, though he directed from above whereas Barnes had done so from within. After only two years of Delane's editorship a former editor noted that 'The Times' had become mild, argumentative, and discriminating, in contrast to its thundering reputation under Barnes. 
Delane had quickly learned that moderation is strength, but in 1847 the strength of his own position was seriously threatened by a fracture in the relationship of trust between the chief proprietor and his father. The cause was a misleading financial statement prepared by the treasurer. John Walter, terminally ill, decided that William Delane must go, and that he must surrender his 'Times' shares. Delane's father would not accept the terms offered, and the continuance of the dispute over several months placed Delane in a very difficult position. His call to the bar in May 1847 suggests private doubts as to the outcome. Eventually William Delane was persuaded, for the sake of his son's future, to agree to Walter's terms. Within a few days Walter was dead. 
The new chief proprietor was his eldest son, also John Walter (1818-1894), a year younger than Delane, who wished to combine control of 'The Times' with his duties as a landowner and member of parliament. He needed Delane to take full editorial responsibility, but this did not stop Walter, especially in the early years, from taking a close interest in the paper's content and editorial direction, which Delane sometimes resented. Nevertheless there ensued a relationship of mutual respect shading into friendship, in which Walter played the role of constitutional monarch to Delane's prime minister. Delane ran 'The Times' like a great department of state, and managed the editorial side brilliantly. A measure of Delane's achievement is in the circulation figures. These progressed from about 20,000 copies in 1842 to a sustained level of more than 60,000 copies throughout the last decade of Delane's editorship, despite pressure from cheaper competing titles. 
Delane's first major exclusive was published in December 1845, when 'The Times' announced the imminent repeal of the corn laws on the basis of information from Lord Aberdeen, Peel's foreign secretary. The close understanding which developed between Delane and Aberdeen provided a valuable political tutelage. Delane greatly respected Aberdeen as his mentor during this early stage of his editorial career. The later close relationship with Palmerston developed only after a long period during which 'The Times' had generally opposed his policies. An intuitive ability to see 'how it will look tomorrow' was an important factor in Delane's success as a journalist. He was particularly adept in the art of 'journalistic curvature', the process by which the editor steered opinions into new directions which his finely tuned political antennae told him governments would presently follow. Although this practice led to criticism of 'The Times' for vacillation, it was also crucial to the paper's reputation and influence. In its implementation Delane was ever careful not to require leader writers to write in support of views and policies with which they did not agree. 
Under Delane's editorship 'The Times' was loosely identified with Liberalism, but his main concern was always to maintain the paper's independence, so as to be able to support governments without being their organ. This support was lent rather than given, and could at any time be replaced by criticism or outright opposition. The power of 'The Times' in opposition to government was seen very clearly during the Crimean War, when Delane felt it was his duty to condemn those directing the war. Kinglake wrote of the great journal using its leadership 'to speak, nay, almost one may say to act, in the name of a united people' (Kinglake, 203). 
That Delane was 'the man who worked 'The Times'' was universally known, but in exercising this role he maintained the closest anonymity. Only once was 'the man in the mask' forced to break cover. During an acrimonious dispute with Richard Cobden in 1863 -- over views expressed by John Bright and Cobden respecting the distribution of landed property -- Delane argued, in a letter which Cobden published, that public questions were 'best discussed, not between Mr Cobden and Mr Delane, but as it has always been the practice of the English press to discuss them -- anonymously' (Dasent, 2.89). In certain directions Delane enhanced the editor's reputation at the paper's expense, and the man became inseparable, in the world's eyes, from the paper. A late twentieth-century assessment, by Stephen Koss, is that it was Delane who formulated a principle that 'the duty of the press is to speak; of the statesman to be silent' ('The Times', 6 Feb 1852), in which privilege was mistaken for duty and abused. In his lifetime Delane was widely regarded as the unquestioned head of the journalistic profession, who had done much to raise the tone of journalism. Some of his innovative methods of reporting news, which included the use of interviews, and his Crimean and other 'crusades', foreshadowed the 'new journalism' of the later nineteenth century. In a centennial tribute William Stebbing referred to the extraordinary degree to which Delane won the admiration of rival journalists and concluded that he had been the ideal editor. 
In the social circles which Delane frequented, constantly on the alert for political intelligence, he was welcomed as a delightful companion. He was observant, critical, somewhat reserved, and imperturbably calm, but among friends he would talk animatedly and without restraint. When other men opened their minds, Delane measured them, but all who confided in him knew he would scrupulously respect their trust. As editor Delane was seen as a proud, harsh man, a hard taskmaster who was also true, sincere, and kind-hearted. His idea of dignified happiness was that of a country gentleman, and in mid-life this robust man, with his florid complexion, bright eyes, and genial smile between mutton-chop whiskers, looked the part. In the 1860s Delane still paid his morning calls on horseback before riding to the House of Commons. He claimed to have been the last man to ride through Fleet Street to the West End, on one occasion with a duke walking on either side as he proceeded slowly down Whitehall. He was elected to the Reform Club (1857) and to the Athenaeum (1862). In 1874 he was appointed deputy lieutenant for Berkshire. 
Although Delane wrote little for publication -- his peculiar facility as a journalist was in polishing and sharpening articles written by others -- he was a prolific letter and note writer. Every day he wrote terse and vigorous directions to his leader writers, letters of advice, instruction and criticism to foreign and war correspondents, letters to friends, and an account of the day's activities to his mother. Few Indian mails failed to include letters to two brothers, who were army officers there. All these were written with a quill pen dipped in an inkstand formed from the hoof of a favourite horse. Letters written on holidays show a persistent interest in distances, speeds, and prices. Delane expected all leading articles to be written, like his own notes of instruction, in good simple English, without slang or technicality. He watched with the utmost care every detail of expression, and thereby exerted a valuable influence on the standard of correct English writing. Henry Wace, a regular contributor to 'The Times' and dean of Canterbury, considered Delane a good scholar, lawyer, and doctor -- he had studied for a time in Paris under Francois Magendie, an eminent physiologist. But politics was what really interested him. 
Delane married, on 9 August 1842, Fanny Horatia Serle Bacon, 'nee' Twiss (1818-1874), widow of Francis Bacon, assistant editor under Barnes, and daughter of Horace Twiss (1787-1849), barrister. Her grandfather was Francis Twiss. There were no children from the marriage. Fanny Delane became mentally ill, and from 1853 until her death in 1874 had to be confined. Throughout this period of 'married widowhood' Delane wrote constantly to his wife and kept all her letters to him. His personal correspondence during these years not surprisingly hints at loneliness and frustration, and he often comments on beautiful women he met in society. When first appointed editor Delane lived at 4 Chatham Place, Blackfriars, 'to be near his work', then at 22 New Bridge Street, before settling from about 1847 at 16 Serjeants' Inn, Temple. In 1858 he bought a property at Ascot Heath, to which he retreated whenever possible. 
The editor's daily routine was both arduous -- a sixteen-hour working day seems to have been usual -- and stressful, demanding a peak of mental effort in the small hours. Delane's hand was firmly on all departments. Although he took regular holidays during parliamentary recesses, these were often largely spent in meetings with foreign correspondents and statesmen. Delane's commitment to 'The Times' was total. He told John Walter, following an illness in 1861, 'My whole life is bound up with the paper -- I must either work for it or not at all' (Dasent, 2.27). 
His mother's death in 1869 affected Delane very much, and after 1870 he was often seriously ill from overwork, asthma, bronchitis, and gout. W. H. Russell found him in April 1877 'thin, old, bowed, speaking slowly, with glassy eye' (Cook, 259). Even before Delane retired, after attending to the issue for 9 November 1877, effective control had been discreetly and informally assumed by others. Delane's final months were spent at Ascot Heath, cared for by his unmarried sister. He died on 22 November 1879 and was buried in Easthampstead churchyard, Berkshire, on 29 November 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 7441


Delane, Solomon (1727-1812), landscape painter, was born probably in Dublin, the son of Richard Delane, a clergyman. He trained under the artist Robert West in the school in George's Lane, Dublin, and was awarded a premium by the Dublin Society in 1750. His first recorded work is a portrait of a famous Dublin comedian, 'The Right Comical L.C.J.I. Sparks', of which he made a folio-sized etching inscribed 'S. Delane pinxit ex fecit' in 1752. He spent some twenty years in Rome, where he was well regarded as a landscape painter. In 1763 he was elected to the Society of Arts and sent landscapes from Italy to exhibitions in 1773 and 1776 as well as to the Royal Academy in 1777 and 1782-4. During these years Ingamells noted his travels in Italy, including his election to the Accademia di Belle Arti, Florence in 1777 (Ingamells, 290). In 1781 he travelled near Augsburg, Germany, and in the following year reached London, before returning to Dublin where he married. Although he no longer exhibited in London after 1784, his name appears among the exhibitors at Parliament House in 1802 and at Hawkins Street, Dublin, in 1812. 
Delane worked in the classical manner of Claude Lorrain and many of his pictures were sold in London as Claude originals. This landscape idiom had been popularized by the Welsh-born painter Richard Wilson and Delane found many aristocratic clients in Rome who had developed a taste for such pictures. One patron, James Irvine, admired his composition but found his colouring 'a little too cold' (Ingamells, 290). Although principally renowned for his views of the Roman campagna, Delane also depicted Dublin in this grand manner and examples of his work are in the National Gallery of Ireland. Delane died in Dublin in 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 7442


Delany, Mary (1700-1788), court favourite and artist, was born at Coulston, Wiltshire, on 14 May 1700. The elder daughter of Bernard Granville (1671-1723) and his wife, Mary Westcomb (died 1747), she was widely connected in court and political circles. Her father's elder brother was George Granville, Lord Lansdowne; his sister Ann, the wife of Sir John Stanley, who held a court appointment, had been maid of honour to Queen Mary. 
The family moved to London shortly after Mary's birth. Educated at home and at an exclusive school run by a Huguenot refugee, she became fluent in French, well read in history and the classics in translation as well as English literature, a good musician, and a superb needlewoman. She showed early talent for drawing, cutting, and design. When she was eight she went to live with her aunt Stanley at Whitehall, presumably to be groomed for a place at court. However, the death of Queen Anne in 1714 and the subsequent whig supremacy reversed the family fortunes. Lord Lansdowne was held in the Tower for nearly two years. Bernard Granville was detained briefly; he then retired with his family to Benchland, near Camden, Gloucestershire. There Mary attracted the attention of a young man, Robert Twyford, who was as penniless as she. An invitation for her to join the Lansdowne household at Longleat in September 1717 was a welcome solution to this unsuitable courtship. 
At Longleat Mary Granville met Alexander Pendarves (1660-1725) of Roscrow, near Falmouth, Cornwall. The wealthy and childless 57-year-old MP welcomed a match that would possibly bring him an heir in addition to furthering his political alliance with Lansdowne. Since her family was entirely dependent on her uncle's generosity, Mary Granville had little choice but to accept Pendarves's proposal. They were married at Longleat on 17 February 1718. The marriage was unhappy for both partners. They first lived at Roscrow, where Mary was kept in nearly total seclusion, as he was jealous of any attention she received. Removed from her family and friends, she experienced the greatest despair of her life. The situation improved somewhat after 1721, when they returned to London, although Pendarves drank heavily and brought in his sister to keep an eye on his wife. Mary, however, was able to make visits to her family and to sample the delights of London society. Pendarves died unexpectedly on 8 March 1725. His widow was left with no resources beyond her jointure, but she was freed from his unpredictable presence. 
For the next eighteen years Mary Pendarves lived in London. The first years of her widowhood were spent under the protection of the Stanleys, and from 1733 she occupied a house in Lower Brook Street. She was a participant at court functions, and attended the opera and theatre as well as private social events. Despite her lack of fortune her charm and vivacity brought her a number of suitors, including Lord Baltimore and Lord Clare, but she showed no inclination to marry again. Many of her most important friendships were cemented in this period, especially that with Margaret, duchess of Portland. The great collection of letters to these friends, and to her mother and sister, began during her widowhood; her autobiographical fragment, in the form of letters to the duchess, was written about 1740. 
In 1731 Pendarves joined her friend Anne Donnellan, the daughter of Nehemiah Donnellan, chief baron of the Irish exchequer, in Ireland for a visit of eighteen months. They were widely entertained in Dublin and the country and introduced to most of Anglo-Irish society. Pendarves met Jonathan Swift, with whom she afterwards corresponded. More important was her meeting with Patrick Delany (1685/6-1768), an Irish Anglican cleric. The two were clearly attracted to each other, but he was already engaged to a rich widow, whom he married in 1732. In 1743, after his wife's death, Delany went to England to propose to Pendarves. Her male relations opposed the match, for Delany had neither fortune nor gentle birth. But she ignored these protests, and the marriage took place in London in early June 1743. 
The Delanys lived principally at Delville, his house in Dublin. After his appointment as dean of Down in 1744 they spent some time there each year when in Ireland. Every two to three years they made an extended visit to family and friends in England. Mary Delany entered fully into her husband's life in Ireland, entertaining, decorating and embellishing his houses, and improving the gardens. She approached her important relations such as Lord Carteret for a higher place in the church for her husband, but with no success. They were frequently worried by a lawsuit over his first wife's property, which was finally settled in his favour. Patrick Delany died at Bath in May 1768. 
Mary Delany returned to London, and lived first at Thatched House Court and then at St James's Place. She spent most summers at Bulstrode in Buckinghamshire, the favourite country house of the duchess of Portland. There the friends improved the gardens, collected shells and botanical specimens, indulged in various arts and crafts, and entertained poets, scientists, theologians, friends, and royalty. It was there in 1774 that Delany began what she called her paper mosaics, the cut-paper illustrations of flowers and plants that were her most important artistic achievement. Using various shadings of coloured tissue, she cut freehand all the parts of the plant, which were then pasted on black paper to make a perfect specimen. Nearly a thousand pages of her 'Hortus siccus' were completed by 1784, when she had to give up the work because of failing eyesight; these are now in the department of prints and drawings at the British Museum. 
Among the visitors to Bulstrode were George III and Queen Charlotte. Delany and the royal pair had many tastes in common, including botany and the music of Handel. After the duchess's death in 1785, the king gave Delany a house at Windsor and a pension of $300. She enjoyed her last years as a royal favourite, and died at Windsor Castle, probably of pneumonia, on 15 April 1788. She was buried at St James's, Piccadilly. 
Although the flower collages were Delany's major work of art, she left other evidence of her talents. She designed and embroidered panels for clothing, chair covers, bed hangings and coverings, and other furnishings. She was a fine copyist of paintings, a maker of silhouettes, and a creative crafter of shellwork. Her most important legacy is the extensive correspondence that she carried on with members of her family and her friends. These letters contain information about every aspect of the life of the propertied class in England and Ireland from about 1725 to 1788. Cultural figures including Swift, Handel, and Rousseau make an appearance, as do prominent women writers such as Frances Burney, Elizabeth Montagu, Frances Boscawen, and Hannah More. The greatest number of the letters are to and from Delany's sister Ann Granville Dewes, her daughter Mary Dewes Port, and her daughter Mary Ann Port Waddington. The letters were edited and published in six volumes in 1861-2 by Lady Llanover, Waddington's daughter. Although much personal detail is omitted in this edition, the letters are nevertheless a major source for contemporary information about such varied topics as medicine, servants, food, costume, reading, marriage, gardening, and collecting. 


@@@@@


doc= 7443


Delany, Patrick (1685/6-1768), Church of Ireland dean of Down and writer, was born at Rathkreagh in Queen's county, a younger son of Denis Delany, a small farmer. He was educated at the popular school run by Dalton at Athy in co. Kildare, whence he proceeded to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1701. He was elected a scholar of the foundation in 1704. Later Delany paid tribute to the excellent grounding he received there from the then provost, Peter Browne. To Browne he traced his taste in the classics, his style in preaching, and perhaps his concern with charity. He continued beyond his BA (taken in 1706) and MA (1709) to prepare for ordination. In 1709 he was elected to a fellowship of the college. At this stage his political leanings towards the tories assisted his ascent. By 1713 he was a chaplain to the intemperate tory lord chancellor, Sir Constantine Phipps. Delany's toryism proved less helpful after 1714 but his reputation as the foremost tutor in the college and one of the best preachers in Dublin protected him. In 1724 he was appointed professor of oratory and history. The following year Archbishop Hugh Boulter calculated that Delany earned $600 or $700 from his pupils. Boulter, keen to see Delany's influence within the college diminished, refused to allow him to combine a fellowship with the incumbency of a Dublin parish (St John's). However in 1728, backed by Dean Swift and the lord lieutenant, Carteret, he received the chancellorship of Christ Church Cathedral in the capital. Within two years he added the chancellorship of Dublin's second cathedral, St Patrick's. He was also inducted into a college living in co. Fermanagh. 
With access to these prominent pulpits Delany was able to consolidate his position as a leading preacher. Concurrently he was active in the cultural and social life of protestant Dublin. Friendly with Swift, even before his formal link with the cathedral of which the latter was dean, Delany turned his hand to verse and periodic journalism as well as to sermons. Later, in 1754, he published a refutation of Lord Orrery's criticisms of Swift. With a colleague from Trinity, Dr Richard Helsham, Delany built a suburban retreat outside Dublin, subsequently renamed Delville. There sociability was consciously (even self-consciously) cultivated. Delany, a byword for hospitality, managed his ample emoluments badly. Difficulties were eased by a timely marriage in 1732 to Margaret Tenison, 'nee' Barton, the rich widow of a co. Louth landowner. She brought her new husband an annual income of $1600. After her death in 1742 problems over her will involved Delany in protracted litigation, which had not been resolved by the time he died. Earlier his expansive tastes could be indulged not just at Delville but in his Dublin town house in Stafford Street. Each Thursday seven or eight friends would gather. Both the conversation and the restrained refreshment were remembered affectionately. Here he practised those virtues, such as contentment and happiness, that he extolled in print. Integral to his philosophy was an ideal of moderation. Virtue and piety, he firmly believed, were most likely to be found among those 'in the middle state' (P. Delany, 'Sixteen Discourses', 1754, 235). 
From the 1730s Delany wrote more ambitious works than the slight verses that he had previously published. In 1732 he published an attack on contemporary education, 'The Present State of Learning', under an easily penetrated pseudonym. He lamented the neglect of classical literature and contempt for the scriptures among feeble imitators of Newton. He feared that this attitude had affected some clergy who no longer behaved as if they were addressing 'corrupt, unruly mortals' but 'pure, unbodied intelligences' (P. Delany, 'The Present State of Learning', 1732, 7-8). 'Profane scurrility' was instead the favoured mode. At the same time fashionable lay people treated church services as a kind of entertainment. This assault was incorporated into a more comprehensive restatement of the tenets of orthodox Christianity in 'Revelation Examined with Candour', which appeared in three volumes between 1732 and 1763. Despite the persisting doubts about his political reliability Delany was invited to preach on state occasions. His sermon in 1738 on the anniversary of Charles I's execution was acclaimed by Swift for its refusal to compromise. Delany urged all Christians to obey the current sovereign and warned that republican ideas 'must end, as they are intended, in popery and arbitrary power' (P. Delany, 'A Sermon Preach'd in Christ-Church, Dublin,... on Monday, January 30, 1737 [8]', 1737 [8], 19). In the same decade he was tempted to examine and attack the practice of polygamy. He analysed both ancient and modern empires to disprove the contention that the habit increased population more rapidly than monogamy; he had been aided in demonstrating this by the demographic calculations of his friend Dr Helsham. He also published a three-volume life of King David (Dublin, 1743), whom he promoted as the exemplar of friendship, an attribute to which he often reverted. Characteristically the study was designed to improve, entertain, and inform. 
On 9 June 1743 Delany married, as his second wife, Mary, 'nee' Granville (1700-1788), widow of Alexander Pendarves and the elder daughter of Bernard and Mary Granville ['see 'Delany, Mary]; her mother was an artist with wide court and society connections. Thanks to her persistence and connections Delany was advanced in 1744 to the deanery of Down, where (to his wife's chagrin) he stuck. Vacant bishoprics eluded him. The revenues of the deanery were reckoned to be $2300 per annum, however, and Delany's wish to retain his other preferments irritated his superiors. It was part of an attitude to the clerical calling, idealistic in the abstract but personally lax, notably over the question of residence. He spent long periods in England and, as his health worsened in the 1760s, so he contracted his circuit to Dublin and its environs. Yet he publicly espoused a number of causes dear to the interests of the established Church of Ireland. A noted educationist himself, he often adverted to the importance of proper schooling. Good schoolmasters, he contended, were among the most useful members of any society. He reminded the young at Trinity College of the value of early industry. He inveighed against parents who neglected the education of their children or entrusted them to ignorant servants and foreign tutors. He wanted women to be educated so that they were better prepared for becoming faithful friends and amiable companions of their husbands (in the mode -- no doubt -- of his own wife). He backed the Incorporated Society and its charter schools as helps to the poor. More contentiously he upheld the rights of the clergy to their tithes. At Down he became embroiled in a battle to extract tithes from the local linen weavers; although he contended that only disinterested zeal for the rights of the church motivated him he found himself opposed not just by the weavers but also by the official linen board and powerful landowners. 
On entering into the deanery of Down Delany tried to rectify the neglects of his predecessors and planned to visit all the families within the district. He wanted to build new churches and a fitting residence for himself and his successors. In his rented house at Mount Panther, outside Downpatrick, as well as at Delville, he and his wife personified the social virtues that he so frequently recommended. In manner of life, avoiding ostentation, he continued to merit Swift's tribute that he made 'no parade' and was 'one of the very few within my knowledge on whom a great access of fortune hath made no manner of change' ('Correspondence', 4.104). He continued to combat vicious habits common among the leaders of society; thus duelling, gambling, excess in dress, diet, and drink, cheating, avarice, envy, and pride were all attacked in his publications. On occasion too he voiced something of the patriotism increasing among aggrieved Irish protestants. In a sermon of 1744 he regretted the deluded English policies that had led to constant economic discrimination against Ireland. He insisted that the interests of the protestants of Ireland were inseparable from those of their co-religionists in Great Britain. He wanted this fact to be recognized in more generous treatment of Ireland by the Westminster parliament. Ironically, in view of his own lineage (seemingly of native Irish stock), he insisted that there were not ten notable families in Ireland 'who are not originally British' (P. Delany, 'A Sermon Preach'd before the Society Corresponding with the Incorporated Society in Dublin... March 13th, 1743/4', 1744, 15). His voluminous writings, economical and direct in style, convey something of the reasons why he was so esteemed as mentor and preacher. 
In a quest for restoratives Delany revisited England, where -- at Bath -- he died on 6 May 1768. His body was returned to Ireland to be interred at Glasnevin, close to his favourite haunt of Delville. 


@@@@@


doc= 7444


Delap, John (1724/5-1812), poet and playwright, was born at Spilsby, Lincolnshire, one of the four children (two sons and two daughters) of John Delap (died 1756), gentleman, of Gainsborough, in the same county. After schooling at Beverley grammar school, Yorkshire, he was originally entered at Trinity College, Cambridge, in March 1743 but transferred to Magdalene College and was admitted pensioner on 15 March of the following year. He took the degrees of BA in 1747, MA in 1750, and DD in 1762. On 30 December 1748 Delap was elected to a fellowship at Magdalene, and on 4 March 1749 was admitted into its emoluments. He was ordained deacon on 22 May 1749 and appointed curate at Londonthorpe and Gunerby, near Grantham. He was ordained a priest in the Church of England on 23 December 1750 and, on the following day, was appointed rector at East Keal, Lincolnshire, where he remained probably until 1760. Between 1756 and 1758 he served as curate to the poet the Revd William Mason at All Saints Church, Aston, Yorkshire, and from 1759 to 1765 as curate at Ousby, Cumberland. His thesis for his divinity degree (12 April 1762), entitled 'Mundi perpetuus administrator Christus', was published in 1763. He was vicar of Iford and Kingston, near Lewes in Sussex, from 1765 to 1812, of Woolavington from 1774 to 1812, and sinecure rector from January 1779 at St Mary's, Cilcain, Flintshire. 
Delap's first publication was 'Marcellus: a Monody' (1751), which was inspired by the death of George II's eldest son, and was inscribed to his widow, the princess of Wales. This was followed by his 'Elegies' (1760) in which the author who 'very feelingly lamented his want of health' -- a recurrent theme -- is heavily influenced by Gray (Nichols, 9.8). Later poems include 'An Elegy on the Death of the Duke of Rutland' (1788), 'Sedition, an Ode Occasioned by his Majesty's Late Proclamation' and 'The Royal Pavilion, an Ode' (both 1792), and 'The Lord of the Nile, an Elegy' (1799). 
Delap's great love was writing tragedies and while he met with little dramatic success, he remained undaunted both in his attempts to promote his own efforts and to curry favour and fame. He also conferred and disputed endlessly with friends and colleagues over the merits of his own writings. David Garrick, Frances Burney, and Hester Thrale were recipients of Delap's almost obsessive preoccupation with his dramatic works. Burney described Delap's fondness for talking about his own work to the point of tedium and impoliteness: 'he returned to the same thing a million times, asked the same questions, enacted the same compliments, and worked at the same passages, till I almost fell asleep with the sound of the same words' (29 May 1779). Burney also claims that Delap's thirst for reputation was such that he preferred to 'make a general rout and reform' of his plays rather than miss the chance of production -- an intention which he communicated to Garrick 'at portentous length' (Parsons, 186). Burney summed up Delap as 'a man of deep learning, but totally ignorant of life and manners'. 

'Hecuba' (1761), a tragedy in three acts, was Delap's first dramatic success. The play was produced by Garrick at Drury Lane on 11 December 1761. In a letter to George Coleman, manager of Drury Lane, Garrick claims that: 'We might steal it on to Six Nights with much loss, but I hope, that the Author will be reasonable, & satisfy'd with what We have already done, without insisting upon our losing more to 'force' a Reputation' ('Letters', 1.348). While Garrick also alludes to the performance as resulting from a personal favour to the author it seems unlikely that he would have produced, spoken the prologue, and written the epilogue if he considered it to be totally without merit. Stone states that the play was produced four times between its first night and 8 January 1762 while Baker claims that 'it only ran for three nights'. Genest asserts that the play is derivative from West's 'Hecuba' but also describes it as 'not void of merit, but it cannot by any means be called a good play' (Genest, 'Eng. stage', 4.638). Baker confirms this assessment pointing to the play's lack of dramatic action, a tendency for too much declamatory statement, its 'indifferent success', but he does concede that it contains certain merits in its use of poetic language (Baker, 2.287). As a tragedy 'Hecuba' stays faithful to its classical model in its emphasis on representing Hecuba as the most unfortunate of mothers. While little action takes place on stage the text is of interest for its rendition of a model of feminine passivity (Hecuba's maternal suffering and Polyxena's sacrifice) and how this signifies definitions of male heroism (ghostly Achilles's decree, Ulysses's justification for the Greeks' actions and Polydore's suicide for honour's sake). The potential within the play to offer a reading of the codification of gender roles was not missed by Garrick whose epilogue (spoken by Miss Bride) draws a contemporary analogy: '
Do you not shudder parents, at this tale? 

You sacrifice a daughter now and then, 

To rich, old, wither'd half-departed men. 

' The play was published in 1762 at a price of 11's'. 6died and dedicated to Thomas Barrett of Lee, near Canterbury, where it appears Delap was living. A number of Dublin editions followed. 
Delap's next play, 'Panthea', was rejected by Garrick and never produced, though this fact did not deter the author, who stated his intention to rewrite the play ('Letters', 3.933). Delap was again in correspondence with Garrick concerning his attempt to have produced his next play, 'The Royal Suppliants', previously titled 'The Royal Exiles'. Garrick advised Delap to make a number of changes to give the play dramatic interest and was most perturbed by the last act which he described as being the 'worst, & ought to be the best' (ibid., 3.932). The subject of this neoclassical five-act tragedy is a dynastic power struggle. Baker praises the play for 'two very affecting scenes between the mother and daughter, which are genuine pictures from nature' (Baker, 3.231). The play, which is based on Euripides's 'Heraclidae' and 'The Suppliants' of Aeschylus, was finally produced at Drury Lane on 17 February 1781 and thereafter eight times. The performance announced in the playbill for 1 March 1781 did not occur owing to the illness of the actress Miss Crawford. The play was published in 1781 with two further editions in the same year. 
Delap's next play, 'The Captives', was produced on 9 March 1786 at Drury Lane where it ran for three nights. It was published in the same year. The play was not a success: Baker refers to it as being withdrawn 'after dragging through three nights' (Baker, 2.82). Kemble in a letter to Malone offers a contemporary review, caustically describing the play as being 'set at liberty last night, amidst roars of laughter' (Hogan, 10.870). A further play, 'Gunilda', which was never acted, was published in 1786. This play, together with other unacted plays, was published in Delap's 'Dramatic Poems: Gunilda, Usurper, Matilda, and Abdalla' (1803). 
Delap appears to have lived for most of his literary life in South Street, Lewes, in Sussex. He was nevertheless acquainted with literary circles of the day, visiting the Thrales at Brighton, Tunbridge Wells, and Streatham. Through the Thrales he became acquainted with Samuel Johnson as well as David Garrick and Frances Burney. His acquaintance with important literary figures of the day does not seem greatly to have enhanced his own dramatic abilities. Delap died, unmarried, at Lewes in late 1812 aged eighty-seven, and was buried on 24 December 1812 at St Thomas a Becket, Cliffe, Lewes. 


@@@@@


doc= 7445


Delaram, Francis (fl. 1615-1624), engraver, was a contemporary of Simon de Passe, with whom he dominated the London engraving trade in the second half of the reign of James I, putting an end to the near monopoly that had previously been held by Renold Elstrack. Nothing is known about his life apart from what can be deduced from his forty-seven surviving prints. The earliest of them is a portrait of James's botanist Matthias de Lobel, dated 1615, which is fully developed in style and among the best of his plates. This, and the fact that other plates are lettered 'Londini', suggests that Delaram had been trained abroad and had recently arrived in London. But if he was (as seems most likely on stylistic grounds) a Netherlander, no trace of his activity has been recorded in the Low Countries either before or after his time in London. 
Most of Delaram's plates are title-pages and portraits, apparently after his own designs. He also made some of the first English books of flowers, beasts, and birds, and probably the first English drawing-book (of which no copy survives). Delaram worked for all the main London publishers of the day, including Compton Holland, Sudbury and Humble, Thomas Jenner, Roger Daniell, and Maurice Blount; he never published anything himself. His most interesting works are a portrait of Queen Elizabeth after Nicholas Hilliard, published with a royal privilege; this has always been linked with a licence that Hilliard was given in 1617 that gave him a monopoly of printed portraits of James I. Delaram's major plate, a very large portrait of James, published by Edward Pierson, is dated 1619, the year of Hilliard's death, and therefore after the expiry of his monopoly. Only one impression of it survives and is now in the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 7446


Thomas de la Rue (1793-1866), born in La Foret, Guernsey, on 24 March 1793, and apprenticed to the master printer Joseph Antoine Chevalier at St Peter Port in Guernsey in 1803. On finishing his apprenticeship, Thomas took up with Tom Greenslade of Bishop's Nympton in Devon, who was related by marriage to Thomas's future wife, Jane Warren: in 1812 they launched a newspaper, 'Le Publiciste'. After only a few months Thomas walked out on the partnership and, with a determination and audacity that were to characterize his business life, raised funding from John Campion, husband of his sister Rachel, to publish his own rival newspaper, 'Le Miroir Politique'. This was so successful that after only a few months he advertised for an apprentice. Thomas's interest in the quality of printing and in other types of publication, such as editions of the litany and 'Psalms', indicated the future direction of his career. 
On 21 March 1814 de la Rue married Jane Warren (1789-1858) of Bishop's Nympton. Their first child, Warren de la Rue (1815-1889), was born at St Peter Port in January 1815. In that summer de la Rue left the 'Miroir Politique', and after his father's death in November 1816 he and his family left Guernsey. They may have moved first to Barnstaple before settling in London, where Thomas set up business in Finsbury Square manufacturing straw hats, a skill perhaps learned in Guernsey through family connections. His second son, William Frederick ['see below'], was born in London soon after. Millinery still allowed de la Rue to experiment with different printing techniques and dyes for paper bonnets during the 1820s; however, a reference to playing cards in his notebooks for 1828 signalled what was to become a lucrative new line. Two years later he was in business with Samuel Cornish and William Frederick Rock, calling themselves 'Cardmakers, Hot Pressers and Enamellers'. 
The new decade brought mixed fortunes. The first few years were prosperous: in 1831 de la Rue registered an ace of spades at the Stamp Office, Somerset House, as was required for purposes of duty on playing cards; the following year he received royal letters patent for improvements in the colour printing and decoration of playing cards. His specification contained descriptions of two methods of applying colour by surface-printing, one employing typography from raised wooden or metal blocks, the other lithography, printing from stones. In each case separate blocks or stones were used for different colours and Thomas paid particular attention to methods of fitting the design together in perfect register, with no overlap or gap between colours. Not all his innovations were successful: attempts to add character to the expressions on the face cards were unpopular -- instead, Thomas applied creativity to decoration on the back of the cards. In 1835 the business moved to the address that became the seat of its empire, 110 Bunhill Row in the City, with the family living next door at number 108. However, the commercial depression of 1837 caused serious financial difficulties for the firm and the partnership -- now de la Rue, James, and Rudd -- was dissolved. Things were so bad that late in May de la Rue was arrested for debt, and though it was in his creditors' interest to bail him out, they drove a hard bargain to do so, running the business for a while as a trust with de la Rue as a paid employee, and negotiating a low price to buy his patent for the production of white lead. The family pulled together to weather the storm: by 1837 both de la Rue's sons were working in the business, and his wife and eldest daughter also helped out. Warren de la Rue had joined the firm some two years earlier, and was already proving the worth of his scientific interests; indeed, another scientist with whom he had collaborated, Charles Button, lent de la Rue money to help clear his debts. In 1839 both Warren and Charles Button were made partners in the firm, and in the following year Warren married Georgiana Bowles (1819-1918), who travelled with him on business and helped him throughout his career. Typically, Thomas de la Rue bounced back from his problems, celebrating Victoria's coronation in June 1838 by employing 100 staff for six days to gild a special edition of the 'Sun' newspaper. 
For several decades both family and business flourished as established lines and new products were developed with shrewd collaboration and constant experiment, and were rewarded with public recognition. Warren de la Rue combined scientific experiment with business travel, as well as superintending building works and devising an improved boiler for making tea for the workmen. Playing cards became a cornerstone of the business, the more expensive packs distinguished by the work of Owen Jones (1809-1874), who in an association lasting several decades produced over 170 designs for playing cards alone, including a pack for the royal family, as well as for diaries and calendars. The cards and their manufacture earned the praise of Charles Dickens in his 'Household Words' (vol. 6, 1853), and their influence was indirectly acknowledged by the family long after the business had diversified: referring to the number of cards in a pack, William Frederick left $52 in his will to Owen Jones, while Warren's younger son, Thomas Andros de la Rue ['see below'], had the houses of Cadogan Square renumbered so that his would be number 52. 
In an early venture into overseas markets in the early 1840s Thomas de la Rue established his younger brother, Paul, in St Petersburg to oversee the tsar's playing card business, for which De La Rue supplied machinery. Railway tickets and visiting cards were added to the range of printed goods, and the range of social stationery expanded. Such activities followed on from existing business, but as early as 1840 de la Rue took out a printing patent which contained hints of two key areas of future development, in a reference to 'banknotes, post office envelopes or any work requiring great difficulty of invention'. At this date the firm was not yet directly engaged in the security printing of currency or stamps, but among several valuable contacts, Warren was friendly with Edwin Hill, the brother of Rowland Hill who introduced the pre-paid penny postage in 1840. Capitalizing on the market opened up by the increase in post, De La Rue initially moved into the manufacture of envelopes, cut mechanically by a machine invented by Warren de la Rue and Edwin Hill. 
This venture was just one feature of the accolade published in 'Chambers's Edinburgh Journal' in July 1846: recounting his experience in 'A day at De La Rue's', the writer found 'an amusing hive of industry; steam-engines, machinery and animated beings, commingling in restless and varied movement' to produce playing cards, mourning stationery and marriage cards, needle-books, and even a portable chessboard. The description shows that inventive production was matched by economies of scale and good management: the firm made and repaired their own machinery, while the productivity of some 300 employees was maximized by such paternalistic measures as replacing beer breaks with a shorter working day and establishing a library and a sickness fund. The article described the firm as the largest of its kind in the world -- journalistic exaggeration, perhaps, but indicative of status which was recognized and enhanced at the Great Exhibition of 1851. 
With the help of good contacts -- Warren had by now been elected to the Royal Society and Owen Jones was superintendent of works for the Great Exhibition -- De La Rue had a prime site and attracted huge crowds to their display, of which the envelope-making machine was the centrepiece. Other items included portable writing-desks, designed by William Frederick, and playing cards with coloured pips to assist those with poor sight; the latter were not a success at the time, though similar devices are now a common feature on paper currency, of which the present-day De La Rue is a major producer. Thomas, Warren, and the firm won medals for their contributions to the exhibition, which were also rewarded by good publicity in the exhibition catalogue, the 'Illustrated London News', and in Henry Selous's painting of Victoria opening the exhibition, which included Thomas and Warren among the onlookers -- indeed, the family bought the painting, later presented to the Victoria and Albert Museum. At the exhibitions in New York and Paris in 1853 and 1855 the firm won further honours and Thomas was made chevalier of the Legion d'honneur. 



@@@@@


doc= 7447


Rue, Warren de la (1815-1889), chemist and astronomer, was born on 18 January 1815 in Guernsey, the elder son of Thomas de la Rue (1793-1866), printer, and his wife, Jane Warren (1789-1858) ['see under 'Rue, de la, family]. The family moved to London not long after his birth, but he was subsequently sent to the College de Ste Barbe in Paris to be educated. He returned to London in his teens and entered his father's business, which, by this time, was establishing itself as a major producer of stationery. He followed his father in being interested in technical innovation, and studied privately relevant areas of science, more especially chemistry. On 17 February 1840 de la Rue married Georgiana (1819-1918), the third daughter of Thomas Bowles from Guernsey. They had four sons and one daughter. 
De la Rue's paper relating to the chemistry of electric batteries (a lifelong interest) appeared in 1836. The work derived from his concern for the use of electrotypes in printing, a process which he was one of the first to introduce on a large scale. In 1845, when the Royal College of Chemistry was founded in London by the German chemist, August Wilhelm Hofmann, de la Rue became one of the first to study there. Besides meeting a number of future leaders of British chemistry at the college, he became a close friend of Hofmann himself, and helped him edit chemical translations from the German. De la Rue's scientific work benefited from skills developed as part of his business activities. Good draughtsmanship was one example. Another was mechanical aptitude. On the business side, this led him to invent, along with Edwin Hill, the first envelope making machine, which became one of the exhibits at the Great Exhibition of 1851. Both de la Rue and his father were jury members at the exhibition, and for the former his involvement proved highly significant both in terms of business and of science. On the business side, de la Rue became interested in another of the exhibits -- a patent candle. He subsequently carried out chemical studies which led to improvements in this product. For this he received a substantial payment from its manufacturers. In 1850 de la Rue's scientific activities were recognized by his election to the Royal Society. 
Though de la Rue carried out a number of investigations into organic chemistry in the latter part of the 1850s and the early 1860s, his research time was increasingly taken up by astronomy. In 1840 he came into contact with James Nasmyth, a successful engineer, who had developed an interest in astronomy and, more especially, in the construction of an altazimuth reflecting telescope. He inspired de la Rue and cast two speculum mirrors for him; de la Rue developed his own methods for figuring and polishing them. Nasmyth was in close contact with another wealthy amateur astronomer, William Lassell, who not only provided de la Rue with additional suggestions for polishing mirrors, but also pointed out to him the value of equatorial mountings for reflecting telescopes. The major outcome of all this advice was that by 1849 de la Rue had constructed a 13 inch equatorial reflector which he installed in a small observatory at his home in Canonbury, Middlesex, and used for a number of studies in subsequent years. Lassell's interest in Saturn also communicated itself to de la Rue. His first astronomical publication for the Royal Astronomical Society was based on a drawing he made of that planet which showed its newly discovered inner ring. 
At the Great Exhibition de la Rue saw daguerreotypes of the moon sent from Harvard College observatory. Astronomical photography had an immediate appeal for him, combining as it did his interests in chemistry, astronomy, and instrumentation. The timing was also propitious. The daguerreotype process was slow and inconvenient, and the plates were unable to record faint objects. In 1851 a new wet collodion process was brought into use. As the name suggests, this entailed exposing plates immediately after they had been sensitized by chemical immersion. Though the plates were not entirely convenient to handle this allowed much fainter details to be recorded. De la Rue applied the new process to taking pictures of the moon, obtained several useful images, and enlarged them. However, his telescope had to be accurately guided by hand during exposures, and this proved to be difficult. 
In 1857 de la Rue moved from Canonbury to Cranford, Middlesex, where he remounted his telescope with a mechanical drive. He soon produced not only better pictures of the moon, but also photographs of Jupiter, Saturn, and a bright double star. One important result to emerge was the extent to which the photographic images of the moon and planets differed from their visual appearances. Since the photographic plates were more sensitive to blue light than the human eye, these differences indicated variations in colour. De la Rue further realized that the moon could be photographed from slightly different angles as it pursued its path round the earth. This allowed him to combine photographs taken at different times to provide the first stereoscopic pictures of an astronomical body. Like his earlier work on telescope making, this new advance was warmly praised by the leading British scientist Sir John Herschel. 
The observatory at Kew had come under the control of the British Association in the 1840s, and Herschel suggested that it should be used to obtain daily photographs of the sun. De la Rue was the obvious person to consult on this matter, so the Kew committee of the British Association asked him to examine the requirements for constructing a photo-heliograph. Funds for the construction were provided by the Royal Society. De la Rue inaugurated the new instrument at Kew in 1858, where it remained in operation -- with a short period at de la Rue's own observatory -- until 1872. In 1859 Balfour Stewart was appointed to take charge of the Kew observatory. Over the next few years de la Rue, Balfour Stewart, and the assistant at the observatory, Benjamin Loewy, were involved in an intensive series of solar studies. 
In 1860 de la Rue took the photo-heliograph to Spain where a total solar eclipse was visible. His photographs played an important part in demonstrating that prominences were undoubtedly genuine features hovering above the sun's surface. De la Rue described this work in his Bakerian lecture to the Royal Society in 1862. Meanwhile, in 1861, he applied his stereoscopic methods to photographs of the sun. The results, along with other observations at Kew, supported the suggestion made by Alexander Wilson in the eighteenth century that sunspots represent depressions in the solar surface. It also appeared that the bright solar faculae occupied positions above, and often behind, the sunspots as the sun rotated. These observations were important for current discussions of the sun and its atmosphere. However, the main reasons for obtaining frequent photographs of the sun were twofold: to investigate in more detail the solar cycle, discovered by the German amateur astronomer, Heinrich Schwabe in the 1840s, and to relate this to the solar-terrestrial interaction affecting the earth's magnetic field, detected in the early 1850s by Edward Sabine. The Kew studies, which covered an entire solar cycle, provided the best statistical data on sunspots then available, and were used to examine the variations in spot numbers in considerable detail. More speculatively, de la Rue and his colleagues tried to relate the incidence of sunspots to the motions of the planets. 
Balfour Stewart resigned from Kew in 1871. De la Rue's photo-heliograph was transferred to the Royal Observatory, beginning its operations there in 1873 (though it returned to Kew a few years later). Nevertheless, in November 1872 de la Rue withdrew from the Royal Astronomical Society council because of their deference to Airy's opposition to an independent solar observatory. However, de la Rue continued to be involved in the Kew observatory until his death. With the departure of the photo-heliograph he started preparing for the forthcoming transit of Venus in 1874 but, his eyesight a problem, he finally decided he was no longer fit enough to carry out intensive astronomical observations. In 1873, having heard from Charles Pritchard that Oxford University was to fund a new observatory, he offered his telescope and other equipment on the understanding that it would be installed and used. By this he became co-founder of the new observatory, and a vital benefactor of it, and so maintained his interest in observational astronomy at Oxford. In 1887 he paid for a photographic refractor so that the observatory could participate in the new international 'carte du ciel' project. 
In 1873 de la Rue moved house to Portland Place in central London. Here he reverted to his chemical interests, setting up a laboratory in which he and his friend, Hugo Muller, carried out a series of investigations. Muller had worked with him earlier on organic chemistry, but by the end of the 1860s they had turned their attention to the study of electrical discharges through gases. De la Rue's interest in them may well have stemmed from Balfour Stewart, who suggested that aurorae, one of the phenomena affected by solar-terrestrial interaction, might be electrical discharges. The topic of discharges became increasingly important as the century progressed, and de la Rue continued working on it until a few years before his death. To obtain the voltage required, he returned to his development of electrical batteries. By the time he finished his experiments he was using a battery containing 15,000 cells. One of the key figures in understanding discharges, J. J. Thomson, subsequently declared that de la Rue and Muller had taken some of the best photographs of striated discharges ever made. Unfortunately, a proper understanding of the discharge phenomenon, and hence of the photographs, came only after de la Rue's death. 
De la Rue was one of the wealthy amateurs who played a vital role in nineteenth-century British science. In part this was by direct donation. Apart from his interest in Oxford he offered financial support for other scientific enterprises. One example was the expedition by David Gill in 1877 to Ascension Island in order to make a new determination of the sun's distance. Equally, de la Rue devoted a good deal of his time to the organization of science. In terms of his two main concerns -- chemistry and astronomy -- he was, in the former field, a founder member of the Chemical Society and its president from 1867 to 1869 and in 1879-80. In astronomy he was an honorary secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society from 1855 to 1862, president from 1864 to 1866 and a member of its council for most of the time from 1866 until his death. He was also president of the London Institution for many years, retiring from this position in 1878, when he became secretary of the Royal Institution. He was much in demand as a committee member throughout his life, for he was regarded as tactful, kindly, and generous. 
Many honours came to de la Rue from both home and abroad. He was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1862, a royal medal of the Royal Society in 1864, and the prix Lalande of the Academie des Sciences in 1865. He was a corresponding member of a number of foreign societies, but his closest ties were with Paris, which he continued to visit throughout his life. Like his father before him, he was appointed to the Legion d'honneur. 
Having worked in the family business all his life de la Rue became head of the firm on his father's death in 1866. He tried to retire in 1869, but was forced to return in the following year on the death of his brother. He finally retired in 1880, when the business activities devolved on his sons. He suffered from poor health in his later years, which curtailed his activities. Following a bout of pneumonia he died at 73 Portland Place, Marylebone, London, on 19 April 1889. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7448


Delattre, Jean Marie (1745-1840), engraver, was born at Abbeville, France. He was a pupil of J. P. Le Bas and had already composed some small portrait engravings in Paris before coming to England in 1770 to work for William Wynne Ryland. He showed with the Society of Arts in that year when he was living opposite the Mother Red Cap in Kentish Town, London -- Francois Ravenet's address -- and a year later was publishing in partnership with Ravenet's son-in-law Victor Marie Picot. He apparently returned to Paris shortly before 1773, where he produced two portraits and worked for the printsellers Esnauts and Rapilly, but after this date he settled in London, and on 18 February 1773 married Ann Davis (died 1834) at St Anne, Soho. Two daughters survived him: Charlotte May (1780-1851) and Juliet Ann ('b'. 1783). 
From 1779 Delattre engraved for a variety of printsellers including Anne Bryer, and also for Francis Bartolozzi. Early prints after Kaufmann for Bartolozzi are signed 'Delattre sculps. Bartolozzi direxit'. Later he became Bartolozzi's principal assistant and was responsible for much of the work bearing Bartolozzi's signature. He also worked for booksellers, making portraits and vignettes for 'London Theatre' (1776) and portraits for Samuel Johnson's 'Works of the English Poets' (1779). Occasionally he engraved in line rather than in stipple, as in his work for Bell's 'British Theatre'. 
About 1800 the American painter John Singleton Copley commissioned Delattre to produce a line-engraving at a reduced scale of Bartolozzi's large plate 'Death of the Earl of Chatham', which depicted fifty-six members of the House of Lords, and for which Bartolozzi had received $2000. Copley agreed to pay $800, with an advance of $220, but he was dissatisfied with the resulting print and refused further payment. Delattre brought an action in king's bench to recover the balance. The trial on 2 July 1801 occupied the entire day; Delattre called fourteen witnesses, who declared that the sixty portraits depicted were all good likenesses, and that the print was worth at least $800. Copley's twelve witnesses considered the likenesses to be poor. The jury found for Delattre, who received the outstanding $580. 'The Times' later commented that the real defect of the print was that it depicted equally strong likenesses in all lights and at all distances. 
Delattre and his family resided in one of the small houses known as St John's Villas, on North End Road, Fulham, London. A watercolour, now in the British Museum, was made of Delattre one year before his death on 30 June 1840. The inscription on his tomb in Fulham churchyard declares that he was in his ninety-eighth year, which would have brought his birth forward to 1742 or 1743. His wife, who died in 1834 aged eighty-four, and his eldest daughter, who died in 1851 aged seventy-one, are also commemorated on this tomb. 


@@@@@


doc= 7449


Delaune, Gideon (1564/5-1659), apothecary, was born in Nimes, France, the eldest of the ten children of William Delaune (c.1530-1611), physician and Reformed protestant minister, and Katherine des Loges (died 1607). Paul Delaune was a younger brother. The family moved to England in 1572-3, to escape the persecution of Huguenots in France, and settled in the Blackfriars precinct in London some time about 1575. Although it is not known where he received his medical training, by 1590 Delaune was established as an apothecary in Blackfriars and was married to another French immigrant, Judith Chamberlen. This marriage and his sister Sarah's subsequent marriage to Judith's cousin, Pierre Chamberlen, tightly connected Delaune to this other prominent Huguenot refugee medical family, whose members were principally known for their contributions to obstetrics. Judith died in 1631, and Delaune remained a widower for eighteen years before he married Jane Johnson on 31 May 1649. Jane was still living at the time of his death in 1659. 
Some time between 1606 and 1610 Delaune was appointed apothecary for Anne of Denmark, James I's queen. Together with the king's physician, Theodore Turquet de Mayerne, another Huguenot refugee, Delaune pressed for the formation of a separate guild or society for apothecaries, who at that time were subsumed within the Grocers' Company. In 1610 he was the foremost advocate of a parliamentary bill that would have distinguished apothecaries from grocers. That bill failed, but in December 1617 James I did grant a charter incorporating apothecaries into a separate society, placing them, however, under the ultimate supervision of the College of Physicians. Delaune, one of the original members of the new society named in the charter, immediately took an active and prominent part in the life of the new body. He headed the first court of assistants of the society, and in 1618 oversaw the revision of the 'Pharmacoepia Londoniensis', which set out the proper ingredients of the goods which members of the society could make and sell. After the City of London made him a freeman in 1623, Delaune served as under-warden of the society in 1624-5, upper-warden in 1627, and master in 1628-9 and again in 1636-7. In 1632 he provided the property for the building of Apothecaries' Hall in Blackfriars, the area of London where he resided throughout his life in England. An entry in the court minutes of the society in 1648 acknowledged Delaune as 'a principal means for the procuring of the said company to be made a corporation and for the purchasing of the capital messuage now belonging to the said company called Apothecaries' Hall'. 
Delaune was also one of the foremost members of the Huguenot immigrant community in the capital, which gathered together in the autonomous French church in Threadneedle Street, London. The minister of this church, Nathaniel Marie, was his brother-in-law, while Delaune's own brother Pierre was minister to the Huguenot congregation in Norwich. Delaune himself served as a deacon of the London church from 1593 to 1596, and as elder from at least 1614 and throughout the 1620s. In 1621 he served on its delegations, which called on the archbishop of Canterbury and the privy council to argue for the preservation of the church's distinct Calvinist ecclesiastical discipline. 
Delaune's alien birth at times impeded his participation in the political and economic life of London. In January 1626 he had to step down from the office of alderman of Dowgate Ward, to which he had been elected, because he was a 'stranger'. Although he only became a 'denizen' of the realm in April 1635, Delaune largely overcame the disabilities connected with his alien birth and was able to enter the circles of the native English elite. In 1613 the College of Arms awarded him and his brothers a coat 'of the arms of the family of Delaune of Belmesnil in Normandy, from which they were descended'. He owned the manor of Sharsted in Kent, an estate at Roxted in Bedfordshire, shares of land in Virginia and Bermuda, and a mansion and ten tenements in Blackfriars, London. The two children from the twelve born to him who grew to adulthood both married into the English gentry. His daughter, Anne Delaune, married Sir Richard Sprignell, baronet, of Coppenthorpe, Yorkshire; his son, Abraham Delaune, married Anne Sandys, the daughter of Sir Edwin Sandys of Northbourne Court, Kent. 
A kinsman, Thomas Delaune, claims with a good deal of hyperbole in his 'The Present State of London' (1681) that Delaune was worth $90,000 at the time of his death at Blackfriars in 1659 (p. 330). Much of this great wealth probably came from the sales of 'Delaune's pill', which Thomas Delaune claimed 'is in great request to this day, notwithstanding the swarms of pretenders to pill-making' (ibid.). Gideon Delaune's will and a funeral certificate from the College of Arms both claim that he was aged ninety-four years at his death. He left $1000 for his burial and was buried on 3 March 1659 in the churchyard of St Anne Blackfriars; the funeral was conducted by the College of Arms and followed the ceremony usually reserved for an alderman of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7450


Delaune, Paul (c.1585-1655?), medical practitioner, was born in the parish of St Anne Blackfriars, London, the youngest of the four surviving sons of the Huguenot immigrant William Delaune (c.1530-1611), physician and Reformed minister, and Katherine des Loges (died 1607). He was thus the youngest brother of the wealthy Blackfriars apothecary Gideon Delaune. 
Paul Delaune was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he proceeded MA in 1610. He graduated MD at the University of Padua on 13 October 1614, the degree being incorporated at Cambridge on 4 November 1615. He was examined before the censors' board of the College of Physicians on 8 September 1615, was admitted a candidate of the college on 25 June 1616, and became a fellow on 21 April 1618. During the previous year (22 November 1617) he married, in his parish of St Anne Blackfriars, Sarah Argent the sister of John Argent who was to be eight times president of the College of Physicians (1625-33). 
When Lord Falkland was appointed lord deputy of Ireland in 1622, Delaune accompanied him as his physician, and lived in Dublin for many years. There he worked for the formation of a college of physicians in Dublin, modelled on that in London, but this project was not realized until 1654, well after Delaune had left Ireland. By 24 May 1642 (by which time his wife had died) he was in London again, when he was made an elect, and in 1643 senior censor, of the College of Physicians. On 13 June 1643, after the withdrawal of Thomas Winston to the continent, Delaune was appointed professor of physic in Gresham College through the influence of Thomas Chamberlane, a member of the Mercers' Company. For over nine years Delaune carried out his professorial duties with efficiency and success. On 27 June 1643 he volunteered to act as one of three college physicians serving the parliamentary army under the earl of Essex. Delaune's involvement in the parliamentary cause, his education at Emmanuel College, and his service as an elder of the French church of London from 1651 to 1654 strongly suggest that he was of puritan religious inclinations. 
In 1652 Thomas Winston returned to England and was restored to the Gresham professorship. For some time after his compulsory resignation of the chair of physic Delaune was in straitened circumstances. In 1654 he accepted from Cromwell the appointment of physician-general to the fleet that was about to embark to capture Hispaniola as part of the 'western design'. He was probably present at the capture of Jamaica in 1655, but appears to have been been lost at sea shortly thereafter, as the fleet on its return could give no information regarding his whereabouts. 
John Ward, in his 'Lives of the Professors of Gresham College' (1740), writes of Delaune that 'He was naturally of an easy temper, and chearful with a small fortune, temperate and frugal himself, tho indulgent to his children some of whom probably survived him' (Ward, 268-9). His will of 13 December 1654 mentions three children: his son and heir, Benjamin Delaune, a merchant of the East India Company, and his daughters, Elizabeth and Olave. 


@@@@@


doc= 7451


Delaune, Thomas (d. 1685), religious writer, was born at Brinny in co. Cork, Ireland. His parents were poor Roman Catholics who rented a farm from Major Edward Riggs, a wealthy Cromwellian soldier who had settled on a large estate about 7 miles from the town of Cork in 1651 and who also had a partnership in a nearby fishery. Riggs, who was the founder of Cork Baptist Church, was sufficiently impressed with Delaune's intellectual giftedness that he provided for his education until Delaune was about sixteen. The young Catholic became a Baptist largely through the influence of Riggs. For several years Delaune was the clerk of a pilchard fishery near Kinsale, which may very well have been the one in which Riggs had a share. Delaune's embrace of protestantism, though, brought upon him obloquy from his Catholic neighbours and this eventually compelled him to settle in England. 
Not long after his arrival Delaune made the acquaintance of Edward Hutchinson, a Baptist minister with experience in Ireland, whose daughter Hanna he subsequently married. The couple made their home in London, where Delaune provided a livelihood for his family by keeping a grammar school and publishing religious works. A number of theological tracts and treatises came from his pen during the 1670s and early 1680s. Some of them took up the defence of Baptist principles against various paedobaptist authors, including the prominent nonconformist Richard Baxter. Delaune was clearly highly regarded by the leadership of the London Particular Baptist community. In July 1675, for instance, he co-authored a book with Hanserd Knollys, William Kiffin, and three others that defended believers' baptism. Six years later Delaune and Benjamin Keach co-authored the monumental 'Tropologia: a Key to Open Scripture Metaphors' (1682), which sought to give the interpreter of scripture a solid grasp of the various tropes, metaphors, and similes in the 'Bible'. In it Keach owned his debt of gratitude to Delaune, whom he called his 'Friend', for the work was far 'too heavy for a single Undertaker' (foreword, 'Tropologia', book 2). It is clear from 'Tropologia' that Delaune was fully conversant with Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and that he had read widely in classical authors such as Virgil and Pliny the younger, a number of church fathers including Tertullian and Gregory of Nazianzus, and various Reformed divines. By his own admission, he was never ordained. 
Other writings, better known, defended nonconformity. Delaune's 'A Plea for the Non-Conformists' (1683) was issued in response to a sermon by the Anglican minister Benjamin Calamy about the 'scrupulous conscience' of dissent. Calamy maintained that dissenters had no just cause to separate from the Church of England. In fact, he argued, their separation was about 'mere niceties' and thus their 'wayward skittish Consciences ought to be well bridled and restrained' (B. Calamy, 'A Discourse about a Scrupulous Conscience', 1683). In response Delaune's tract argued that the dissenters had as much reason to separate from the Church of England as the latter did from Rome. Moreover, they did not separate over trivial matters, but profound spiritual issues. Delaune also defended religious toleration. 'I cannot find', he wrote, 'that Christ or his disciples, ever... 'Newgated' scrupulous consciences to conformity' ('Plea', pt 3). Convinced that 'A Plea' 'contained things dangerous to the government' ('Plea', pt 3), government authorities ordered Delaune's arrest on 29 November 1683. He was tried in January 1684 at the Old Bailey on a charge of sedition and found guilty, despite the fact that nothing seditious had been said in his book. He was fined 100 marks (just under $67), but because he was unable to pay he was kept in Newgate prison. Delaune's books were also publicly burnt in front of the Royal Exchange, London. His wife and two children soon joined him in prison. The utterly miserable conditions in the prison broke their health and the entire family perished there, Delaune dying last, in 1685. 

'Tropologia' and Delaune's 'Plea' were the two literary pieces by which posterity would remember Delaune. The 'Plea' became something of a standard nonconformist apology, reprinted up to the beginning of the nineteenth century. Daniel Defoe, who wrote the preface to a 1706 edition, noted something of the irony in this: surely, he asked, the dissenters, whose 'champion' Delaune was, could have raised the money to have paid his fine and thus freed him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7452


Delaune, William (c.1530-1611), Reformed minister and physician, was born at 'Bellenewell', near Dieppe, but little else is known about his background. In 1582 he said that he was aged fifty-two. He studied medicine for eight years at Paris and Montpellier, under Duretus and Rondelet. About 1558, having completed his medical training, he became a Reformed minister, most probably at Montpellier, combining this with the practice of medicine. He married Katherine des Loges (died 1607) from Rouen, probably the daughter of a fellow minister, M. des Loges (died 1570), at Uzes. In 1564 or 1565 their first son, Gideon Delaune (1564/5-1659), was born at Nimes; Isaac, Peter, Nathaniel, Paul Delaune (c.1585-1655?), Sara, Ester, and Elizabeth were born subsequently. 
Delaune initially served the churches of Generac and Beauvoisin in Lower Languedoc. On des Loges's death, Delaune took responsibility for his family, and in 1570 asked to be relieved of his church due to his extreme poverty. He seems to have returned to Normandy, where he may have had property, but in the wake of the St Bartholomew's day massacre (1572) took refuge in England, initially at Rye where he served as a minister. By 1575 he had moved to London, where he became an assistant minister in the French church. He also had contacts with Cambridge, corresponding with the professor of divinity, Peter Baro, but, with the support of the French church, continued to practise medicine and as a result was summoned to appear before the College of Physicians in December 1582. He petitioned the college for permission to continue to practise as he depended upon it for his livelihood; the college agreed and he was made a licentiate. The following year he asked for permission to be released from his preaching duties in order to concentrate on medicine. 
However, Delaune continued to be involved in religious matters. In 1583 he published an abridged version of Calvin's 'Institutes', entitled 'Institutionis Christianae religionis a Joannes Calvins conscriptae epistome'; a second edition was published in 1584 and an English translation in 1585. He also retained his links with the continent. In 1599 he arranged for his son Nathaniel to be sponsored in his studies for the ministry by the Reformed church in Dieppe. Delaune died in London early in 1611; he was buried on 19 February at St Anne Blackfriars beside his wife, who had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7453


Delaune, William (1659-1728), college head, was born on 14 April 1659 and baptized on 26 April at St Stephen, Coleman Street, London, the son of Benjamin Delaune of London, and Margaret, daughter of George Coney, a wealthy London merchant, and possibly grandson of Paul Delaune (c.1585-1655?). Educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from 1672, he proceeded to St John's College, Oxford, in 1675. He graduated BA in 1679, and proceeded MA in 1683 and BD in 1688. Once ordained he became chaplain to Peter Mews, bishop of Winchester, who presented him to the living of Chilbolton, Hampshire, in 1689. 
In 1697 Delaune proceeded DD, and on 12 March 1698 was elected president of St John's, allegedly on account of his inherited wealth. Installed as a canon of Winchester in 1701, he was appointed vice-chancellor of the University of Oxford in October of the following year. As vice-chancellor, Delaune was chairman of the delegates to the university press. During his tenure of this office, which lasted until October 1706, the press's income (including the profits from the first two editions of Clarendon's 'History of the Great Rebellion') was calculated to be $2773 3's'. 9died Only $493 of this sum had been paid into the university chest, Delaune borrowing much of the remainder, probably to finance gambling debts. Thomas Hearne charged him, perhaps unfairly, with embezzlement. Delaune admitted making advances to himself out of the university exchequer but claimed he had every intention of repaying. When he was sued in 1709 by the chancellor's court for $231 1's'. 2died, Delaune appears to have agreed to pay $300 in two portions. Canon William Stratford claimed that when Delaune admitted that he was unable to pay, the income from his college presidency was sequestered, but there is no evidence to confirm this. However, Delaune did default, and his successor to the vice-chancellorship, William Lancaster, determined to recover the debt in full. He charged Delaune with owing $2280 3's'. 9died, the difference between the press's income during Delaune's delegacy and the amount actually paid to the university. Lancaster met with no success, so obtained an order from the chancellor's court to sequester both Delaune's rectory of Long Hanborough, Oxfordshire, and his Winchester prebend. Between 1711 and 1720 a sum of $2590 2's'. was recovered. 
Hearne suggested that an affection for cards and dice was the vice which contributed principally to Delaune's financial difficulties, and the outburst against the vice-chancellor by the 'terrae filius' at the Act (encaenia) in 1703 confirmed that there were scandals attributable to Delaune. Nicholas Amhurst, expelled from St John's in 1719 by the president and fellows, printed a revengeful account of the encaenia incident in his series of pamphlets, 'Terrae filius', first published in 1721. Amhurst is also thought to have written the accusatory 'Letter from a Student in Grubb Street' (1720). 
Delaune is said to have lost his considerable fortune, as well as the money borrowed from the university chest and from colleagues. His financial situation was perilous; in 1711 his tory friends, notably the future lord chancellor, Simon Harcourt, were pressed to help. Harcourt planned to obtain for Delaune the lucrative bishopric of Raphoe. Two years later another attempt was made to secure for him the see of Derry. In spite of the chancellor's influence, Delaune was appointed to neither. 
In 1715 Delaune successfully stood for election to the Lady Margaret divinity professorship. It was said that Delaune had swung the election in his favour by calling in all the bachelors of divinity who had left the university in debt; only two heads of houses and six doctors of divinity voted for him. Ironically, he was also appointed a delegate of the press and of accounts in 1721. The publication in 1728 of 'Twelve Sermons upon Several Subjects and Occasions' (fulsomely dedicated to Lord Abingdon) was also an attempt to relieve his deep debts. 
Delaune, of tory persuasion, did not allow his personal politics to interfere with potential advancement. In 1704 he had allied himself to the rising Robert Harley and developed close relations with Harcourt, Henry Sacheverell, and Francis Atterbury, but when times changed Delaune changed with them. Although chaplain to Queen Anne from 1703, during which time he acquired some reputation as a preacher (although Thomas Wagstaff declared that Delaune knew little of theology or patristics), Delaune determined that the queen's death in 1714 would not jeopardize his future; in spite of his personal politics he made sure to be seen praying for the new king some hours before it was announced that Anne had died, and was quick to dissociate himself from Harley in decline. 
Delaune died, unmarried, on 23 May 1728, and was buried without the usual eulogistic epitaph in St John's College chapel. Wagstaff's humorous epitaph suggests that Delaune's appearance, with his broad-brimmed hat which put him into perpetual shade, his wide and flapping collars, and his agitated hand movements, were sufficient to make him both very noticeable and, apparently, distressing to young ladies. 


@@@@@


doc= 7454


Delaval, Edward Hussey (bap. 1729, d. 1814), natural philosopher, was baptized at Newburn, Northumberland, on 12 June 1729, the third son of Francis Blake Delaval (bap. 1692, d. 1752) ['see under 'Delaval family], landowner of Seaton Delaval and Ford Castle, Northumberland, and of Doddington, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Rhoda (died 1759), daughter of Robert Apreece of Washingley, Huntingdonshire. He was admitted a fellow-commoner at Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 4 July 1747; he graduated BA in 1750 and MA in 1754, and was elected a fellow in 1755. When his eldest brother, Sir Francis Blake Delaval, died in 1771, his elder brother, John Hussey Delaval (1728-1808), succeeded to the Northumberland estates; he was made Baron Delaval of Seaton Delaval in 1786. When the latter died childless in 1808 the barony was extinguished, and Edward Delaval succeeded to the entailed estates at Seaton Delaval, having already inherited Doddington in 1774. On 22 December 1808 he married Sarah, daughter of George Scott of Methley, Yorkshire; they had no children. 
Delaval was an accomplished musician and classicist, with a knowledge of French, German, and Italian. At Cambridge, under the influence of John Mickleburgh, professor of chemistry, he became interested in Newtonian natural philosophy and in the experimental ramifications of Newton's work in chemistry, electricity, and optics. His family patronized the portrait painter and electrician Benjamin Wilson, and in 1759 Delaval supported Wilson's theory of two electric fluids with some ingenious experiments on conductivity, which were published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (51, 1759, 83-8; 52, 1761, 353-6). This led to a dispute with John Canton, who supported a one fluid theory. Delaval was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 6 December 1759 (his certificate was signed by Wilson and Benjamin Franklin), and in 1764 he contributed an illustrated account of the effects of lightning on St Bride's, Fleet Street, London, to the 'Philosophical Transactions'. In 1769 he was appointed with Franklin, Wilson, and William Watson to report to the society on the means of securing St Paul's against danger from lightning. When the cathedral was struck by lightning on 22 March 1772, Delaval gave an account of the damage. In the subsequent controversy between Franklin and Wilson on the merits of pointed or blunt lightning conductors to protect the powder works at Purfleet, Delaval sided with Wilson. 
Following up Newton's 'Opticks' (3rd edn, 1721), Delaval experimented on the specific gravities of gold, lead, silver, copper, and iron and their colours when united to glass or in solutions; for his paper on the subject, published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1765, he received the Royal Society's Copley medal. He believed that the 'bigness' (size) of the ultimate particles of metals might be deduced from their colours. He developed the subject in 'An Experimental Inquiry into the Cause of the Changes of Colours in Opake and Coloured Bodies' (1777), the first fifty pages of which had been printed 'some years ago' (p. 55) and translated into French in 1774. A complete French translation was made by the dyer Quatremere Dijonval in 1778, and an Italian version appeared in 1779. Delaval's classical scholarship was revealed in a long historical preface on the dyeing and textile technologies of the ancients, his argument being that since a practical skill in dyeing depended upon the separation of matter into its smallest parts, the ancients were aware of the atomic nature of matter. The treatise was packed with interesting experiments on the colours of plant extracts, animal materials, and minerals, and Delaval suggested that the sky is blue because blue is the most refrangible colour and air is more minutely divided than any other medium (p. 92). In 1785 he was awarded the gold medal of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society for 'An Experimental Inquiry into the Cause of the Permanent Colours of Opake Bodies', which detailed his investigations of reflected and transmitted light. Implicit in all of his work on colours was a corpuscular theory of light; he also adhered to the phlogiston theory of chemical composition. Although he lived through the chemical revolution he published nothing after 1785; before then his writings were well known on the continent, and he was a member of the royal societies of Gottingen and Uppsala, and of the Institute of Bologna. 
Among Delaval's minor achievements was the manufacture, under his direction, of an elaborate set of musical glasses. These inspired Franklin to design the armonica in 1761. Delaval also made artificial gems, and devised a method of extracting fluor (calcium fluoride) from glass, of which he left various coloured samples. His Gothic-styled house in Parliament Place, Westminster, London, was fireproofed with artificial stones made under his direction. He died in Parliament Place on 14 August 1814, and was buried in the nave of Westminster Abbey. His estates were inherited by a nephew, Sir Jacob Henry Astley, MP for Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 7455


Delavall, Sir Ralph (d. 1707), naval officer, was the eldest son of William Delavall (1616-1667) of Newcastle and his wife, Mary (died 1675), daughter of Sir Peter Riddell of Newcastle. Delavall was probably educated locally and his spelling in later life was bad and phonetic. He was appointed lieutenant of the 'Cambridge' on 23 August 1666 and served in the 'Henrietta' from October 1666 to December 1667 before being appointed a lieutenant on the 'Tiger' from March 1668 to May 1669. As part of retrenchment he was then dismissed, and not employed again until January 1671 when he was appointed lieutenant of the 'Adventure'. In January 1672 he moved to the 'Advice' as lieutenant, but seems to have missed the battle of Solebay on 28 May 1672 as the 'Advice' had been sent out cruising. On 6 January the next year he was promoted to captain of the 'Eagle' and ordered to sail to Guinea, so missing the battles of Schooneveld and the Texel. When he returned early in 1674 he was sent out with a convoy to Helsingor where he seized a Dutch cannon. When asked why he had seized the Dutch property, Delavall replied that the Dutch were 'professed Enemies to my Nation and that my Prince had declared them to be so, it was my duty to do them all the prejudice I could' (TNA: PRO, ADM 51/4177/1, 'Eagle'). When Delavall returned to England he was among the captains dismissed from the service at the end of the Third Anglo-Dutch War and in December 1674 he was commissioned a lieutenant in the regiment of foot guards; in 1685 he was promoted to captain and in 1687 to lieutenant-colonel. 
Delavall was appointed captain of the 'Constant Warwick' on 9 April 1677, having been given permission to leave his regiment. In June 1677 he clashed with Balthazar St Michel, muster-master at Deal, over his refusal to sign the ship's muster-books, Delavall 'alleging his not being enjoined thereto by his instructions' (TNA: PRO, ADM 106/326, fols. 238-9; Cat. iv 446). Delavall was in the West Indies in 1678; he had returned to England by May the next year, when he appeared before the parliamentary committee investigating miscarriage in the navy, concerning his seizing several ships on the pretence of their trading to Guinea. He also had to justify his religion, as it had been publicly suggested he was a Roman Catholic. He was discharged from his commission in July 1679 and rejoined the foot guards. 
On 1 October 1688 Delavall was appointed captain of the 'York'. He told the Navy Board on 3 November 1688 that he had not yet fitted his ship out because Portsmouth was 'barren of saylers... esteeming myself extremely unfortunate under this unhappy delay' (TNA: PRO, ADM 106/383, fol. 275). As part of the fleet commanded by Arthur Herbert he took part in the battle of Bantry Bay on 1 May 1689. A year later, on 31 May 1690, he presented a loyal address from the fleet to the queen, who knighted him. Promoted to vice-admiral of the blue he raised his flag in the 'Coronation' and commanded the Blue squadron, the rear squadron at the battle of Beachy Head on 30 June 1690: he and his squadron fought the French for five hours and at the inquiry made by the lords commissioners sent to investigate the action he blamed the large Dutch losses on the Dutch themselves. Delavall was allegedly no friend of Torrington's and was president of Torrington's court martial in December 1690 (which acquitted him). 
From the end of 1690 until the summer of 1691 Delavall commanded a powerful squadron in the channel, cruising off Dunkirk and attacking the port. He captured a French ship and seized papers relating to Viscount Preston's plots in England, but as he could not understand French he did not know what he had found until one of his captains told him. In December 1691 he commanded a squadron off Cadiz and in January 1692 convoyed the Mediterranean Fleet to the straits and continued cruising in the channel to protect trade. In March 1692 when Delavall arrived at Plymouth he was said to have $2.5 million of bullion aboard, though this was later said to be exaggerated. On 13 May, with his flag in the 'Royal Sovereign', Delavall served under Russell as vice-admiral of the Red squadron, and at the battle of Barfleur/La Hougue he commanded the detached squadron which on 22 May burnt the 'Soleil Royal' and two other French ships in Cherbourg. Afterwards Delavall complained bitterly and constantly about Russell's conduct before and after the battle. In November 1692 it was reported that Delavall had fallen off his horse while on his way to Portsmouth and had broken his arm. In 1693 Delavall, Killigrew, and Shovell were appointed jointly as admirals of the fleet. Following the loss of the merchant convoy destined for Smyrna, it was suggested that Killigrew and Delavall were acting in the interest of King James. Delavall bitterly denied this, declaring 'I... should be ashamed were I guilty of intended ill to my country' ('CSP dom.', '1693', 201). William none the less dismissed him from all his military offices, including his command of the 1st foot regiment, and he did not serve at sea again although in July 1693 he was appointed a prize commissioner for Jamaica and Barbados and promoted to admiral of the blue. Appointed an Admiralty commissioner in April 1693, Delavall, because of his service at sea, attended only two meetings. Following his dismissal as admiral later that year William ordered him not to attend any further meetings and he was removed at the next renewal in May 1694. At the end of 1694 Delavall kissed William's hand and it was said he would command the fleet in 1695, but this did not happen. 
Delavall sat as MP for Great Bedwyn as a tory in 1695-8. In 1699 he was granted a pension 'for good service at sea' ('CSP dom.', '1699-1700', 197) and as admiral of the blue 'by a dormant commission' he was included on a list presented to William on 30 March 1700 of flag officers 'unemployed at sea' ('CSP dom.', '1700-02', 283). Delavall married Hester Major of London. They had at least four children, two sons who died young and two daughters, Hester and Mary, who survived him. He possibly retired to Seaton Delaval in Northumberland, and may have died in London at his house in St Margaret's Westminster. He was buried on 23 January 1707 in the upper end of the west aisle of Westminster Abbey; his wife died six months later, on 10 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 7456


Delepierre, Joseph Octave (1802-1879), author and antiquary, was born at Bruges on 12 March 1802, the son of Joseph Delepierre, for many years receiver-general of West Flanders. His mother was a Penaranda, descended from a Spanish family long established in the Netherlands. By the age of twelve he had been taught neither to read nor to write, but when at last he was sent to school he made rapid progress and soon qualified for the University of Ghent. Having obtained the degree of doctor of laws, he became an 'avocat', and was appointed archivist of West Flanders in Bruges and at once set himself to bring the chaotic archive into better order. 
Delepierre was a keen antiquary and his 'Precis des annales de Bruges' (1835) was the first of many volumes devoted to the antiquities of his native city. He also collected books and works of art. When the prince consort and his brother visited Bruges in 1839, Delepierre was their cicerone. In 1840 he compiled the first volume of a 'Precis analytique' of the contents of the archives under his care. From 1841 he also edited several volumes for the Societe d'Emulation. 
Denied promotion in the archive, Delepierre was persuaded by Van de Weyer, afterwards Belgian minister in Britain, to go to London in 1843; in August 1849 Van de Weyer appointed Delepierre a secretary of legation, and obtained for him the post of Belgian consul. During his first years in Britain official duties and an active participation in literary circles occupied him so completely that he published little until 1849, when he drew up an account of a collection of early French farces and moralities in the British Museum. In 1852 he produced 'Macaroneana', followed in 1862 by 'Macaroneana Andra', well-reviewed descriptions of macaronic writings. 
When the duc d'Aumale, Van de Weyer, Lord Houghton, and others founded the Philobiblon in 1853 (then limited to thirty-six members), Delepierre was appointed one of the honorary secretaries. He contributed twenty-two papers to its 'Miscellanies', many of which he later enlarged and republished separately. Delepierre was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and a member of many other British, Belgian, and French societies. He was decorated with several foreign orders of knighthood. For more than thirty-five years he acted as Belgian secretary of legation, and, until 1877, when he resigned, he was consul-general for Belgium in London. He was twice married, first to Emily, the sister of Sir Robert Cornelius Napier, the first Lord Napier of Magdala, and daughter of Major Charles Frederick Napier (died 1812); they had two daughters. One of these died young; the other married Johannes Nicholas Trubner, who wrote a memoir of Delepierre in 1880. His second wife, who survived him, was the widow of Captain Jasper Trowce. Delepierre died on 18 August 1879 at the house of his son-in-law J. N. Trubner at 29 Upper Hamilton Terrace, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 22 August. 
Delepierre was a prolific author, mainly on topics related to Belgium and particularly Bruges, and in many fields of antiquarian studies. His works were mainly in French and were published in Belgium. They extend to translations and editions of the works of others as well as his own writings. Tall and dignified, Delepierre was a good companion, who enjoyed conversation and chess. Although he became quite English in habits and speech, he never lost his attachment to his native land. 


@@@@@


doc= 7457


Lisle, Ambrose Lisle March Phillipps de (1809-1878), Roman Catholic layman and ecumenist, eldest son of Charles March Phillipps (1779-1862), of Garendon Park, Leicestershire, was born at Garendon, the home of his grandparents, on 17 March 1809. His mother, Harriet (1790-1813), youngest daughter of Gerald Gustavus Ducarel of Walford, Somerset, died when her son was five years old. In youth he was delicate and solitary. The choice of Maisemore Court School, near Gloucester (it was later moved to Edgbaston), was not a happy one, but was crucial to the rest of his life. Phillipps's unhappiness there was aggravated by religious questions to which the answers he was given seemed contradictory. The French master, Abbe Giraud, an emigre priest exiled by the revolution in France, treated him kindly and lent him books. Without the knowledge of his family, Phillipps at the age of sixteen was received as a Roman Catholic at the church of St Peter, Birmingham. 
After tuition at home, Phillipps matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1826. His religious affiliation was reinforced by his friendship with Kenelm Digby, a recent convert and the author of books which extolled the holiness of the medieval period and the principles of chivalry. Phillipps began to emphasize his descent from a knight who had accompanied Duke William to England and was rewarded by land on the Isle of Wight, from which the family name Lisle derived. He changed his name to de Lisle in 1862, on the death of his father and his inheritance of the Garendon estates. 
Each Sunday, Phillipps, with Digby, rode to St Edmund's, Ware, 25 miles from Cambridge to attend mass. In the spring of 1828 the exertion overpowered him and his lungs were affected. He left Cambridge and was taken by his father to winter in Rome. Here he met John, sixteenth earl of Shrewsbury, a Roman Catholic peer, who was later to provide substantial sums for church building in England, often at Phillipps's prompting. He also met Hugh Clifford, later seventh baron, whose ward Laura was to become Phillipps's wife. During this and a subsequent visit to Rome a year later, he was received by two popes, Leo XII and Pius VIII, and made the acquaintance of Luigi Gentili and his superior, Antonio Rosmini, and Dominic Barberi. 
Phillipps visited a hermit who predicted that he would father a large family, and that he would not die until he had seen the reunion of the churches, in which process he would play a part. This incident became the justification for many later initiatives. Phillipps married Laura Mary Clifford on 25 July 1833; she bore sixteen children, to whom he was devoted. They set up house in 1835 at Grace Dieu Manor, Whitwick, with adjoining acres and tenants provided from his father's estates nearby. This became the focus of his social and religious programme. A. W. N. Pugin, architect and a friend of Phillipps's, designed extensions to the house several times, and also to the Gothic chapel where an elaborate liturgy, with plainchant sung by a choir, was provided on feast days. Phillipps refused to accept nomination to parliament, but took on local appointments as magistrate, deputy lieutenant, and, in 1868, high sheriff, of Leicestershire. 
The conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1830 of George Spencer, son of the second Earl Spencer, was at least partly owing to Phillipps's influence; it was the catalyst that encouraged him to act to bring about what he called 'the return of England to Catholic unity'. This was to be achieved in two ways: by the conversion of individuals and, more importantly, by the corporate absorption of whole groups into the Roman Catholic communion. He built chapels in the Gothic style in his neighbourhood and brought priests to minister in them. The proportion of Roman Catholics increased substantially. In 1835 he bought 230 acres of land to found a Cistercian monastery, with buildings designed by Pugin and largely paid for by Lord Shrewsbury. Two major attempts were made by him to secure corporate reunion. The first, in 1841, was the subject of a lengthy correspondence with J. R. Bloxam of Magdalen College, Oxford, and other Tractarians, but was short-lived. The second, in 1856, in collaboration with F. G. Lee, led to the founding of the Association for the Promotion of Christian Unity. At its peak in 1862 there were 8000 members, of whom 1000 were Roman Catholics. A ban from the Holy Office required them to withdraw in 1864, which they did. But de Lisle continued his ecumenical efforts with greater discretion, by correspondence and exchanges of hospitality with friends and acquaintances in England and abroad. Grace Dieu became a meeting place across denominational boundaries. Portrayal of de Lisle, faintly disguised as Eustace Lyle, a Roman Catholic philanthropist, in the novel 'Coningsby' by Benjamin Disraeli was the result of meeting members of the Young England movement. 
Although a life-long Conservative, in 1868 de Lisle established a friendship with William Gladstone, who made a visit to Garendon in 1873 while prime minister. When Gladstone asked de Lisle, an 'opportunist' over the impending definition of papal infallibility in 1870, for help in drafting pamphlets in reaction to the Vatican decrees, de Lisle was able to see that J. H. Newman, whom he had known since 1841, received a proof copy. It owed much to his insistence that Newman was persuaded to write his 'Letter to the Duke of Norfolk'. It was a type of covert activity typical of de Lisle, who incurred accusations of meddling in the church's business. But from the perspective of the late twentieth century, with its emphasis on the participation of lay people, he can be seen as something of a prophet. He was also unusual for a Roman Catholic in taking an important part with Gladstone in the campaign against the Bulgarian atrocities in 1876. De Lisle was small and slight in appearance; he weighed 9 stone in 1844, and was described, in 1856, as delicate with a 'trifle melancholy look'. His writings were not well received in his lifetime, due partly to their verbosity. He died on 5 March 1878 and was buried in the abbey church of Mount St Bernard, which he had founded. 
His eighth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 7458


Rudolph Edward March Phillipps de Lisle (1853-1885), was born at Grace Dieu on 23 November 1853 and entered the training ship 'Britannia' on 2 May 1867. In August 1884 he was appointed to the naval brigade attached to the upper Nile expedition sent to relieve Gordon at Khartoum. He was killed at the battle of Abu Klea on 17 January 1885 and buried on the battlefield. His letters to his family, which survive in the de Lisle archives, contain descriptions of scenes he witnessed during his naval career, particularly in South America. 


@@@@@


doc= 7459


Dell, Henry (b. in or before 1733), bookseller and playwright, was the son of Henry Dell, a tailor in St Peters Chalfont, Buckinghamshire. He was apprenticed to the London stationer James Penny on 6 March 1750 and was freed as a member of the Stationers' Company on 5 July 1757. As a bookseller, Dell first appears trading in Tower Street, London, possibly from the same premises as his former master; he served as master to Edward Barker between 6 December 1757 (when the apprentice was turned over to Dell from Kenrick Peck) and 12 June 1759 when Barker was freed. On 6 June 1758 Jonathan Turner Dell, probably Dell's brother, was also bound to Dell but he never seems to have completed his term. By 1765 Dell was trading as Dell & Co. at the corner of Brooke Street and Holborn, London, and appears to have been mostly concerned with the peddling of secondhand books. 
As a bookseller Dell forged a less than distinguished career, although he did continue to issue catalogues until 1793, but it was his association with the London stage which dominates his reputation. His acting career seems restricted to a curious attempt to perform the part of Mrs Termagant at Covent Garden Theatre in Thomas Shadwell's popular play 'The Squire of Alsatia'. Dell appears to be the only man to take the role of Mrs Termagant during the eighty-year history of the play, and not surprisingly his performance was, by all accounts, without success. He was also the author or adapter of four plays, the first of which was 'The Spouter, or, The Double Revenge', an original comic farce produced in 1756. Although there is no record of performance, it seems that Dell's play was the inspiration for Arthur Murphy's 'The Spouter, or, The Triple Revenge', which was performed at Covent Garden Theatre on 26 April 1756. That same year Dell wrote a tragedy called 'Minorca' which was 'printed just when the place from which it is named was taken. Nothing can be more contemptible than it is in every point of view' ('New Theatrical Dictionary', 186). The untimely nature of the play prevented its performance; however, a second edition was printed in 1756 in which Dell responded to 'what obscure hackney writers have been pleased to say concerning a few mistakes' ('DNB'). Dell also adapted Cibber's 'Comical Lovers' as a two-act comedy called 'The Frenchified Lady Never in Paris', which was first performed at Covent Garden Theatre on 23 March 1756 and regularly revived there and at Drury Lane Theatre until 1773. The following year another adaptation by Dell called 'The Mirror', from Thomas Randolph's 'The Muses' Looking-Glass', appeared but it was never acted. 
Some years later Dell wrote and published 'The Bookseller: a Poem' (1766), which one reviewer in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' described as 'mere prose in rhyme' and which another critic denounced as 'a wretched, rhyming list of Booksellers in London and Westminster, with silly commendation of some, and stupid abuse of others' ('GM'; Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.641). Nothing further is known about Dell's life or career and he reputedly died in poverty at his place in Holborn but no record of his death or estate can be found. He does not seem to have been the Henry Dell, bachelor, formerly of Kew, whose estate was administered on 11 March 1795. 


@@@@@


doc= 7460


Dell, Jonas (d. 1665?), soldier and religious writer, may have fought in the parliamentarian army in the civil war. Nothing is known about his origins or early life, but in 1658 he attacked a corrupt establishment thus: 'I did not think at Marston Moor fight, nor several other engagements since, that ever any of the innocent lambs of God should have been beaten and put into prison... for crying out against the ministers of Antichrist' (Dell, 'A Voyce', 44). Certainly, his 'Christ Held Forth by the Word', dedicated before September 1646 to 'my honourable Collonel Rich', suggests he was by then a soldier. This work concluded that 'Christ is so our liberty, to redeem us from the bondage of the law, from the bondage of ceremonies, and from the bondage of human ordinances' (sig. D2). Such views were common in radical circles, and soon the Quakers provided organization for many of those that shared them. Dell later recalled that 'till Christ was made manifest in me I was not saved, nor had no life as to God, though I was high in profession and knowledge outwardly' (Dell, 'Forms', 48). He may himself have been earlier a Baptist, for he argued against them in 1657 that 'I am come out of your ground, and I cannot observe your fashions', and was forced therefore to 'disown you... who are degenerated from what you were' (Dell, 'A Voyce', 38, 95). 
It seems that Dell joined the Quakers in 1655-6, certainly before George Fox's arrival in the country in 1657. When serving in Scotland at the garrison of 'Holmdell' (perhaps Helmsdale) in Sutherland, he tells us, he had argued with a group of Baptists who held the doctrines of free will and falling away, and with another Baptist officer, one W. P. (probably William Packer, later deputy to Major-General Fleetwood), who had written a 'scandalous paper which was handed up and down in the regiment, from one to another, making a scorn of me' (Dell, 'Forms', 11). W. P. accused him of antinomianism (which he denied) and of opposing the literal truth of the resurrection (a view he vigorously defended). Dell may have earlier been attached to the free-will group, for he confessed of them that 'you do something more resemble the true church than they in outward things' (ibid., 11). He wrote 'Forms the Pillars' in 1656; the work would have been longer 'but that this great marsh [march] out of this onked [unkind] nation of Scotland into England, hath prevented me' (ibid., 72). In December 1657 he was resident in the capital, referring to 'my neighbour anabaptists in the city and suburbs of London' (Dell, 'A Voyce', 92). Though 'A Voyce' was 'written and published to go abroad in the army', Dell seems by now to have been at the point of leaving it, disillusioned with the Cromwellian establishment, resentful of ceremonious respect for rank, and contemptuous of 'carnal weapons'. Spiritual warfare, however, was another matter: on 28 December 1657, 'in the night upon the Guard in Paul's that great cathedral, when as I was reproving the souldiers for sin in the power of God, and directing them to the light', Dell was engaged in polemical combat by John Mercer, a Baptist officer (ibid., 89). 
Jonas Dell is reported to have died at Stepney in 1665. Perhaps, many years earlier, he had married and had children. The administration of the will of a Jane Dell of Stepney was granted to her son John in November 1667, but in February the following year, probate of the estate of John Dell of Stepney was granted to his principal creditor, Maria Haffnaile. 


@@@@@


doc= 7461


Dell, William (d. 1669), ejected minister and educational reformer, was admitted sizar at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in April 1624; there is no reliable information about his early life. He graduated BA in 1628 and MA in 1631, subsequently becoming a fellow. With the support of Oliver St John, first earl of Bolingbroke, on 20 February 1641 he was instituted rector of Yielden (sometimes Yelden), Bedfordshire, a benefice worth some $200 a year. His first published work, 'Power from on High' (1645), was dedicated to Elizabeth St John, countess of Bolingbroke, whom he thanked for supporting him through an earlier crisis, perhaps a serious illness. 
During the early 1640s Dell was most prominent as chaplain to Sir Thomas Fairfax and the New Model Army, at which time the earliest signs of Dell's controversial nature became apparent: in November 1644 he was sent home as part of Oliver Cromwell's attempt at conciliating the earl of Manchester. He was subsequently recalled, however, and he accompanied the New Model on its key campaigns from Naseby (June 1645) onwards, first as minister to Colonel Sir Miles Hobart's regiment and later as personal chaplain to Fairfax. His contribution climaxed with a sermon to the triumphant army before Oxford, published as 'The Building and Glory of the Truely Christian and Spiritual Church' (1646), in which the army was his principal example of the lively, spiritual church as opposed to 'the forms of the former age'. He officiated at the marriage of General Ireton and Bridget Cromwell at Holton, Oxfordshire, on 15 June 1646. He was awarded $50 by the Commons on 22 June for bringing the news of the surrender of the city of Oxford and went back to consolidate the ideological victory in the pulpits of the city. However, on 27 June he was ordered to appear before the House of Lords to answer accusations made in a paper they had received relating to his sermon at Marston earlier in the month. In July he successfully argued that the charges were too general to stick, but he continued to be the butt of presbyterian attacks. He preached the November 1646 fast sermon to the House of Commons, published as 'Right Reformation', complete with an attack on Christopher Love, the presbyterian who had also been preaching that day. He resigned as chaplain to Fairfax in March 1648, but he continued to defend the army 'in its ways of Justice and Righteousness' (title-page) in 'The City Ministers Unmask'd' (1649). 
At the height of his influence Dell was one of the puritan ministers offering spiritual consolation to Charles I before his execution -- though his offer was turned down. That year he dedicated to the House of Commons his sermon 'The Way of True Peace and Unity in the Churches', in which he argued that congregations should choose their ministers, and the state should keep out of church and theological matters. Dell disliked uniformity in church practice, and made a clear distinction between unity and uniformity, regarding the latter as an inappropriate exercise of power in spiritual matters. This brought him into regular controversy with the presbyterians, most notably Thomas Edwards, who in the third part of 'Gangraena' accused him of sedition, and Samuel Rutherford, whose 'Survey of the Spirituall Antichrist' (1648) argued that Dell's emphasis on inward religion was antinomian: 'Come and learn at Mr 'Del', 'to keepe' the heart right, and violate all the ten commandments' (p. 31). Dell's tract 'The Doctrine of Baptisms' (1652), for example, argues that any kind of water baptism is irrelevant to the spiritual baptism of Christ; as late as 1832 this was being republished by Quakers, though Dell had no leanings towards Quakerism himself. It is not clear how thorough-going he was in putting his convictions into practice. By the early 1650s he had married Martha (died 1681), whose other name is unknown. Of their seven children the names of Anne (16 December 1653), Nathaniel (16 May 1655), and Mercy (16 February 1657) appear in the baptismal registers of Yielden, while that of John ('b'. 1652/3) does not. This may indicate that he changed his mind, or simply that baptismal registers in the Commonwealth were used as records of births. Dell's indifference to ceremony is illustrated by the complaint his parishioners made to the House of Lords on 20 June 1660 that in 1659 he had not celebrated communion at Christmas, but had let John Bunyan, a tinker, preach to them; this is of a piece with his earlier encouragement of 'mechanic preachers' in the army. Yet his policy on baptism was not the only one vulnerable to charges of hypocrisy: he preached against tithes but still took them, and the same ambivalence characterized his second university career. 
On 7 May 1649 Dell was intruded as master of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. During his early years he appears to have been active in managing the college, including the chapel, but less so as his term progressed. On the evidence of the college gesta book, he appears to have been present at key moments in the college's life, but not ordinarily resident, although he managed to get his salary augmented. In the early 1650s he preached controversial sermons in the university church and town on the role of learning, arguing that understanding scripture was a spiritual gift, and that 'humane learning' was a positive hindrance, involving the corrupting study of pagan authors. This was in response to a commencement sermon by his fellow Independent Sydrach Simpson, now master of Pembroke, who had argued for a learned ministry. Dell argued that universities should stop awarding divinity degrees; the syllabus led its candidates astray, the concept of degrees was unacceptably hierarchical in the church, and their existence served to mislead people who took them as marks of holiness. In 'The Stumbling Stone' (1653) he argues 'there needs nothing to the ministry of the 'New Testament' but only God's pouring out his Spirit' (p. 24). In an appendix to 'The Tryal of Spirits' (1653), 'The right reformation of learning', he made further proposals for the reformation of education: that the civil power should provide schools in every town and village in the Commonwealth, and that there should be a university in each major town to reduce the hold of Oxford and Cambridge, teaching the liberal arts, mathematics, medicine, and law (though not divinity, of course) to a much wider constituency. Dell's emphasis, like that of many of the antinomian commentators on education at the time, such as John Webster, Gerard Winstanley, and George Fox, is on learning that might be useful to the Commonwealth. For these views he was attacked by Simpson, and in an appendix to Seth Ward's 'Vindiciae academiarum' (1654). In 1657 he was active, along with John Donne, the minister of Pertenhall in Bedfordshire, in collecting a petition against the second protectorate parliament, published as 'The Humble and Serious Testimony'. Dell's disappointment with his one-time allies was thus political as well as spiritual. 
Dell resigned his mastership on 11 May 1660, just before the Restoration. Following the hostile petition of his Yielden parishioners on 20 June, he was ejected from his living; his successor was instituted on 4 January 1661. While there were some disputes over college property near his lands in Westoning, south of Bedford, where he lived in retirement, his correspondence from that period seems genial and cheerful. He died on 5 November 1669 and was buried in his own land two days later. He was survived by his wife, Martha, and six of his children. Some years later, during the exclusion crisis of 1681, his 'Increase of Popery' was published. 
Dell was a key figure in the development of antinomian religion in the 1640s and 50s, though he quotes most often from Luther, and regarded himself as the heir of Wycliff and Hus as well. His influence lasted more than a century after his death, though ironically among Quakers rather than the heirs of the Independents with whom he was most closely associated. Richard Baxter, who had earlier been alarmed at Dell's influence in the army, wrote that he was 'one, who took reason, sound doctrine, order and concord to be the intolerable maladies of Church and State, because they were the greatest strangers to his mind' (quoted in Walker). The evidence of his writing, and what survives of his charismatic preaching, suggests that his reforming ideas were more substantial than that verdict suggests; but it does show Dell's talent for making enemies. 


@@@@@


doc= 7462


Lolme, John Louis de (1741-1806), political writer, was born in Geneva on 28 October 1741, the son of John de Lolme. Little is known of de Lolme's early life, aside from his education in law at the College de Geneve and his qualification as a notary and soon after as an advocate in the 1760s. In Geneva he came to prominence as a member of the 'representant' movement, which believed that France increasingly treated Geneva as a protectorate, and that the city's magistrates had become agents of French government policy. By the mid-1760s the 'representants' were demanding constitutional and legal reform and on 15 December 1767 de Lolme published 'Purification des trois points de droit souilles', a combative attack on the city's ruling magistracy, followed in January 1767 by an account of Genevan sovereignty again critical of the magistrates. The 'Purification' was condemned by the authorities and de Lolme was expelled from the city, whereupon he moved to Britain, allegedly with the help of funds from a fellow 'representant', Etienne Claviere. 
De Lolme now began a lifetime's study of the British government. His interest in this subject was stimulated, he later claimed, by the peculiarity of the system and by his earlier political experiences, which had given him 'insight into the first real principles of governments'. His views were heavily influenced by Montesquieu, whose writing he had encountered in Geneva. In 1769 he began work on a major study of the British constitution that aimed to show the benefits of a balanced constitution, and claimed to have identified in British government the practical means by which freedom could be reconciled with political stability. He praised the jury system in particular, and admired the way in which monarchical authority had been effectively and beneficially limited by the settlement of 1688. 
De Lolme's book was first written in French, and published in the Netherlands in 1771 as the 'Constitution d'Angleterre, ou, Etat du gouvernement anglais compare avec la forme republicair et avec les autres monarchies de l'Europe'. The study, which was published in numerous French editions in continental Europe (and in England in 1785), was widely praised as a superior account of the British constitution, comparable with the eleventh book of Montesquieu's 'L'esprit des lois' and William Blackstone's 'Commentaries on the Laws of England'. The circumstances in which the work appeared in English are somewhat obscure. Parts of the study first appeared in English as an anonymous pamphlet, 'A Parallel between the English Constitution and the Former Government of Sweden' (1772). Generally treated as de Lolme's work, though translated by another hand, the pamphlet attracted considerable attention in London political circles. An anonymous response attacked its factual inaccuracies while respecting its 'acuteness of comprehension'. At the same time, de Lolme was seeking subscriptions for the publication of a translation of his book, only to find that one had already been begun by two booksellers. He paid $10 for them to drop their undertaking, and the first full and credited English edition was published as 'The Constitution of England, or, An Account of the English Government' in 1775. It has been suggested that he was assisted in the translation by Baron Maseres, and the quality of the translation would appear to support this assertion. It is striking that a passage from the 1775 edition of 'The Constitution of England' appeared previously in the preface to the Junius letters written as early as November 1771 and published in 1772. This coincidence led to the conjecture that de Lolme and Junius were the same person. The theory was elaborately worked out by Thomas Busby in 'Arguments and facts demonstrating that the letters of Junius were written by John Louis de Lolme' (1816). It is impossible to determine whether Junius saw the translation before publication or whether de Lolme adopted Junius's translation of the passage. 

'The Constitution of England', which reached a fourth (revised) edition in 1784, proved a great success. For a time de Lolme was feted by the London political establishment. Proceeds from the sale of the book should have given de Lolme a comfortable income, but through improvidence and, it was rumoured, dissipation, gambling, and speculation, he remained in almost constant poverty. Isaac Disraeli, who mentions that de Lolme received relief from the Royal Literary Fund, and that 'the walls of the Fleet too often enclosed the English Montesquieu', considered his misfortunes a national reproach (D'Israeli, 2.262-3). Thomas Busby recalled that de Lolme was 'exalted and neglected, lauded with commendation and consigned to poverty' (Machelon, 30). De Lolme's penury regularly led him to take on hack work and in 1777 he revised Jacques Boileau's 'Historia flagellantium' as 'History of the Flagellants, or, The Advantages of Discipline'; four editions of this work were followed by its revision and republication as 'Memorials of Human Superstition' (1784). Having great conversational powers -- de Lolme 'has been compared to Burke', noted one of his editors, 'for the variety of his allusions, and the felicity of his illustrations' ('Preface' to 'The Constitution of England', new edn, 1807) -- he gained the acquaintance of most of the leading men of his time and participated in the community of exiled Genevans -- including Etienne Dumont and Francois D'Ivernois -- resident in London from the mid-1780s. On occasions he appeared in fashionable clothes and moved in the highest circles, but he was always in debt. He concealed his lodgings and changed them frequently; indeed he appears to have been homeless for long periods. A later admirer and editor of his works, the politician John MacGregor, described him as exhibiting 'the miserable and degraded appearance of a tattered and slovenly vagabond' (MacGregor, 3). 
Beyond this, only the barest details are known of de Lolme's life. In 1775, according to Busby, he attempted to start a publication called the 'News Examiner', the object of which was to expose the party animosity and the inconsistency of the London journals by republishing their leading articles. However, he could not pay the stamp duty, and the project was abandoned. There followed a series of pamphlets, some more successful than others, which brought him his occasional bouts of prosperity. He wrote on a wide range of political issues. In 1788 he made a notable contribution to the debate on the window tax (the abolition of which he supported). He produced a tract on hawkers and peddlers and one which suggested the 'removal of Smithfield market to a more convenient location'. He wrote a history, 'The British Empire in Europe' (1787), which was a rather impressionistic account of the English colonization of Ireland and the union of England and Scotland. In 1789 he used his authority as a constitutional expert to write a commentary on the regency question ('The Present National Embarrassment Considered'). This embroiled him in a bitter pamphlet war with the pseudonymous Neptune, who scorned de Lolme's contribution to the debate on the basis of his nationality and his disreputable private life. He appears to have remained in England until the beginning of the nineteenth century, when, having inherited property from a relative, he paid his debts and returned to Geneva. He was elected a member of the Council of Two Hundred, and shortly before his death is said to have been made a 'sous-prefet' under Napoleon, although there is no evidence that he ever took up the post. He died in Seewen-sur-le-Ruffiberg in the canton of Schwitz on 16 July 1806. There is no evidence of a marriage or of any children. 
De Lolme had an active and ingenious mind, and Jeremy Bentham was one of those who compared him with Blackstone. His work on the English constitution was for several decades the principal authority on the subject. It was influential in the United States, where, for example, it was cited by both supporters and opponents of the 1787 federal constitution. The book indeed contains many shrewd observations, but de Lolme had a cavalier attitude to research and the historical aspects of his analysis are full of errors. His principal legacy is to have helped disseminate the ideas of Montesquieu to the British reading public in a popular style. 


@@@@@


doc= 7463


Deloney, Thomas (d. in or before 1600), silkweaver and writer, is thought to have been born in Norwich; his surname is of French origin, and Flemish and French protestant refugees had been settling in Norfolk in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, working in the cloth trades. In addition, the first known ballad by Deloney was published in Norwich. There is, however, no clear evidence to confirm his place of birth. Deloney began publishing in the early 1580s and may well have been born any time between about 1540 and 1560. He evidently received a grammar school education, given that he published translations from Latin. He may also have translated Bonaventure Des Periers's 'Les contes ou les nouvelles recreations et joyeux devis'; the English version, 'The Mirror of Mirth and Pleasant Conceits', is signed T. D. ('Novels', xxiv). Deloney's trade was silkweaving, although it is not certain where he practised it. In October 1586 he was living in London, as the baptism of his son Richard at St Giles Cripplegate indicates. 
By the early 1590s Deloney was famous for his ballads; Thomas Nashe, in 'Have with You to Saffron Walden' (1596), describes him as ''Thomas Deloney', the Balleting Silk-weaver' who: 'hath rime inough for all myracles, & wit to make a 'Garland of Good will' more than the premisses, with an Epistle of 'Momus' and 'Zoylus'; whereas his Muse, from the first peeping foorth, hath stood at Livery at an Ale-house wispe, never exceeding a penny a quart, day or night, and this deare yeare, together with the silencing of his looms, scarce that; he being constrained to betake him to carded Ale: whence it proceedeth that, since 'Candlemas' or his Jigge of 'John for the King', not one merrie Dittie will come from him, but 'The Thunder-bolt against Swearers, Repent, England, repent, & The strange judgements of God'. ('Works of Thomas Nashe', 3.84)' 
'The Garland of Good Will' was a popular collection of Deloney's ballads, entered in the Stationers' register in 1593 (like the rest of his works, early editions have been read out of existence and the earliest surviving is that of 1626). Many of Deloney's ballads consist of what might be called topical reportage, such as 'The Queenes Visiting of the Campe at Tilsburie with her Entertainment there' of 1588, one of several ballads about incidents surrounding the Spanish Armada. As well as political news, he wrote about sensational events, as in 'The lamentation of Mastr Pages wife of Plimmouth, who being enforced by her parents to wed him against her will, did most wickedly consent to his murther, for the love of George Strangwidge'. There is also a series of ballads on historical subjects (for example, Edward II, Edward III, Henry I, Henry II, and John). 
In the 1590s Deloney became caught up in political protest by the London weavers, who believed that French and Dutch workers relocating in England were ignoring the rules of apprenticeship laid down by the Weavers' Company. The weavers wrote to the pastors of the French and Dutch churches in London in 1595, asking that their parishioners obey the rules, but the pastors had the weavers' three ringleaders (including Deloney) gaoled in Newgate. They were later released, after petitioning the lord chief justice ('Novels', xxvii-xxviii; Consitt, 146-52). In 1596 the mayor of London objected to a ballad (now lost) in which Deloney complained of the scarcity of grain in England, giving rise to 'discontent' ('Novels', xxviii). The mayor took into custody the publisher and printer of the ballad, but was apparently unable to apprehend Deloney. 
It was during this time, in the late 1590s, that Deloney turned to the genre of prose fiction, producing four works between 1597 and 1600. While some of his ballads are powerful and many are of considerable historical interest, his fiction is a remarkable achievement, given the paucity of models for what was virtually a new genre. In 1597 he published 'The Pleasant History of John Winchcomb, in his Younger Years called Jack of Newbury' (often referred to as 'Jack of Newbury'). Deloney dedicated this work 'To all famous cloth workers in England', praising the 'long honoured trade of English Clothiers'. The narrative is based on a historical figure and is set in the reign of Henry VIII. The rags to riches story follows the fortunes of Jack, who begins as an exemplary workman, marries his master's widow, and becomes master himself of a massive (for the times) weaving establishment. Reflecting the tension in the late 1590s between the increasing economic power of the merchant class and the lack of a defined social position for its members, Deloney's text is a mixture of archaic forms and social realism. Jack's achievements as a master weaver are capped by his response to a summons to arms from the king, when he is able to provide a more impressive contingent of men for the French campaign than many a powerful nobleman. Despite this, Jack does not want to change his social status (unlike the social climber Wolsey), but he is a ruler within his own world and his 'kingdom' is, in some ways, more impressive and certainly more orderly than the king's. In chapter 2, in a set-piece description (in rhyming couplets for greater effect), the reader is shown Jack's workroom with its 200 looms, 100 carders, and 200 spinners, right through to the dye-house. The episodic tale consists mostly of events which prove just how superior a figure Jack is. 
In his next work Deloney turned to a different trade: shoemaking. 'The Gentle Craft' was published in two parts, probably in 1597 and 1598. The first part is dedicated to the shoemakers, the second to the Company of Cordwainers. Both narratives are more fragmented than 'Jack of Newbury', though the first part has the clear purpose of offering a mythologized ancestry for the 'gentle-craft' of shoemaking, with the stories of St Hugh, sons of the king of Powys, and Crispin and Crispianus, sons of the king of Logria. The concluding episode in part 1 is an account of Simon Eyre, the shoemaker who became mayor of London. The second part of 'The Gentle Craft' is something of a pot-pourri, held together by the theme, once again, of the glory and worthiness of shoemakers. Like in Deloney's other fiction, broad knockabout comedy is a feature, and there is a considerable amount of jest-book fare, including material centred on Long Meg of Westminster (legendary subject of other jest-books). 
Symbolically, 'Thomas of Reading, or, The Six Worthy Yeomen of the West' may be seen as Deloney's last work of fiction because it reveals a new, sombre side to his vision; it may well have been published before the second part of 'The Gentle Craft', but the exact date is unknown. In contrast to his other fiction, this narrative seems to question the exuberant success stories and benign association of aristocrats and tradesmen. In particular, the grim account of the murder of Thomas Cole (one of the worthy yeomen) for his money by a marauding host and hostess of an inn serves to question the prosperity that is so celebrated elsewhere in Deloney's work. 
All four of Deloney's pieces of prose fiction proved to be extremely popular: 'Jack of Newbury' had some sixteen editions by 1700, 'The Gentle Craft', part 1, at least thirteen, and 'Thomas of Reading' eight. Further testimony to Deloney's popularity is found in 1599, when Thomas Dekker used the first part of 'The Gentle Craft' as a source for his play 'The Shoemaker's Holiday'. In 1598 Deloney's last published work was entered in the Stationers' register: 'Canaan's Calamity, Jerusalem's Misery' (first extant edition, 1618), an ambitious poem on the destruction of Jerusalem derived from Josephus and from Nashe's 'Christ's Tears over Jerusalem'. Deloney uses this theme to offer some sharp social commentary on contemporary England: '
Seeke not your neighbors lasting spoyle 

By greedy sute in lawe. 
('Deloney's Works', 459)' The only detailed reference to Deloney's death is in Will Kemp's 'Kemp's Nine Days' Wonder' (1600), which concludes with a prose comment headed: 'To the tune of Thomas Delonies Epitaph'. Kemp describes Deloney as: 'the great Ballet-maker T. D., alias Tho. Deloney, Chronicler of the 6. yeomen of the west, Jack of Newbery, the Gentle-craft, and such like honest men, omitted by Stow, Hollinshead, Grafton, Hal, froysart, and the rest of those wel deserving writers; but I was given since to understand your late generall Tho. dyed poorely, as ye all must do, and was honestly buried. (Kemp, 21)' The exact circumstances of Deloney's death are unknown and no will has been traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 7464


Delpini, Carlo Antonio (c.1740-1828), pantomimist, was born in Rome, possibly in the parish of San Martino, and was a pupil of Nicolini. His first London engagement was apparently with David Garrick at Drury Lane in 1774, although two years later, on 26 December 1776 at Covent Garden, the playbills announced his 'first appearance on an English stage' when he performed in the pantomime 'Harlequin's Frolics', in the role of Pierrot. His attention then turned to behind-the-scenes work, particularly with respect to mechanical arrangements for the 1777-8 season at Covent Garden. However, he continued to act in pantomimes both there (1778-9, 1789, 1796-7, 1799-1800) and at various other London theatres, including the Haymarket (1780, 1784-5, 1788, 1794-5, 1795-6, 1806), Drury Lane (1779-80), and the Royal Theatre (1787-8, 1782), where his wife, whom he married in 1784, also acted. With his expertise in scenic invention and his stress on character acting, Delpini is credited with having invented the Regency pantomime. In 1788 he worked as acting manager at Hughes's Royal Circus, producing pantomimes alongside the entertainment provided by the theatre's horses, tigers, leopards, and other animals. In the following year he was seriously hurt in an accident at the Haymarket. He appeared in 1798 at Astley's Amphitheatre, the main rival of the Royal Circus, but the production was not well received. Delpini had failed to subscribe to a theatrical fund which acted as a friendly society providing for death and sickness; as a result, he lay on his sickbed in old age with no relief, except for the $200 granted to him by his patron, 'The Prince -- his Present Majesty', George IV, for whom he had once organized a grand masquerade at the Pantheon and arranged entertainments at the Pavilion in Brighton. Delpini had a superstitious fear of the number eight and predicted that he would die in 1788; instead, he died early in 1828 at the age of eighty-eight, either on 20 January or on 13 February (according to different sources), in Lancaster Court, Strand, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7465


Deluc, Jean-Andre (1727-1817), natural philosopher and politician, was born on 8 February 1727 in Geneva, the elder of the two children of Francois Deluc, a wealthy watch manufacturer. He was educated by his father, who had published defences of Christianity against Mandeville and other rationalistic writers, and was active in the stormy arena of Genevan politics. Francois Deluc had been 'one of the most terrible of the [bourgeois] party in our troubles of 1734 and 1737', complained Charles Bonnet; the 'two sons suckled demagogy with their milk and are, with their father, at the head of the party' (Wolf, 4.194-5). Bonnet's assessment of the Deluc family's political leadership is just, though the implications as to Deluc's character are not. In 1763, after the republic's aristocratic ruling council had burned Rousseau's 'Social Contract' and banned its author, Deluc was chosen, along with forty-one others, to submit a representation protesting against the act. This inaugurated Geneva's bourgeois revolution. He continued to lead the party of 'represantants' in negotiations with Rousseau and played a key role in difficult and dangerous negotiations with Geneva's guarantor powers, France, Bern, and Zurich, and with the aristocratic ruling party. At the eleventh hour these negotiations secured a peaceable solution: a new constitution, the edict of 1768, that granted the bourgeoisie significant powers. A contemporary observed that during the crisis Deluc frequently cooled heated spirits: 'always calm in the midst of peril, in the greatest dangers he never lacked expedients, and rendered distinguished service to his fellow citizens' (Gur, 170). 
A trade embargo imposed by France during the crisis caused the failure of Deluc's business, and in 1773 he emigrated to England, a refuge for liberal bourgeois Genevans. There he secured a post as reader to Queen Charlotte and lived at Windsor. The queen found him 'philosophe comme il faut, for... all his works are full of admiration for the Supreme Being' (Tunbridge, 18). He was elected FRS in 1773. In the 1790s, as Geneva fell increasingly under threat from France, he received letters requesting his intercession with George III in favour of British intervention; many Genevans hoped for his return. In 1797, under cover of an appointment as honorary professor of natural history and geology to the University of Gottingen, he was sent by the British government on a secret mission to enlist the duke of Brunswick's support for the entry of Prussia into a Quadruple Alliance; Deluc also met Frederick William III, king of Prussia. The mission, however, was unsuccessful. 
'The elder is made for better things', Bonnet had urged (Wolf, 4.194-5). Deluc had acquired early on a taste for natural philosophy. Already at seventeen years of age he began nearly annual explorations of the alps of the Faucigny, at the time an unknown region. His brother, Guillaume Antoine, accompanied him on these journeys and continued to supply him with observations for the duration of his lifetime. His alpine travels led Deluc to the two fields to which he was to make important contributions: meteorology and geology, both terms which he used himself. His mountain observations of fogs and clouds convinced him of the incorrectness of the accepted solution theory of evaporation, according to which evaporating water dissolves into the air. In his 'Idees sur la meteorologie' (2 vols., 1786-7) and in several articles he maintained instead that heat causes evaporation and that water vapour is an expansible fluid (a gas) that fills space independently of the presence of any other gases. This principle was extended to all gases by John Dalton some fifteen years later, to form what was later known as Dalton's law of partial pressures. Long awaited, and regarded as revolutionary by his contemporaries, Deluc's 'Recherches sur les modifications de l'atmosphere' (2 vols., 1772) was the product of his search for a reliable method to measure mountain heights with a barometer. His approach to the problem generated exemplary designs for accurate barometers and thermometers, along with rigorous methods for using them in precise measurement. Deluc also arrived at a clear statement of such principles of instrumentation as comparability among instrument scales, their linearity, and the role of the fixed point. 
Deluc published his geological investigations in numerous treatises, articles, and letters, among which the most important are 'Lettres... sur l'histoire de la terre' (1779), 'Lettres a Delametherie' (1790-93), and 'Geological Letters, Addressed to Professor Blumenbach' (1793-4). His early interest in the subject sprang from a youthful appreciation of the beauties of mountain scenery; later he came to view the earth's history as necessary background for an understanding of the origin, history, and nature of man -- which he viewed as a pious Christian of Calvinist origin. 
Deluc sought to establish a chronology of the earth's history based on the character of the rock strata and the fossils they contained: 'two parallel histories', as he put it, 'that of rock layers and that of organized beings' (Ellenberger and Gohau, 248). These histories recorded a succession of forms through time, with the more recent fauna being closer to present forms. The way in which these alterations occurred, according to Deluc, was as follows: in the beginning God created a chaotic fluid. From this fluid the successive rock strata precipitated, the precipitate changing as expansible fluids (gases) periodically erupted from the interior of the earth, altering the chemical composition of the original fluid. The fluid's changing composition induced modifications among the fauna as well. Shells and skeletons were deposited in successive strata. The eruptions of gases also deformed previously laid down strata. In this way he bound together fauna, lithology, and orientation of strata. 
Deluc recognized the high antiquity of the earth and correlated long epochs, punctuated by eruptions of expansible fluids, with the six days of the account in 'Genesis' -- to the defence of which he devoted himself unremittingly. The six epochs terminated with the deluge, since which time, some 5000-6000 years ago, creative geological processes ceased; the earth was now quiescent, under the operation of 'present-day causes' -- a term that he coined (Deluc, '8e Lettre', 'Observations sur la physique', 37, 1790, 202-9). 
Deluc's religious convictions, his belief that the earth had experienced transformations too great to allow for the operation of present-day causes in the distant past, and his determined opposition to Hutton -- whose theory seemed to him not only to threaten Christianity, but also to lack sufficient historical sense -- have earned him harsh criticism from historians of geology from Lyell onwards. His great prolixity did not lighten the task of his advocates; Priestley complained that 'he could barely comprehend' the 'Idees sur la meteorologie' (Bickerton, 94). Nor did his vigorous opposition to the new chemistry of Lavoisier help, although his opposition was shared by many British and Germans who associated French chemistry with the French Revolution and its conquests. Two other controversies in which he became embroiled further reduced his credit: with Horace Benedict de Saussure over the relative merits of their respective hygrometers (Saussure's was superior), and over his claim to be the discoverer of the principle of latent heat. Nevertheless, contemporaries held him in universally high regard. Hutton considered him his most redoubtable adversary, and Cuvier, who borrowed extensively from him, placed him in the first rank among geologists of the late eighteenth century. 
Historians of geology began to re-evaluate Deluc's work at the end of the twentieth century. Far from having engaged in baseless speculations, he supported his theories with an immense fund of observations gathered on his extensive travels. His correlation of fossils with rock strata was an important early contribution to the notion of palaeontological dating of strata. His appreciation of the close relation between palaeontological and tectonic changes influenced the later work of Elie de Beaumont and Croizet and Jobert, and he recognized the long-term formation of mountains, requiring successive periods of orogenic activity or, as he put it, 'revolution upon revolution' (Gohau, 227). If he was not first to use the term 'geology' in its modern sense, he was one of its earliest advocates. His principal weakness in geology lay in his focus on a grand theory of the earth and his relative lack of interest in the prosaic, methodical description of local strata. 
Deluc married twice: the name of his first wife is not known; his second wife, Mary, he married after settling in England. He suffered a painful and lingering illness during the last years of his life, which confined him to his room but did not prevent him from pursuing research in electrochemistry. He developed a galvanic pile, which he called a dry pile but has more often been called the Zamboni pile after its later improver. The pile consisted of a large number of discs of zinc foil and of paper silvered on one side. By eliminating the wet conductor between the two metal conductors he believed he had succeeded in separating the electrical from the chemical aspects of the pile. 
Besides works in meteorology and geology Deluc published treatises on a wide range of subjects: a work showing that Bacon's French translator had omitted passages favourable to religion ('Bacon tel qu'il est', 1800); on Christian education ('Lettres sur l'education religieuse de l'enfance', 1799); and an apologetic work, 'Lettres sur le christianisme adressees a M. le pasteur Teller', 1801. 
Deluc died at Windsor on 7 November 1817 and was buried in the churchyard at Clewer, Somerset. Contemporaries praised the mildness of his character, 'the warmth of his feelings, and the habitual gentleness and urbanity of his manners' ('Philosophical Magazine', 393). Much loved at court, he was described by Fanny Burney as the queen's philosopher. 


@@@@@


doc= 7466


Delvaux, Laurent (1696-1778), sculptor, was born in Ghent on 17 January 1696, the son of Godefroid Delvaux (died 1743), a cornet in the Austrian cavalry, and his wife, Francoise Chasselat. There were no sculptors in his immediate family: his early training was with Gery Helderenberg (1651-1739) in Ghent and in 1713 or 1714 he joined the Brussels workshop of Pierre-Denis Plumier (1688-1721). In 1721 he accompanied his master to London, where Plumier died leaving designs and models for a major monument to John Sheffield, duke of Buckingham, in Westminster Abbey. Delvaux and Peter Scheemakers completed this in 1722, Delvaux carving the figure of Time, according to George Vertue. In 1722 he was also responsible for a life-sized Hercules (Waddesdon Manor, Buckinghamshire) for Lord Castlemaine's gardens at Wanstead, a companion to Scheemakers's Omphale; also for Wanstead he carved two vases (Anglesey Abbey) for a set of four, using as models the antique Borghese and Medici vases. 
After working briefly for Francis Bird, Delvaux joined forces about 1723 with Scheemakers, working from premises at Millbank, Westminster. Together they provided the wall monument to Sir Thomas Grantham ('c'.1723?) in Bicester church, Oxfordshire, and large standing monuments to Lewis Watson, first earl of Rockingham at Rockingham church, Northamptonshire, 1724-5 and Sir Samuel Ongley at Old Warden church, Bedfordshire, 1727-8. After 1725 Delvaux carved a group, 'Vertumnus and Pomona' (V&A) for Cannons, Middlesex, a companion to Scheemakers's 'Apollo and Venus'. Delvaux provided a life-sized marble statue of George I (1727; Royal Courts of Justice, London) for the Rolls House and, for an unknown garden, figures of Four Seasons (West Wycombe Park). He and Scheemakers also turned out a number of small recumbent Venus statuettes, including one for Sir Andrew Fountaine. 
On 27 May 1726 Delvaux went briefly to Antwerp, where he married Plumier's widow, Madeleine ('nee' Pauwels), in Sint Jacobskerk; she died shortly after in childbirth. In 1728 Fountaine gave Delvaux an introduction to Cardinal Corsini (later Pope Clement XII) and, with Scheemakers, he auctioned their stock, announcing that they were going to Italy: they sold several classically inspired models, probably for garden figures. Papal protection led to commissions in Rome, including two colossal angels completed in 1730 as part of a large project for the basilica of the royal palace in Mafra, Portugal. Around 1730 Delvaux carved marble copies of the 'Nymph with a Shell', 'Crouching Venus', 'Hermaphrodite', and 'Biblis and Caunus'; in 1732 he signed and dated a bust of Caracalla, which evidently pleased him since it featured in a portrait of the strong-featured, portly sculptor in formal dress painted by Isaac Whood in 1733. These works were all sold to the duke of Bedford, together with a lion after Flaminio Vacca and a David, after Bernini; all are now at Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire. Payments were received between 1733 and 1736. 
Delvaux probably carved 'Longevity' for Hugh Chamberlen's monument in Westminster Abbey -- otherwise the work of Scheemakers -- before leaving London. However, he did return there briefly in 1733; thereafter he maintained English contacts through Scheemakers, who negotiated the sale of the Woburn marbles. In 1732 Delvaux moved to the Austrian Netherlands with a papal introduction to the regent, the archduchess Marie-Elisabeth, who appointed him court sculptor in 1733. He established a workshop in Nivelles, where he remained until his death. In 1734 he married a silk and lace merchant, Marie-Agnes Colas (1698-1764), with whom he had three children, two of whom survived: Jean Godefroid (1737-1813) and Anne-Francoise (1740-85). During the 1740s Delvaux carved his masterpieces, which were narrative compositions, largely of oak, for religious institutions: they include a 'Conversion of St Paul' (1735-6) for St Paul's, Nivelles, a pulpit for the Carmelite church, Nivelles (1743-4; now St Gertrude's Collegiale), and the magnificent marble and oak pulpit in Ghent Cathedral (1741-5) which graphically presents Time and Truth, surrounded by naturalistic foliage. His interest in the antique was displayed in the monument to Leonard Vandernoot, for the Carmelite church in Brussels (1746; Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam), with its grieving Minerva. These works illustrate his transitional style, which hovered between the rococo and neo-classicism. 
After Charles of Lorraine's succession as governor of the Netherlands in 1750, Delvaux worked on decorative schemes for the royal palaces at Tervuren, Mariemont, and particularly Brussels, where he carved allegorical reliefs for the facade and staircase and free-standing statues, including an imposing Hercules (1768-70) at the staircase foot. He died on 24 February 1778 and was buried near his pulpit in the Carmelite church. Among his many workshop assistants were Joseph Wilton, employed in the early 1740s, A.-J. Anrion, Laurent Tamine, P.-F. le Roy, and G.-L. Godecharle. A notebook relating to his practice between 1738 and 1742 survives in the Delvaux family archive and a sketchbook of studies from baroque sculpture made in Rome is in the Bibliotheque Royale, Brussels. Several of his delicate terracotta models can be found in Belgian museums. 


@@@@@


doc= 7467


Demainbray, Stephen Charles Triboudet (1710-1782), natural philosopher and astronomer, was born on 20 February 1710 in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London, the son of Stephen Triboudet Demainbray of that parish and his wife, Marie Rigaud, daughter of Alexandre de Schivac, minister of the French church in Bristol. Demainbray's parents were Huguenots who had come to Britain with William III. They died when he was a small child, and he was subsequently brought up by his uncle, and then in the family of John Theophilus Desaguliers. He was educated at Westminster School and by Desaguliers, and as the latter was then the most influential lecturer in natural philosophy in England, Demainbray became familiar with the business of lecturing. In 1727, at the age of seventeen, he married Mary Warshare (died before 1755) of Embden, and left England to study at the University of Leiden, in the Netherlands. About 1731 he became a freemason, and joined a French lodge in London. 
In the 1740s Demainbray ran a school in Edinburgh for young ladies learning French and English. His teaching career was interrupted when he volunteered for the British army and took part in the battle of Prestonpans on 21 September 1745. By 1747 he had experimented on the effect of electricity on plant growth and published letters on the subject in the 'Caledonian Mercury' and 'Gentleman's Magazine'. Although he did not pursue this work further, these letters brought him to the attention of savants such as Stephen Hales and Abbe Nollet. During the winter of 1748-9 he took up lecturing on natural philosophy. Having left Edinburgh in early 1749, he gave courses of lectures in Newcastle, Durham, and Sunderland. By December he was in York, where he met the instrument maker Henry Hindley, from whom he acquired a pyrometer to demonstrate in his lectures. Demainbray lectured next in Leeds in April 1750. His growing reputation led to his being awarded an LLD degree by King's College, Aberdeen, the following July. 
By August 1751 Demainbray was in Dublin. There, through James Simon, a wine merchant and antiquarian, he made contact with Henry Baker, a teacher of deaf people and writer on the microscope, in London. In 1753 he left Dublin for France, and during the next year he travelled to Bordeaux, Montpellier, where his wife died, Lyons, and Toulouse. In each of these towns he lectured to the local academy and became an associate member in recognition of his work. His success was in part due to the fact that the members of these academies had a growing interest in Newtonian philosophy. In Lyons he collected models of machines, including some he copied from M. De Grollier's collection, which he later demonstrated in his lectures in London. In the autumn of 1754, on the eve of the outbreak of the Seven Years' War, he returned to London, having visited Paris on the way. 
In London, on 1 February 1755, Demainbray remarried. His new wife was Sarah Horne, whose father, John, was the royal poulterer. Later that month Demainbray offered a course of lectures on natural and experimental philosophy at his house in Panton Street, near the Haymarket. Soon afterwards he lectured to the prince of Wales, later George III, and Prince Edward. One consequence of this royal patronage was that Demainbray introduced his brother-in-law, John Horne (later John Horne Tooke), to the prince of Wales, a connection that eventually caused much embarrassment for Demainbray when Horne became a staunch supporter of John Wilkes and opponent of the king. 
Unfortunately for Demainbray and others, lecturing on natural philosophy could not provide sufficient income in the later 1750s. In an attempt to increase his audience, Demainbray offered a course on natural history. During 1758 he moved from Panton Street to an 'experiment-room' in Carey Street, but his fortunes did not improve and he gave up these premises early in 1759. He made a last attempt to give a 'Popular and practical course of experimental philosophy' in 1761, but it was not a success. During a visit to Britain two years later the French astronomer Lalande heard that Demainbray had abandoned physics and could not even be bothered to show his instruments to Benjamin Franklin. 
When George III, his old pupil, came to the throne in 1760, Demainbray's hopes of royal patronage rose. He became an official of the customs, and eventually found a sinecure connected with natural philosophy. In 1768 he was appointed superintendent of the king's new observatory at Richmond. Kew observatory, as it was known, was built for the king to observe the transit of Venus that occurred on 4 June 1769. The significance of this rare event was that it was possible, from measurements made at different places on earth as Venus crossed the disc of the sun, to calculate the size of the solar system; numerous expeditions were mounted to observe the transit in remote parts of the world. 
In the years following the transit Demainbray spent his time recording the weather, perhaps giving a few lectures, and checking the clocks that provided time for parliament. He died on 20 February 1782 at Northolt, Middlesex, where he was living at the time and where he was buried. His son, 


@@@@@


doc= 7468


Stephen George Francis Triboudet Demainbray (c.1759-1854), succeeded him as superintendent at Kew. The younger Demainbray was also a royal chaplain. He was assisted at the observatory by his brother-in-law Stephen Rigaud, and then by his nephew S. P. Rigaud (1774-1839), who later became professor of astronomy at Oxford and a historian of science. 


@@@@@


doc= 7469


Demaus, Robert (1829-1874), schoolmaster and biographer, was educated at Edinburgh University, where he was signet medallist and graduated MA on 13 February 1850. He became master of the Breadalbane School at Aberfeldy in Perthshire, and in 1856 addressed a 'Letter to the Right Hon. Earl Granville, Lord President of the Council' criticizing recent regulations enacted by the committee of council on education for improving the efficiency of teachers in government schools. In the same year he was appointed principal of the grammar school at Alnwick; in 1857 he became a fellow of the Educational Institute of Scotland, and in 1858 master at the West End Academy in Aberdeen. In 1860 he was ordained deacon by the bishop of Down and Connor, and in 1862 priest by the same prelate. From 1860 to 1865 he was chaplain to Thomas George Suther, bishop of Aberdeen, and in 1865 he became senior curate of St Luke's, Chelsea, where he remained until his death. In 1869 he was also appointed principal of Whitelands Training College, an institution founded by the National Society for training school mistresses for church schools. 
The author of a considerable number of textbooks, including 'A Class-Book of English Prose' (1859) and 'The Young Scholar's Guide' (1860), Demaus is best remembered for his biographies of Latimer and Tyndale. His 'Hugh Latimer' appeared in 1869, a new and revised edition being published in 1881. In 1871 he issued 'William Tyndale: a Contribution to the Early History of the English Bible'; a new edition, slightly revised by Richard Lovett, appeared in 1886. His work for these biographies was careful and critical. He carried out extensive research among state papers and in archives in Brussels and other Belgian towns. The subsequent publication of the 'Letters and Papers of Henry VIII' added little factually to Demaus's biography of Tyndale, which remained the standard work for many years, despite its unhelpful system of referencing; even after it was superseded it continued to be regarded as a real contribution to Tyndale scholarship. Demaus died, apparently of apoplexy, at 11 St Leonard's Terrace, Chelsea, on 15 March 1874. His wife, Jane, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7470


Morgan, Augustus De (1806-1871), mathematician and historian, fifth child of Colonel John De Morgan (1772-1816) of the Indian army, was born on 27 June 1806 at Madura in the far south of India. His mother, Elizabeth (1776-1856), was the daughter of John Dodson of the custom house, and granddaughter of James Dodson. Seven months after De Morgan's birth his family sailed for England with their five children, settling at Worcester. The youngest son, Campbell Greig De Morgan, born in 1811, made his career in medicine. 
De Morgan was educated privately and sent to various schools, one of his teachers being J. Fenner, a Unitarian minister and an uncle of H. Crabb Robinson. He pricked out equations on a pew at St Michael's Church, Bristol, some of which remained after his death, instead of listening to the sermon. In February 1823 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he soon showed his mathematical ability. He made many friends at college, including his teachers William Whewell and George Peacock. He belonged to a musical society called the Camus (Cambridge Amateur Musical Union Society), and was a skilful flautist. In 1827 he graduated as fourth wrangler, though far superior in mathematical ability to any man in his year. He was disappointed by the result, which was due to his discursive reading. He always disliked competitive examinations as tending to give the advantage to the docile over the original students, and because they encouraged 'cramming'. 
De Morgan's career was now affected by religious issues. His parents had inculcated their strict religious principles into him from a very early age; but even at school he had revolted from the doctrines held by his mother, and at Cambridge he became heterodox. He was throughout life a strong theist and preferred the Unitarian to other creeds, but he never definitely joined any church, calling himself a 'Christian unattached'. His scruples prevented him from proceeding to the MA degree or becoming a candidate for a fellowship. After some thoughts of medicine he resolved to go to the bar, and entered Lincoln's Inn. 
At this time London University was established, without adherence to any religious institution. De Morgan found law unpalatable, and, though the youngest applicant, he was unanimously elected on 23 February 1828 the first professor of mathematics on the strength of very high testimonials from Peacock, G. B. Airy, and other Cambridge authorities. He gave his introductory lecture, 'On the study of mathematics', on 5 November 1828. However, difficulties soon arose in the working of the new institution: the council claimed the right of dismissing a professor without assigning reasons, and so dismissed the professor of anatomy. De Morgan immediately resigned his post in a letter dated 24 July 1831. 
In October 1836 his successor, G. J. P. White, was accidentally drowned, whereupon De Morgan offered himself as a temporary substitute. He was then invited to resume the chair and, as the regulations had by then been so altered as to give the necessary independence to professors, he accepted the invitation. He was reappointed and served as professor for the next thirty years. At that time King's College, London, was being formed as an institution under the Church of England, London University became University College, and the two colleges merged as the University of London, an examining body which conferred degrees. 
De Morgan revealed a power of clear exposition, often though not always combined with learning and original genius, a quaint sense of humour, and a thorough contempt for sham knowledge and low aims in study. He did much work with his students beyond regular lecture times, and occasionally took private pupils. His income as professor never reached $500, and in later years declined, seldom exceeding $300. 
In the autumn of 1831 De Morgan moved to 5 Upper Gower Street, where he was a neighbour of William Frend, mathematician and political reformer. He married Frend's daughter, Sophia Elizabeth (1809-1892) on 3 August 1837, and settled in 69 Gower Street. Of his seven children, William Frend De Morgan (1839-1917), was to make a distinguished career as a ceramicist and novelist, while George Campbell De Morgan ['see below'] showed great promise in mathematics before his early death. Augustus De Morgan was so much absorbed in various kinds of work that he had little leisure for domestic recreation. His lectures permitted him at first to return home at midday, but this practice had to be abandoned on his move to 7 Camden Street, Camden Town, in 1844. After 1840 he gave up the practice of taking a holiday with his family in the country. An inveterate Londoner, he loved the town, and had a humorous detestation of trees, fields, and birds. He could not even bear Blackheath, calling the heath 'desolation', although he liked the steamboats. 
From the first De Morgan was a most energetic worker in other London institutions. Elected in May 1828 a fellow of the Astronomical Society, he was placed on its council in 1830. He was secretary from 1831 to 1838 and from 1848 to 1854, and at other periods held office as vice-president. He took a keen interest in its proceedings, edited its publications, and made many intimate friends at its meetings. By contrast, he never became a fellow of the Royal Society, and held that it was too much open to social influences to be thoroughly efficient as a working institution. He did, however, become a member of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK), founded by Lord Brougham and others in 1826. It published some of his early writings, and he contributed a great number of articles to its other publications: the 'Penny Cyclopaedia', for which he wrote about 850 of the articles, the 'Quarterly Journal of Education', and the unfortunately short-lived 'Biographical Dictionary'. He also published with the society an 'Elements of Algebra' (1835), and, especially, a massive and high-level 'Treatise on the Differential and Integral Calculus', which appeared in instalments between 1836 and 1842. He became a member of the committee in 1843. (The society was dissolved in 1846.) 
For many years De Morgan promoted the adoption of a decimal coinage. He gave evidence before commissions, and was on the council of the Decimal Association formed in 1854. A commission finally decided against the measure in 1859 and the agitation dropped. 
De Morgan read and wrote much despite losing an eye in childhood. In a brilliant remark made in a book review in 1868 he commented that mathematics and logic constituted the 'two eyes of exact science', but that each was trying to put out the other one, 'believing that it can see better with one eye than with two' ('The Athenaeum', 2, 1868, 71-3). This point surrounded much of his research work, for his mathematical speciality was algebra, and his contributions to logic drew upon certain algebraic principles. 
As an undergraduate De Morgan fell under the influence of Peacock and Whewell; from them he learned the distinction, then widely discussed in Britain, between form and matter in common algebra. Form related to the general conception of an algebra, like his 'double algebra' where the elements could be combined in two different ways (like + and x in ordinary arithmetic); his work here helped W. R. Hamilton to develop his quaternion algebra in 1843. Matter arose in particular cases such as the 'real' existence of negative numbers. 
In 1836, De Morgan wrote for the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' the first comprehensive survey of functional equations, a fairly new algebra which had been brought into English mathematics in the 1810s by John Herschel and especially Charles Babbage. The task was to find mathematical functions which obeyed some given particular property. His work was to relate to the last of his four main contributions to logic, which he had begun to study at this time and most of which appeared in a suite of five papers, 'On the syllogism', published between 1846 and 1862, and in his book 'Formal Logic' (1847). 
First, De Morgan published in 1831 a book, 'On the Study and Difficulties of Mathematics', followed in 1839 by a booklet, 'First Notions of Logic (Preparatory to the Study of Geometry)', in which he tried to discern the logical manoeuvres involved in Euclid's logic. The status of the parallel postulate in geometry concerns the axiomatization of the theory, which is a different question. 
De Morgan was then, in the 1840s, involved in a priority dispute initiated by the Scottish philosopher Sir William Hamilton over the 'quantification of the predicate', in which propositions such as 'all Xs are some Ys' were added to syllogistic logic. They greatly expanded the range of valid and invalid modes. A pair of laws now named after him arose in this context in 1853, in his third paper: 'The contrary of an aggregate [the complement of the union of two classes] is the compound [intersection] of the contraries of the [two] aggregants; the contrary of a compound is the aggregate of the contraries of the components'. However, he did not realize their full importance for logic. 
De Morgan's third contribution was his examination of various aspects of his expanded syllogistic logic. These included 'numerically definite' ones such as 'Each of the 50 Xs is one or other of the 70 Ys'. He also studied algebra-like properties of the copula such as transitivity, and stressed its various roles, such as predication distinct from identity. He noted analogies with algebra, such as logical inference with algebraic elimination. He devised ingenious semiotic notations using dots and brackets to represent propositions -- for example, for predicates X and Y: 'X).(Y' for 'No X is Y', and 'X(.)Y' for 'Y sometimes not in X'. (His handling of classes of objects satisfying predicates was of the part-whole kind, then the usual way of treating collections of things.) These notations also provided concise ways of representing valid modes. 
De Morgan's fourth paper, 'On the Logic of Relations', published in 1860, contained arguably his most substantial innovation in logic. He outlined many of the basic properties of a logic of two-place relations, such as 'brother of' or 'greater than', and operations such as composition and inversion (if possible) upon them. He deployed algebraic notations to signify many of his notions and findings. From a structural point of view this work showed close kinship with his study of functional equations; several principal properties, for example, the existence of inverse(s), are common to both. 
Most of De Morgan's work in logic can be characterized as conservative (though valuable) extensions of syllogistic logic -- less radical than the efforts of his friend George Boole in 1847. But he was well aware of the limitations of syllogism, not only the absence of relations but also non-syllogistic inferences such as 'man is animal, therefore the head of a man is the head of an animal'. 
On the more informal side of logic, De Morgan produced 'A Budget of Paradoxes', which was based on many short articles in 'The Athenaeum'. The book was published in 1872 shortly after his death, under the editorship of his widow. He assembled many newspaper reports, short articles, poems, and much other material, commenting with logical acumen and wit. 
In 1837 De Morgan wrote another article for the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana', on probability theory. He considered probabilistic inference, that is, the transmission of probability values from premises to consequences. In 'An Essay on Probabilities' of the following year he emphasized the importance of the subject in life contingencies, which gave his book a good reception in the assurance industry. Indeed, during 1831-6 when he was absent from the university, he often worked as an actuary; he also contributed to the 'Insurance Record'. 
De Morgan also wrote extensively on the history of mathematics and astronomy, including a long series of articles in the journal 'Companion to the Almanac' and many of the SDUK pieces in the 'Quarterly Journal of Education' and the 'Penny Cyclopaedia'. His two most substantial topics were an annotated bibliography of books in arithmetic, information which he gathered together in 'Arithmetical Books' (1847), and articles in which he exposed for the first time the dishonest way in which Isaac Newton had argued within the Royal Society in the early eighteenth century that G. W. Leibniz had plagiarized him in the invention of the calculus. Until the First World War, De Morgan's historical work was well remembered; in particular, it was cited in many articles in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. He was a prolific correspondent, often adorning his letters with well-drawn caricatures and sketches. He had a love of puns, and of ingenious puzzles and paradoxes. A year before his death an annuity of $100 was obtained from the government, and accepted with some reluctance. 
Among other activities De Morgan collaborated with his wife on pioneering studies of psychical mediumship. As 'C. D.' she published 'From Matter to Spirit' in 1863, to which her husband, 'A. B.', contributed an excellent preface. 
In 1866 the chair of mental philosophy and logic at University College became vacant. A discussion arose as to the principle of religious neutrality avowedly adopted by the college when refusing to appoint as professor of philosophy James Martineau, who, as a Unitarian minister, was pledged to maintain the creed of a particular sect. De Morgan, on the other hand, held that any consideration of a candidate's ecclesiastical position or religious creed was inconsistent with the principle, so again resigned his office, in a letter dated 10 November 1866. Though no personal bitterness was produced, De Morgan had felt the blow so keenly that it injured his health. Some of his old students begged him to allow his portrait to be painted for the library of 'our old college'. But he objected on principle to testimonials, and is alleged to have replied that 'our old college no longer exists'. 
De Morgan died on 18 March 1871 at his home, 6 Merton Road, Hampstead, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His library consisted at the end of his life of about three thousand volumes. He was a genuine book-hunter, though his means compelled him to limit himself to occasional treasures from bookstalls. He made many amusing marginal and learned annotations, and turned his bibliographical researches to a good account in his historical writings. His library was bought after his death by Lord Overstone and presented to the University of London, where it became part of the University Library at its foundation. 
De Morgan's son 


@@@@@


doc= 7471


Morgan, Campbell Greig De (1811-1876), surgeon, was born at Clovelly, near Bideford, Devon, the youngest of the three sons of Colonel John De Morgan (1772-1816) of the Indian army, and his wife Elizabeth (1776-1856), the daughter of John Dodson and granddaughter of James Dodson. Augustus De Morgan, the mathematician, was his elder brother. He was educated at University College, London, and afterwards at the Middlesex Hospital. In 1835 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and in 1841 he was lecturer on forensic medicine at the Middlesex Hospital. In 1842 he became assistant surgeon there and he held the chair of anatomy in 1845. He became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1843 and then full surgeon at the Middlesex on the retirement of Mr Tuson in 1854. 
With John Tomes, De Morgan contributed a paper to the Royal Society on the development of bone, which gained him election as FRS and which was printed in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1852. He wrote the article 'Erysipelas' in Holmes's 'System of Surgery' (1860) and in 1865 he joined the Pathological Society and began contributing papers to its 'Transactions'. In 1872 he published a work entitled 'Origin of Cancer', following a series of papers on that subject published in 'The Lancet' in 1871. This was a subject which he had studied during thirty-four years in the special cancer wards of the Middlesex Hospital. 
De Morgan continued his teaching career, lecturing on anatomy, physiology, and forensic medicine, and on the retirement of Mr Shaw he became sole lecturer on surgery at the Middlesex. He worked as a consulting surgeon to the London Fever Hospital and to the East Grinstead Dispensary, and he was also a surgeon at the Institution for Invalid Gentlewomen. 
In addition to his professional attainments De Morgan was said to be an accomplished musician and a gifted caricaturist. He was described as a man who, under a somewhat cold manner, had great kindness and warmth of heart, and his contemporaries knew him as a modest and generous man of deep religious convictions. His last act was one of devoted attention to his old friend J. G. Lough, the sculptor; after sitting up with him through the night, he returned home to 29 Seymour Street, Portman Square, London, in the cold of an early morning and caught a fatal chill. He died at home on 12 April 1876 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, on 18 April. His wife (formerly Miss Hobson) had died in 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 7472


Dempster, George, of Dunnichen (1732-1818), agriculturist and politician, was born at Alexander Kyd's Close, Dundee, Forfarshire, on 8 December 1732, the eldest son of John Dempster (1700-1754), landowner and grain merchant, and his first wife, Isabel Ogilvie (1700x10- 'c'.1738). 
Dempster was educated at Dundee grammar school ('c'.1739- 'c'.1748) and possibly also at the small parish school at Leuchars, Fife. On 24 February 1748 he entered the University of St Andrews and studied there until about 1750, when he left without taking a degree and moved to Edinburgh, to study law at the university. Edinburgh at this time was entering upon its greatest period of social and intellectual glory, and Dempster, by nature gregarious and convivial, took full advantage of the opportunities offered. He became one of the first members of the Select Society and later became a member of the Poker Club. 
On the death of his father in November 1754 Dempster inherited the family estates, which comprised some 6000 acres, yielding $769 per annum, and thereby became moderately wealthy. Four months later he completed his legal studies, being admitted as a member of the Faculty of Advocates on 4 March 1755. The following year he set off on the grand tour of Europe, but was recalled suddenly to Scotland because of the illness of his eldest sister. Although she recovered, Dempster never managed to complete his grand tour. His role as family head occupied the next few years, dealing with estate and family affairs in Dundee and looking after the education of his younger brothers and sisters. The record of Dempster's career as an advocate has not survived, though it appears that he did practise during these years. 
In 1760 Dempster turned his back on the legal profession and decided to enter parliament, offering himself as a candidate for the Perth district of burghs (comprising Perth, St Andrews, Dundee, Forfar, and Cupar), which were notorious for corruption and venality. Against the odds Dempster succeeded at his first attempt, albeit at a crippling cost, estimated at $10,000. He contested four more general elections, on each occasion strengthening his popularity and support. He faced serious opposition in 1768 and 1780, but by 1784 had become virtually unassailable, remaining unchallenged despite his whig sympathies, while over 160 whigs lost their seats. The enormous cost of his first two elections forced Dempster to sell some 2500 acres -- all his land apart from the family estate at Dunnichen -- which he regretted for the rest of his life. 
Dempster was an MP for 28 years, but though from the start a frequent and passionate speaker (between 1768 and 1774, for example, he spoke on 193 occasions, a record exceeded by only 16 MPs out of the total of 692), he was not a natural politician. Although he called himself a whig, party politics and the need to vote with a party against his principles were distasteful to him, and he almost invariably followed an independent line. He wrote: 'I have long thought... that unless one preserves a little freedom and independency in Parliament to act in every question and to vote agreeably to the suggestions of one's mind, a seat in Parliament is a seat on thorns and rusty nails. ('Letters', 84-5)' His insistence on speaking and voting in accordance with his conscience rather than with his party gained him a reputation for incorruptibility and independence, and the sobriquet Honest George. Dempster readily presented petitions on behalf of his constituents, and regularly championed Scottish economic causes. Although this led to his being viewed as a Scottish patriot, he resented any accusation of partiality, saying that 'the sooner all national distinctions between the two kingdoms were forgot the better it would be for both' (Debrett, 10.125). 
Early in his career Dempster was recruited as a government supporter, but he soon became restive and withdrew his support in December 1762. In 1765 he spoke and voted against the 'Stamp Act', and thus began a long involvement with American affairs in which he unwaveringly supported the colonists and opposed government attempts to oppress them. The American question led Dempster to become a supporter of the marquess of Rockingham, whose views on America accorded with his own, and he remained a Rockinghamite for almost the whole of the remainder of his parliamentary career. When Rockingham became prime minister in August 1765, Dempster's support earned him the appointment of secretary to the Order of the Thistle, of which he was immensely proud. His unwillingness to place party above personal integrity, however, resulted in this being the only office he was ever granted. 
India also became a major interest, both in and out of parliament. Dempster became a 'proprietor' (shareholder) in the East India Company in 1763, and was elected a director in 1769 and 1772. He was very active, opposing government attempts to remove the company's independence, instead favouring internal reform of the company to eliminate fraud, corruption, and other abuses. He argued against colonization, believing that relations with India, as with China, should be purely commercial, and in 1787 he proposed a new type of government for India made up of a viceroy, council, and, in an echo of his views on America, an elected assembly of resident Europeans to which native Indians could make representations. Dempster strongly defended Warren Hastings against Edmund Burke's campaign of impeachment, believing Hastings to be unfairly blamed for many of the scandals involving the company. 
Other issues that Dempster vigorously supported included proposals for a Scottish militia, freedom of the press and the right of newspapers to report parliamentary proceedings, and reduction of the national debt, the last being a theme to which he returned regularly. He backed the younger Pitt's proposed sinking fund, but managed to find fault with every one of the taxes with which Pitt intended to finance it. On reform of the parliamentary franchise Dempster was ambivalent. He was by nature a democrat and champion of the common man, but while supporting extension of the franchise in the counties he repeatedly surprised his colleagues by resisting that of the burghs, apparently to avoid betraying his electors; he was placing friendship, in this case to his constituents, above political principle. 
In London Dempster married, on 24 September 1774, Rose Heming ('c'.1748-1810), daughter of a Jamaica sugar planter. The marriage produced no children, but from the start was a very happy one. Dempster commented to Sir Adam Fergusson's brother, Charles, 'as for happiness I protest to you I did not know what it was till I was married' ('Letters', 87). After his marriage he became increasingly disillusioned with parliament and spoke often of settling down as a farmer. This resulted, in the summer of 1788, in his resolving not to stand again for parliament, and though he participated in the 1788-9 session he did not attend the final session the following year. His last major parliamentary activity was in autumn 1788 during the regency debates, when he opposed Pitt's proposed limitations on the prince of Wales's powers as regent. Dempster's last recorded speech was on 22 July 1789, in support of famine relief for Revolutionary France. 
Dempster gained great fame among his Scottish countrymen for striving to advance Scottish commerce and manufactures. He tirelessly promoted the textile industry, first linen and later also cotton. In 1763, realizing that the lack of proper banking facilities was hampering trade in his native Forfarshire, Dempster founded the first bank in Dundee, under the name George Dempster & Co., and it prospered sufficiently for a second bank to be established in Dundee in 1792. Despite the leading role he played in founding the bank, once it was established he withdrew from active involvement. 
Dempster's greatest period of activity in the cause of the Scottish economy was in the 1780s, when he attempted to stem the growing tide of emigration to North America by transforming the wealth of the highlands and islands. Inspired by the reports of John Knox and James Anderson, Dempster conducted his own tour of the west highlands in January 1785, and became convinced that with encouragement the highland economy was capable of considerable advancement. 
Improvements to the fisheries came first, and Dempster was instrumental in the setting up of a parliamentary inquiry, which led to two 'Fisheries Acts', of 1785 and 1786. These reformed the salt laws and other antiquated fisheries legislation, and established an incorporated company, the British Fisheries Society, to encourage the industry. Other measures included acts promoted by Dempster in 1787 and 1789 to found lighthouses on the Scottish coasts and to establish the Northern Lighthouse Board, and, about 1785, Dempster's suggestion of transporting fish preserved in ice rather than salt as hitherto, thus laying the foundation of the vast modern frozen food industry. As one of the directors he was from the outset a leading light in the British Fisheries Society, which established villages at Tobermory and Ullapool, and at Stein in Skye, to support fishermen and act as centres of economic growth. He took a particular interest in Ullapool and Stein, and also in another site not in the end selected, on Canna. 
In the same period Dempster vigorously promoted the textile industry. In 1783 he encountered Richard Arkwright, the great cotton pioneer, and was so impressed with the mills at Cromford that he invited Arkwright to join him in establishing a mill in Scotland. Arkwright agreed to build mills at New Lanark in partnership with Dempster and the Glasgow merchant and manufacturer David Dale (1739-1806). Building started in April 1785 and spinning commenced in March 1786. However, Dempster withdrew in December 1786 to concentrate on another venture, a cotton mill at Stanley, Perthshire, involving Arkwright and some Perth merchants. Construction here commenced in 1785 with production beginning early in 1786. The company experienced mixed fortunes and was finally dissolved in December 1799, with heavy losses for the partners. 
Perceiving that the lack of good roads was an impediment to economic prosperity, in his later years Dempster promoted road building in both the highlands and the lowlands. The Ullapool to Dingwall road, built by the British Fisheries Society and connecting the east and west coasts, was the first such project in which Dempster was involved. He successfully steered the proposal through parliament in 1789, and the road was constructed between 1792 and 1794. In the 1780s and 1790s he campaigned for turnpike roads in Forfarshire, and he was instrumental in the proprietors' obtaining a 'Turnpike Act' in 1789. By 1790 he was delightedly informing his correspondents of the commencement of the Arbroath to Forfar turnpike; during the next ten years further turnpikes were constructed linking all the main settlements of the region. 
Dempster's efforts on behalf of the Scottish economy were recognized on 13 July 1786 by his being voted a piece of silver plate by the convention of royal burghs of Scotland. 
From the time of his inheritance in 1754 Dempster displayed great interest and enjoyment in the management and improvement of his estate at Dunnichen. He found the tenants, as elsewhere in Scotland, in a state of wretched poverty, still bound by medieval codes of loyalty and servitude to their landlords, and the land divided up and farmed in accordance with the antiquated and inefficient runrig system. Reflecting contemporary enlightened opinion, he was determined to provide greater prosperity for both tenant and landlord by a reform of agricultural practices and the conditions under which tenants worked, and by the introduction of manufacturing industry. 
Dempster commenced his improvements in 1761, and in the following year gave his tenants greater security by granting them leases for life, at the same time abolishing all personal services: thirlage to the mill and blacksmith's shop, carriage, and bonnage. These he felt especially strongly about, frequently inveighing against them in his correspondence. He substituted money rent for payment in kind, enclosed farms with freestone walls, and built proper houses to replace the hovels that existed formerly. The runrig system was replaced by crop rotation, and turnips and other crops were introduced for winter feed for cattle and horses, the breeds of both being progressively improved. Dempster's early efforts were driven more by enthusiasm than prudence, which forced him to retrench for a while, but by 1764 he was ready to start again. In 1768 he wrote to Edmund Burke: 'I am a farmer and a very serious one myself.... Of late the spirit of agriculture has gain'd ground amongst us [in Scotland]. I have been employ'd in it these last four years and hope in as many more to Quadruple the value of my six thousand Patrimonial Acres. (Dempster to Burke, 26 Sept 1768, Wentworth Woodhouse MS MF/76, 1/223)' Dempster planted trees in vast numbers, hoping thereby to derive significant income. He devised incentives for the tenants to protect and nurture them, and this policy was very successful, the tenants even planting replacement trees when necessary. In January 1788 he commenced draining Loch Restenneth in order to extract shell-marl, a form of lime that was extremely valuable as fertilizer. The operation was completed in July, exposing a vast area of marl: Dempster, after meeting his own needs, profited hugely from sales -- estimated at $14,000 over fourteen years. 
Another ambitious project was the founding, in 1788, of a village at Letham, intended as a market town and centre for linen manufacture. In 1803 Dempster pioneered there a system of self-government based on a nine-member feuars' committee, which was to adjudicate in disputes and the affairs of the village. The members were to be chosen by a surprisingly modern method of secret voting invented by Dempster. This used grooved voting sticks in which a sliding tongue could be moved to indicate a 'yes' or 'no' vote; the system apparently survived until well into the twentieth century. 
In July 1786 Dempster purchased the run-down estate of Skibo in Sutherland, 18,000 acres in area, and later added a number of smaller contiguous estates. He intended Skibo to be run by his half-brother, John Hamilton Dempster, a sea captain in the East India Company's service, on John's retirement from the sea. He also expected that Captain Dempster's son, on whom Dempster doted, would eventually inherit the estate. 
These purchases also gave Dempster the opportunity to try out his agricultural improvements on a larger scale, and to demonstrate their viability and worth in the more extreme climatic conditions of the highlands. He hoped by his example to encourage other landowners to do likewise, thus complementing the British Fisheries Society's work. The basic strategy was the same as at Dunnichen: the tenants were granted long leases and relieved of personal services, and agricultural practices were reformed. As at Letham, Dempster granted his Skibo tenants a constitution and encouraged new settlers to become tenants of the estate, and devised a system of concessions and incentives to that end. 
Dempster was eager to establish villages at Skibo, and having selected two sites, he established a small linen-weaving business at one and the more ambitious project of a cotton mill at the other. Both projects failed: the linen-weaving concern never amounted to much while the mill, completed in 1794, was burdened with heavy debts from the start and suffered from its remote location, and the highlanders found it difficult to adjust to long hours of mill work alien to their traditional life. In 1805 it was sold to a Glasgow cotton spinner and in 1806 was destroyed by fire and never rebuilt. However, the agricultural innovations were much more successful, enabling rents to be raised dramatically while Dempster gained great esteem from his reforming zeal. 
In the 1790s Dempster suffered severe personal setbacks. His half-brother's wife and son both died of tuberculosis in the period 1798-1801, and the captain himself drowned at sea in 1800. Skibo passed to John Hamilton Dempster's natural daughter, who returned from India with her husband to claim it. Dempster henceforth increasingly confined himself to Dunnichen and its environs, though this may have been from increasing infirmity due to age as much as from loss of spirit. At Dunnichen he remained energetic, in 1802 rebuilding the church there and in 1803 founding the Lunan and Vinney Farming Society, named after the two principal burns on the Dunnichen estate. The society was modelled on others founded at the same time, its only activity being the holding of an annual meeting, which involved a formal meal followed by speeches and convivial discussion on a wide range of matters relating to agricultural improvement. The membership, which reached a peak of about eighty, tended to be Dempster's friends and neighbours in the local farming and landowning community. He was elected president in perpetuity at the first meeting, and remained so until the society's eventual demise about 1815. 
Dempster's wife, Rose, died on 10 July 1810, following which he began spending time at Broughty Ferry and St Andrews, at the latter encountering to his delight an old friend from his Edinburgh days, the philosopher Adam Ferguson. In St Andrews Dempster also befriended some old ladies with whom he played whist, a game of which he had always been fond. Nevertheless, by this time the deaths of most of his lifelong friends (Ferguson himself died in 1816) made his last years increasingly lonely. Towards the end of 1817 Dempster suffered a stroke, and he died at Dunnichen House on 13 February 1818. He was buried that month at Restenneth Priory, near Forfar. 
Dempster is remembered best as an agricultural improver, but he spent half his adult life as a popular, very active, and conscientious independent whig MP, and gained great public renown through his efforts to promote Scottish trade and industry. His attractive and outgoing personality was marked by candour, enthusiasm for the causes he espoused, and a willingness to help others. He placed personal merit above rank and wealth, and commanded much affection, partly from his charming personality and partly from the altruism and integrity he displayed in public life. His reputation survived the use of bribery during elections -- which was, however, a normal part of public life in the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 7473


Dempster, Thomas (1579-1625), writer, was, by his own account, born on 23 August 1579, a date which has been accepted by those authorities who have written about him. The place of his birth was Cliftbog in Aberdeenshire, an estate belonging to his father, Thomas Dempster, laird of Muiresk, Auchterless, and Killesmont, who also seems to have held the office of lieutenant ('prorex') of Banff and Buchan. His mother was Jean Leslie, daughter of William Leslie, ninth baron of Balquain. The couple, according to Dempster's autobiography, had twenty-nine children, of which he was the twenty-fourth. This statement has been taken at face value by Irving (Irving, 'Lives', 1.347), but it is possible that Dempster was only the third son of three (Leslie, vol. 3). 
Dempster -- again by his own account -- learned the alphabet in one hour at the age of three. Whatever the truth of this, he was sent at an early age to school in Turreff, under the care of the schoolmaster Andrew Ogston. After this, he continued his education in the classics at Aberdeen, under Thomas Cargill, who later became rector of the grammar school there. 
While Dempster was receiving this early education, his family became embroiled in an internal feud. This was caused by James, his eldest brother, marrying his father's mistress, Isabella Gordon, for which his father disinherited him. James sought revenge by gathering some Gordon associates and attacking his father as he rode about his business one morning. In the resultant battle several men on both sides were killed, and James Dempster fled Scotland. That he was disinherited is confirmed by a charter of 6 January 1592, which gives the barony of Muiresk to the elder Dempster's second son, Robert. If Thomas Dempster was only the third son, and his brother Robert died during his lifetime, he would have been justified in calling himself baron of Muiresk, as he did in later life. If, however, he was the twenty-fourth child as he claimed, it is highly unlikely that he ever inherited the honour. It was in any case an empty one, as the Muiresk estate was impoverished, and would have brought him no financial benefit even if he had legitimately been the tenth baron. 
This family chaos caused Dempster's uncle, John Dempster, an Edinburgh lawyer, to advise his nephew to leave Scotland. Taking this advice, Dempster went to Cambridge about 1589, and became a student at Pembroke College under a tutor called Walter Whalley. How long he stayed at Cambridge is uncertain, but he soon left for France, being robbed of all his money and most of his clothes on the journey and, with difficulty, eventually reaching Paris. Here he was assisted by some fellow Scots, and planned to continue his studies. He was prevented from doing this by a severe outbreak of plague, which killed many Parisians and which nearly killed him as well. When he recovered, he left for Louvain and entered the university there, but did not stay long. He was selected along with other Scottish students by the Jesuit William Crichton, principal of the Scottish College at Louvain, to be sent for further education in Rome. He reached that city after a hazardous journey through Germany and Italy, which were ravaged by war and plague at the time. 
At Rome Dempster attracted the attention of Cardinal Cajetan, on whose recommendation he was admitted into the Roman seminary. Unfortunately, he again fell seriously ill, and doctors advised a change of climate. Accordingly, he set off for the Netherlands, travelling via Switzerland, in the company of another Scot, Andrew Crichton. At Tournai he met his fellow countryman James Cheyne, who had been professor at both Paris and Douai, and it was by Cheyne's advice that Dempster entered the latter university. He soon became disenchanted and planned to leave, but Cheyne persuaded him to complete the three-year course, and Dempster took the degree of MA at Douai. He was maintained during his studies by a pension from the king of Spain, and Archduke Albert, who governed the Spanish Netherlands. Following this, he taught briefly at Tournai, but soon left for Paris. Here he took a doctorate in canon law, and became a regent in the College de Navarre. Dempster asserts that he was seventeen at this time, which would mean that he took up his college position in 1596. This is unlikely, but not impossible in the seventeenth century when it was feasible for a precocious young man to attain academic distinctions that today would be associated with people much older. Dempster also seems to have become a doctor of civil law at about this time, but at what university is unknown. In later life, he described himself as a doctor of both branches of law. 
Dempster soon continued his travels, visiting St Maixent in Poitou and becoming professor of humanities at Toulouse, a city which his involvement in 'town and gown' battles soon obliged him to leave. He considered becoming professor of philosophy at Montpellier, on the invitation of two Scots, Adam Abernethy and Andrew Currie, but instead went to Nimes, where he became professor of eloquence as the result of a competition for the post, which he won. As Nimes was a Huguenot college, it is probable that Dempster concealed his Catholicism, although he usually presented himself in Europe as one who had abandoned a great estate in Scotland for the sake of his religion. 
Dempster was not allowed to pursue his career in peace. One of the defeated competitors in the contest for the professorship, the Swiss Jacob Grasser, attacked him in print and tried to have him suspended from his duties. However, Dempster fought back successfully, and managed to have Grasser imprisoned at Nimes, and, when he escaped, in Paris. A two-year lawsuit followed, which the 'parlement' of Toulouse eventually decided in Dempster's favour. 
Despite this vindication, Dempster started travelling again. He made a brief visit to Spain, and, on his return to France, accepted a position as tutor to Arthur l'Espinay, the son of the famous soldier Marshal de Saint-Luc and later bishop of Marseilles. He lost this post almost immediately by quarrelling with one of his charge's relations at Brissac, and decided to return to his homeland. Here, however, he found that most of his relations were too poor to be of any assistance to him, and that his Catholicism was a severe drawback. The Scottish protestant clergy appear to have harassed him, and, according to his autobiography, he engaged in a three-day theological dispute with William Cowper, later bishop of Galloway, which he claims he won. The truth of this story is uncertain, but Dempster certainly seems to have had a grudge against Cowper, whom he treated abusively in his 'Historia' and damned as a heretic. 
As Scotland had nothing to offer, Dempster returned to Europe about 1608, and was employed for seven years as regent in the four Paris colleges of Lisieux, Grassins, Du Plessis, and Beauvais. While at Paris, he published in 1613 his edition of Rosinus's 'Antiquitatum Romanorum corpus', which he dedicated to James VI and I of Scotland and England. 
It was while at the College de Beauvais that Dempster became involved in an affair which caused him to leave France again. His own version of the story is that he left because a Norman called Jean Robillard tried to assassinate him for some unspecified reason. A more circumstantial account, repeated by Irving (Irving, 'Lives', 1.353), states that the trouble was caused by Dempster's public flogging of a student who had challenged another to a duel. The young man tried to avenge this humiliation by bringing three soldier relations to the college in order to attack Dempster, who armed his servants, ordered the killing of his assailants' horses to prevent their escape, and led a counter-attack so successful that he overpowered his adversaries and locked them up in the college bell-tower. Legal proceedings would certainly have followed this episode, and as Dempster was unsure as to what the outcome of these would be, he left France. 
Dempster went to England, where he had been previously invited by King James, who considered himself a scholar and who had been flattered by the dedication in the 'Antiquitatum Romanorum corpus'. He arrived there in 1615 or early 1616. The king awarded him the sum of $200 on 19 February 1616, and seems to have appointed him historiographer royal for England. This arguably makes Dempster the first holder of this office, although the unbroken line of English historiographers royal only begins in 1661 (Hay, 24, 31). While in London, he married Susanna Waller. The couple later had one child, a daughter, who lived only a few days after her birth. Dempster might have begun a successful career in England, but once again his religion proved a stumbling block. The English clergy, led by Dr Montagu, the bishop of Bath and Wells, criticized him to the king and convinced him that it was improper for the king of a protestant country to show such favour to a professed Catholic. Realizing that he would never prosper with such opposition, Dempster left England, having stayed only a short time. 
Dempster made his way to Rome where he was arrested on suspicion of espionage, and briefly imprisoned. He easily proved this suspicion baseless and soon left for Florence. In Rome he had become friendly with Gucciardini, the Tuscan ambassador to the papal court, and it was on Gucciardini's recommendation, supported by that of the pope, that he was appointed professor of the pandects at the University of Pisa by the grand duke of Tuscany, Cosimo II, in 1616. 
Shortly after his appointment, Dempster went back to England to fetch his wife. The couple travelled to Pisa by way of France, where Mrs Dempster caused commotion by appearing with more flesh exposed than was normally the case in France. The crowd she attracted grew so dense and disorderly that the Dempsters were obliged to take refuge in a house. The rest of the journey, however, was uneventful, and they reached Pisa in time for Dempster to deliver his inaugural lecture on 2 November. Their short-lived daughter was born soon after they arrived in Italy. 
Dempster at last showed signs of prospering. His salary was increased to 400 ducats a year, and he began work on his 'De Etruria regali', a project which pleased the grand duke as it dealt with the history of the part of Italy which formed his duchy. Dempster appears to have been an enthusiastic and dedicated scholar, who wrote and studied for fourteen hours a day, when possible, and had so powerful a memory that he was known as the Living Library. He was equally fluent in Latin and Greek, and dictated in these languages so rapidly that no pen could keep up. He also seems to have been thorough about research, and in 1617 again visited Britain, in order to obtain books for use in writing the 'Etruria'. 
In 1619 Dempster's career at Pisa came to an end. He became involved in a dispute with an unnamed English ecclesiastic, who seems to have had the ear of the grand duke, and who managed to convince that ruler that Dempster was in the wrong. The duke gave Dempster a choice of apologizing or of leaving Tuscany. Refusing to apologize, Dempster left Pisa on 21 July 1619. His intention appears to have been to try his luck in Scotland again, but on his way he stopped at Bologna to visit Cardinal Capponi, who convinced him to stay in Italy. The cardinal also managed to obtain for him within twelve days the professorship of humanities at the University of Bologna, at that time the most prestigious seat of learning in Italy. 
Trouble, however, continued to follow Dempster. The English priest with whom he had clashed at Pisa renewed his attacks, accusing Dempster of being a doubtful Catholic and of possessing heretical books. Dempster did not help his case by writing the Englishman a furious letter, which his enemy had translated into Italian and presented as evidence against its writer. He succeeded in gaining the support of several cardinals, and Dempster was obliged to go to Rome personally in order to defend himself in audience with the pope. A reconciliation was eventually staged between Dempster and the English foe, but the accusations caused the Inquisition in Rome to regard Dempster with continued suspicion. A decree dated 16 March 1621 condemned his edition of Rosinus, and a further one of December 1623 prohibited another of his works. 
Dempster's career now flourished. He attracted many students to Bologna, and evidently lost his urge to wander, as he turned down the offer of a professorship of civil law at Padua, although the salary there was larger than that which he received at Bologna. A new pope, Urban VIII, himself a keen Latinist, knighted him and granted him an annual pension. He was also made a member of the distinguished Academia della Notte. 
In 1625 Dempster's wife eloped with a lover, assisted by some of Dempster's own students and taking with her some of her husband's property. He set off in pursuit, and got as far as Vicenza, where he learned that the fugitives had crossed the Alps and were out of Italy. Abandoning the chase, he went to Butri, near Bologna, to rest. Here he caught a fever, which made it necessary to move him to his home in Bologna, where he died on 6 September 1625. He was buried in St Dominic's Church in that city, where his fellow members of the Academia della Notte erected a monumental stone with a Latin inscription in his memory. 
Dempster listed fifty of his own works, a list which is reproduced by Irving (Irving, 'Lives', 1.363-70), who also admitted that there is no confirmation for items twenty-nine to forty-seven on the list except Dempster himself. Considering his working habits, it is certainly possible that Dempster produced a large volume of work, but when and where he wrote most of the items on his list is unknown. The work for which he is most famous, or notorious, is the 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Scotorum', first published in Bologna in 1627, two years after his death. Despite the title, this is not an ecclesiastical history of Scotland, but a descriptive catalogue of supposedly Scottish writers and saints. It includes people whose existence is doubtful, and lists books which are almost certainly fictitious. Dempster claimed as Scots many early figures who were more likely Irish, but this might be the result of genuine confusion, because the term Scotia was used to describe both Ireland and Scotland until at least the eleventh century, after which its use was increasingly limited to Scotland. Besides this, Dempster also claimed as Scots such unarguably non-Scottish figures as Alcuin, the noted Carolingian scholar, St Boniface, and even Boudicca (Boadicea), the Icenic queen who fought the Romans in the first century AD. Not only is she made out to be Scottish, but she is also attributed with the authorship of several books. His descriptions of other historical figures have been considered more valuable, although they are sometimes distorted by Catholic prejudice; Dempster invented an imaginary work attacking Wyclif by a fourteenth-century Scottish hermit called Grant, and plainly thought that the early Scottish protestants Patrick Hamilton and George Wishart were justly burned at the stake. 
Dempster's reasons for exaggerating the number of early Scottish writers were almost certainly patriotic. As David Allan has pointed out (Allan, 'Virtue', 197, 222), he is only one of a number of Scottish historians who, over the centuries, have tried to present the dark ages as an era of learning in Scotland. 
Charges of fraud have not been levelled against Dempster's other writings. These, even if half his list is disregarded for lack of evidence, are numerous and varied. His 'De Etruria regali' was much admired and is regarded by Irving as his best work (Irving, 'Lives', 1.360). His edition of Rosinus was also commended, and subsequent writers on Roman antiquities used it as a source. Dempster also produced some small works on Roman law, commentaries on the works of the late Roman poets Claudian and Corippus, and some original Latin verse, which was highly regarded by his contemporaries. 
In the seventeenth century Scots seem to have regarded Dempster as a writer of whom to be proud, and an example of the once-great literary tradition from which late seventeenth-century Scotland was seen to have fallen (Allan, 'Prudence', 473). At the same time, however, non-Scots such as Towers and Bishop Lloyd denounced him for the exaggerations and lies of the 'Historia'. In the eighteenth century Dempster appears to have vanished into the obscurity created by Scottish enlightenment belief that the seventeenth century was a dark age for Scottish letters, a belief to which the lamentations of late seventeenth-century Scottish writers had contributed. He resurfaced briefly in the nineteenth century during the period of Scottish antiquarian enthusiasm associated with Sir Walter Scott, and his 'Historia', edited by David Irving, was published for the Bannatyne Club in Edinburgh in 1829. Irving also included Dempster among the illustrious Scots he described in his 'Lives of Scotish Writers', published in 1839. Irving's account takes Dempster to task for the falsifications of the 'Historia', and these features of Dempster's work are what subsequent writers have concentrated upon, when they mention Dempster at all. This reputation for dishonesty, or, more charitably, credulity, and the fact that Dempster wrote entirely in Greek or Latin, is probably largely responsible for his not having received much in the way of serious scholarly attention. 


@@@@@


doc= 7474


Dendy, Walter Cooper (1794-1871), surgeon, was born at or near Horsham in Sussex. After an apprenticeship in that area he moved to London about 1811 and entered himself as a student at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1814 and commenced practice in Stamford Street, Blackfriars; soon after he moved to 6 Great Eastcheap. He was made a fellow of the Medical Society of London, of which he became president. 
Dendy was noted for his cultivated taste and polished manners; he was also an excellent speaker. He held some unusual religious views but he was considered too much of an enthusiast to be a materialist. He was the author of many books, including 'On the Phenomenon of Dreams' (1832), 'The Philosophy of Mystery' (1841), and 'Psyche: a Discourse on the Birth and Pilgrimage of Thought' (1853). His other writings included works on medical and geographical topics. Dendy was a skilled draughtsman and illustrated his own works. He also contributed to medical journals and published a number of papers in the 'Psychological Journal'. For many years he acted as senior surgeon to the Royal Infirmary for Children, in the Waterloo Road. On 2 April 1867 he was nominated a fellow of the Anthropological Society of London; on 3 November 1868 he read a paper 'Anthropogenesis' before the society, which contained a trenchant attack on Darwinian theories. 
Dendy was somewhat retiring by nature and, with the exception of the annual dinner of the Medical Society and the biennial festival of the students of Guy's Hospital, he seldom appeared at the profession's social events. Having retired from practice he spent much of his time in the reading-room of the British Museum, where his eccentric costume made him a well-known character. After a short illness he died at his home, 25 Suffolk Street, Pall Mall, London, on 10 December 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 7475


Dene, William (fl. 1317-1354), supposed chronicler, may have been the author of BL, Cotton MS Faustina B.v, which comprises the 'Registrum Roffense', the author of which declares himself to be a public notary (BL, Cotton MS Faustina B.v, fol. 12'v'), and the 'Historia Roffensis'. The former contains a detailed account of the disputed election of Hamo Hythe (died in or after 1357) as bishop of Rochester. William Dene, a public notary, was one of those sent by the bishop-elect to cardinals Gaucelin and Luca at Durham in August 1317 with a papal commission to confirm his election. When the cardinals then remitted the case to the papal curia, Hythe sent William Dene and Dr Michael Berham as his proctors to prosecute his claim there. At Avignon Dene was physically threatened by Jean de Jargeau, the proctor of Queen Isabella, who was supporting another candidate. Back in England, after his election had been confirmed, Hythe handed the papal bulls confirming his election to Dene on 29 November 1319; and Dene was present when Hythe made his profession to Walter Reynolds, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1327), and when he performed homage to the king at York in early December 1319. Dene's name occurs in the long series of documents arising out of the dispute between Hythe and Walter Reynolds over sums due to Hythe from the long vacancy of the latter's see; but so does that of another public notary, Gilbert Sedgeford, who has therefore also been considered a possible author of the manuscript. John Joscelyn (died 1603) did not differentiate between the 'Registrum' and the 'Historia' when asserting that William Dene was the author of the manuscript. 
The 'Historia Roffensis' provides a chronological narrative moving between information of local interest and national importance from 1320 to 1350. Part of it was printed by Henry Wharton, 'Anglia sacra' (1691), while folios 34'v' to 36'v', describing the events of the Westminster parliament of 1321, have been published in 'Parliamentary Texts of the Later Middle Ages' (ed. N. Pronay and J. Taylor, 1980). Other passages provide insight into the diplomatic activity resulting from the War of St Sardos. The revolution that led to Edward II's deposition, the deposition itself, and the coronation of Edward III are well covered. The chronicle is one of the richest sources for the career of the little-known Archbishop Simon Mepham (died 1333), about whom Dene is critical, probably reflecting Bishop Hamo's attitude. Despite Hythe's reluctance to attend parliaments in the 1330s, the chronicle provides valuable information about Edward III's wars in Scotland from Dupplin Moor and Halidon Hill to Nevilles Cross. Concern that Scottish campaigns were making the realm vulnerable to French attack is at times discernible. Events leading to the Hundred Years' War and the burden of taxation that the war brought with it are detailed, as are major military and naval events: Sluys; the siege of Tournai (about which the chronicler incorporates an extensive news bulletin); Crecy; and the siege of Calais. Other lengthy insertions include evidence pertaining to the bishop of Rochester's claim to jurisdiction over the church of Isleham in the diocese of Norwich; a sympathetic account of the assumption of power in Rome by Rienzi, whose death in 1354 is the last securely dated event to be referred to; and legislation consequent upon the black death. 
Like the 'Registrum', the 'Historia' was almost certainly written by someone who was in the entourage of Hamo Hythe while he was bishop of Rochester between 1319 and 1352, and who was alive in 1354. It is possible therefore that the William Dene who was provided to the archdeaconry of Rochester at the bishop's request in September 1323, and who resigned that office in June 1359, was the author. However, in Bishop Hamo's register, this William Dene is described as 'magister' when instituted to the church of Maplescombe, Kent, in September 1321, whereas the William Dene in the 'Registrum Roffense' is never so described. 


@@@@@


doc= 7476


Denham, Dixon (1786-1828), explorer in Africa, born in London on 1 January 1786, was the son of James Denham and his wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Symonds. He was educated from 1793 at Merchant Taylors' School. After being briefly articled to a London solicitor, he joined the army as a volunteer in 1811 and served in the Peninsula, where he was promoted lieutenant, and in Belgium. In Lisbon he married Harriet Hawkins, a widow, a marriage he solemnized in London on 20 February 1815 but never again seems to have referred to publicly. He was placed on half pay in 1818 and appointed an instructor at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he ingratiated himself with the authorities. 
The course of the Niger was still untraced. Attempts to trace it from west Africa, begun originally by Mungo Park, had ended in disaster, and it was proposed instead to approach it from Tripoli, where the British consul-general, Hanmer Warrington, had established friendly relations with the ruling Turkish pasha, Yusuf Karamanli. In 1818 Joseph Ritchie set out but died after a few months. To replace him, the Colonial Office recruited a Scottish doctor, Walter Oudney, and his Edinburgh neighbour Hugh Clapperton, a half-pay naval officer. Denham then wrote to the Colonial Office proposing his own services. He seems to have had influential supporters, for he was not only accepted but given command of the expedition. This was to prove disastrous. Pushy, self-important, and malicious, Denham treated his colleagues with a scarcely veiled contempt that from the start soured relations between them. 
In April 1822 they left Tripoli for Murzuq, the capital of the Fezzan. The success of their journey depended on the pasha's support. At Murzuq they found that no further arrangements had been made, so Denham returned to Tripoli and, after fruitless arguments with the pasha, set off impulsively for London. At Marseilles, however, he heard that the necessary military escort would be provided and rejoined his colleagues; in November 1822 they set out southwards. 
They travelled across the desert along the long-established Sahara trade route to the kingdom of Bornu (later Nigeria), a route littered with the skeletons of thousands of slaves abandoned there over the centuries. At the pasha's suggestion they wore European clothes (consular uniforms), since they were in no danger under his protection. In February, having sighted Lake Chad, they reached Kuka (later Kukawa), the capital of Bornu, where to their amazement they were welcomed by a spectacular array of some five thousand horsemen, many of them wearing chain-mail armour, sent by Sheikh Muhammad el Kanemi, the Muslim prophet who ruled Bornu in the king's name. Though delighted to meet them, he refused to let them leave Bornu, lest they meet some misadventure for which he would be blamed. Unwillingly he let Denham accompany a campaign against some neighbouring Fulani. The Bornu forces were routed, Denham was wounded and nearly captured. During the rains Denham and his companions stayed in Kuka, Denham secretly sending home malicious reports about Clapperton's sexual behaviour (which he was later to admit he had never believed). They then separated. Oudney and Clapperton made for Kano, but Oudney died on the way. Denham investigated Lake Chad, but was prevented by warfare from reaching its eastern shore. Once Clapperton was back from Kano they returned to Tripoli, suffering a terrible desert crossing. They reached England in June 1825, having failed to find the Niger, but having opened much of north central Africa to European knowledge. 
Unlike his companions, Denham retained his health throughout the expedition. Clapperton, despite his broken condition, immediately embarked again on the Niger quest, where he died. Denham, feted in London as the hero of the expedition, and elected a fellow of the Royal Society, published his 'Narrative of Travels and Discoveries in Northern and Central Africa' (1826), in which he suppressed as much as possible all mention of his companions, and took the credit for some of their discoveries. Written in a lively style, and embellished with engravings of his own sketches, it became one of the classics of its genre. 
A new appointment was found for Denham in Sierra Leone, to reorganize the Liberated African department, which cared for the slaves rescued by the British naval squadron and liberated in Freetown. He arrived in January 1827 with the rank of lieutenant-colonel to find that the newly appointed governor, Sir Neil Campbell, was busy reorganizing every aspect of government, including his own department. Not until Campbell died in August was Denham able to take full charge. He travelled round the villages where the liberated people were settled, and sent detailed, well-thought-out descriptions and recommendations to the Colonial Office -- not in formal dispatches, but in private letters to the under-secretary, where he could safely indulge malicious comment. In January he went on a cruise for his health to Fernando Po, where he heard, and sent home, the news that his erstwhile colleague Clapperton had died. 
Meanwhile Denham had secured for himself the post of lieutenant-governor, and was soon quarrelling with the officer commanding the troops, his senior in age and rank. But his term of office was brief. In Sierra Leone his customary good health failed. A contemporary wrote, 'he took to physicking himself, became soft and fleshy, and gradually sank under the fever' (Alexander, 111-12), and he died in Freetown on 9 June 1828. He was buried on 15 June at the city's Circular Road cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 7477


Denham, Henry (fl. 1556-1590), printer, of whose parents and family nothing is known, was apprenticed to the London printer and bookseller Richard Tottel on 14 October 1556 and was made free of the Company of Stationers on 30 August 1560. He set up his own printing house in White Cross Street, London, in 1564 but from 1565 was at the sign of the Star in Paternoster Row. Denham was involved in several controversies concerning printing privileges and in 1564-5 he was fined for illicit printing. He was fined again in 1564-5 for employing someone without informing the master and wardens of the company. The following year he was fined for 'mysvsying' one of the wardens (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.316). He was admitted into the livery of the Stationers' Company on 20 July 1573, and held several posts within the company. He acted as an official searcher on several occasions and served as renter warden in successive years for 1579-80 and 1580-81, and as under-warden for 1586-7 and 1588-9. On 6 January 1579 he failed to attend before the lord mayor and incurred a fine of 12died, and in August he was fined for arresting a freeman of the company without a licence. However, a 20's'. fine in April 1584 for using indecent speech to the upper warden was remitted. 
Despite signing a petition against printing privileges in 1577, Denham benefited the following year when William Seres, no longer able to continue his own business, assigned his privilege for the printing of all psalters, primers, and prayers to Denham together with 'all his presses letters stock and copies' for a yearly rent (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 2.771). Denham duly took seven young men from the Stationers' Company to assist him. By 1583 he was noted as operating four printing presses and in the same year, as executor with Ralph Newbery for Henry Bynneman, he also inherited Bynneman's privilege for printing dictionaries, chronicles, and histories. In January 1584 he was among several printers who made over their privilege in certain books for the benefit of the poor of the company. In 1585 he moved to Aldersgate Street where he remained until at least 1587; another survey of London printing presses, in 1586, recorded that he had three in operation. In 1587-8 he was one of a number of senior members of the company who contributed towards the cost of the drawing up of the 1586 Star Chamber decrees concerning printing. In November 1589 he gave a gift to the company of a gilt spoon, about 3 oz in weight, engraved with his name. 
Denham 'had a large and varied assortment of letters' and his blacks were noted for their beauty (McKerrow, 88-9). His woodcut initials belonged to those known as the AS series which are attributed to Anton Sylvius, an Antwerp engraver. His mark was a star surrounded with the inscription 'Os homini sublime dedit'. Among the many books to appear under this sign was the 'New Testament' in Welsh which he printed for Humphrey Toy in 1567, four years after a bill was passed in parliament for the 'Bible' to be translated into Welsh. He also printed 'Bullokar's Booke at Large' (1580), the first attempt to establish orthography for English to appear in print. As an assignee of Henry Bynneman he was able to print the second edition of Holinshed's 'Chronicles' which Clair suggests was probably the edition which Shakespeare used. 
We do not know the date of Denham's death, but he was last recorded in attendance at the court of the Stationers' Company on 4 July 1590. No book was printed under his sign after 1590. 


@@@@@


doc= 7478


Steuart, Sir James, of Coltness and Westshield, third baronet (1713-1780), economist, was born on 10 October 1713 in Edinburgh, the only son of the five children of Sir James Steuart, second baronet (1681-1727), lawyer and politician in the first Union parliament, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Hew Dalrymple, lord president of the court of session. The foundations of the Steuart family fortunes had been laid by James Steuart (1608-1681), a successful merchant who later became lord provost of Edinburgh. His son, James Steuart's grandfather, was appointed lord advocate in 1693 and was made a baronet two years later. With two estates at Coltness (near Glasgow) and Goodtrees (near Edinburgh), the family had apparently emerged from the conflicts of the seventeenth century with office but an uncertain political allegiance. 
Young James passed his early years at Goodtrees and later attended the parish school at North Berwick. He entered Edinburgh University in 1725 and subsequently studied Scots law under Alexander Bayne and constitutional history with Charles Mackie. On the death of his father in 1727 he became third baronet. He made the expected progression from the university, and passed the bar examinations in 1735. Nothing seemed to stand in the way of what promised to be a successful, even brilliant career, whose start was merely postponed by the last phase of a gentleman's education: the foreign tour (1735-40). 
Steuart first travelled to the Netherlands with the intention of pursuing further study in the universities of Leiden and Utrecht. It is likely that Steuart and his constant companion, James Carnegy of Boysack, then moved on to France, where they visited Avignon. Still a papal territory, Avignon was at this time a refuge for those who had been 'out' in the rising of 1715 and consequently something of a Jacobite centre. It was here that Steuart met the exiled duke of Ormond, an ardent supporter of James Francis Edward Stuart, the Old Pretender, who encouraged him to visit Spain with a view to contacting George Keith, the last Earl Marischal of Scotland, and later confidant of Frederick the Great. 
The meetings with Ormond in Avignon and with the Earl Marischal in Spain may well have determined Steuart to travel on to Rome. He was certainly in that city in 1739, where his portrait was painted, and where there can be little doubt that he indulged his genuine taste for classical antiquities. But the visit proved fateful in that Steuart established the contacts for which Ormond and the Earl Marischal had hoped. In Rome he became a member of a prominent Jacobite club, the Young Gentlemen Travellers, and was described by one contemporary as the 'prettiest most agreeable little Cur that ever lived if he were not such a Jacobite' (Chamley, 'Documents', 37). Steuart was committed to the cause before he left Rome in 1739 and became further devoted to it in the years which followed. There is as yet no firm evidence as to Steuart's meetings in Rome, but it is known that he wrote to James Edgar, secretary to the Old Pretender, on 28 December 1739 'en route' home, and that the latter replied on 14 January acknowledging Steuart's compliments to the 'king' and his commitment to the Jacobite cause. John Murray, secretary to Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, also wrote to Edgar about Steuart's loyalty (5 September 1743). Steuart was, he believed, 'deservedly liked by all his acquaintance' (Blaikie, 43), noting elsewhere that he was one 'of the most considerable of the King's friends, with whom I had frequent meetings' ('Memorials', 113). 
The summer of 1745 found Steuart at Coltness, but he returned to Edinburgh ostensibly to seek medical assistance for his wife, Lady Frances Wemyss, daughter of the earl of Wemyss, whom he had married on 25 October 1743. For a time events moved slowly, but on 16 September 1745 the Jacobite army was 2 miles from the city. Sir James initially made no overt move, and it was possibly not until the battle of Prestonpans had been won on 21 September that he publicly declared himself. Steuart's caution may be understandable, given that he was one of a number of supporters who believed that a successful action required 6000 regular troops, arms for 10,000, and 30,000 louis d'or. But Sir James knew of the lack of such support in 1745 and agreed to keep silent. 
In the company of his brother-in-law, Henry, tenth earl of Buchan, Steuart went to Holyrood Palace, where the two men arrived, masquerading as prisoners of the Jacobite force. Prince Charles refused to meet them under such prudent conditions. Buchan left the palace and took no further action; Sir James remained. The die was now cast, and henceforth Steuart was busy. As a close relative, Elizabeth Mure, remarked, 'he was consulted in everything, he wrote the 'Manifesto', and several little things in the public papers'. It is interesting to note that Mure should have attributed Steuart's commitment to an ambition thwarted by the Arniston interest: 'I look on this as the foundation of all his after conduct, for had that revolution taken place which he wished, he would have been the first man in the state' (Chamley, 'Documents', 16). 
Towards the end of October 1745, and just before the Jacobite march to Derby, it was decided to send an ambassador to the French court to replace George Kelly, one of the celebrated 'seven men of Moidart', the sole escort which had landed with the prince in Loch nan Uamh the previous July. Steuart left with the approval of Cameron of Lochiel and Lord George Murray, the Jacobite general, who considered him to be a 'very proper person' (Tomasson, 63). Curiously, Steuart departed from the port of Stonehaven, under conditions similar to those by which he had arrived at Edinburgh, namely as a captured officer of General Cope's defeated army, complete with the Hanoverian emblem of a black cockade. Steuart landed at Dunkirk and immediately went to see the intendant to enquire about preparations for an invasion of England. On 8 December he presented his credentials at Versailles. After the audience he was taken to Cardinal Tencin, to whom he explained the state of the prince's affairs, including the reasons for his march to Derby. It was in the course of this interview that Steuart rashly asserted that at least half the landed interest in England would support the Jacobite cause if French support was forthcoming. 
Thus far Steuart had every reason to suppose that there would be effective help and appeared to be executing his commission with a fair measure of success. But despite the Jacobite victory at the battle of Falkirk on 17 January 1746 Steuart had begun to suspect that an invasion was less than probable. With this realization came rather sharper exchanges. During one conversation with the French minister Maurepas, Steuart pointed out that since the Jacobites had served the purposes of France in drawing English troops from Flanders, the French in turn had an obligation to the forces of Prince Charles. The minister readily recognized the intemperate nature of this exchange, and discounted it accordingly. 
After the defeat of the Jacobite army at Culloden in April 1746 Steuart remained in Paris, issuing funds to the needy and informing Rome of new arrivals from Scotland. Steuart's continuing involvement with the prince's cause is also confirmed by the pointed terms of a commission which he received from the Young Pretender on 29 December 1746, entrusting him 'with full powers dated this day with the French court concerning our affairs' (Blaikie, 424). Steuart's second embassy also proved unsuccessful. Indeed, he had already written to the Old Pretender indicating that he had hopes of escaping the attainder and thus returning to Scotland. Sir James did avoid the attainder, but not the 'Act of Indemnity'. Reconciled to exile, he moved to Sedan in 1747 and thereafter to Angouleme, where he stayed with his family for seven years. Lord Elcho recorded that Steuart spent some 12,000 livres a year, and that he kept 'the best establishment in the area'. There was a constant run of company, as Steuart recalled, further enlivened by visits to Paris. Even so, Steuart was bored. 
The visit of the exiled 'parlement' of Paris in 1754 brought new contacts which were to change the direction of Steuart's life. From the members of the 'parlement', including Mercier de la Riviere (later a celebrated physiocrat), he procured a great deal of information as to the state of France; these meetings may have encouraged a return to more academic pursuits. It was during his stay at Angouleme that Steuart embarked upon his defence of Newton's 'Chronology', and probably upon the study of political economy. 
Steuart left Angouleme for Paris in 1754 at a time when Jacobite fortunes had all but evaporated. Even if still in sympathy with the cause, he obviously felt that he could now look to his own interest without embarrassment. Once in Paris, it was through the good offices of Mercier de la Riviere that Steuart met Montesquieu and probably Mirabeau, whose 'Friend of Man' (1756) was one of the sources which influenced the shape of Steuart's future work. Steuart was still in Paris in May 1756 but appears to have departed for Brussels soon after in order to avoid compromising his position in the event of hostilities breaking out between France and Great Britain. He stayed in Brussels until the spring of 1756, and when his wife returned from a visit to London, where she had gone to see to the inoculation of their son, and to make a further application for a pardon, the family moved to Spa. It was here that he met Mr Burrage, the British envoy to the small courts of the Rhine, before settling at Tubingen, where the family spent four happy years. In this atmosphere Steuart found little difficulty in beginning to write what became his best-known work, 'An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy', the first two books of which were completed by summer 1759. The same year also saw the publication of 'A Dissertation on the Policy of Grain', followed two years later by 'A Dissertation on the German Coin'. 
In the spring of 1758 Steuart set off on a tour through the Tyrol to Padua in search of relief from the gout which had plagued him while at Spa. His destination was Venice and it was here that he met Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. She proved to be a good friend, encouraging Sir James when he became depressed with his writing. She also tried hard to secure a pardon for him through the agency of lords Holdernesse, Barrington, and Bute. Holdernesse had instruments prepared for the king's signature which would have permitted Steuart to return to Britain, but his efforts were thwarted by George II's death in 1760. 
In the following year the then secretary of war, Lord Barrington, who had met Steuart during his foreign tour, secured a cornetcy for Sir James's son, also James (1744-1839) ['see 'Denham, Sir James Steuart], in the Royal or 1st regiment of dragoons. With the problem of his son's career solved, there was now no further reason to stay in Tubingen. As it turned out, the decision to leave Germany was to involve Sir James in his last political adventure and, indirectly, to bring about his return to Britain. Steuart moved to Rotterdam, where he spent the winter of 1761-2 while his wife travelled to London to see their son into the army and to make a further application for pardon. On her return the family went to live in Antwerp before returning to Spa for the sake of Sir James's health. But on 27 August, Steuart was arrested by the French and his house in Antwerp raided. One reason for the arrest, which was effected on neutral territory, was Steuart's well-known (and no doubt well-planned) expressions of satisfaction with the course of the Seven Years' War along with his intimate knowledge of French affairs. But a further telling motive is to be found in a subterfuge that would certainly have appealed to Sir James. 
It appears that Steuart had been caught in possession of the coded plans for the seizure of Santo Domingo (Haiti); these plans had been prepared by Mercier de la Riviere 'who had a personal pecuniary interest in an English invasion of the island and may also have realised that it would do his friend Steuart no harm in the eyes of London if he were arrested by the French' (Chamley, 'Documents', 44-6). As Paul Chamley has remarked: 'Steuart garda bien le secret' (ibid., 46). The French declined to release Steuart until after the peace of 1763. In the interval Sir James remained a prisoner, steadfastly refusing offers of employment just as he had previously refused similar offers in Germany. 
Under the impression that Lady Frances had persuaded the British ministry to intercede on his behalf, Steuart hastened to London at the end of the war, only to discover that he was still regarded as a traitor -- no minor matter in view of the fate of Archibald Cameron only eight years earlier. During this time Steuart appears to have stayed with, and to have enjoyed the protection of, his old friend and benefactor, Lord Barrington. 
However precarious his position, Steuart set off for Scotland in order to put his remaining estate (Coltness) in order. There he found time for more than agricultural improvements. During this period he worked on the fourth book of the 'Principles' and in particular on his analysis of Scottish banking practice. The 'Edinburgh Evening Courant' and the 'Scots Magazine' carried a large number of pamphlets and letters on the exchange crisis of the 1760s, especially with reference to the use of the optional clause in Scottish bank notes, and Sir James followed this literature closely. In 1764 he wrote a series of comments on two anonymous studies, the 'Memorial on Scottish Banks' and 'Thoughts Concerning Banks', which had been sent to William Mure, baron of the Scots exchequer, by the Glasgow merchants Messrs Ingram and Glassford. By March 1766 Steuart's work was sufficiently advanced to justify a journey to London to enquire about publication. Steuart was not wanting in friends to give advice and encouragement. Shortly after his arrival in London William Rouet, professor of oriental languages at Glasgow, and a cousin of Mure's, wrote: 'George Scott and David Hume have looked unto our friend's MS and are exceedingly pleased with it. I begin to entertain further views from the publication of this ingenious performance than merely a sum from a bookseller; though this last is not yet touched upon [it] will be done soon. (Mure, 2.83)' The work was completed by October and early in 1767 Steuart's 'Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy' appeared in two volumes costing 2 guineas. Again he received help from Rouet, who sent George Scott to see the editor of the 'Monthly Review' in search of a suitable commentator. They settled on 'Mr Bentley, merchant at Liverpool' who produced an extensive and often sympathetic criticism of the work. The 'Critical Review' was similarly complimentary, describing Steuart's aims as 'extensive and the execution laborious'; yet it was also aware that this was a subject in its early stages of analysis: 'so little have the principles of political economy been investigated, that the grounds he works upon require to be cleared before they can be cultivated' (23.321). Less complimentary were the responses of James Boswell who thought the book 'irregular and fanciful', while David Hume, despite his initial favourable reaction, was said to be critical of the book's final 'form and style'. 
In his defence Steuart highlighted the difficulties involved in creating a 'composition' which was the fruit of wide reading and 'many years spent in travelling' (Steuart, 'Principles', 1966, 1.4; 1998, 1.4). He wrote frequently in the first person singular, in effect involving the reader in a complex dialogue. Though this approach was criticized by Hume, it is essential that Hume's wider influence on the work is appreciated. The organizing principle of Steuart's study owed much to Hume's deployment of a historical method which enabled Sir James to conduct himself 'through the great avenues of this extensive labyrinth' (ibid., 1.29; 1.35). 
Steuart's aim was to produce a great conceptual system, linking the most interesting branches of theory and policy, such as ''population, agriculture, trade, industry, money, coin, interest, circulation, banks, exchange, public credit and taxes''. He added that: 'The principles deduced from all these topics, appear tolerably consistent; and the whole is a train of reasoning through which I have adhered to the connection of subjects as faithfully as I could. (Steuart, 'Principles', 1966, 1.7; 1998, 1.7)' Steuart's attempt to produce a systematic treatise confirms that he sought to include economics in the broad body of organized science. In fulfilling this task he clearly differentiated economics from other social disciplines and formally set out and deployed the techniques of reasoning associated with the Newtonian method in building up a body of analysis which progressively increased in complexity. 
In the 'Principles', Steuart made notable contributions to economic theory: the historical analysis of the origins of the exchange economy, where he (like Adam Smith) was influenced by David Hume; to the theory of economic development with its emphasis on the importance of interdependent sectors; to the theory of competitive price, and, most notably, to the treatment of money and banking, where he showed his appreciation of banks as a means of mobilizing resources in countries undergoing the process of institutional, as well as economic, change. But it should be recalled that the first two books of the 'Principles' had been completed in Germany by the summer of 1759; that is, prior to the dissemination of the physiocratic macro-economic model of a system using capital, later supplemented by a clear distinction between factors of production and categories of return. But despite detailed changes to the 1767 edition, most of which were incorporated in his collected 'Works' (1805), and now in the 1998 edition, Steuart did not fundamentally change his approach, perhaps because he believed that the model of 'primitive accumulation' continued to be relevant to the circumstances which he had encountered in Europe. 
While Steuart's extensive knowledge of Scotland, France, Spain, Italy, and Germany may have had some impact on his analytical strategy, it certainly influenced his attitude to economic policy. He was aware, for example, that he confronted countries which were still undergoing the effects of transition to the exchange economy and the problems of regional unemployment. There was evidence of what might be termed structural unemployment in certain areas in all the countries with which he was familiar, all requiring positive action. 
In the same way Steuart was aware of the imperfections in the markets for corn, arguing in favour of a managed market in the shape of a granary scheme. This argument, previously advanced in his 'Dissertation on the Policy of Grain', was later made use of in his 'Considerations on the Interest of the County of Lanark in Scotland' (1769), published under the pseudonym Robert Frame. Here Steuart took the specific case of a regional economy with a view to illustrating general principles, arguing strongly for support of the local infrastructure and of agriculture -- especially in view of the proposed Forth and Clyde Canal. Protection for local agricultural interests would also be a theme of his contribution to the corn law debate of the late 1770s when the Glasgow merchants argued in favour of a reduction in the import price. But Sir James failed to influence the merchants: 'I have had conversations with the Glasgow theorists. I have written to them on the same subject, to no purpose' (Steuart, 'Works', 6.379). A decade on from the publication of the 'Principles', Steuart attributed the dismissal of his proposals in part to the influence of his 'rival in fame', Adam Smith, who 'has printed in favour of free importation... my opinions have little weight, they have been long printed, little read, and less considered' (Chamley, 'Documents', 140-42). But it should be added that Steuart was not engaged in a dispute with Smith so much as with the mercantile interests which had abused his authority. 
Steuart formally dropped the assumption of a closed economy in the second book of the 'Principles'. Here he showed a clear understanding of the benefits of foreign trade to the countries engaged upon it. But the treatment is distinctive in that Steuart examined cases where trade may take place between countries with different institutional structures, manners, factor endowments, and levels of economic development, and varying rates of growth. Such perceptions suggested that economic policy should vary with the circumstances which prevailed (cf. Tortajada, 1999). 
Steuart reduced the possible variations to three: the stages of infant, foreign, and inland trade (bk 2, chap. 19). In the case of infant trade the strategy is one of protection with a view to encouraging domestic development. Where countries can effectively compete with one another, the appropriate policy is to encourage freedom of trade (including movement of gold). In the case of inland trade Steuart examined a case where relatively mature economies have lost their competitive edge. Here the appropriate policy is to protect domestic employment levels and to take such steps as may enable the economy in question to re-enter the international market. 
Steuart is likely to have found evidence in support of this perspective in contemporary Europe. Analytically he would have found a precedent in Hume's 'Political Discourses' (1752), while the identification of the stages of trade may owe much to Mirabeau's 'Friend of Man' (1756). However, it is sometimes forgotten that the analysis applied not just to particular economies but equally to regions and indeed to particular industries. The policy position which emerges is nothing if not complex and is readily open to misinterpretation. It should also be noted that Steuart consistently suggests that economic policies must always be related to specific circumstances and that he did not advocate intervention for its own sake. His general position is aptly summarized in the statement that 'the scaffolding must be taken away when the fabric is completed' (Steuart, 'Principles', 1966, lxxvi; 1998, 4.301n.). In the manner of Hume, Sir James was 'completely free from the paralysing belief that crept over the intellectual life of Europe, in practical principles that claim universal validity' (Schumpeter, 292). 
Throughout the time that the 'Principles' had been in preparation, Steuart maintained an anxious correspondence with Baron Mure and Lord Barrington. At one stage in 1764 he reminded Mure that 'time runs away', indicating that on the advice of Barrington he was to postpone a visit to London on the grounds that it was unlikely to be useful. 
The task of securing Steuart's status proved to be unexpectedly difficult. The earl of Buchan spent much of the summer of 1766 trying to interest William Pitt in the case, and towards the end of the year it seemed that progress was being made. On 11 December Barrington was able to inform Sir James that the duchess of Hamilton had persuaded General Conway to present a petition, and that the lord chief justice was favourably disposed. The application, signed by Conway, was drawn up by 1 January 1767. The request for pardon was duly referred to Thomas Miller, the lord justice clerk, who produced a report dated 19 February 1767. Miller may not have been truly convinced by Steuart's case, and in recommending clemency placed more emphasis on the fact that there had been a 'happy change in the sentiments... of those who had so long remained disaffected to your Royal House'. In the circumstances Steuart may have been regarded as harmless, and it is interesting to note that Miller should have concluded that the facts of Steuart's association with the Jacobite cause 'remain true'. 
Steuart's case, quite understandably, was officially viewed with extreme caution. The formalities were completed only in December 1771 when the attorney-general, given the opinion of the lord justice clerk, recommended a pardon rather than a 'noli prosequi' as 'the clearest and fullest indemnity to Sir James Steuart'. Steuart was presented at court on 20 March 1772 by his 'never failing friend, Lord Barrington'. On this occasion George III enquired of Barrington why Sir James had departed from the political opinions of his ancestors. Barrington replied: 'from Sir James's information, that such had been the personal civilities which he had received from Charles Stuart at Rome, he thought himself obliged to return them at Edinburgh. The king said, 'he did not like him the worse for his motive'. (Steuart, 'Works', 6.380)' 

Following his pardon it is possible that Steuart hoped to embark on a new career: that of government adviser. During a visit to London in 1772 this ambition was partially fulfilled. Lord Barrington brought Steuart's name to the attention of the East India Company, as a result of which Steuart was invited to comment upon the currency problems in Bengal. He stayed in London for the three months (May to July) it needed to prepare the report, which falls into three parts: on coinage, the causes of the scarcity of coin, and methods for expanding paper credit. The essay was published in 1772 as the 'Principles of Money Applied to the State of the Coin in Bengal'. 
After a further visit to Lord Barrington, Steuart arrived back at Coltness late in September. He wrote to thank the East India directors for a diamond ring, but soon turned his attention elsewhere. He was approached for advice on the proposed reform of the British coinage, and later completed an additional chapter for the 'Principles of Political Oeconomy', 'The state of the British coin in 1773'. By December he had drafted a brief treatment of the 'State of the Revenue of Scotland'. It was in this year that Sir James changed his name to Steuart Denham as a condition of a bequest from a relative, Archibald Denham. 
In 1775 Steuart Denham wrote his 'Observations' on a new bill designed to alter the electoral qualifications for freeholders and completed a 'Plan for Introducing the Uniformity of Weights and Measures'. The beginning of 1776 found him writing to Paris to secure copies of the 'Encyclopedie' and Turgot's 'Edicts'. This was also the year of the publication of Adam Smith's 'An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations'. Steuart Denham must have heard of its coming appearance from Hume and, as an established authority, must have been awaiting the event with interest. However, Sir James can have derived scant pleasure from the 'Wealth of Nations', which did not accord him, then one of the most prolific economists of the time, so much as a mention. Smith's decision was deliberate, but difficult to assess. In a letter to William Pulteney dated 3 September 1772 he noted that 'without once mentioning the book ['Principles'], I flatter myself that every false principle in it, will meet with a clear and distinct confutation in mine'. On the other hand, Smith's biographer John Rae recorded contemporary evidence which suggested that Smith understood Sir James's system better from his conversation than from his volumes (Rae, 61). 
After 1777 Steuart Denham began to turn away from political economy to the study of philosophy and theology. In 1778 he suffered a serious illness. Even so, in the following year, he wrote his 'Critical Remarks' on Mirabaud's 'System of Nature', and followed this with the essay 'The Motive for Obedience to the Laws of God'. Sir James also found time to write an article on the distillery industry, which was published in the 'Edinburgh Evening Courant' on 4 October 1779. But ill health had taken its toll. Before the winter was over he was suffering from a giddiness in the head as well as gout. Under the care of Sir Stuart Thriepland of Fingask, an old friend, relative, and fellow Jacobite, he made a partial recovery, sufficient at least to allow a short summer tour in 1780. During September and most of October Sir James was free of illness. He recovered much of his old energy and, during these months, maintained an active correspondence with Sir George Colebrook's daughter, who was then contemplating residence abroad. Steuart Denham also completed a long account of French finances and sources of revenue for Sir George Colebrook. But once he had finished this task, he was obliged to travel to Edinburgh for medical attention. It was here, according to the 'Annual Review', that Steuart Denham died at 2 p.m. on 26 November 1780. He was interred in the family vault at Cambusnethan, near Wishaw in the county of Lanark. The vault is now a ruin. 
Steuart's 'Collected Works' (published in 1805) was prepared by George Chalmers, with the assistance of Sir James's son, now General Sir James Steuart, who also erected a monument to his father's memory in Westminster Abbey. In Britain this edition did much to confirm Steuart Denham's reputation as Eurocentric in perspective and as an advocate of strong government in economic affairs. Early reviewers, while quick to praise the scholarship of this 'philosophical genius', were almost universally adverse to Steuart's interventionism. The 'Monthly Review' had gone so far as to accuse him of imbibing ''prejudices abroad no means consistent with the present state of' 'England'', and the genius of Englishmen''. Sir James replied with some asperity: 'Can it be supposed that during an absence of near twenty years, I should in my studies, have all the while been modelling my speculations upon the standard of English notions?' (Steuart, 'Principles', 1966, 1.4; 1998, 1.5). Later he recognized the importance of the point as it applied to an English audience. In a note to the corrected copy he wrote: 'I frankly acknowledge that I have, perhaps, on some occasions, been more apt to consider myself in the light of a political matron, than that of a jovial and free born Englishman' (Steuart, 'Principles', 1998, 4.301n.). 
By contrast, as in the immediate aftermath of its publication, the later influence of Steuart's greatest work, 'An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy', proved to be most considerable on the continent. During the 1770s the text was translated into German (twice), and into French in 1789. One authority has noted that 'until the final decade of the eighteenth century, Sir James Steuart's 'Inquiry' was better known and more frequently cited than Smith's 'Wealth of Nations'' (Tribe, 133). The admiration of the members of the nineteenth-century German historical school is now well known. Steuart's historical and cosmopolitan perspective later attracted the well-documented attention of Marx, while it is known that Hegel spent some three months studying one of the German editions. But perhaps the most intriguing link is with North America. The Dublin edition of the 'Inquiry' (1770) was widely circulated in the colonies. The book also attracted the attention of Alexander Hamilton, whose protectionist position was adopted with a view to counterbalancing the competitive advantages of the British economy in the years following the treaty of Paris (1783). Ironically, Steuart Denham had written, in the late 1770s, a series of letters on the American question in which he argued in favour of economic sanctions rather than military force. But in the last analysis he (like Smith) supported freedom of trade with the colonies irrespective of the political outcome. 


@@@@@


doc= 7479


Denham, Sir James Steuart, of Coltness and Westshield, eighth baronet and fourth baronet (1744-1839), army officer, was born James Steuart on 7 August 1744 at Goodtrees, near Edinburgh, only son of Sir James Steuart of Coltness and Westshield, seventh and third baronet (1713-1780), political economist, and his wife, Lady Frances (1722-1789), daughter of James Wemyss, fifth earl of Wemyss. A year after his birth James was left in the care of relatives on his father's political exile, but he later joined his parents in Angouleme, France. On the outbreak of war between Britain and France in 1755 the family removed itself from Paris, first to Flanders and then, in 1757, to Tubingen in Wurttemberg, where young James enrolled in the university. He studied there until 1761, when, through the good offices of the secretary at war, Lord Barrington, he was given a cornetcy in the 1st dragoons; he subsequently served with his regiment throughout the Westphalian campaign of 1762. On 13 January 1763 he purchased a captaincy in the 105th foot, went on half pay when his regiment was reduced a year later, and then spent two years travelling on the continent until the opportunity arose for him to purchase a troop in the 5th dragoons. Posted in consequence to Ireland, in 1769 he was appointed aide-de-camp to the lord lieutenant, Lord Townshend, and in 1772 he married Alicia (died 1840), daughter of William Blacker of Carrick, co. Antrim. The same year he purchased a majority in the 13th dragoons and, in 1776, after a brief spell with the 1st Irish horse, returned to the 13th dragoons as lieutenant-colonel. 
Steuart succeeded to his father's titles and the seat at Coltness, Lanarkshire, in 1780 and took the additional surname of Denham, which his father had adopted upon inheriting Westshield (also in Lanarkshire) four years earlier. Promoted brevet-colonel (1782), he entered parliament as member for Lanark county in 1784, a seat which he held for the next eighteen years. In 1788, while stationed in Dublin, he was entrusted with improving the training of the cavalry in Ireland; the changes which he introduced to its system of field movements was much commended by headquarters. However, neither this achievement nor the support that he gave to the Pitt administration in parliament sufficed to win him the colonelcy of a regiment of foot, something which he earnestly sought: he was given instead the colonelcy of the 12th dragoons (9 November 1791). In October 1793 he was promoted major-general, which had the effect of making him too senior to join the siege at Toulon, where he had previously been ordered. He was also disappointed when, in 1794, having been given command of the cavalry intended to accompany Lord Cornwallis's mission to the Prussian army, the enterprise was cancelled. That September he accepted Henry Dundas's offer of a post on the staff in Scotland with a brief to superintend the fencible cavalry. 
In March 1798, as a newly promoted lieutenant-general, Steuart Denham arrived to take command of Ireland's southern district. Major-General John Moore found him to be suffering from a nervous complaint 'which... completely unfitted him for business' ('Diary', 1.275). None the less, Steuart Denham persisted and, in the months before the outbreak of the Irish rising, pursued a conciliatory policy. During the Wexford rising he took credit to himself for his subordinate General Henry Johnson's victory at New Ross (5 June 1798). But within a fortnight he received an official reprimand from the commander-in-chief, General Lake, for failing -- until the order was repeated -- to send troops from Munster against Wexford from the west. In response Steuart Denham claimed that he had possessed discretionary powers to withhold the troops, and resigned from the Irish staff in protest a month later. He received no further employment. 
Steuart Denham was promoted full general in 1803 and exchanged the colonelcy of the 12th dragoons for that of the 2nd dragoons on 12 January 1815. He was made a knight grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order in 1830. Although never rich, Steuart Denham expended his fortune on hospitality and improvements to the neighbourhood, 'leaving to his latter days a pittance barely adequate for comfortable subsistence, and that, ere his death, his heritage had passed to strangers' (Dennistoun, 390). He died at Cheltenham on 12 August 1839; his baronetcies fell to a cousin. 


@@@@@


doc= 7480


Denham, Sir John (1559-1639), judge, was the second son of William Denham (died 1583), a goldsmith of St Matthew's, Friday Street, London, and later of Thorpe, Surrey, and his wife, Joan (died 1589), perhaps a Prideaux. His sister Catherine (died 1626) was the mother of the puritan exemplar Joan Drake. Nothing is known of his schooling; he entered Lincoln's Inn from Furnival's Inn in August 1579. Called to the bar on 29 June 1587, Denham was appointed with two fellow barristers in 1602 to refurbish the house library (which might link him with the John Denham who owned a fifteenth-century English verse life of St Cuthbert, now BL, Egerton MS 3309). Promoted bencher the following year, in 1604 he purchased the mansion of Imworth at Egham, Surrey, which he subsequently rebuilt. Having delivered his reading in Lent 1607 on the statute 31 Eliz. c. 6 (elections to colleges), he was created serjeant in May 1609 (naming the earl of Salisbury and Lord Chancellor Ellesmere as his patrons) and also knighted, preparatory to being sworn chief baron of the exchequer in Ireland. 
In 1612 Denham succeeded Humphrey Winch, another Lincoln's Inn lawyer, as chief justice of Ireland. Following the death that year of his first wife, Cicely Kellefet ('nee' Farr), who herself had been twice widowed before she married Denham in 1596, he married Eleanor Moore, the daughter of an Irish peer, about 1614; she was the mother of his first acknowledged child, the future poet John Denham, at Dublin in 1614 or 1615. After serving as one of the lords justices during a vacancy in the viceroyalty from November 1615 until July 1616 Denham returned to England early the next year, and was appointed baron of the exchequer in May 1617. Eleanor died in childbed two years later; a monument erected by her husband in Egham church depicts her with a 'beautiful and ingenious visage' (Aubrey, 'Natural History', 3.157). 
Denham remained on the judicial bench for another twenty years. Commended by the godly divine Richard Bernard as 'reverend and religious' (Bernard, sig. A4), Denham was nevertheless appointed to the ecclesiastical high commission in 1633, although he also joined Chief Justice Richardson in a celebrated attempt to suppress Somerset church ales. His written decision against the crown in the ship money trial was delivered shortly before his much anticipated death, which occurred at Egham on 6 January 1639. He was buried at Egham on 10 January. A long-time colleague memorialized Denham as 'an able, prudent, and good judge, of great integrity and honesty... who died with [the] good applause of all good and pious men' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 113), but in 1637 a barrister characterized him as 'the old absurd Baron' (Bulstrode Whitelock to Edward Heath, BL, Add. MS 37343, fol. 147). His wealthy estate included lands in Essex, Suffolk, and Surrey, '2000 or 1500 pounds in ready money, two houses well furnished, and much plate' ('Brief Lives', 182). 


@@@@@


doc= 7481


Denham, Sir John (1614/15-1669), poet and courtier, was probably born in Dublin, the only son of Sir John Denham (1559-1639), judge, and his second wife, Eleanor (died 1619), daughter of Gerald, or Garret, Moore, Baron Moore of Mellefont and first Viscount Drogheda. His father, some fifty-six years his senior, was then serving as chief justice of the king's bench in Ireland. In October 1619, two years after their return to England, Lady Denham died after giving birth to a stillborn daughter and was buried at Egham in Surrey. The puritan exemplar Joan Drake, was a cousin. 
On 26 April 1631 Denham was enrolled at Lincoln's Inn and on 18 November following matriculated as fellow-commoner from Trinity College, Oxford, aged sixteen; his autograph subscription describes him as a son of Sir John of Little Horseley, Essex. John Aubrey, to whom is owed most of the surviving anecdotal information about Denham, was told by his college contemporary Josias Howe that he had been 'the dreamingst young fellow; he never expected such things from him as he haz left the world' ('Brief Lives', 1.217). Denham's great vice was to 'game extremely' (ibid.), and he was rebuked in chapel by the president of the college, Ralph Kettel, for not repaying a loan from the recorder of Oxford. Wood asserts that he performed the exercises for the BA, but did not graduate. On 25 June 1634 he married, at St Bride's, Fleet Street, Anne (died 'c'.1647), one of the two daughters of Don Cotton and coheir of her grandfather Ralph Cotton of Whittington, Gloucestershire. She brought with her the Buckinghamshire manor of Horsenden. They had at least two sons and two daughters. 
Denham then applied himself to the study of common law. Judge Wadham Windham, his senior by three years at Lincoln's Inn, recalled that he was 'as good a student as any in the house', though 'not suspected to be a witt' ('Brief Lives', 1.217). A drunken prank of painting out all the signs between Temple Bar and Charing Cross, which 'cost him... some moneys', was recalled by 'R. Estcott, esq., that carried the inke-pott' (ibid.). Aubrey records that parental disapproval of his addiction to cards and dice led him to write the brief tract that was printed anonymously in April 1651 as 'The anatomy of play: written by a worthy and learned gent.: dedicated to his father, to shew his detestation of it'. His earliest known literary venture is the translation of books 2-6 of Virgil's 'Aeneid' that he made in 1636, which was not published until 1656. 
Denham and his family lived with his father at the manor house of Imworth in Egham. The burial of one of Denham's sons in Egham on 28 August 1638 was followed by the death of Denham's father on 6 January 1639. On 29 January that year Denham was called to the bar. Despite the income from eight inherited estates in Surrey, Essex, and Suffolk worth upwards of $10,000, in less than twelve months he had run up gambling debts of $4500 and over the next four years sold or mortgaged several properties. 
In March 1641 Denham was called upon as a witness for the defence of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, on whose death in May he wrote, but did not publish, an elegy. His true debut as poet and dramatist came about on the very eve of civil war with 'Cooper's Hill' and 'The sophy', issued anonymously early in August 1642, of which the poet Edmund Waller famously remarked that he 'broke-out like the Irish Rebellion -- threescore thousand strong before anybody was aware' ('Brief Lives', 1.217). 'The sophy', a verse tragedy based on events in Persia under the tyrannic Shah Abbas I (died 1628), was advertised as having been acted 'with success' ('DNB') by the king's company at Blackfriars. In 'Cooper's Hill' the prospect from a Thames-side viewpoint at Egham is made the occasion for historical and moral reflections on kingship at a critical juncture in English history. The poem, which shows the influence of some then unprinted verses by Waller, was praised by fellow poet Robert Herrick and pronounced by John Dryden 'the exact Standard of good Writing' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.825). As an early instance of the topographical reflective genre and in its development of the closed couplet it looks forward to the Augustans. It was progressively revised, translated into Latin in 1667 by Moses Pengry, and long remained one of the most famous poems in the language. 
On 10 November 1642 Denham, then sheriff of Surrey, briefly took possession of Farnham Castle for the king, following withdrawal of the parliamentary garrison under the aged poet George Wither. The removal of goods allegedly worth $2000 from Wither's house by members of the occupying force led the older poet to spend fifteen years seeking reparation from the younger. Farnham surrendered after three weeks and Denham was sent prisoner to London. On his release in March 1643 he published 'Mr Hampdens speech occasioned upon the Londoners petition for peace', a satire in rhyming verse, and, leaving his wife about to give birth at Imworth, he joined the cavaliers in Oxford where he brought out a new edition of 'Cooper's Hill' and wrote anti-parliamentary ballads. Articles of peace drawn up in November 1644 stipulated his removal from the royal counsels. While his creditors continued to pursue him and parliament early in 1645 ordered the sale of his goods he persisted in his old habits, losing $200 at 'New-cutt' in a single night ('Brief Lives', 1.218). Taken in January 1646 at the surrender of Dartmouth, on the journey to London he managed to impress the Independent minister Hugh Peters. The Commons exchanged him for a prisoner held at Exeter, but although discharged from the king's bench he was briefly re-arrested for debt. 
Following his release in May 1646 Denham retired to the continent and spent some months in Paris with Henrietta Maria, who sent him to attend Charles I in captivity: the Lords' pass for him to return to compound for his estates is dated 24 March 1647. At some time before May his wife died, and in July through the influence of Peters he obtained access to the king at Caversham. Charles, who had seen his commendatory verses in Richard Fanshawe's 'Il pastor fido', urged him to give up poetry now that he was 'thought fit for more serious Employments' (J. Denham, 'Epistle', 'Poems', 1668). Later in the month Denham was one of the eleven-member council convened at Woburn to answer the army's proposals, but when the king fled from Hampton Court in November he had orders to remain in London as agent for royal correspondence, being 'furnisht with nine several Cyphers in order to it' (Kelliher, 5). Then and for some years afterwards he figured in royalist documents under various pseudonyms. In December he delivered his petition to compound, and parliament left him relatively unmolested in London until about August 1648, when his role was 'discovered by their knowledge of Mr. 'Cowleys' hand' (J. Denham, 'Epistle', 'Poems', 1668). He fled to The Hague to join the prince of Wales, who soon afterwards appointed him to negotiate for the aid of the Scots. In the spring he was acting as courier between Charles, now king, and his mother: Henrietta Maria's signed instructions to him of 10 May 1649 are copied in Abraham Cowley's hand. In June he contributed an elegy to the 'Lachrymae musarum' published in England on the death of Lord Hastings, and at the Louvre until mid-September wrote verses 'to divert and put off the evil hours of our banishment' (ibid.) on subjects proposed by Charles. 
In April 1650 one fifth of Denham's estate was ordered to be paid to Colonel John Fielder as guardian to his two daughters, Elizabeth and Anne, and son John, who is last heard of as enrolling at Wadham College, Oxford, in July 1654. About June Denham left the exiled court at Breda with William, Lord Crofts, on a mission to raise money from Charles's Scottish subjects resident in Poland. By their return in autumn 1651 they had collected $10,000; disposal of the money was discussed in two letters that Denham wrote to Lady Isabella Thynne at Paris that winter. He continued to lose at play, wrote ribald ballads on his fellow exiles Thomas Killigrew and Sir John Mennes, and may have been cured of disfiguring venereal disease. Lack of money drove him to return to England in March 1653 to face a committee of the council of state, a member of which, Philip Herbert, sixth earl of Pembroke, entertained him over the year that followed in London and at Wilton, where Aubrey first made his acquaintance. By September his new found favour with the regime was known in Paris, where a spy of Thurloe's could write of him as 'the state's poet' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 1.471). In April appeared 'Certain verses written by severall of the authors friends', a series of mock commendatory poems on Sir William Davenant's 'Gondibert' (1651), of which eight were the unsigned work of Denham. Along with a new version of 'Cooper's Hill' (1653, 1655), emended to suit the changing political climate, he published a revised translation of book 2 of 'The Aeneid' as 'The Destruction of Troy' (February 1656), claiming it to represent a 'new way of translating this Author' (J. Denham, preface, 'Destruction of Troy', 1656) in the non-literal manner which he had praised in Fanshawe, and according to Aubrey wrote and then burnt a burlesque of Virgil. On 9 June 1655 he was banished from London on suspicion of conspiracy, but three days later John Evelyn was asked by his friend Thomas Henshaw to endorse Denham as 'the fittest man... in England' for a post in the household of the earl of Northumberland (BL, Add. MS 78311). In October 1656 Denham and his son called on Sir Richard Browne in Paris and in June 1657 he was at Brussels with the duke of Buckingham. The following March he obtained a licence from Cromwell to live at Bury St Edmunds, and on 24 September was granted a passport to go abroad with Pembroke's heir, William, Lord Herbert. By mid-November he was attempting to mediate between Charles II and the new protector, later joining Aubrey de Vere, earl of Oxford, in opposition to Lord Mordaunt's attempts to promote conspiracy. In May 1659 he published in broadside a scurrilous anti-Quaker ballad later reprinted as 'News from Colchester'. Although Sir Edward Hyde's lingering suspicion of his connections with Henrietta Maria's party still stood in the way of complete trust, Denham's correspondence with the king early the next year shows him trying to form a party to restore the king, and he was still negotiating with parliamentary factions on the eve of the Restoration. 
In May 1660 Denham was confirmed in the post, which had been spontaneously offered to him at St Germain in 1649, of surveyor of works, despite a petition from John Webb, nephew and assistant of the previous holder, Inigo Jones. It thus fell to him in April 1661 to make the physical arrangements for the coronation, at which he figured among sixty-eight new knights of the Bath. In the same month Pembroke's interest secured him a seat for the borough of Old Sarum in the new parliament, and on 20 May 1663 he was elected as one of the first fellows of the Royal Society. As surveyor he lacked the practical skills of an architect: in the dedication to Denham of his translation of Freart's 'Parallel' (1664) Evelyn, whose advice on the siting of the new Greenwich Palace he rejected, praised him merely for paving the streets of Holborn. Yet he proved an active and competent administrator and left Webb to superintend building work on the royal palaces. In March 1661 he leased land adjoining his office in Scotland Yard for a building of twenty rooms that he let out for rent, and in 1665 built Burlington House. Aubrey reports that he 'gott seaven thousand pounds, as Sir Christopher Wren told me of, to his owne knowledge' ('Brief Lives', 2.219) on an official salary of only $382. In the Commons, which he attended regularly over eleven sessions as an adherent of the court party, he sat on sixty-two committees, though none of any political importance. Wither's committal to the Tower in April 1662 for publishing a seditious pamphlet may have given rise to the story of Denham's seeking his pardon on the ground that while Wither lived he himself 'should not be the worst poet in England' (ibid., 221). 
On 25 May 1665 in Westminster Abbey Denham, then fifty years of age, 'ancient and limping' ('Brief Lives', 1.219), married Margaret (1641/2-1667), daughter of Sir William Brooke, and a beauty some twenty-seven years his junior. Six days earlier, as coheir of the last lord Cobham, she had been granted the precedency due to a baron's daughter. From summer, when the great plague struck London, to October, when parliament convened at Oxford, the couple may have been absent from the capital. Early in the following March Denham's lameness led him to be summoned by the king to test the healing abilities of Valentine Greatrakes. Soon after, while in the west country to inspect the Portland stone quarries, he fell dangerously ill; Lady Denham left London on 7 April to be with him. By the 14th it was said that the 'great master of wit and reason, is fallen quite mad, and he who despised religion, now in his distraction raves of nothing else' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 3.217). Rumour attributed his derangement to jealousy at his wife's very public affair with the duke of York, whom Pepys on 10 June reported to be already 'wholly given up' to it (Pepys, 7.158), visiting her with his retinue at Scotland Yard. By 22 September Denham had resumed his official duties, and though said not to have 'recovered his former understanding in any measure, yet spoke very good sense' in debate on 13 October (Bodl. Oxf., Carte MS 35, fol. 101). In his mock 'Panegyric upon Sir John Denham's recovery from his madness', Samuel Butler savagely attacked him for literary plagiarism, peculation, gambling, and faults of character. By November, when the duke's passion had abated, Lady Denham in turn was sick. Pepys noted that she 'says, and everybody else discourses, that she is poysoned' (Pepys, 7.365), while gossip fastened on a cup of 'mortal Chocolate' (A. Marvell, 'Last Instructions', 1667, 1.342) administered through the duchess of York's agency ('CSP dom.', '1666-7', 262-3). After rallying awhile Lady Denham died on 6 January 1667, when an autopsy performed by her own wish found her free from venom ('A Collection of the State Letters of... Roger Boyle, First Earl of Orrery', ed. T. Morrice, 1742, 219), and, as Pepys sceptically added, still a virgin. She was buried three days later in Westminster Abbey. No credence need be given to the fanciful account in Anthony Hamilton's 'Memoirs of the comte de Grammont' (1713) or to the scurrilous story preserved by Oldys that Denham contracted syphilis in order to pass it on to the duke. 
In September 1667 it was reported that like his friend and fellow courtier Edmund Waller, 'poor Sir John Denham is fallen to the ladies also. He is at many of the meetings at dinner, talks more than ever he did, and is extremely pleased with those that seem willing to hear him' (W. Temple, 'The Works of Sir William Temple', new edn, 4 vols., 1814, 1.459). When the Commons reconvened in October, besides allegedly proclaiming the merits of the newly published 'Paradise Lost' there, Denham opposed the bill for further penalties on recusants by citing a tale of Boccaccio, and on 7 November, during the attack on the lord chancellor, Clarendon, made 'a most rational and excellent speech' ('Diary of John Milward', 104-5, 116). Late in the year appeared a pamphlet entitled 'Directions to a painter... being the last works of Sir John Denham'. This included four pieces in the advice-to-a-painter mode recently introduced by Waller. Denham's authorship of the 'Second advice' ('c'.June 1666), an attack on the conduct of the Second Anglo-Dutch War that alluded in passing to his wife's affair, was strenuously denied in his friend Christopher Wase's poem 'Divination', and he is not nowadays thought to have had a hand in any of them. His pen, however, had not been idle. By the time that he registered his elegy on Cowley, a mere twelve days after the latter's funeral on 3 August 1667, plans for a collected edition of his poems were already forming. The project did not come to fruition until the following February, a month in which the court witnessed a sumptuous performance of Corneille's 'Horace' in a translation by Katherine Phillips that Denham had been persuaded to complete. In 'Poems and Translations' (1668), which comprised twenty-five pieces, fourteen of them printed for the first time, he claimed that, true to his promise to Charles I, he had not taken up writing poetry until the previous summer at 'the Wells', instancing his translation of two fifteenth-century Latin moralizing poems. These, with another didactic piece, 'The progress of learning', and a revised version of 'The sophy' conclude the incomplete and oddly haphazard collection that remained the basis for all editions until that of T. H. Banks in 1928, revised in 1969. Denham's own copy incorporates autograph texts of an elegy on Davenant's death on 7 April 1668, along with eleven satires of which eight had been printed anonymously in the 'Gondibert' volume. In the same year his 'Version of the Psalms of David', unprinted until 1714, came to the notice of Samuel Woodford, a former contemporary of Denham's son at Wadham. The final months of his life saw the publication of his 'Cato Major of old age' (1669), a loose verse translation of Cicero's 'De senectute', while some mock commendatory verses appeared in Edward Howard's 'British princes' in Easter term. A century later Johnson summed him up as, by virtue of 'Cooper's Hill', one of the founding fathers of English poetry, commenting on his talent for 'grave burlesque' and reflective poetry (Johnson). 
Denham's last official act, on 6 March 1669, was to ensure the appointment of Wren as his successor in the surveyorship. He died in Scotland Yard on 19 March and was buried four days later among the poets in the abbey, 'at night and without pomp' (BL, Add. MS 36988, fol. 91). His passing was strangely unlamented, the sole known elegy, by Wase, surviving only in manuscript. Aubrey described him as 'of the tallest' but slightly bent at the shoulders, not very robust, with a stalking gait and piercing grey eyes that 'look't into your very thoughts' ('Brief Lives', 1.220). His will, dated 13 March 1669, affirmed his Anglican faith and named as one of its overseers Sir John Birkenhead, the 'J. B.' of the address printed in the 1655 edition of 'Cooper's Hill'. The will was proved on 9 May by his unmarried daughter Elizabeth, to whom he left the lease of Scotland Yard, worth about $440 a year, from which sums were to be set aside for the education of his eldest grandson, John Morley (died 1683), child of his daughter Anne and her husband Sir William Morley. To the new St Paul's he donated $100 and all the fees that he had received for rebuilding the old cathedral before the fire. Other grandchildren also received bequests, but all dying without issue his line became extinct. An inventory taken on 24 June records, besides almost $1000 owing to his estate, household goods and money estimated at $382 and 'bookes valued at $5-0-0'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7482


Denham, Michael Aislabie (1800/01-1859), collector of folklore, was a native of Bowes, Yorkshire, who worked at Hull in the early part of his life and ultimately settled as a general merchant at Piercebridge, near Gainford, co. Durham, where he was a member of the Society of Friends. 
From 1825 Denham industriously collected local proverbial lore, beginning with 'A collection of proverbs and popular sayings relating to the seasons, the weather, and agricultural pursuits, gathered chiefly from oral tradition' (1846), printed by the Percy Society. Other folklore compilations included 'Cumberland Rhymes, Proverbs, and Sayings' (published in four parts, the last in 1854); 'Folklore of the North' (six parts, the last in 1856), a similar work relating to Westmorland (two parts, 1858); and 'Folklore, or, A collection of local rhymes, proverbs, sayings, prophecies, slogans, &c., relating to Northumberland, Newcastle-on-Tyne, and Berwick-on-Tweed' (1858). From 1849 to about 1854 twenty 'Minor Tracts on Folklore' were published; a distinctive volume was 'The Slogans, and War and Gathering Cries of the North of England' (1850, 1851). Denham listed his works in 'A Classified Catalogue of the Antiquarian Tomes, Tracts, and Trifles' (1859). He died at Piercebridge on 10 September 1859, aged fifty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 7483


Denholm, James (1772-1818), topographer and painter, was born in Glasgow and educated at Glasgow Academy. He was taught drawing and geography and became a painter of miniatures and landscapes. He made his publishing debut in 1797, with 'An Historical and Topographical Description of the City of Glasgow'. An enlarged edition, including 'a sketch of a tour to Loch Lomond and the falls of the Clyde', appeared in 1798 and a third edition followed in 1804, with 'a sketch of a tour of the principal Scotch and English lakes' appended. The 'Sketch' was also published separately in the same year. 
In 1803 Denholm became a member of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow, founded in 1802; he was president from 1811 to 1814. He was also a member of the Philotechnical Society of Glasgow and the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. Denholm was married with children; he died in Glasgow on 20 April 1818. Although now fallen into obscurity, his artistic work was valued by his contemporaries. Compilers of nineteenth-century local histories and guidebooks paid him the compliment of plundering his 'Description'; in 'Glasgow, Past and Present' (2nd edn, 1884) he was described as 'one of the most interesting and able of our local chroniclers' (Pagan and Robertson, 1.62). 


@@@@@


doc= 7484


Denis, Sir Peter, baronet (c.1713-1778), naval officer, was born at Chester, the eleventh of twelve children of Revd Jacob Denis, or Dennis as he was known in England ('b'. 'c'.1667, died before 1746), a Huguenot who had fled from France after the revocation of the edict of Nantes, and Martha Leach ('c'.1669-1746), originally from Manchester. His father became a naval chaplain in 1718, and Peter, who retained the surname Denis, entered the navy as chaplain's servant to his father on 9 June 1724 in the 'Success' (Captain Isaac Townshend), succeeding Robert Denis, probably a brother, who seems later to have become a purser. In 1728 he entered the 'Tartar' as able seaman and became midshipman ordinary and then midshipman. After spells in the 'York', he became mate in the 'Hound', but he left her 'for preferment' in May 1734. Although he passed for lieutenant on 16 October 1734 he next appears only in 1739 when appointed lieutenant to the 'Centurion' and then the 'Wager', both ships being in the squadron dispatched under George Anson against Spanish possessions in South America. Anson brought Denis back to the 'Centurion', where he proved a useful officer, his activities including detached services. As with most of the 'Centurion''s officers, he was promoted soon after his return, becoming captain on 9 February 1745 at a time when Anson was called to the Board of Admiralty; Denis also became Anson's political follower. 
In 1746 Denis commanded the 'Windsor' (60 guns) and in 1747 his old ship, the 'Centurion', with a reduced armament of 50 guns. In her he took part in Anson's action with De la Jonquiere, and afterwards carried home Anson's dispatches. In the autumn he joined the fleet under Rear-Admiral Edward Hawke, but not until after the defeat of L'Etenduere. On 2 September 1750 he married Elizabeth ('c'.1721-1765), illegitimate daughter of John James Heidegger; they had no children. In 1754 he was elected MP for the borough of Hedon in Yorkshire, but he was to attend only rarely. Early in the following year he was appointed to command the 'Medway' (60 guns). In her he continued on the home station during 1756, and he sat as a member of the court martial which tried and condemned Admiral John Byng. In 1757 he had command of the 'Namur' (90 guns) which formed part of the fleet under Hawke in the unsuccessful expedition against Rochefort, Denis being one of those appointed to survey the coast. In 1758 he commanded the 'Dorsetshire' (70 guns), in which he captured, after a sharp action, the French ship 'Raisonnable' (64 guns) on 19 April, and the following year shared in the great victory in Quiberon Bay, the 'Dorsetshire' being the first to engage. In March 1760 he was moved to the 'Thunderer', and in August 1761 he commanded the yacht 'Charlotte' as flag-captain to Lord Anson, on the voyage which took to England George III's bride, Princess Charlotte of Mecklenburg. He continued to command the yacht until 18 October 1770, when he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, having been made a baronet on 19 September 1767. In the spring of 1771 he was commander-in-chief of the 'Medway', and in the summer he went out to the Mediterranean, with his flag in the 'Trident'. His command there was uneventful. After his return he was advanced to vice-admiral of the blue on 31 March 1775. Sir Peter lived with his wife in Queen Square, London, and later at Valence, near Westerham. Following Elizabeth's death on 30 December 1765 he moved to Maze Hill House, Greenwich. He died vice-admiral of the red on 12 June 1778 at his Greenwich home. At the time of his death Denis also had a house in Percy Street, London, and land in Romney Marsh. His will shows him to have had considerable means -- he made bequests of $12,600, to numerous friends and also to many charities, as well as his property, much of which he left to his sister Anne, and he had shares in the Pantheon and the opera house in London and the public assembly rooms, Bath. Unfortunately nothing comes through of his character, though he was clearly a competent commander. 


@@@@@


doc= 7485


Denison, Albert, first Baron Londesborough (1805-1860), connoisseur of the arts and politician, was born Albert Conyngham at 8 Stanhope Street, Piccadilly, London, on 21 October 1805, the third son of Henry Conyngham, first Marquess Conyngham (1766-1832), and his wife, Elizabeth Conyngham (1769-1861), eldest daughter of Joseph Denison, banker, of St Mary Axe, London; later rumours that he was a natural son of George IV appear to be unfounded. He was educated at Eton College and in 1820 was gazetted a half-pay cornet in the (disbanded) 22nd dragoons. He served in the Horse Guards in 1823-4, but resigned and joined the diplomatic service as attache at Berlin, May 1824, and at Vienna from May 1825, then was secretary of legation at Florence, February 1828, and secretary at Berlin, January 1829 to June 1831. He was created KCH (civil) in August 1829. He sat as the MP (Liberal) for Canterbury 1835-1841 and 1847-50, but on 4 March 1850 was created Baron Londesborough, in the East Riding of Yorkshire. On 4 September 1849 he had taken the sole name of Denison, in lieu of that of Conyngham, to comply with the will of his uncle the banker and MP William Joseph Denison, whose enormous wealth he inherited. He acquired estates in Yorkshire at Selby (bought from the Hon. Mrs E. R. Petre), Londesborough near Market Weighton (bought from George Hudson MP), and Grimston Park, near Tadcaster (bought from Lord Howden), and he owned over 60,000 acres, producing an income of about $100,000 per annum. 
Londesborough was an enthusiastic antiquary, and was elected FSA on 26 March 1840 and FRS on 13 June 1850. He became first president of the British Archaeological Association in 1843 but resigned in 1849 and later became a vice-president of the Archaeological Institute and president of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society in 1855. He served also as president of the Numismatic Society and was a vice-president of the British Association at its Hull meeting in 1853. He took an active role in tumular excavations, in Kent and the East Riding, for example those near Driffield, which he reported in the 'Archaeologia' in 1852; and he frequently displayed examples from his extensive collections to fellow enthusiasts at the antiquaries' meetings and at special receptions. His collections of armour, plate, and other objects (including John Dee's famous mirror, French furniture from the Petit Trianon, and also Landseer's 'The Monarch of the Glen') were of wide range and high quality. A quarto catalogue, 'Miscellanea graphica', compiled by F. W. Fairholt and introduced by Thomas Wright, was issued in 1857, and one (also by Fairholt) of his antique silver plate in 1860, after his death. His antiquities were dispersed mainly in four London sales in 1879, 1884, and 1888. In 1835, as Lord Albert Conyngham, he had published 'The Natural Son', a translation of Carl Spindler's 'Der Bastard', and in 1849 a journal of his travels in Greece and Italy, 'Wanderings in Search of Health'. 
Lord Londesborough, in the portrait by Sir Francis Grant, formerly at Blankney, is depicted as an imposing figure of 6 feet 4 or 5 inches, tall and thin and dark, and (in the words of his grandson Sir Osbert Sitwell) 'like a comb, all teeth and backbone' (Sitwell, 60). He is shown, in recognition of his antiquarian tastes, with his hand resting beside a great helm. He had the reputation of being highly strung, and did not wish to see his servants, who had to attend to his many houses invisibly. He married first, on 6 July 1833, Henrietta Maria (1809-1841), fourth daughter of Cecil Weld-Forester, first Baron Forester, with whom he had two sons and four daughters; and second, on 21 December 1847, Ursula Lucy Grace (1823-1883), eldest daughter of Vice-Admiral the Hon. Charles Orlando Bridgeman, with whom he had a further four sons and two daughters. Having latterly, for the benefit of his health, spent much time at his villa at Cannes, he wintered in 1859 at St Leonards, but returned to his London house, 4 Carlton House Terrace, where he died on 15 January 1860. He was buried on 24 January in Grimston, Yorkshire. He was succeeded by his eldest son, who became first earl of Londesborough in the jubilee creations of 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 7486


Denison, Edward (1801-1854), bishop of Salisbury, was born at 34 Harley Street, London, on 13 March 1801, son of John Denison, formerly Wilkinson (1758?-1820), of Ossington, Nottinghamshire, a merchant and politician, and Charlotte, his second wife, daughter of Samuel Estwick, a West India planter and MP for Westbury. (John) Evelyn Denison (1800-1873), speaker of the House of Commons, George Anthony Denison (1805-1896), archdeacon of Taunton, and Sir William Thomas Denison (1804-1871), colonial governor, were his brothers. He was educated at Esher and Eton College, matriculated at Oriel College, Oxford, in 1818, graduated BA with first-class honours in 1822, and entered the Middle Temple. Regarded as one of the most promising men of his generation at Oxford, he was elected fellow of Merton College, Oxford, in 1826, and proceeded MA in 1827. Ordained on 23 December 1827 as assistant curate successively of Wolvercote, near Oxford, and Radcliffe, Nottinghamshire, he became vicar of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, and a prebendary of Southwell in 1834. He was a traditional high-churchman of liberal whig sympathies. Lord Melbourne nominated him bishop of Salisbury in 1836. Joseph Blanco White alleged he was appointed because, although learned, he never published, and was passive in theology, and it was difficult to find a sympathetic Oxford whig to prefer. 
On 27 June 1839 Denison married Louisa Mary ('b'. 1812), daughter of Henry Ker Seymer of Hanford, Dorset, who died on 22 September 1841. It was of this first marriage that Edward Denison (1840-1870) was born. He married secondly, on 10 July 1845, Clementina ('b'. 1812), daughter of Charles Baillie-Hamilton, archdeacon of Cleveland, who died on 12 May 1894. 
Denison supported reform in the church, but criticized the legislation for merely diverting revenues to purposes deemed of greater utility. In the Lords he amended the 'Cathedrals Bill' to retain prebendal stalls and their titles after the alienation of their endowments. In appointing new prebendaries at Salisbury he preferred senior clergy from the diocese, and encouraged residentiaries to become involved in diocesan work. He was an early advocate of the revival of synodical government in the Church of England. 
Denison criticized the Tractarians for their exaggerated views, declining to support Pusey and Newman's projected 'Library of the Fathers' in 1838 and joining in the condemnation of 'Tract 90'. He did not always see eye to eye with his Tractarian brother George Anthony Denison, most notably at the outset of the controversy over eucharistic doctrine sparked by the latter in 1853-4. However, he presented Walter Kerr Hamilton, his Tractarian successor at St Peter-in-the-East, to a canonry of Salisbury and encouraged him to 'improve' worship in the cathedral. Later he recommended Hamilton to Lord Aberdeen as his successor, and he was duly appointed. 
As a reforming bishop Denison established a church building society and discouraged pluralism. He gave concomitant encouragement to clerical residence, despite the smallness of the population in many parishes. He noted a steady increase in the number of parishes where there were two Sunday services and monthly holy communions. He used the new railways to visit his clergy regularly and to conduct confirmations in more parishes, confirming in sixty-four places compared with his predecessor's nine confirmation centres. 
In the alarm over government grants to denominational schools based on satisfactory inspection reports, Denison, along with bishops Blomfield and Kaye, sought to avoid confrontation with the government, and persuaded Archbishop Howley to a compromise, giving the archbishop of Canterbury a veto in the appointment of inspectors. Denison feared that lack of provision of education contributed to the restlessness of the poor in industrial towns. In many parishes too small to support day schools, he encouraged Sunday schools when evening schools were unsuccessful. He established a diocesan board of education, a system for inspecting schools, and an institution for training schoolmistresses. 
Denison criticized the new poor law, rejecting as self-righteous the individuality of political economy. He saw the poor as victims of the faults of their betters, including the church. He discouraged clergy from serving as guardians, and regretted the church's identification with the new workhouses, believing the church was becoming cut off from the poor. He encouraged the establishment of friendly societies to assist the poor to save money. In the Salisbury cholera epidemic of 1849 he was reputed to have visited many of the sufferers. He was reckoned to have given away more than $17,000 to charitable causes in his lifetime. Denison died on 6 March 1854 at the bishop's palace, in Salisbury, aged fifty-two, and was buried in the cathedral cloister garth on 15 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 7487


Denison, Edward (1840-1870), philanthropist, born at the palace, Salisbury, Wiltshire, on 8 September 1840, was the son of Edward Denison (1801-1854), bishop of Salisbury, and his first wife, Louisa Mary (1812-1841), second daughter of Henry Ker Seymer of Hanford, Dorset. After some education at home Denison went to Eton College and to Christ Church, Oxford. Unfortunately, while at Eton, when training for a boat race, he overtaxed his strength and brought on congestion of the lungs, from which he never really recovered. He matriculated in 1858 from Christ Church, and in 1861 obtained a second-class degree in law and history, missing a first solely as a consequence of his bad health. From 1862 to 1866 he read for the bar at Lincoln's Inn, being called in 1868. 
In the spring of 1864 Denison travelled through Italy and the south of France to Madeira and Tangier. While at St Moritz in Switzerland on his way back, he was deeply impressed with the habits and condition of the peasantry there. On his return to England he showed great interest in the state of the poor in the East End of London, and became almoner of the Society for the Relief of Distress in the District of Stepney. With a view to studying social questions from a practical point of view, he moved in the autumn of 1867 to a lodging in Philpot Street, Mile End Road, where he stayed for eight months, only occasionally visiting his friends in the West End. During that time he built and endowed a school, in which he himself taught 'Bible' classes and gave lectures to working men. 
Denison was one of the earliest members of the committees formed in 1869 by the Society for Organising Charitable Relief and Repressing Mendicity (or the Charity Organization Society). Though he represented the moral rather than the political economy tradition in the society he favoured treating destitutes harshly and believed that charity was a chief cause of the housing crisis in London. In 1868 he went to Paris, and later to Edinburgh, to study the working of the poor law. In November 1868 he was elected for Newark, where his uncle (John) Evelyn Denison, the speaker, lived. (He was his uncle's heir presumptive.) In May 1869, with his health declining, he visited the Channel Islands, whose political constitution he studied with great interest. In Guernsey he had an interview with Victor Hugo, who 'ranted' at him for half an hour, and convinced him that 'with all his sublimity of imagination he was a bad politician and a worse reasoner'. Further difficulties with his lungs forced him to abandon a projected visit with Sir Michael Hicks Beach to the United States, and he decided to make a voyage to Melbourne, where he hoped to study the questions of emigration and colonization. He left England in October 1869; the voyage made his health worse rather than better, and he died at Melbourne on 26 January 1870, within a fortnight of landing. He never married. 
Denison's letters and other writings, edited by Sir Baldwyn Leighton, were published in 1872 (repr. 1875); they had considerable impact and he posthumously obtained something of the much greater influence attached to Arnold Toynbee. Denison House, the headquarters of the Charity Organization Society, perpetuated his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 7488


Denison, George Anthony (1805-1896), Church of England clergyman, born at Ossington, Nottinghamshire, on 11 December 1805, was the fourth son of John Denison (1758?-1820), merchant, of Leeds, MP for Colchester (1802-6) and for Minehead (1807-12), and his second wife, Charlotte Estwick. His siblings included Edward Denison (1801-1854), bishop of Salisbury, (John) Evelyn Denison, Viscount Ossington (1800-1873), and Sir William Thomas Denison (1804-1871), colonial governor. Denison was educated at private schools, at Eton College from 1817 to 1823, and at Oxford, for which he was prepared by a private tutor, Charles Drury, whose severe discipline he described as the most salutary experience of his life. He matriculated from Christ Church on 14 November 1823, graduated BA (with a first class in 'literae humaniores') in 1827, and proceeded MA in 1830. He twice gained the chancellor's prize -- by his Latin essay in 1828, in which year he was elected fellow of Oriel College, and by his English essay in 1829. 
In 1832 Denison took holy orders and served as curate of Cuddesdon. In 1830 he was elected to a college tutorship at Oriel, which he retained until 1836, when he exchanged it for the office of treasurer. He found Oriel society extremely uncongenial, and in 1838 accepted from his brother Edward, bishop of Salisbury, the vicarage of Broadwinsor, Dorset. On 4 September of that year he married Georgiana (1819-1908), eldest daughter of Joseph Warner Henley. He was collated on 10 August 1841 to the prebend of Wilsford and Woodford in the church of Sarum, and on 28 April 1849 to the ninth prebend of Combe in the church of Wells. This he exchanged for the two prebends of Milverton in the same church on his appointment in September 1851 to the archdeaconry of Taunton. In 1845 he had been appointed vicar of East Brent in Somerset. 
From the first a strong high-churchman, and subsequently very sympathetic to the teachings and practices of the Tractarians, Denison united with Henry Edward Manning in organizing resistance to the regulation of parochial schools by the state, on which subject he wrote extensively from 1847, becoming a champion of the National Society. He also joined in the protests against the preferment of the broad-churchman R. D. Hampden to the see of Hereford in 1847 and against the final judgment of 1850 in the Gorham case. He was himself defendant in another ecclesiastical 'cause celebre'. The high-church doctrine of the eucharist which, as examining chaplain to the bishop of Bath and Wells, he set before the candidates for ordination led to a disagreement with the bishop's commissary, in which Denison was so poorly supported by the bishop, Richard Bagot, that he resigned (June 1853). He then defined his doctrinal position with precision in three sermons preached in Wells Cathedral (7 August 1853, 6 November 1853, and 14 May 1854). In these sermons Denison affirmed a real (though non-material) presence of Christ in the elements by virtue of consecration and prior to their reception. All communicants thus received the inward grace of the sacrament (though not necessarily its spiritual benefit) together with the outward sign. Such a view seemed to contradict article twenty-nine of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and, moreover, to encourage devotion to the sacramental species. The terminology which he employed reflected that of other Tractarians, especially R. I. Wilberforce in his 'The Doctrine of the Holy Eucharist' of 1853. Denison's position was also explicitly supported by John Keble in the latter's 'On Eucharistical Adoration' (1857) when the Evangelical Alliance, on the basis of Denison's sermons, instituted proceedings in the ecclesiastical courts. The prosecution, initiated ostensibly by the Revd Joseph Ditcher, vicar of South Brent, was pursued with vigour, and met with firm resistance from Denison. The result, as in the Gorham case, served only to illustrate the uncertainty of the law. Denison's views were declared contrary to the twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth of the articles of religion by Archbishop J. B. Sumner, sitting with assessors at Bath on 12 August 1856, and as Denison declined to recant he was sentenced to deprivation on 22 October. However, the execution of the sentence was deferred, pending an appeal to the court of arches, which resulted in its reversal on a technical point on 23 April 1857. An appeal from this decision was dismissed by the judicial committee of the privy council on 6 February 1858 without any decision on the substantive question, but to the relief of most Tractarians. 
Denison was editor of the 'Church and State Review', published from 1862 until 1865. For many years he was a potent conservative voice in the convocation of Canterbury, which he succeeded in committing in 1863 to a censure (20 May) of J. W. Colenso's 'Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua Critically Examined', and in the following year to a more formal condemnation (24 June) of the controversial 'Essays and Reviews' (1861). He also led opposition to the endowment of the regius chair of Greek at Oxford, apparently for no other reason than that it was held by the heterodox Benjamin Jowett (1817-1893), and in December 1869 entered his protest against Frederick Temple's consecration to the see of Exeter. He was also a consistent opponent of any change in the law of divorce. Denison remained staunchly opposed to any form of state intervention in Church of England schools and viewed the 1870 'Education Act' with disgust. His attempt to foreclose the discussion on the Athanasian creed, in the course of Dean Stanley's speech in the lower house of the convocation of Canterbury, on 24 April 1872, caused a dramatic scene which terminated in his temporary secession from the assembly. 
The one issue upon which Denison himself admitted to a change of opinion was that of ritualism. His eucharistic beliefs gradually led to his support for more ceremonial, a fact signalled by his joining the Society of the Holy Cross in 1877. He remained entirely unreceptive to development of biblical criticism, and his disapproval of 'Lux mundi' (1889), a series of essays by more liberally inclined younger Anglo-Catholics, caused his secession in 1892 from the English Church Union, of which he had been one of the founders. He was resolutely opposed to the policies of the Gladstonian Liberal Party in the 1880s and 1890s, and his vehement denunciations in print of Gladstone's character and opinions attracted much public attention. Embittered by the progress of the social, political, and religious change which he had vainly but vigorously opposed, he spent his last years in comparative seclusion at East Brent, where he died on 21 March 1896. He was buried in East Brent churchyard on 26 March. 
Although an unsparing opponent in public controversies, Denison's private character was an appealing one. He reserved his 'odium theologicum' exclusively for public use: despite the depth of his public differences he always maintained harmonious private relations with Dean Stanley. As a parish priest he shared in the Tractarian desire to restore the neglected aspects of worship, and had a keen eye to the temporal as well as the spiritual needs of his parishioners. With him the popular harvest festival is said to have originated, and he improved the water supply at East Brent at his own expense. 


@@@@@


doc= 7489


Denison, John (1569/70-1629), Church of England clergyman, from a Warwickshire family, matriculated at Oxford from Magdalen Hall in May 1590, when he was twenty, graduated BA from Balliol College in 1594, and proceeded MA in 1600. After holding the headmastership of the free school in Reading, Berkshire, he was then successively vicar of the three churches in the town, being instituted to St Laurence's in 1604, St Giles's in 1612, and St Mary's in 1614. Between November 1610 and the spring of 1613 he held concurrently the rectory of Woodmansterne, Surrey, to which he had been presented by the king. Meanwhile he returned to Oxford to take his BD in 1607 and DD in 1611. 
Having been licensed in 1606, he was, according to Wood, highly regarded as a preacher, and was chaplain to the duke of Buckingham, whose father Denison described in 1619 as 'my much honoured friend' ('Heavenly Banquet', dedication), and to James I. Between 1608 and 1624 he published a number of sermons, several subsequently reissued in various editions, and 'De confessionis auricularis vanitate' (1621), a treatise countering Cardinal Bellarmine's views on auricular confession, dedicated to the king. Dedications to such works as 'The Heavenly Banquet, or, The Doctrine of the Lords Supper' (1619), 'The Sinne Against the Holy Ghost' (1620), and 'The Blessednesse of Peace-Makers' (1620) reveal that he had long enjoyed the friendship and patronage of a variety of eminent men including Lord Chancellor Ellesmere, Bishop John King of London, and the earl of Kelly. The works themselves combine thoroughgoing anti-popery, approval of sabbath observance, and quotation of Calvin and Beza, Cartwright and Reynolds, with justification of kneeling at communion as 'most consonant to comeliness and order' ('Heavenly Banquet'), exhortation to 'study to make our election sure by good works' ('Blessednesse of Peacemakers', 79) and denunciations of 'peace-breakers' (42) who object to surplices -- 'they have the zeale of God, though not according to knowledge' (ibid., 42). 
According to a letter from Sir Thomas Bodley to Dr John King, vice-chancellor of Oxford University, read in convocation in July 1628, Denison presented 'several valuable books to the Bodleian Library' (Coates, 336-7). He died in Reading at the end of January 1629, leaving money for the poor in the three Reading parishes, a study of books to his eldest son, John, legacies to him, to another son, and to three daughters, and property in Fryers Street, Reading, to his wife, Mary. He was buried in St Mary's Church, Reading, on 1 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 7490


Denison, (John) Evelyn, Viscount Ossington (1800-1873), speaker of the House of Commons, was the eldest of the nine sons of John Denison MP (1758?-1820), of Ossington Hall, Nottinghamshire, and his second wife, Charlotte, daughter of Samuel Estwick MP. One of his sisters, Lucy, married Charles Manners-Sutton, speaker of the House of Commons. His brothers included Edward Denison (1801-1854), Sir William Thomas Denison (1804-1871), and George Anthony Denison (1805-1896). He was born at Ossington on 27 January 1800, and was educated at Eton College from 1811 to 1817. He then went to Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in June 1823, MA in May 1828, and honorary DCL in June 1870. In July 1823 he entered parliament as one of the members for the borough of Newcastle under Lyme, and in the following year went on a lengthy tour through Canada and the United States, in company with lords Derby, Taunton, and Wharncliffe. At a by-election in December 1826 he was returned unopposed for Hastings. Though seen as a whig, his maiden speech opposed Lord John Russell's motion for parliamentary reform. On 2 May 1827 he was appointed one of the council of the duke of Clarence, the lord high admiral in Canning's administration. When Wellington became prime minister in 1828, Denison resigned the post and never again took office. On 14 July 1827 he married Lady Charlotte Cavendish-Scott-Bentinck (1806-1889), third daughter of William Cavendish-Scott-Bentinck, fourth duke of Portland, and his wife, Henrietta. At the general election of 1830 he unsuccessfully contested his old constituency of Newcastle under Lyme, and in November that year was defeated at the by-election at Liverpool consequent on Huskisson's death. At the general election of 1831 he was elected for both Liverpool and the then undivided county of Nottinghamshire, where his family had some, but not great, influence. He chose to sit for the latter, and in the two following parliaments of 1833 and 1835 was returned for South Nottinghamshire without opposition. He supported the reform bills of 1831-2. Denison was a whiggish Liberal, and the chief influence in the constituency was the tory duke of Newcastle. In 1837 Denison did not contest the constituency, which returned two tories. After being out of the house for four years, he was returned unopposed at the general election of 1841 for the borough of Malton, which constituency he continued to represent in the two following parliaments of 1847 and 1852. In March 1857, the Newcastle influence having become more Liberal, he was elected without opposition for North Nottinghamshire, holding the seat until his retirement from the Commons. Denison played some part, but not a significant one, in the private and public business of the house, and it was with some surprise -- to himself as well as his contemporaries -- that Palmerston, on J. T. Delane's recommendation, suggested to him that he be the government's candidate for the speakership on the retirement of Charles Shaw Lefevre. He was unanimously elected on 30 April 1857 and sworn of the privy council on 1 May. Denison was three times re-elected to the chair unopposed, on 3 May 1859, 1 February 1866, and 10 December 1868. 
Denison was fairly well regarded as speaker. A consolidator rather than an innovator (he prevented, for example, the introduction of printed notice of questions to ministers), he none the less defended the financial rights of the Commons against the Lords, deploring the latter's action in rejecting the bill of 1860 repealing the paper duty, and opposing the Lords' introduction of a financial provision into a divorce bill (Laundy, 307). The tories in 1862 hoped he might be encouraged to retire and be replaced by Spencer Walpole. Denison was the last speaker to speak and vote in committee, and he voted against the government on the budget on 9 June 1870. He was a dignified speaker but was thought by contemporaries sometimes lacking in firmness. 'The Times' noted on his death: 'On the occasions which called for his active interposition with the House we do not care to dwell' (Laundy, 310). Denison was a cultivated man who thought the speaker should have a general influence on national life: thus he sponsored the 'Speaker's Commentary' on the 'Bible' (published in ten volumes between 1871 and 1881). 
The fast pace of legislation in Gladstone's first government exhausted Denison and he retired in February 1872, being succeeded by H. B. W. Brand. Denison was created Viscount Ossington of Ossington on 13 February 1872, but declined the usual substantial speaker's pension on the grounds that he had 'a private fortune which will suffice, and for the few years of life that remain to me I should be happier in feeling that I am not a burden to my fellow-countrymen'. Denison kept a discreet diary between 1857 and 1872, which shows him to have had an unsubtle but competent mind; it was published posthumously as 'Notes from my Journal when Speaker of the House of Commons' (1900), edited by his widow. He was president of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1856-7 and was a trustee of the British Museum from 1872. He died at Ossington Hall on 7 March 1873, aged seventy-three, and was buried on the 13th in the family vault there. He had no heir. His widow, on the death of her brother the fifth duke of Portland, succeeded to part of the Portland estates and in 1882 took the surname of Scott instead of Denison, leaving over $400,000 when she died in 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 7491


Denison, William Joseph (1770-1849), banker and politician, was born in Prince's Street, Lothbury, London, in May 1770, the only son of Joseph Denison (c.1726-1806), a cloth merchant and banker of St Mary Axe, London, and Denbies, near Dorking, Surrey, and his wife, Elizabeth (1738/9-1771), daughter of William Butler, a hat maker of Tooley Street, Southwark. Denison's paternal grandfather had been a woollen cloth maker and dissenter in Leeds, and his father had amassed a considerable fortune in London, purchasing, in 1787, the Denbies estate in Surrey from Lord King, and also the Seamore estate, near Scarborough, from the duke of Leeds for $100,000. Little is known of Denison's early life. He spent his business career in his father's bank, Denison, Heywood, and Kennard of Lombard Street, becoming senior partner upon his father's death. The bank, which dealt in both domestic and foreign loans, prospered exceedingly under his direction, and Denison was probably among the eight or ten wealthiest British businessmen at the time of his death. 
Upon the advice of George Rose, the MP and Pittite minister, Denison entered parliament, successfully contesting Camelford in 1796, and holding the seat until 1802. After unsuccessfully contesting Hull in 1802, he was elected for this seat in 1806, but failed to stand at the 1807 election. He was elected for Surrey in 1818, remaining its member until 1832; after the 'Reform Act' he was elected for Surrey West, holding the seat until his death. He was thus a member of parliament for thirty-eight years. Although a keen supporter of Pitt recommended his entry into politics, Denison was, from the first, a staunch whig, joining Brooks's Club in 1797 and speaking regularly on behalf of the whig opposition in parliament. Denison was a strong supporter of parliamentary reform, voting in its favour in 1797 and subsequently. He was, however, opposed to the repeal of the corn laws in 1846. Denison was one of the founders of the Reform Club, and his portrait occupies a prominent place in the club's main room. 
Denison also became a major landowner in Yorkshire and Surrey. He served as a lieutenant in the Middlesex Volunteers and, in 1808-9, as high sheriff of Yorkshire; he was a patron of two livings. In 1794 Denison's sister Elizabeth (died 1861) married Henry Conyngham, third Baron and first Marquess Conyngham. Owing to the influence of his sister, a friend of George IV, Denison was offered -- and declined -- a peerage at some time in the 1820s. 
Denison left the whole of his fortune, estimated by contemporaries at $2.3 million, to his nephew Lord Albert Conyngham (1805-1860) ['see 'Denison, Albert, first Baron Londesborough], the second surviving son of the first Marquess Conyngham, on the condition that he alter his name to Denison. Although the younger son of an aristocrat could normally expect neither title nor estate, through this highly unusual arrangement Denison's nephew received both. In 1850 he was created Baron Londesborough, and he used his inherited wealth to add substantially to the landed acreage he inherited from his uncle. In 1883 the second Baron Londesborough owned nearly 53,000 acres in Yorkshire, worth $68,000 per annum in rental income, one of the very greatest examples of the use of business wealth to purchase land on a grand scale in modern British history. 
Denison, who was unmarried, died at his home at 90 Pall Mall on 2 August 1849. He was the author of a patriotic poem on Napoleon's threatened invasion of 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 7492


Denison, Sir William Thomas (1804-1871), army officer and colonial governor, the third son of John Denison (1758?-1820), of Ossington, Nottinghamshire, and his second wife, Charlotte Estwick, was born in London on 3 May 1804. (John) Evelyn Denison (1800-1873), Edward Denison (1801-1854), and George Anthony Denison (1805-1896) were his brothers. After attending a private school at Sunbury he spent four years at Eton College, and then studied under a private tutor, the Revd C. Drury. In February 1819 he entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. He passed for the Royal Engineers in 1823, but did not receive his commission as lieutenant until 1826, having spent part of the interval in working at the Ordnance Survey. 
Following instruction at Chatham, Denison was sent in 1827 to Canada, where during the following four years he was employed with a company of sappers in the construction of the Rideau Canal. While on this duty he made experiments to test the strength of various kinds of American timber, as a result of which the Institution of Civil Engineers voted him the Telford medal and appointed him an associate. After returning to England at the end of 1831 he served at Woolwich, and in February 1833 was appointed instructor of the engineer cadets at Chatham, where he established a small observatory. In 1835 he was appointed a member of the municipal corporation boundary commission, and the following year he was employed at Greenwich in making observations with Ramsden's zenith sector. In the autumn of 1837 he was appointed engineer in charge of the works at Woolwich Dockyard, and in 1841 was promoted captain. He worked for the Admiralty at Woolwich and Portsmouth, and in 1842 visited Bermuda to inspect the dockyard works; in all three places he gained experience in dealing with convict labour. During these years Denison paid considerable attention to scientific and professional studies; at Woolwich he originated the publication of the professional papers of the Royal Engineers in 1837, and edited them until he left. In 1844-5 he served as an engineer on the royal commission on the health of towns, whose report was the basis of British health legislation for twenty-five years. 
In June 1846 Denison was nominated lieutenant-governor of Van Diemen's Land on the recommendation of Sir John Burgoyne, inspector-general of fortifications, whom the colonial secretary, W. E. Gladstone, had asked to nominate an officer of engineers qualified for the post. Gladstone's successor, Lord Grey, confirmed the appointment, and Denison, knighted that year for his services under the Admiralty, sailed for Hobart Town on 13 October; he arrived there on 25 January 1847. 
The colony was in a somewhat disorganized condition. The excessive number of convicts transported between 1842 and 1845 had caused a large deficit in the Treasury, a crisis in the convict department, and the recall of Sir John Eardley-Wilmot for his incompetent administration. Denison was told that no convicts would be sent for two years, which would give him time to reform the department (helped by a new controller, Dr. J. S. Hampton). But Grey wanted to resume transportation in 1848 and was delighted to find Denison then convinced that convict labour was desirable to undertake the public works he wanted to carry out, to relieve the labour shortage, and to keep down wages. However, Denison faced strong and growing opposition from members of the Anti-Transportation League, which he foolishly described as 'a farce'. Led by the Revd John West, whom Denison intolerantly described in a letter to Deas Thomson in Sydney as 'a dirty dog with whom no gentleman would associate' (West, xvii), in 1851 the league's supporters won every elective seat in the legislative council. However, the discovery of gold on the mainland, together with prison building and less perceived crime at home, convinced Lord Stanley's tory administration in 1852 that imperial convicts should no longer be transported to Van Diemen's Land. Denison was disappointed, but the decision removed a major source of opposition to him, and in 1854 he earned further praise by closing the much criticized penal establishment on Norfolk Island. 
Denison had been criticized for high-handedness in making appointments to the legislative council, in trying to dismiss Chief Justice Pedder after the supreme court had declared the 'Dog Tax Act' invalid in 1847, and the following year in authorizing expenditure which the legislative council had rejected. He was fortunate in that, although Grey censured him for acting 'rashly and unadvisedly', he tempered his criticism of these 'errors of judgment' by praise for Denison's 'zeal and ability' (Denison, 1.98). This he had shown in dealing with the convicts, by successfully asserting over Bishop Nixon the crown's right to nominate Anglican clergy as convict chaplains, and by establishing in 1853 a board of education to control undenominational schools. These he thought should be based on 'religious principles' but not necessarily on 'religious opinions', and they would supplement the existing denominational schools -- though he was unable to persuade the legislative council to authorize local rates to pay for them. He paid great attention to the orphan school and he established local councils in Hobart Town and Launceston. When the Crimean War broke out in 1854 he ordered the construction of batteries for the defence of Hobart's harbour and trained the police to act as gunners. He continued to show an interest in science, succeeded in negotiating a union between the rival Royal and Tasmanian societies, became the patron of the new Royal Society, and contributed six papers to the first volume of the latter's journal. In the 1854 debates on the new constitution to be granted to Van Diemen's Land he criticized the prevailing 'democratic spirit' and the character of the colonists and pressed for a nominated upper house; this was rejected, but he gained agreement for a very restrictive franchise for an elective council and a not very liberal one for the legislative assembly. 
On 29 November 1838 Denison had married Caroline Lucy (died 1899), the daughter of Admiral Sir Phipps Hornby. She accompanied him on all his postings, and over the years they had thirteen children; domestic life at Government House contrasted favourably with that of his predecessor, Sir John Eardley-Wilmot, whose conduct had occasioned gossip in Hobart and concern at the Colonial Office. But Denison's strength lay in his administrative ability, which also contrasted sharply with Eardley-Wilmot's, and it was that which brought him promotion to New South Wales, where he assumed office as governor-general in January 1855 -- described in his journal as 'a very great appointment for so 'young a Governor'' (Denison, 1.256). 
The title of governor-general of Australia which went with the governorship of New South Wales was nothing more than a name. Denison himself opposed it, and his lack of power was shown in the limited role he was able to play in the inter-colonial negotiations about tariffs, the Murray River border convention of 1855, and the subsidizing of a steam postal service to the United Kingdom. He did nothing to prevent New South Wales and Victoria adopting different railway gauges, and he opposed Lord Grey's proposals to establish a federal system in Australia, telling the secretary of state that if 'a general assembly' of the local colonies were established it 'would have nothing to do' (Denison, 1.262). But being governor of New South Wales was a different matter, and Denison retained this office until 1861. Shortly after his arrival in Sydney he had introduced the new system of constitutional or responsible government there. He did not like it, and complained on 31 October 1859 that during three and a half years he had had five sets of ministers, by whom 'not one measure of social improvement had been passed, and the only acts of importance that had stood the ordeal were those of very questionable advantage' (Denison, 1.467). He wanted to diminish what he thought were the evils of a low qualification by dividing the country into large electoral districts, each returning several members, and limiting the right of voting to one vote so as to give more scope for the representation of various interests and of property. 
Denison emphatically deprecated the disposition to regard the colonies rather as an encumbrance than as a benefit to the empire. He was opposed to the formation of a colonial military force as likely to be expensive and ill disciplined, but in 1855 hastened the building of Fort Denison in Sydney harbour and installed other batteries for its defence. He was happy to send some of its imperial troops both to India during the mutiny and to New Zealand during the wars there -- though he was sympathetic to the Maori grievances after his visit to New Zealand in 1857. He held that the prevention of crime was the main object of punishment, and objected to 'maudlin sentimentality' in dealing with criminals; he considered that sentences should be fully and strictly enforced, and that imprisonment should invariably, even in the case of prisoners awaiting trial, be accompanied by labour. In this, in 1858, the New South Wales government adopted his views at least partially. Denison took much personal interest in the return of the Pitcairn islanders, the descendants of the mutineers of the 'Bounty', to Norfolk Island, twice visiting it and investigating various matters connected with the well-being of the islanders. In 1856 he was created a civil KCB. 
In September 1860 the imperial government decided to appoint Denison governor of the Madras presidency, and in January 1861 he left for this post. Immediately on assuming office, on 18 February, he had to consider a plan for reorganizing the Sepoy army. He thought it radically unsound, and predicted that the proposal to link promotion to length of service would lead before long to an excessive proportion of field officers, while the irregular system, depending for its efficiency on exceptional capacity in the officers, was utterly unsuitable for an entire army. Five years later he thought it had been 'in every way injurious'. He also opposed the retention of separate armies for Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, and here he anticipated a report of the Indian army commission, but the home government rejected it. He was against the establishment of legislative councils in the minor presidencies and provinces and the introduction of Indians into those councils, holding that these measures would lead to demands for representation and were not really desired by the Indians. He deprecated the cry of 'India for the Indians', and emphatically condemned 'the theory that we are acting as tutors to teach the Hindoos to govern themselves', which he characterized as 'sentimental trash'. He speedily formed an unduly low opinion of the native character. He was opposed to the recently introduced system of open competition for admission into the covenanted civil service, insisting that, above all else, officers should be gentlemen, and he disapproved of the settlement of Europeans in India, as they were likely to get into trouble with the Indians. 
Denison again gave much attention to public works. He recognized the great value of irrigation and of improved communications, although he deemed the railways being built needlessly expensive. He reorganized the public works department, and took issue with the employment of officers of the Royal Engineers on civil duties. He passed a town improvement act in 1865 and tried to promote the improvement of agriculture and the revision of the principles on which the land revenue should be assessed. 
Following the death of Lord Elgin, in the latter part of 1863, Denison was called on to assume temporarily the office of governor-general; he was then able to recall an order for the withdrawal of the troops then engaged on the Sitana expedition, a measure which he thought could not have failed to affect injuriously Britain's military prestige. 
Denison retired from the Madras government in March 1866. In 1868 he was appointed chairman of a royal commission to consider the pollution of British rivers, a position he held until his death, at Observatory House, Mortlake, East Sheen, Surrey, on 19 January 1871. 
His abilities were solid rather than brilliant, but his great industry and unimpeachable integrity made him a distinguished public servant. A keen scientist, in Sydney he had urged the imperial government to compile a natural history of the British colonies; in Madras he wanted a natural history of India. He corresponded with Sir Roderick Murchison on geography and population. With the strong religious convictions of a fundamentalist Anglican, he decidedly rejected the theories of Charles Darwin and wrote a criticism of 'Essays and Reviews' and an essay on the antiquity of man; he showed little interest in 'humane' disciplines which might have modified his severe judgements, though a tendency towards arrogance was modified in his private life, where he was warm-hearted and generous. 


@@@@@


doc= 7493


Denman, George (1819-1896), judge and politician, was born on 23 December 1819 at 50 Russell Square, London, the twelfth child and seventh son of Thomas Denman, first Baron Denman (1779-1854), and his wife, Theodosia Anne (1779-1852), eldest daughter of the Revd Richard Vevers, rector of Kettering. Thomas Aitchison Denman, second Baron Denman, was his brother. He was educated first at Felsted and then at Repton School, before entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1838, where he obtained a scholarship in 1840. As the son of a peer he was permitted to study classics without having to pass an examination in mathematics and distinguished himself as senior classic in 1842. He also rowed in the Oxford and Cambridge boat races of 1841 and 1842, and won the Colquhoun sculls in October 1842. He graduated BA in 1842 and was elected fellow of Trinity College on 10 October 1843. He became MA in 1854, and acted as auditor of Trinity College from 1852 to 1865. 
On 19 February 1852 Denman married Charlotte, daughter of Samuel Hope, banker, of Liverpool; they had six children. Their eldest son, G. L. Denman, was appointed a Metropolitan Police magistrate in 1890. 
Encouraged by his father to choose the bar as a profession Denman became a student at Lincoln's Inn in November 1843, entering the chambers of a well-known conveyancer, Peter Bellinger Brodie. In November 1844 he became a pupil of Barnes Peacock, then a junior in a large practice, staying with him until he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 24 November 1846. He joined the home circuit on 2 March 1849, and gradually acquired a practice there. During his early years at the bar he also acted as a law reporter on the staff of the 'Law Journal'. 
In 1856 Denman stood, unsuccessfully, as parliamentary candidate for Cambridge University as a Liberal after the death of Henry Goulburn. In the following year he was appointed counsel to the university. He became queen's counsel in 1861. At the general election in May 1859 Denman was elected MP for Tiverton as Lord Palmerston's colleague, and held the seat until 1872, except for a short interval in 1865-6. In parliament he became interested in the reform of the law of evidence in criminal trials. The 'Evidence Further Amendment Act' of 1869, popularly known as 'Denman's Act', was entirely due to his efforts. This allowed witnesses of no religious belief to affirm in place of taking the oath in courts of justice, so that parties who previously could not be heard could give evidence. 
On 3 May 1864 Denman seconded a motion for a select committee to inquire into the retention of the death penalty ('Hansard 3', 1864, 174.2069). He was always in favour of enlarging the operation of the various reform bills and took an active part in the debate on the 'Representation of the People Bill' of 1867. He also showed great interest in parliament in all questions affecting public schools and universities, and supported the 'University Tests Bill' of 23 May 1870 ('Hansard 3', 1870, 201.1280). 
In October 1872 Denman was chosen to succeed Sir James Shaw Willes in the court of common pleas. As the son of a peer he did not accept the customary knighthood. In November 1875, by virtue of the 'Judicature Act', he became justice of the Common Pleas Division of the High Court. From 1881 to 1892, when he retired from the bench, he acted as judge of the High Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Division. After retirement he became a privy councillor in January 1893, and occasionally sat on the judicial committee of the privy council. 
Denman was popular on the bench, but was more distinguished as a graceful scholar than as a strong lawyer. He was said to have a fine presence and a beautiful voice. From his schooldays he had found writing verses easy and continued to read Greek and Latin classics for pleasure. In 1871 he published a translation of Gray's 'Elegy' in Greek elegiac verse, which he dedicated to Sir Alexander Cockburn, the lord chief justice, and in 1873 the first book of Pope's translation of the 'Iliad' in Latin elegiacs, which he dedicated to W. E. Gladstone. In 1896 he printed for private circulation a translation of 'Prometheus Bound' in English verse. 'Intervalla', a selection of his verses in Greek, Latin, and English, was printed for private circulation in 1898. 
Denman died on 21 September 1896 at his London home, 8 Cranley Gardens, South Kensington, and was buried in the churchyard at Willian, near Hitchin. A brass was placed in the chapel of Repton School to commemorate him and a memorial scholarship founded in his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 7494


Denman, Thomas (1733-1815), man-midwife, was born at Bakewell, Derbyshire, on 27 June 1733, the second son and third child of John Denman, apothecary, and his wife, Elizabeth. After early education at the free school in Bakewell, Denman became assistant to his elder brother, who had succeeded to their father's business. In 1753 Denman went to London and began to study medicine at St George's Hospital, but within six months his savings had run out. He then decided to apply for the post of surgeon's mate in the navy. During the next nine years Denman led an adventurous life as surgeon's mate and surgeon. On leaving service in 1763, he returned to Bakewell, but he soon decided to move to London and resume his medical studies. Midwifery in particular attracted him. The male practice of midwifery had been steadily increasing since the first quarter of the eighteenth century, and many were the medical men who had made their fame and fortune in this field. Once in London, Denman continued his study of anatomy, and attended William Smellie's midwifery lectures. On 13 July 1764 Denman gained an MD from Aberdeen University. After a short but unsuccessful attempt to set up practice in Winchester, Denman returned to London, where he lodged at first with Mr Norton, apothecary in the Strand. Denman took on any job, however small, but progress was so slow that he tried to resume his previous position in the navy. 
Denman was unable to procure a warrant, but he had the luck to be granted $70 a year for occasional duties as a surgeon on one of the royal yachts. This enabled him to rent a small house in Oxenden Street, off the Haymarket, which helped increase his professional visibility. His practice began to grow rapidly, boosted also by two publications that were well received in medical circles. The collection of 'Essays on the Puerperal Fever, and on Puerperal convulsion' (1768) was followed in the same year by a short publication on the 'Construction and Use of Vapour Baths', which appeared in the form of a letter to Dr Huck. Denman recommended the use of an apparatus in which steam from the spout of a kettle was introduced within the envelope of blankets enclosing the patient. 
As a man-midwife Denman faced strong competition in London. William Hunter enjoyed the most extensive and lucrative practice in the West End of town, and it was not until his death in 1783 that Denman was able to make rapid progress. Denman was appointed physician-accoucheur to the Middlesex Hospital in 1769. About this time Dr Cooper, a teacher of midwifery of no great reputation, died, and Denman agreed to give lectures in conjunction with William Osborn, a fellow student at St George's Hospital. Denman and Osborn purchased Cooper's apparatus for $120 and in 1770 they began to lecture. The lectures flourished, as did Denman's business. Denman married at St James, Westminster, on 1 November 1770, Elizabeth (1747-1833), younger daughter of Alexander Brodie, an army linen draper; they had one son, Thomas Denman (1779-1854), who became lord chief justice of England, and twin daughters; one married Matthew Baillie, the other Sir Richard Croft. In 1772 Denman moved to Queen Street, Golden Square, where he lectured and practised. By 1778 he was making $600 a year from his practice and $150 from the lectures, but as he found that his income was not increasing as rapidly as he hoped, he took six pupils. In 1781 the house in Queen Street burnt down and Denman then moved to Old Burlington Street, where he lived for many years. 
By the mid-1780s Denman had established his reputation as one of the leading man-midwives in London. In 1783, when the Royal College of Physicians resolved to grant a licence in midwifery, Denman was one of three practitioners who successfully applied for it. By now his practice was so extensive that he was forced to resign his post at the Middlesex Hospital. In 1791 he purchased a house at Feltham, Middlesex, and began to limit himself to consultations, while his son-in-law Richard Croft carried out the more laborious part of the practice. When Croft was established Denman moved to a smaller house in Old Burlington Street, and afterwards to Mount Street. 
Denman's reputation rests on two works: 'Aphorisms on the application and use of the forceps, and vectis; on preternatural labours, on labours attended with haemorrhage, and with convulsions' (1783); and 'An Introduction to the Practice of Midwifery' (2 vols., 1794, 1795). The latter ran through seven editions. Denman advocated the induction of premature labour in cases of contracted pelvis. It was chiefly due to his adoption of the procedure that the practice became established in Britain long before it was accepted abroad. In cases requiring the use of instruments, Denman favoured the vectis over the forceps. This suggests that he may have been connected with John Bamber, a London man-midwife who had acquired the vectis from the Chamberlen family and kept its use a secret for a long time. Denman's use of instruments was limited, however. Like Smellie and Hunter he trusted and admired nature, arguing that too much confidence in one's dexterity and too little dependence on the natural resources of the organism caused more errors in the practice of midwifery than ignorance of the art. 
Denman had a cheerful and amiable disposition. He was a well-cultivated and entertaining man, of remarkably simple habits and unassuming manners. He had a firm belief in religion and took an active interest in public charities, especially the Society for the Relief of Widows and Orphans of Medical Men. Denman died suddenly at Mount Street on 25 November 1815 and was buried in London at St James's Church, Piccadilly. 


@@@@@


doc= 7495


Denman, Thomas, first Baron Denman (1779-1854), judge, was born on 23 February 1779 in Queen Street, Golden Square, London, the only son and youngest of the three children of Thomas Denman (1733-1815), a distinguished physician whose textbook on midwifery was an eighteenth-century best-seller, and his wife, Elizabeth (1747-1833), daughter of Alexander Brodie, an army accoutrement maker. Denman remained close to his parents and twin sisters throughout their lives. His moral rectitude, the hallmark of his character, owed much to his mother's stern example and training (Arnould, 1.8). His biblical knowledge was built on his promise to her to read one chapter of the 'Bible' each day, a promise which he fulfilled even during the busiest period of his life. It was she who inspired his love of music and literature. His letters reveal him constantly turning to such favourites as Shakespeare, Dante (in a translation by his son-in-law, Ichabod Wright), Byron, whose obscene conversation repelled him however, and Wordsworth. Jane Austen's 'Emma', by contrast, he dismissed as a 'very silly book' (ibid., 1.114). 
Denman's love of the classics was just as great and his knowledge as profound. His classical education was a traditional one. From the age of three he was at Mrs Barbauld's school at Palgrave, Suffolk, and from seven at Dr Thompson's, Kensington. At the age of nine he was sent to Eton College where he remained until he was sixteen. At Eton he first expressed his ultra-liberal views, and was consequently bullied by most of his peers who were vehement Peelites or anti-Jacobins. But this ragging did not dilute his regard for the school; he sent three sons, Thomas, Joseph, and Richard, there, and presided at its 400th anniversary festival. 
Denman's health was indifferent, and his father concluded that he should spend a year with his uncle the Revd Peter Brodie, rector of Winterslow, Wiltshire, before going up in 1796 to St John's College, Cambridge. At Cambridge he read 'classics and general literature'. For pure mathematics he had nothing but contempt; so, unable to take the mathematical tripos, he was debarred from competing for such major classical prizes as the chancellor's medals and left Cambridge with an ordinary degree. But unlike most 'ordinaries' he did not give himself over to idleness and pleasure. His Cambridge companions were the intellectual elite and he contributed a translation of the song of Callistratus to their 'Collections from the Greek Anthology', which Byron said was 'the best English translation' (Byron, 'Childe Harold', III.20). Cambridge strengthened his liberal views; like his father Denman venerated Fox and remained a Foxite until he died. 
The Denman who left Cambridge in 1800 was no longer a sickly youth. 'His countenance was very expressive; the features high and strongly marked, but well formed and handsome, the whole face conveying an expression of sweetness combined with power. He was about five feet eleven inches in height, spare and strong in frame, capable and fond of vigorous exertion, as is proved by his having more than once while at Cambridge walked thence to London... in little more than twelve hours. (Arnould, 1.25)' He had intelligence, presence, and a mellifluous voice, which have been the hallmarks of many a successful barrister, as he was determined to be. 
Success at the bar came slowly. From 1800 Denman spent three years in London as a pupil successively to Charles Butler, the eminent real property lawyer, Henry Dampier, who became a judge of the king's bench, and the special pleader, William Tidd, whose pupils included John Singleton Copley (later Lord Lyndhurst), Christopher Charles Pepys, and John Campbell, all future lord chancellors. In 1803 he began practising as special pleader and a year later, on 18 October 1804, married the sister of a college friend, Theodosia Anne Vevers (1779-1852), 'a young lady rich in virtues and graces... but with little or no fortune' (Arnould, 1.42). They lived modestly on an allowance of $400 from Denman's father and on Denman's occasional articles for the 'Monthly Review', a whig magazine. Their marriage was an exceptionally happy and united one; of their fifteen children, five sons (among them Thomas Aitchison Denman, second baron, and George Denman) and six daughters survived to adulthood. 
Denman was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn on 9 May 1806, the same year as Campbell and two years after Copley, and joined the midland circuit and the Lincolnshire sessions. Denman claimed that on circuit he and Copley were drawn together by their 'sentiments... of extreme political Liberalism' (Arnould, 1.62). When Copley became solicitor-general in the Liverpool administration in 1819 Denman publicly accused him of apostasy, but Copley always denied ever having held radical views. Thereafter their relationship was formal -- Greville once saw them shake hands 'with much politeness and grimace' (Greville, 2.331). Denman 'never could forget or forgive this dereliction of principle' (Arnould, 1.63). 
Denman was never without a certain amount of practice but, like many young barristers, he had to find other means of financial support, so he turned to literary journalism; for example, he reviewed John Marshall's 'Life of Washington'. However, he rejected his father's suggestion that he become, like Copley and Campbell, a law reporter; Campbell's 'Nisi prius Reports' proved wrong his prediction that 'the office of reporter is much oftener a bar than an introduction to general business' (Arnould, 1.69-71). During these years his family was growing and on occasions his wife found herself 'distressed for money'. Generous to a fault, he did not number prudence and economy among his many virtues. He enjoyed the social pleasures of circuit life which first brought him into contact with Brougham, who was to become an intimate friend. His uncle, Dr Joseph Denman, died in 1812 leaving him estates in Lynn, Norfolk, and Stoney Middleton in Derbyshire. This munificent device did not immediately relieve him of his financial worries since his interest was a reversionary one. But these did not deter him from leaving 5 Queen Square in Bloomsbury and moving to 50 Russell Square, then in 'point of residence, the 'ne plus ultra' of a successful barrister's ambition' (Arnould, 1.58). 
After five years Denman's practice began to increase, but at the bar he never earned the large fees which Campbell, Scarlett, or Pollock commanded. It was his eloquent defence in 1817 of Luddites, charged with high treason, which first brought him to the attention of the whig grandees who had few able lawyers in the House of Commons. His political views were well known, and in 1818 he was brought in as the member for the close borough of Wareham in Dorset, taking his seat on 14 January 1819. But he was never a committed parliamentarian and his interventions in debate were ponderous and uninspiring, disappointing his political patrons. In 1820, in the election following the death of George III, he was compelled to incur the considerable expense of contesting the open borough of Nottingham which, although he won the election, threw him further into debt. 
1820 was for Denman a momentous year. Brougham and he were appointed respectively Queen Caroline's attorney- and solicitor-general. They were then made benchers of Lincoln's Inn, but Eldon, who never forgave them for attacking his court of chancery, refused to make either of them a king's counsel. Denman believed the queen to be 'the most wronged and insulted of womankind' (Arnould, 1.137). But, following Brougham's example, he forbade his wife to call on her, a decision which he later regretted. Soon after the queen's arrival in England Denman urged the House of Lords select committee to delay its report on the queen's conduct until the witnesses called by the Milan commission arrived in England. This was refused, and Lord Liverpool introduced a bill of pains and penalties in the House of Lords. Copley led for the crown and Brougham for the queen. Denman was the most prominent of Brougham's juniors. His final speech (24-25 October 1820), which lasted ten hours, made him a popular Liberal hero. It was histrionic, passionate, emotional oratory which moved everyone who heard it but which does not have the same impact in print. Denman made two tactless aspersions. His sarcastic parallel between Caroline and the innocent Octavia, the wife of Nero, whose servants were tortured in an attempt to prove her adultery with a slave, enraged George IV who would not hear Denman's name spoken and refused him a silk gown. It was only after Denman's memorial, denying that he intended to compare the king to Nero, and Wellington's personal intervention at the insistence of Lyndhurst, that the king relented in 1828. The future William IV, who did not conceal his belief that Caroline was an adulteress, was equally incensed by Denman's famous apostrophe addressed to him, 'Come forth, thou slanderer'; but, more magnanimous than his brother, he did not oppose Denman's appointment either as attorney-general (1830) or as lord chief justice two years later. The public loved what they saw as Denman's Hanoverian jibes, and Carlton House became known as Nero's Hotel. What passed unnoticed at that time in the packed and emotional House of Lords was his inapposite appeal to their lordships to imitate 'that Divine Authority' who would not condemn the woman taken in adultery but said 'Go and sin no more' -- which prompted the epigram '
Most gracious Queen we thee implore 

To go away and sin no more; 

Or, if that effort be too great, 

To go away at any rate. 

' 

Denman's popular success led to his election in 1822 as common serjeant of the City of London, defeating Bolland, later a baron of the exchequer. He was still a junior, so the stipend of $1200 as common serjeant was a most welcome addition to his income. Among Denman's papers there is an autobiographical fragment which recorded his political credo while a member of the House of Commons. He opposed the policy of repression in Ireland, and was committed to the interest of 'freedom, justice and truth', to free trade, political and legal reform, to the purgation of corruption and abuse, and above all else to the abolition of slavery in every corner of the world. Between 1818 and 1826, in a hostile House of Commons, he introduced a motion for black emancipation, supported Brougham's motion for an inquiry into slavery in the West Indies, and spoke feelingly of the plight of individuals who had fallen foul of the repressive legislation forbidding seditious meetings and blasphemous libels, two of the infamous 'Six Acts'. Both he and Campbell supported whig motions condemning Eldon's steadfast opposition to any proposal to remove the chancery arrears or to the reform of common-law procedure. He was very anxious to soften the rigour of the bloody criminal law, attempting to secure the abolition of the death penalty for forgery and counsel for those accused of felonies. Both proposals were later to be adopted. 
Denman's campaign for legal reform was conducted outside the house as well as within it. It was probably he -- speaking fluent French as he did -- who wrote the critical, if complacent, review-essays in the 'Edinburgh Review' (40, 1824, 169-207) of Dumont's French edition of Bentham's 'Traite des preuves judiciares' advocating the adoption of the French system of investigation and interrogation of witnesses. For Denman, as for Blackstone, it was a matter of pride that an Englishman enjoyed the security of trial by a lawful jury of his county. Interrogation, he argued, was unfair to the prisoner: 'the mere fact of being accused is, in itself, an overwhelming calamity to an innocent man' ('O'Connell v. R.', House of Lords appeal, D. Leady). Moreover, in France the 'keen encounter of wits between judge and culprit... have a direct tendency to degrade the dignity of justice, because they always disturb its calmness and serenity'. 
In the election of 1826 Denman decided not to stand; his finances were not equal 'even to an undisputed election' (Arnould, 1.204). However, after he became a king's counsel his practice increased; so in 1830 he stood again, and was elected for Nottingham. Denman was saddened that Wellington, whom he personally respected, remained obdurately opposed to parliamentary reform. But Wellington soon resigned, to be succeeded by Grey. In 1831 the cabinet resolved to introduce the first 'Reform Bill', and Denman, who had been appointed attorney-general in the previous November, was instructed to draft its complex provisions. In his speech following the introduction of the first 'Reform Bill' he took the opportunity to confess 'some sense of shame that he had not had virtue' to refuse the invitation to stand for the rotten borough of Wareham in 1818 ('Hansard 3', 2, 2 March 1831, 1247). His speeches, on the second reading, were largely devoted to the refutation of the special objections to its clauses. On the dissolution of parliament, after Grey's defeat on Gascoyne's motion against the bill, Denman was returned for Nottingham unopposed. 
When the 'Reform Bill' was reintroduced the considerable burden of defending its schedules in committee fell on Denman. Like Campbell, Denman considered that the paramount question was parliamentary reform. But, also like him, he was no republican, describing himself as a 'Conservative reformer' (Arnould, 1.393). 'For to hazard all the secured benefits of an established order, from a distaste for those forms which fools alone contest; to reject the freedom which may be enjoyed under a constitutional monarchy for the purpose of an experiment... this is a course which would no doubt deserve many other names, but certainly that of folly in a pre-eminent degree. (ibid., 1.389)' He reflected on the impact of the bill in a letter to his close friend Merivale: 'For my part I could have been well pleased to follow the great work of Parliamentary Reform with a long repose, that we may set our House in order, not as on the eve of dissolution, but to ensure its being safely and comfortably and socially inhabited. (ibid., 1.394)' In March 1832 the bill passed the Commons, only for the Lords, led by Lyndhurst, to resolve to postpone discussion of the disenfranchising clauses until the enfranchising clauses had been debated. Grey immediately resigned and Wellington was invited to form an administration. Denman's prospects were now bleak. But he wrote cheerfully to his eldest daughter that, despite the loss of the common serjeantship, which he had resigned on becoming attorney-general, and the fact that the etiquette of the bar prevented him going on circuit again, he could not doubt that he should 'hold a good station at the Bar'; his wife was not so optimistic, being a 'little hard to pacify just at first' but was now 'a very Portia' (Arnould, 1.362). Denman's fears were not realized. Wellington found it impossible to form a government, and Grey once more became prime minister. On 4 June the House of Lords passed the 'Reform Bill', the majority of tory peers having accepted Wellington's advice to give up the struggle. 
It was not until early September 1832 that the parliamentary session ended and Denman was able to escape to the grange (or small manor house) at Stoney Middleton, near Bakewell, Derbyshire, which he had lovingly improved over the years. Some thought it unprepossessing; Wensleydale said that Denman 'must be very fond of ancestral property to like such a house' (Arnould, 1.384 n.). Denman was very tired. The 'Reform Bill' debates had been prolonged. Moreover, he had the burden of prosecuting the agrarian and Bristol rioters and was induced to issue 'ex officio' informations against William Cobbett and Richard Carlile, the atheistic publisher, who were, he considered, more guilty than the rioters, having encouraged them to violence. But he resisted royal pressure to initiate further 'ex officio' informations for libels on the royal family. Shocked as he was by their content and tone, he concluded that further prosecutions might be seen by juries as an attack on the freedom of the press. 
The execution of rioters in Nottingham in January 1832 led to Denman's being vilified at a public meeting in August that year. However, at the general election following the 'Reform Bill's' enactment he was again elected, having refused an invitation from the county of Derby. On 3 November 1832 Lord Tenterden died. On Brougham's suggestion, Grey proposed Denman as his successor and, 'after a short struggle' ('Life and Times', 3.224), William IV assented to the appointment which was enthusiastically greeted by the profession and the press. Denman was sworn in as lord chief justice of England on 9 November 1832, and presided over that most influential common-law court for the next seventeen years. 
As an advocate Denman could not be compared to Scarlett, and as a lawyer he was much inferior to Campbell and Parke. Nor was he as intelligent as his contemporaries, Lyndhurst and Brougham. But his tenure as a judge was a successful one. His relationship with the other judges was one of 'uninterrupted harmony' (Arnould, 1.420-21), the bar respected him, and the public regarded him as the personification of judicial dignity. When he took office there was a substantial volume of business in arrears in the king's bench. The exchequer was relatively moribund and the work of the court of common pleas was restricted by the fact that only serjeants-at-law could practise before it. Denman resolved to destroy what he called 'that gigantic monster called Arrear' (ibid., 1.423). He did so by working 'like a dragon' (ibid.) and requiring the court to sit from early in the morning until late in the evening; remarkably he did so without alienating either the profession or their clients. Denman was a distinguished trial judge. Although he quickly reached a decision, he had the capacity '[to wind himself] up to the state of patience and quiet which alone can guide [him] through [the heavy calendar] with the least possible annoyance' (ibid., 2.140). He was impartial and unfailingly courteous. Like Lyndhurst, Denman was a judge for the parties, fair, scrupulous, and temperate. 
Greville's judgement was very different. He wrote in his journal that Denman was a 'very bad judge but much respected' (Greville, 2.331). It is true that he left few memorable judgments. Denman thought that his reputation as a lawyer would depend on his judgment in 'Stockdale v. Hansard' in 1839, which the distinguished American judge and jurist Joseph Story had praised (Arnould, 2.110-11). The court of king's bench held that the existence of a privilege claimed by either of the houses of parliament and, in particular, the House of Commons was a matter of law for the courts and was not determined by a resolution of either house. To decide otherwise would make the judge 'an accomplice in the destruction of the liberties of his country, and expose every individual who lived in it to a tyranny no man ought to submit to'. 'In truth, no practical distinction can be drawn between the right to sanction all things under the name of privilege, and the right to sanction all things whatever, by merely ordering them to be done'. Denman never forgave Campbell, then attorney-general, for his intemperate expression of disapproval and portrayal of Denman as a vainglorious champion of the people. 
In 'O'Connell's case' Denman joined Cottenham and Campbell in quashing O'Connell's conviction for conspiracy and sedition. They upheld two objections to the validity of the sentence, rejecting the advice of the great majority of the judges. Some of the counts in the indictment were bad. Moreover, the omission of names from the list of jurors was fatal. If this latter objection were rejected, 'trial by jury itself, instead of being a security to persons who are accused, will be a Mockery, A Delusion and a Snare'. The reports contain other well-known judgments: for example, 'Eastwood v. Kenyon' (1840), which established that moral consideration was not consideration necessary to found a binding contract; and 'Williams v. Carwardine' (1833), which held that the motive for an act which amounts to an act of acceptance in law of an offer to contract is immaterial. 
In 1834 Brougham persuaded Grey to strengthen the judicial membership of the House of Lords. Denman was the obvious candidate; on 22 March his title was duly gazetted as Baron Denman of Dovedale. His belief in the rights of the individual was one of the moral principles central to his life. Unlike Lyndhurst, Denman was not a man who would sacrifice principle for party dogma. After the passing of the 'Reform Bill', he wrote: 'The greatest of all political evils I have always thought was this -- injustice deliberately perpetrated or wilfully persisted in by the State. My own opinion has uniformly been that injustice and wrong, whenever detected, ought to be instantly swept away. Like everything that prevails, it will by degrees strengthen itself by inveterate habits and factitious interests... Let, then, the first moment be taken when you can bring a sufficient force to bear upon mischief. Shake off the bad principle while you may, and scan not too nicely the inconsistencies or even dangers that may result from the success of your exertions. (Arnould, 1.388-93)' He was alive to the connection between ignorance and crime, and 'doubted how far the State was justified in inflicting punishment for offences against which it had taken no means to guard' ('Hansard 3', 27, 21 May 1835, 1335). In order to 'shake off bad principle' he was ready to support tory bills for the repeal of the 'Test Acts' and the passing of the 'Catholic Emancipation Bill'. 
Denman and Lyndhurst persuaded the House of Lords to pass, despite the opposition of most of the judges, Campbell's 'Prisoners' Counsel Act' of 1837 which allowed counsel for a person accused of felony to address the jury and the accused to inspect and take copies of the deposition against him. Its 'practical execution' was essential for 'the honour of the laws, for the due administration of justice, for the realisation of truth, and for the protection of innocence' ('Hansard 3', 34.760-78); and in the same year a bill abolishing the death penalty for all cases of forgery passed through both houses -- two measures which he had fought for when first elected to the House of Commons. In 1838, this time supported by his fellow judges, Denman unsuccessfully sought to persuade the house to allow witnesses to affirm instead of taking the oath; he thought a witness should be sworn according to the form which was binding on his conscience. The 'Law of Evidence (Amendment) Act' of 1842 which Denman introduced embodied the Benthamite principles that all interested persons should be allowed to give evidence, leaving it to the jury to estimate its value. In 1841, moved by the appeal of Caroline Norton, Denman supported the 'Custody of Infants Bill' which gave a wife separated from her husband access to her children. Denman was one of the few whig peers to attack the government over its treatment of Mazzini, who was said to be a dangerous foreigner, spreading sedition. His letters had been opened at the Post Office under the warrant of Peel's home secretary, Sir James Graham. In the debate in 1844 Denman condemned that so-called right as 'new, and... dangerous and utterly unknown to the people of England'. It is no surprise that Denman supported every Liberal measure. What is surprising is that he regarded his successful proposal that the courts could sit 'in banco' outside the brief legal terms as so significant that he asked for it to be recorded on his tombstone. 
The abolition of all manifestations of the slave trade was, for Denman, the most important of reforms. Slavery was 'the foulest stain that ever rested on the character of the country' ('Hansard 3', 3, 1831, 1408-96). His first major speech in the House of Lords was in the debate on the 'Bill for the Better Suppression of the Slave Trade' of 15 August 1839. Before speaking he was in a 'state of the utmost anxiety' (Arnould, 2.101), as he always was when he spoke on slavery. The bill gave the crown power to seize vessels suspected of engaging in the slave trade. Denman dismissed fears that this would lead the country into war with France. Suppression of the slave trade must be a fact as well as a name: 'There must be a right of visitation and search'. It was true that mistakes would inevitably be made by raiding parties; therefore it was necessary to 'indemnify the officers of Her Majesty in the discharge of the duty imposed on them' ('Hansard 3', 50.331-4). The judgment in 'R. v. Serva' in 1845 shocked him. The 'Felicidade' was a slave-trading vessel, whose crew had killed a boarding party from a Royal Navy cruiser and had been convicted of murder. But the judges gathered to consider crown cases concluded that their convictions could not stand. Denman and Baron Platt dissented. The majority gave no reasons for their decision, and in a pamphlet Denman proposed that in future they should do so. 
Denman's son, Joseph, became the captain of a similar cruiser on the west African coast. He had released slaves from, and set fire to, barracoons where they had been incarcerated. Captain Denman was unsuccessfully sued for the loss suffered by the slave owner. The court of exchequer held that, although the slave owner had property in his slaves and could sue in trespass for their seizure, the ratification by the ministers of state of Captain Denman's act rendered it an act of state, for which the crown alone was liable. Denman bitterly commented that it was the first time that the claim of an owner of slaves had been recognized in an English court of justice. 
Denman sensed with alarm that many politicians and members of the public were becoming antipathetic to the anti-slavery movement. The 'Sugar Duties Bill' of 1846 proposed to equalize the duties on British colonial and slave-produced sugar. Denman spoke fervently against it, arguing that its enactment would increase the slave traffic. But the appeal to free trade prevailed and the bill reached the statute book. In 1848 a committee of the House of Commons, chaired by William Hutt, who had slave-trading interests, concluded that the posting of naval squadrons was ineffectual and counter-productive, increasing the suffering of black people. The slave trade should be left to itself. On 22 and 28 August Denman made two powerful speeches in the house which swayed public opinion and significantly contributed to the decision not to withdraw the squadrons. Denman's speeches on the slave trade were highly emotional, and he admitted that it was 'utterly impossible to talk of slavery and the Slave Trade with any degree of moderation, -- or indeed with any other feeling than that of the most perfect abhorrence' ('Hansard 3', 88, 1848, 511). Anxious to appeal to the country, he published a number of pamphlets, including 'The Slave Trade and the Press', published anonymously in 1847, and 'Letters to Lord Brougham on the Extinction of the Trade' (1848). 
In 1849 Denman was seventy. On circuit and in London he sat very long hours in court; twelve-hour sittings were frequent. The strain was great and he suffered his first stroke the day before the beginning of the Easter term. But, ignoring medical advice, he was determined to sit in the Trinity term and to speak in the house, not only on the slave trade (which his doctors knew would excite him), but also on the motion to enable witnesses who had religious scruples to affirm rather than to take the oath. But the house again rejected the motion. In July 1849 Denman suffered his second stroke. He could now barely sign his name. Friends, including Brougham, and the eminent physicians, Sir Benjamin Brodie and Dr Thomas Watson, urged him to resign. But the prospect of Campbell succeeding him increased his determination to struggle on. Campbell's bitter attack on his motives in deciding 'Stockdale v. Hansard' still rankled ten years later. But Denman was mollified by the letter of Russell, the prime minister: 'No one can be more persuaded than I am that in the decisions given on Privilege, as in all other cases, none but a conscientious sense of duty was allowed to prevail'. Russell concluded with an assurance that Denman's name stood as a 'model of uprightness and independence in the judicial office. If, as I infer, you are about to resign, it would surely be better to carry an undivided homage with you into retirement than to raise a question as to your successor, in which many may think you right, but many others may think you wrong. (Arnould, 2.290-91)' In March 1850 Denman resigned. 
For a short period Denman's health improved. In a letter to Brougham, later published in the 'Law Review', he chided his judicial brethren for their reluctance to embrace reform and their belief in the perfection of the legal system, 'whereas in truth the existing system is for the most part the neglected growth of time and accident' (Arnould, 2.319-21). His final speech in the house, in May 1852, supported Truro's 'Common Law Procedure Bill'. The 'one subject and one subject only, beyond the limits of his private grief [the death of his wife]' which 'had still power to move him deeply... was the terrible, ever-haunting subject of slavery and the slave trade' (ibid., 2.332). The publication in England of Harriet Beecher Stowe's 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' aroused Denman's pity and horror. It led him to attack bitterly, through a series of articles in 'The Standard', his old friend Dickens, for his caricature of philanthropy run mad, personified by Mrs Jellaby in 'Bleak House', which he believed would undermine the anti-slavery movement. Dickens realized that Denman was a sick man, and wrote to his daughter, Margaret (Mrs Cropper), to say that he had 'cleared [his] mind of Lord Denman's last opinions of me' (ibid., 2.333). 
Denman never recovered from his wife's death on 28 June 1852, and his final stroke occurred in Nice in early December of the same year. He comprehended what was said to him, but he would never speak again and could copy only what others had written. Denman died on 22 September 1854 at Stoke Albany, Northamptonshire, and was buried in the churchyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 7496


Denman, Thomas Aitchison, second Baron Denman (1805-1894), politician, born in London on 30 July 1805, was the first son of Thomas Denman, first Baron Denman (1779-1854), and his wife, Theodosia Anne (1779-1852), the eldest daughter of Richard Vevers, rector of Kettering. George Denman was his brother. He was educated at Eton College and at Brasenose College, Oxford. He matriculated on 17 May 1823. He was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1833, and for eighteen years acted as associate to his father as chief justice of England. 
Denman succeeded to the peerage on the death of his father on 22 September 1854. He was always concerned rather with politics than law. During his long life as a peer he was a regular frequenter of the House of Lords, but won notoriety rather from his eccentricities than any eminent qualifications. Though described by Dod as a Liberal until 1884, he frequently voted against major Liberal bills. Limitation of the duration of speeches in the House of Lords and the granting of female suffrage were subjects to which he unsuccessfully devoted his support. Year after year with unfailing regularity, from 1886 to 1894, he brought in bills to secure these objects, and, despite his inability on any occasion to secure even a second reading, he was not deterred from making fresh efforts in each succeeding year. 
Denman married, on 12 August 1829, Georgina, eldest daughter of Thomas Roe; she died on 25 April 1871. He then married, on 10 October 1871, Maria, the eldest daughter of James Aitchison of Alderston, co. Haddington, and by royal licence on 20 December 1879 assumed the additional surname of Aitchison under the will of his wife's mother. With neither of his wives had he any children. He died of heart failure at the King's Arms, Berwick upon Tweed, on 9 August 1894 and was buried at Alderston. 


@@@@@


doc= 7497


Denne, Henry (1605/6?-1666), General Baptist minister and religious controversialist, was born at Well, Ickham, in Kent, the son of David Denne, gentleman. He matriculated at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1621, graduated BA in 1625, and proceeded MA in 1628. At an unknown date he married Roberta, whose surname is unknown; they had four sons and a daughter. After ordination in 1630 at St David's Denne was curate at Pirton, Hertfordshire, for about ten years. Latterly Denne's disputatious printed works led to controversy with other ministers. His 'Grace, Mercy, and Peace' ('c'.1640) and 'Seven Arguments to Prove... God Doth Justifie his Elect' (1643), evoked a charge of antinomianism from 'D. H.' in 'An Antidote Against Antinomianism' (1644). His visitation sermon at Baldock, Hertfordshire, on 9 December 1641, critical of fellow clergy ('The Doctrine and Conversation of John Baptist', 1642, to which was added 'A Conference between a Sick Man and a Minister'), brought similar charges from Thomas Rotherham in 'A Den of Theeves Discovered' (1643) and Samuel Rutherford in 'A Modest Survey' (1648). The heresiographer Thomas Edwards also considered Denne 'a great Antinomian, a desperate Arminian' ('Gangraena', 1645, 1.76). 
By 1643 Denne had adopted Baptist views and joined the Bell Alley General Baptist Church in London under the ministry of Thomas Lamb the soap boiler and future Leveller. The church sent Denne as an evangelist into Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingdonshire, where he established congregations at Fenstanton and Warboys. He was presented to the living at Eltisley, Cambridgeshire, probably in 1643, by the family of Major-General John Desborough, the brother-in-law and associate of Cromwell. In the following year, however, the Cambridge committee for providing preaching ministers had him imprisoned for preaching against infant baptism, but he was removed to London, detained at the Peter-house (Lord Petre's house in Aldersgate Street), and released. In spite of his experience, Denne's 'Antichrist Unmasked in Two Treatises' (1645), included not only 'The Man of Sin Discovered', who was said to fill English pulpits, but also 'The Foundation of Christian Baptism Discovered and Rased', which attacked paedobaptist works by Stephen Marshall and Daniel Featly, a fellow detainee at Peter-house. 
In 1645 Denne preached in London and at Rochester, Chatham, and Canterbury in Kent, and the next year he was arrested in Spalding, Lincolnshire, for baptizing four persons in the river. On this occasion he identified his home as at Caxton near Eltisley and admitted to preaching four times, but not baptizing, at Spalding. In 1646 he added 'The Drag-Net of the Kingdome of Heaven' to his earlier work to produce 'Antichrist Unmasked in Three Treatises'. Denne's argument in 'Drag-Net' that Christ died for all, and his use of the 'New Testament' concept of 'light' have been seen as advancing the Quaker doctrine of the inner light two years before George Fox did, but this now appears doubtful. 
In 1647 Denne joined the parliamentary army as cornet in Colonel Adrian Scrope's regiment of horse. He participated with Levellers in the mutiny of May 1649, marching from Salisbury to Burford, where Cromwell crushed the uprising. Denne and three others were to be executed, but upon his recantation he was spared. As with his earlier release from Peter-house, Denne's association with the Desboroughs perhaps contributed to his pardon. In 'The Levellers Designe Discovered' (1649) he criticized impetuous actions of mutinous Levellers who then responded by denouncing 'the most Trayterous assertions' of 'that wretched 'Judas' 'Den'' ('The Levellers... Vindicated', 1649, 8). By 1653 Denne was again active at Fenstanton but the next year was sent by the congregation to live and minister in Canterbury at the request of Baptists there. In London in 1658 he publicly debated with Peter Gunning on infant baptism, but also displayed wider concerns. In 'The Quaker No Papist' (1659) he came to the defence of Friends, arguing against Cambridge University librarian Thomas Smith (who later rebutted him in 'A Gagg for the Quakers', 1659) that they were papists because they refused oaths. Denne also defended John Bunyan's right to preach and urged greater toleration for Roman Catholics. Finally, in 'An Epistle Recommended to All the Prisons' (1660) he argued that Christians could lawfully take oaths and thus many needlessly languished in prisons, provoking counter-arguments from the Baptist Henry Adis in 'A Fanaticks Testimony Against Swearing' (1661) and the Quaker Samuel Fisher in 'One Antidote More' (1660). 
Denne was among thirty Baptist signatories to 'The Humble Apology' (1661) denouncing Venner's Fifth Monarchist rebellion. He eventually settled in Rochester where in 1666 he died. His will of 1 June 1666, which gives his age as sixty-one, requested burial in his parish church of St Margaret, Rochester, but he was in fact interred at Rochester Cathedral on 4 August. The will also provided 1's'. for each of twenty poor widows, 10's'. to his oldest son John (church elder at Fenstanton), 5's'. to each of John's four children, 10's'. to each child of Denne's deceased son, David, $100 and half his goods to his wife, and his books to his youngest son, Thomas, who was named executor. As a Church of England priest turned Baptist, Denne had, with unusually broad sympathies, supported some of the principles or practices of Levellers, Quakers, and Roman Catholics, and in such a manner as to justify his own conclusion of 1645 that ''The Lord hath sent me as' a man of contention' ('The Man of Sin Discovered', A2'v'). His epitaph, however, read only: '
To tell his wisdom, learning, goodness, unto men, 

I need to say no more; but, Here lies Henry Denne. 
(Taylor, 1.222)' 



@@@@@


doc= 7498


Denne, John (1693-1767), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born on 25 May 1693 at Littlebourne, Kent, the eldest son of John Denne, woodreeve to the see of Canterbury. He was educated at the grammar school, Sandwich; the King's School, Canterbury; and at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, whence he matriculated in 1709. He graduated BA (1713), MA (1716), and DD (1728). He was tutor and fellow of his college from 1716 to 1721. Following ordination in 1716, he was presented to the perpetual curacy of St Benedict's Church, Cambridge. In 1721 he became rector of Norton by Daventry, Northamptonshire, exchanging that living in 1723 for the vicarage of St Leonard, Shoreditch. 
In 1724 Denne married Susannah (1703-1780), youngest daughter of Samuel Bradford (1652-1731), bishop of Rochester, to whom he was domestic chaplain for many years. They had three children: John (died 1800), chaplain of Maidstone gaol; Samuel Denne (1730-1799), the antiquary; and Susannah. While Denne was vicar St Leonard's was rebuilt by George Dance, between 1736 and 1740. From 1725 to 1728 Denne delivered (but did not publish) the Boyle lectures. In 1728 he was appointed archdeacon and prebendary of Rochester and was vicar of St Margaret's, Rochester, until 1731 when he resigned for the rectory of St Mary, Lambeth, which he held until his death. He was for some time prolocutor of the lower house of convocation. 
As an antiquary Denne arranged and bound up the archives of Rochester Cathedral and the acts of the courts of the bishop and archdeacon. He collated Hearne's edition of the 'Textus Roffensis' with the original at Rochester. He compiled 'A history of the chancellors of the diocese of Rochester' and made collections for a history of the cathedral, including transcribing from the registers entries of burials from over 100 years. Manuscripts relating chiefly to Rochester made by him and continued by his son Samuel Denne were rescued from destruction when purchased by the British Museum in 1841 (BL, Add. MSS 11819-11826). Denne was especially learned in ecclesiastical history and contributed materials to John Lewis's 'The History of the Life and Sufferings of John Wicliffe' (1720). He published three other historical works and fifteen sermons, including 'The Blessing of a Protestant King and Royal Family to the Nation' (1727). Having suffered from ill health since 1759, he died on 5 August 1767 at Rochester and was buried in the cathedral there. 


@@@@@


doc= 7499


Denne, Samuel (1730-1799), antiquary, was born at the deanery, Westminster, on 13 January 1730, the second of the two sons of John Denne (1693-1767), archdeacon of Rochester and antiquary, and Susannah Bradford (1703-1780). He was educated at Streatham and at the King's School, Canterbury, and was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1748; he graduated BA in 1753 and MA in 1756. In 1754 he was presented to the vicarage of Lamberhurst in Kent, but he resigned the living in 1767 when he became vicar of the parishes of Wilmington and Darenth, both near Dartford. In 1783 he became a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Denne was described in his obituary as a 'loyal son', and demonstrated this loyalty in maintaining his father's interest in antiquarianism. His first publication on the subject in 1772 was a history of Rochester and its environs, which was published by the local bookseller Thomas Fisher, but to which Denne contributed most of the content. He also assisted Fisher in his revision of the 'Kentish Traveller's Companion'. Denne senior had at one time been vicar of St Leonard, Shoreditch, and Samuel continued the family interest in the parish of Shoreditch, providing Henry Ellis with considerable assistance in his parochial history. He also maintained the family connection with Lambeth, of which his father had been rector, with his 'Historical Particulars of Lambeth Parish and Lambeth Palace', published in 1795. In addition he made significant contributions to other publications, notably John Thorpe's 'Custumale Roffense', Richard Gough's 'Sepulchral Monuments', the 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica', and the 'Illustrations of the Manners and Expences of Antient Times in England' (1797). He corresponded regularly with the 'Gentleman's Magazine' using the signature W & D (Wilmington and Darenth) and was a prolific contributor of papers to the Society of Antiquaries, many of which were published in 'Archaeologia', notably on the introduction of arabic numerals, on water marks, and on stone fonts in England. Like many other antiquaries of his time he entertained a keen interest in Anglo-Saxon antiquities and literature, but was handicapped by having no real command of the language. Denne was somewhat pedantic and not an original thinker but his interests were diverse and wide-ranging. 
Denne appears as a somewhat lonely figure (he never married) and clearly drew immense pleasure from his antiquarian researches and the contacts it brought him with like-minded people. Settled in rural Kent, he felt isolated and often complained of the lack of antiquarian interest in the local town of Dartford. His correspondence with other antiquaries and in particular with his fellow 'Benedictine', Richard Gough, was something of an intellectual lifeline. His circle also included the other Kentish antiquaries William Boys, John Thorpe, and John Latham, but he rather disapproved of the county's historian Edward Hasted whose private life and publications, in Denne's view, both left something to be desired. He was close to his family, particularly his brother and sister. The former, chaplain of the gaol at Maidstone, suffered periods of mental instability from 1777, which Denne blamed on his having to cope with the insurrection at Maidstone gaol, when the prisoners attempted to blow it up. He was very supportive of both him and his sister-in-law, and when she died in 1798 he estimated that he had written over a thousand letters to his brother to amuse him. His brother's experiences as chaplain may account for Denne's own interest in prison reform, which formed the subject of a letter to Sir Robert Ladbroke published in 1771. To his sister, Susannah, who had lived with him, he left his entire estate when he died. In politics he professed great admiration for Walpole, bitterly regretted the loss of the American colonies, and was fiercely critical of the prosecution of the war against France during the 1790s. He appears to have performed his duties as vicar conscientiously and his obituary described him as devoted to the poor and needy of his parish. 
Denne died on 3 August 1799, at Wilmington, in his library, having suffered from a bilious complaint for over forty years, and was buried near his father in the south transept of Rochester Cathedral on 10 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 7500


Dennett, John (1790-1852), inventor of a life-saving rocket, and antiquary, lived in Newport, Isle of Wight. In or about 1830 he invented a life-saving rocket apparatus (known as 'Dennett's') for conveying a rope from the shore to a shipwrecked crew. George William Manby had previously used a grappling shot fired from a mortar for the same purpose. Dennett's apparatus resembled a skyrocket, but had an iron casing rather than a paper one, and a pole 8 feet long. It weighed 23 lb, was propelled by a 9 lb charge, and had a range of 250 yards. Dennett subsequently increased the range to 400 yards by placing two rockets side by side on the same pole, but the action of these parallel rockets proved to be unsatisfactory. 
A ship's crew off Bembridge, in the Isle of Wight, having been saved by means of Dennett's rocket, the board of customs in 1834 had the apparatus supplied to several coastguard stations. Its official use was superseded by the adoption of Boxer's rocket in 1865. Dennett's rockets are said to have been sent to all parts of the world, and to have won for their inventor several overseas honours. A short time before his death, Dennett was appointed custodian of Carisbrooke Castle. It would appear that this was a form of recognition for his services as an inventor. He had a practical knowledge of antiquities, and was a corresponding member of the British Archaeological Association. He contributed to its journal short accounts of various antiquities found in England, and read a paper on the barrows of the Isle of Wight at the Winchester congress of the association in 1845. He died on 10 July 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 7501


Dennie, William Henry (1789-1842), army officer, was born at Deptford, Kent, on 22 June 1789, the son of Henry Dennie, barrister, of London, and his wife, Grace (died 1856), daughter of William Steele and granddaughter of Laurence Steele of Rathbride, co. Kildare. Through General the Hon. Edward Fox, Dennie's widowed mother obtained for him an ensigncy in the 22nd foot, dated 1 January 1800. He became lieutenant in August 1804 and captain on 4 October 1810. He first joined the regiment after its arrival in India in 1802, and won Lord Lake's approval by his conduct during a minor regimental mutiny. 
Dennie served with the regiment throughout Lake's campaigns in India in 1804-5, at the capture of Mauritius in 1810, and afterwards in Mauritius, the Channel Islands, and Ireland. While in Mauritius, where he commanded the coastal defences at Black River, he married, on 20 May 1818, Marie Genevieve Aimee Buttie, the divorced wife of Jean Jerome Toussaint. They had two sons and a daughter. After obtaining his majority in April 1821 he exchanged to the 13th foot (soon made light infantry) and went to India. With the 13th light infantry he served during the First Anglo-Burmese War, in which he distinguished himself and was severely wounded; he was awarded a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy and a CB. He served with his regiment in the army of the Indus in 1838-9. 
When General Nott was appointed to the 2nd division of the army, Dennie succeeded to the command of Nott's sepoy brigade, and was employed in Sind, Baluchistan, and Lower Afghanistan. He quarrelled with General Keane early in the Afghan campaign and General Nott took an instant dislike to him. His services were unacknowledged at headquarters, where there appears to have been a desire to make him a scapegoat for the administrative blundering of the Afghan campaign. He led the storming party at the capture of Ghazni but, as he was at the time in disfavour at headquarters, the Ghazni honours conferred on some of his juniors were withheld from him. He complained respectfully but bitterly to the Indian authorities and the Horse Guards, without redress. Fiery and romantically chivalrous, as a writer in the 'Bombay Gazette' described him, Dennie appears to have been irritably impatient of acts of injustice which would scarcely have moved a less sensitive man. During the occupation of Kabul, Dennie was dispatched with a small force in September 1840 against part of the army of Dost Muhammad, which, after a series of brilliant manoeuvres and though greatly outnumbered, he decisively defeated at Bamian on 18 September. Dost Muhammad surrendered immediately afterwards and the campaign ended. 
In October 1841 a brigade under Sir Robert Sale was sent from Kabul against Afghan insurgents who had occupied the Khurd Kabul Pass. This brigade, which included the 13th light infantry, seized the ruined fortress of Jalalabad and rendered themselves 'illustrious' by its subsequent defence from November 1841 to April 1842. Dennie commanded the rear-guard in the operations in the Khurd Kabul between 9 and 30 October, and, when Sir Robert Sale was wounded, succeeded to the command of the force, which he held during the greater part of the defence of Jalalabad. In the sortie of 7 April 1842 Dennie was shot through the body when riding at the head of his regiment and died soon after. He was buried in a bastion used as a graveyard by the garrison. Tablets to commemorate his bravery were erected at St Peter's Church, Fort William, Calcutta, and St Mary's Church, Carisbrooke, Isle of Wight. His services had been recognized by his appointment as aide-de-camp to the queen. He died after forty-two years' military service, mostly in India, during which he had purchased every step of regimental rank. After his death, Dennie's letters from the Anglo-Afghan War were published as 'Personal Narrative of Campaigns in Affghanistan, Sinde, Beloochistan' (1843); they reveal that his courage and military qualities notwithstanding, Dennie was quick to take offence and frequently at odds with his superiors. He appears to have been assertive, sometimes obstructive, and often quarrelsome, but a fine fighting soldier. 


@@@@@


doc= 7502


Dennis, James Blatch Piggott (1815-1861), palaeontologist and natural historian, was born, possibly at Colchester, on 4 August 1815, the son of Philip Dennis, an army officer. After attending Bedford School from 1830 to 1833 he was admitted to Queen's College, Oxford, in 1835. He graduated in 1839 and was ordained a minister in the Church of England. Two years later, on 30 November 1841, at Heworth, co. Durham, he married a minor, Eliza Potts, daughter of Mathew Potts. 
During 1848 James Dennis produced two pamphlets under the pseudonym Lucius debating Lord John Russell's ecclesiastical policy. He also wrote a tract in his own name, 'Rites and Ceremonies in the Church and the Apostolic Succession'. In 1850 he was appointed curate at St James's Church in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, but resigned his curacy two years later to become a master at the local King Edward VI Grammar School. An active figure in local intellectual life, he organized geological and natural history displays with lectures and study groups in the town's museum. 
From Bury St Edmunds Dennis frequently visited the Norfolk broads to study bird life. In accordance with the ornithological attitudes of the time he shot and stuffed many birds; he sent fifty specimens to the Great Exhibition. At Stonesfield in Oxfordshire he discovered the fossil jawbone of 'Stereognathus ooliticus', a previously unknown Jurassic mammal. Richard Owen's subsequent study of the jawbone, published in the 'Journal of the Geological Society' in 1856, led to Dennis's election as a fellow of the Geological Society. 
In 1856 and 1857 Dennis published articles on the microscopic study of bones and fossils in the 'Quarterly Journal of Microscopic Science'. A paper on the origin of mammals, based on investigations of fossils from Lyme Regis in Dorset, put forward a theory on the bone structure of animals with the power of springing movement. Other contributions discussed cetacean fossils from Felixstowe in Suffolk, and evidence for the origin of birds from fossils found at Stonesfield. In 1860, at the Oxford meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, he delivered a paper on pterodactyl flight, based on researches into fossils from the Cambridgeshire coprolite beds. 
Dennis retired from his post at the Bury St Edmunds grammar school in 1857. In the following year he published 'An Answer to Mr. Ballie' (a member of the Church of England who had converted to Roman Catholicism), arguing the two churches' relative merits. He died of 'brain disease' at his house in Garland Street, Bury St Edmunds, on 13 January 1861, and was buried in the town cemetery. His wife survived him, and after his death the trustees of the town's museum organized a subscription and exhibition to purchase his ornithological collections and provide for his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 7503


Dennis, John (1658-1734), literary critic, was born on 16 September 1658 in the parish of St Andrew's, Holborn, London, the only child of Francis Dennis (died 1663), a saddler, and Sarah Dennis (died 1709/10), who later married Thomas Sanderson, who was also a saddler, with whom she had a daughter, Dennis's half-sister Elizabeth. 
Dennis was educated at Harrow School under Dr William Horne. He was elected orator in 1674. On 13 January 1676 he matriculated from Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he held one of Harrow's two founder's exhibitions, and took his BA in 1679. On reaching his majority, Dennis inherited a bequest of $500 from Simon Eve, his paternal uncle, an alderman of London. He remained in residence but his career at the college came to an end following an incident with a fellow student: on 4 March 1680, he was mulcted $3, deprived of his scholarship, and obliged to leave after attacking and wounding Charles Glenham. Dennis moved to Trinity Hall in 1681. There, in 1683, he took his MA, and with that qualification, but not on the foundation of the college, it is probable that he worked as a tutor until 1686. 
In that year Dennis brought a chancery suit against his mother. She had defrauded him, he claimed, of the interest on his uncle's bequest. Her son had become an unfilial spendthrift, his mother countered. It is likely that the family arrived at an out-of-court settlement. By 1688 he could afford to accompany one of his former Harrow schoolmates, Lord Francis Seymour, on the grand tour. Theirs was the traditional itinerary; the letter in which Dennis describes crossing the Alps into Italy is an early expression of the romantic sublime. The record of his travels is coloured, however, by a hostility to absolutist, Catholic Europe which permanently darkened his political thought. 'I mortally hate them', he wrote of the French (J. Dennis, 'Miscellanies in Verse and Prose', 1693, 126). 
On his return Dennis determined on a literary career. Supported by his private income, he established himself in London as a modish man of letters, publishing occasional verse (fables, translations, and self-conscious exercises in wit, some of which were collected in 'Poems in Burlesque', 1692, and his 'Miscellanies') and several Pindaric odes, including 'The Court of Death' (1695), dedicated to the memory of Queen Mary, and 'The Nuptials of Britain's Genius and Fame' (1697), on the conclusion of the Nine Years' War. He cultivated the leading literary figures, Dryden, Wycherley, and Congreve among them. At the same time, and with an eye on his dwindling fortune, Dennis also courted statesmen. A committed but independent whig, he was proud that his literary works had been favourably received by 'the late Earls of 'Godolphin' and 'Halifax', Mr. 'Maynwaring' and others among the Whigs', he recalled in 1719, 'and by the present Duke of 'Buckingham' and my Lord 'Lansdown' among the Tories' ('Critical Works', 2.173). Rewards were none the less modest and infrequent. His greatest success followed the publication of 'Britannia triumphans' (1704), a celebration of the victory at Blenheim: the duke of Marlborough gave Dennis 100 guineas and obtained for him the position of queen's waiter at the Port of London, a sinecure worth $52 a year. 
A place, however exiguous, compensated for the inheritance Dennis had spent. With neither vocation nor profession to fall back on, he had also turned to the theatre. Dennis wrote several plays which achieved, at best, modest success: 'A Plot, and No Plot' (1697), a farcical comedy; 'Rinaldo and Armida' (1698), a dramatic opera with musical passages written mainly by John Eccles, which freely adapted Tasso's 'Gerusalemme liberata' (1575); 'Iphigenia' (1699), based on Euripides and supported by Colonel Christopher Codrington, who encouraged his friends to attend the author's benefit; and 'The Comical Gallant' (1702), a farcical adaptation of 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', which quickly closed (Dennis was the first to record the tradition that Shakespeare wrote the play at Queen Elizabeth's command). With 'Liberty Asserted' (1704) Dennis achieved his one theatrical success, an anti-French story set in Canada so successful (it was performed ten times between 24 February and 16 March 1704, and again on 27 March) that the author -- it is claimed -- feared the French would seek his extradition under the terms of the treaty of Utrecht. He sought Marlborough's help. The duke could not assist him, however; 'indeed he had taken no Care to get himself exempted in the Articles of Peace', John Mottley's drily aristocratic account relates, 'and he could not help thinking, that he had done the 'French' almost as much Damage as Mr. 'Dennis' himself' (Mottley, 214). A year later 'Gibraltar' (1705), Dennis's weakest play, fell after two performances. 'The Masque of Orpheus and Euridice' (published 1707) was probably never performed. For the production of 'Appius and Virginia' (1709), which ran for three noisy nights, Dennis improved the mustard bowl device in which stage managers created claps of thunder. His advance is remembered in English idiom. At a performance of 'Macbeth' shortly after his own play had closed, tradition tells that Dennis heard deep rumbling off-stage. 'Damn them!', he is said to have exclaimed, 'they will not let my play run, but they steal my thunder'. According to the 'Oxford English Dictionary' this was the origin of the figurative expression, but the incident is more likely to be apocryphal, a story Pope put about to further his own image of the critic. Dennis wrote one more play in 1710, but it was not performed for several years. 
The second decade of the eighteenth century marked a decline in Dennis's fortunes. Frequently ill (he suffered from gout, fevers, stones, increasing weight, and deteriorating sight), he retired from the metropolitan world of clubs and coffee houses in 1705. His finances remained uncertain. Since at least 1710 Dennis had found work as a notary public, empowered to act as an agent and banker. Although he had taken the cause of Royal Navy ratings before parliament ('The Seamens Case', 1699?) and had published a couple of pamphlets on naval affairs ('An Essay on the Navy', 1702, and 'A Proposal for Putting a Speedy End to the War', 1703), in which he reveals an impressive command of detail and sympathy for the sailor's plight, he was twice accused of defrauding seamen of their wages. At some date after May 1711, insolvent, he left the capital. An examining commission declared him bankrupt in August 1711; days later Granville wrote to Robert, earl of Oxford, the lord high treasurer, reminding him that Dennis had made various proposals for raising revenue, including a new tax calculated to assist merchant shipping, and recommending that he be helped. Dennis acknowledged Granville, who stepped in when the ministry failed to act, in the dedication to 'An Essay on the Genius and Writings of Shakespear' (1712) but relief was temporary; corporation records show that he was discharged from the Fleet, where he had been imprisoned for debt, in January 1713 (he may even have been held there as a debtor as early as 1696, but identification is not certain). At times during this period Dennis lived within the verges of the court, where he was safe from arrest, but in March 1716 he sold his waitership to Benjamin Hudson for $600, to which he attached a fifteen-year reversion (he was fifty-seven at the time of the sale), and for at least four years he 'lodg'd continually in the Neighbourhood of 'White-hall'' ('Critical Works', 2.212). He continued to divide his year between the capital and the country. Throughout his life, for months at a time, Dennis sought seclusion, particularly in Northamptonshire and at Cobham, in Surrey; 'who that has Quails and 'Burgundy' before him', he asked Thomas Sergeant, 'would leave them for 'Porter' and Ram Mutton?' (Dennis, 'Original Letters', 127). 
Dennis is now best remembered as a critic. His first substantial works, 'The Impartial Critick' (1693), a Socratic dialogue in five conversational parts, and 'Remarks on a Book, Entitul'd Prince Arthur' (1696), were both directed at opponents of Dryden. 'Letters upon Several Occasions' (1696) gathered correspondence on a variety of literary and critical topics, including a couple of thoughtful letters to Congreve on Ben Jonson and dramatic comedy. Dennis also wrote political defences of the theatre. 'The Usefulness of the Stage to Religion' (1698) was a subtle first reply to the Revd Jeremy Collier's principled, anti-Williamite attacks, and in both 'The causes of the decay and defects of dramatick poetry' (1725?), one of a number of manuscripts held by the printer against money borrowed and unpublished in the author's life, and 'The Stage Defended' (1726), he argued that government regulation of the theatres had social, political, and religious benefits. 
The works Dennis published in the first years of the eighteenth century established his reputation. 'The Advancement and Reformation of Modern Poetry' (1701) revisits the ancients and moderns controversy to propose a return to verse inspired by, and responsive to, Christian precepts. 'The Grounds of Criticism in Poetry' (1704) invokes and amplifies many of the principles aired in the earlier account, including Horatian senses of Aristotelian good order (at some point before 1702 Dennis had translated the 'Ars poetica' into verse), passion, the sublime, and the place of religion in literature, but it was no mere recapitulation; the contents of the volume were a small part of what had been intended to be an ambitious subscription which would formulate the rules for each genre and include critical biographies of selected English poets. Fewer than eighty readers underwrote the edition, however, and Dennis was obliged to publish only what he had gathered. 
In 1711 an occasional series of articles appeared in 'The Spectator' which disparaged critics. Dennis was particularly angered by no. 40 (16 April 1711), which attacked the theory of poetic justice (the idea that characters' fortunes should be determined by their moral conduct), a notion which Dennis had attempted to dramatize in his own plays and whose inclusion in the article he took as a personal affront. He replied in numerous letters to the periodical; a selection was first published as an appendix to his essay on Shakespeare. Addison kept his counsel. With relations strained, and in the face of the greatest dramatic success of the day, it was an act of critical independence, and courage, for Dennis to publish his 'Remarks upon Cato' (1713), a formal account of how Addison's play suffers from its strict adherence to the dramatic unities. Johnson reprinted approvingly long extracts in his life of the essayist. Dennis was eventually reconciled to Addison but remained suspicious of Richard Steele's (blameless) hand in the articles. 
Worse was to come. In a political act, Colley Cibber was deprived of his position at the Theatre Royal. Steele, the patentee of Drury Lane since 1715, wrote in his defence, in favour of the actor-managers whom Dennis blamed for the year-long delays in the production of his final play, 'The Invader of his Country' (1719), an adaptation of 'Coriolanus', and its brief run. The four letters which form the two parts of 'The Characters and Conduct of Sir John Edgar' (1720) turn from a libel of Cibber to a vigorously 'ad hominem' attack on Steele, on his humble birth, his financial imprudence, his plagiarism, and dishonesty. In his 'A Defence of Sir Fopling Flutter' (1722) and 'Remarks on a Play, Call'd The Conscious Lovers' (1723), Dennis maintained the virtues of robustly realistic comedy against the type of sentimental romance Steele had sedulously promoted. 
Pope was scarcely on nodding acquaintance with Dennis when he included him in 'An Essay on Criticism' (1711): '

'Appius' reddens at each Word you speak, 

And 'stares', 'Tremendous'! with a 'threatning Eye', 

Like some 'fierce Tyrant' in 'Old Tapestry'. 
(ll. 585-7)' Dennis unwittingly confirmed Pope's compression of insight and association in his 'Reflections Critical and Satyrical, upon a Late Rhapsody, Call'd, An Essay on Criticism' (1711). The cumulative effect of Pope's subsequent literary and personal ridicule in, among others, 'The Narrative of Dr Robert Norris' (1713), the Scriblerian collaborations 'Three Hours after Marriage' (1717), in which Dennis appears briefly as Sir Tremendous Longinus, and 'Peri Bathous' (1728), and, further, 'The Dunciad: An Heroic Poem, in Three Books' (1728), was to suggest that the critic was lunatic: 'And all the Mighty Mad in Dennis rage' (A. Pope, 'Dunciad variorum', 1729, 1.104). In his own replies, 'A True Character of Mr Pope and his Writings' (1716), printed without his permission, 'Remarks upon Mr. Pope's Translation of Homer' (1717), and 'Remarks on Mr Pope's Rape of the Lock' (1728), to which he added a preface on the attacks of 1728, Dennis let indignation get the better of him; acute close readings of individual lines (later editions of 'An Essay on Criticism' silently incorporated several changes as a result) often give way to abuse of his adversary's physique and disabilities, his religion, politics, and commercial success. Only in 'Remarks upon Several Passages in the Preliminaries to the Dunciad' (1729), a much cooler and more various response, did Dennis arrive at a winningly disinterested tone. Few noticed. 
Throughout his career Dennis commented on topics of public interest. His non-literary prose includes works on morality; both 'An Essay on the Opera's after the Italian Manner' (1706) and 'An Essay upon Publick Spirit' (1711) denigrate foreign influences on the nation; 'Julius Caesar Acquitted' (1722) was Dennis's reply to a republican advocate of political murder, and 'Vice and Luxury Publick Mischiefs' (1724) reacted to a new, expanded edition of Bernard Mandeville's 'The Fable of the Bees' (1714; 1723). Dennis's religious tracts ('The Danger of Priestcraft to Religion and Government' (1702), the first of his works to sell widely, and 'Priestcraft Distinguish'd from Christianity' (1715), a very popular anti-Jacobite pamphlet which had run to a third edition by 1718) were broadly protestant in their sympathies, as were two later works, 'The Faith and Duties of Christians' (1728), a translation of the Revd Thomas Burnet's 'De fide et officiis Christianorum', and 'A Treatise Concerning the State of Departed Souls' (1730), which rendered Burnet's 'De statu mortuorum et resurgentium'. 
These translations, composed at the request of Burnet's literary executor, were completed in poor health and with failing sight. Dennis's final years, spent in blind infirmity, were wretched. He did not marry, although one story uniquely records 'the son of the critic' threatening violent revenge on the poet ('The Works of Alexander Pope', ed. W. Elwin and W. J. Courthope, 10 vols., 1871-86, 8.237, n. 3). In old age, for Dennis, therefore, having outlived the reversion on the sale of his waitership, patronage became alms: since 1724 the earl of Pembroke had remembered the critic with occasional presents of 5 or 10 guineas, Atterbury sent $100 from his French exile in 1730, and, although he had never been a hired pen, Walpole found $20 for him for several years. In January 1725 and January 1731 benefit performances of 'The Old Bachelor' and 'Volpone' were staged for Dennis; on 18 December 1733 a performance of 'The Provoked Husband' at the Haymarket, organized by Thomson, Mallet, Martin, and Pope (who anonymously supplied an equivocal prologue), was given for his benefit. 
By his own admission, Dennis almost always wrote in haste. He revised little and left the transmission of what were often first and only drafts to the discretion of the printer. For a time, though, in the first decade of the eighteenth century, Dennis was England's leading critic, an elegant prose stylist possessed of a shrewd and perceptive literary intelligence. Subsequent generations have always acknowledged his abilities but his reputation gradually dwindled in the face of what others, Pope especially, said he had done. In his early championing of Milton, however, his emphasis on the psychological effects of the sublime, and in his contribution to the development of Wordsworth's and Coleridge's critical thought, Dennis's importance has begun to be recognized. And at his best, Dennis was capable of searchingly acute observation: the blank verse of Shakespeare's tragedies, he noticed, was complicated by polysyllabic line endings which paradoxically domesticate the speech of the characters, close reading he demonstrates at once: 'Such Verse we make when we are writing Prose; we make such Verse in common Conversation' ('Critical Works', 2.5). The pity of his life was the moment he looked up from his studies at the world, and more particularly the people, around him. Dennis died on 6 January 1734 and was buried in the parish church of St Martin-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 7504


Denys, Sir Thomas (c.1477-1561), administrator, was the eldest son of Thomas Denys (died 1498) of Holcombe Burnell, Devon, and Janera, daughter of Philip Loveday of Sneston, Suffolk. Long established in a minor way in Devon, the family was destined to prosper under the younger Thomas, whose legal studies prepared him for a lifetime of crown service. His greatest impact was upon the administration of his own shire. Denys was appointed to the peace commission in Devon in 1504, an honour which he retained until his death, and he assiduously attended quarter sessions. He served as sheriff of Devon no fewer than nine times between 1507-8 and 1553-4, and sat on commissions responsible for musters, the collection of subsidies, and the assessment of church and chantry wealth. His legal advice was valued by many of Devon's monasteries and boroughs, particularly the city of Exeter, which retained Denys for two lengthy stints as its recorder. He was also employed directly by the crown, being thrice auditor of the duchy of Cornwall, and deputy warden of the stannaries by 1512. 
For a man like Denys, whose career rested more upon his own wit than on inherited status, the route to such local preferment began at Westminster. Lacking a university education, the ambitious Denys cultivated the law instead. He was probably a member of Lyon's Inn before his admission to the Inner Temple, where he was elected marshal in 1511 and 1514. It was also important for the aspiring shire gentleman to see some military action, and Denys took part in the Tournai campaign of 1513 (which earned him a knighthood the following year); he would return to France in 1544. But real advancement demanded a patron, and for this he turned to the court. By the time of Henry VII's death Denys was a gentleman usher and esquire of the body; but these were relatively lowly positions, and so by 1515 he had found his way into Cardinal Wolsey's household, where he rose to be chamberlain. From 1526 he was also serving the Princess Mary as comptroller, and in due course was retained by Thomas Cromwell, a friendship that was cemented by the marriage of Denys's stepdaughter Francis Murfyn to Cromwell's nephew Richard. Proximity to the monarchy gained him access to the ceremonial display of Tudor royal power. Having borne a banner at Jane Seymour's funeral Denys was among the party that welcomed Anne of Cleves to English soil, and became chancellor of the new queen's household. His growing status was recognized in his election as one of Devon's knights of the shire in 1529, 1539, and 1553 (although details of his time in the Commons are scant) and in orders, subsequently withdrawn, to muster 200 men against the northern insurgents in 1536. 
But it is as an administrator in his native shire, and especially as a correspondent of Cromwell, that it is easiest to trace the public career of Sir Thomas Denys. His duties ranged from the mundane (supplying the names of those who had unlawfully constructed weirs) to the politically sensitive, as when in 1538 he examined Gulphinus Abevan, a Breton priest supposedly in the employ of Reginald Pole, who made the alarming claim that the renegade cardinal was at large in England. In 1537 his career almost suffered a major reverse: the government was furious that Denys had concealed a robbery in Devon, and the attorney-general even cited him before Star Chamber. But this was not the case of corruption that it appeared to be. Denys had characteristically opted for local arbitration over the full process of law, and Cromwell accepted his apology. Denys was soon back at work hunting down speakers of seditious words, and was a natural choice to serve on Cromwell's brief council of the west. 
By Edward VI's reign Denys was ageing, but he proved a staunch opponent of the south-western rebels of 1549, albeit more conciliatory and less hot-headed than Sir Peter Carew; Denys may have exceeded his brief by promising an end to religious change in order to pacify the commons. His last great act of crown service came when Carew led his own conspiracy against Queen Mary in January 1554. As he had in summer 1553, Denys stood firm for Mary, disproving rumours that he, too, had plotted to prevent Philip of Spain from landing in the west country. But the suspicion remains that his attempts to arrest Carew were calculatedly half-hearted, and that he suffered his countryman and fellow knight of the shire to steal away to France and exile. 
As might be expected, Thomas Denys married shrewdly. By 1506 he had selected Anne, twice widowed; one of her previous husbands, Thomas Warley, had been an exchequer official. In 1524 he married another widow, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Angel Donne and previously married to Sir Thomas Murfyn, mayor of London. They had three daughters and five sons, the eldest being Sir Robert (died 1592), who succeeded his father as MP for Devon in 1555 and served both Mary and Elizabeth as sheriff of Devon. Robert's first marriage, to Mary, daughter of William Blount, fourth Baron Mountjoy, indicates how the standing of the Denys family had risen in Thomas's lifetime. 
Denys's religious faith is difficult to pin down. Slandered in Henry VIII's reign as a papist who hung at the sleeves of the conservative marquess of Exeter, Denys nevertheless profited from the dissolution of monasteries and chantries alike, and bought up land in Essex as well as in Devon. In 1536 it was equally his task to examine the bizarre protestant beliefs of the Axminster shoemaker Philip Gammon, and to question the Exeter women whose stout defence of St Nicholas's Priory had ended in a minor riot; Denys ordered that the women be released, perhaps out of sympathy. In religious terms, his most noteworthy act was to supervise the burning for heresy of the Exeter schoolmaster Thomas Benet in January 1532. Benet, whose crime was to post a scroll on the cathedral door identifying the pope as Antichrist, has his place in Foxe's 'Actes and Monuments' courtesy of the protestant Exonian John Hooker. In sum, Denys's long life witnessed the religious settlements of four Tudor monarchs, and he was loyal to all of them. 
Sir Thomas made his will on 13 December 1558; his wife, Elizabeth, was his executor. Since he was by this time an octogenarian, his deputy lieutenancy of Devon and Cornwall that year can have been little more than a titular recognition of his many years of service. Denys died on 18 February 1561, and asked to be buried with neither feasting nor lights, 'by cause I will avoide all pompe used aboute my ded corps'. A Devonian to the last, he bequeathed 20's'. to the prisoners in Exeter gaol. 


@@@@@


doc= 7505


Dennistoun, James, of Dennistoun (1803-1855), antiquary and art collector, eldest son of James Dennistoun of Colgrain and Camiseskan (died 1834) and his wife, Mary Ramsay, daughter of George Oswald of Auchencruive and Scotston, was born in Dunbartonshire on 17 March 1803 -- one of fourteen children. He was descended from the lords of Danzielstoun who traced their ancestry to the reign of Alexander III. After receiving his education at the universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow he became a member of the Faculty of Advocates in 1824 but never practised. 
Dennistoun early developed a taste for legal and historical antiquities, and made some progress in the collection of materials for a history of Dunbartonshire. During a continental tour in 1825 and 1826, in which his companions were Mark Napier, John Hamilton Gray of Camtyne, and Alexander Dunlop of Keppoch, the art and literature of Italy first attracted his attention. After his father's death he was obliged to part with the family estate on the shores of the Clyde, but with part of his remaining fortune he was able to purchase the farm of Dennistoun Mains in Renfrewshire, the centre of the original possessions of his family in that county. 
A second visit abroad in 1836-9, to the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, was devoted mainly to literary research and to the examination of the monuments of art. It was at this stage that Dennistoun began to form a small, but choice, collection of early Italian pictures and illuminated miniatures from manuscripts, as well as items of the applied arts, which was added to during further visits to the continent in 1843-6, 1851, and 1853. His declared intention was to illustrate 'the progress of painting from the 13th century through the successive schools down to modern times -- but my favourite style goes back to the 14th and 15th' (Dennistoun to D. Laing, 3 December 1848, Brigstocke, 'James Dennistoun's second European tour', 247). He did not in fact achieve his wider aim, but was one of the first acknowledged collectors of early Italian and Netherlandish painting. He also seems to have acquired pictures with his scholarly interests in mind; they included, for example, the portrait of Guidobaldo da Montefeltro attributed to Piero della Francesca (Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid). Although Dennistoun bought extensively abroad, he also attended sales in Britain and correspondingly his taste widened to include Spanish seventeenth-century painting and, somewhat surprisingly, the work of Sir Joseph Noel Paton, whose 'The Reconciliation of Oberon and Titania' (National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh) he owned. The collection was assembled at Dennistoun's house, 119 George Street, Edinburgh, his permanent home from 1846, and a brief account of it was published in the third volume of G. F. Waagen's 'Treasures of Art in Great Britain' (1854). 
Dennistoun was a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for the county of Renfrew, and became a member of most of the societies formed for collecting materials for illustrating the history of Scotland, with a particular interest, for example, in the history of Dunbartonshire. For the Bannatyne Club he edited David Moysie's 'Memoirs of the Affairs of Scotland from 1577 to 1603' (1830). For the Maitland Club he prepared 'Cartularium comitatus de Levenax, ab initio seculi decimi tertii usque ad annum MCCCXCVIII' (1833), 'Cochrane Correspondence Regarding the Affairs of Glasgow, 1745-6' (1836), 'Coltness Collections, 1608-1840' (1842), and, as co-editor with Alexander Macdonald, 'Miscellany, consisting of original papers illustrative of the history and literature of Scotland' (3 vols., 1834). He also wrote 'Letter on the Scotish ['sic'] Reform Bill by a conservative' (1832) and 'Memoirs of Sir Robert Strange, engraver, and of his brother-in-law, Andrew Lumisden, private secretary to the Stuart princes' (2 vols., 1855). His most significant work, however, was 'Memoirs of the dukes of Urbino, illustrating the arms, arts, and literature of Italy from 1440 to 1630' (3 vols., 1851), which combined his interest in early Italian history, art, and literature. It was notable, for example, for the attention devoted to Piero della Francesca. Dedicated to Lord Lindsay, twenty-fifth earl of Crawford, author of 'Sketches of the History of Christian Art' (3 vols., 1847), the 'Memoirs of the Dukes of Urbino' was issued in a second edition in 1909 with a short biography of the author by Edward Hutton. For the 'Quarterly Review' of December 1846 Dennistoun wrote an article entitled 'The Stuarts in Italy', and for the 'Edinburgh Review' of October 1854 a review of J. H. Burton's 'History of Scotland'. After a highly critical article in the 'Edinburgh Review' in April 1853 (pp. 390-420) Dennistoun gave valuable evidence before the committee of the House of Commons on the National Gallery in London in the same year, and furnished an analysis of the report of the committee to the 'Edinburgh Review' of April 1854. 
Dennistoun married, on 2 March 1835, in Bern, Isabella Katharina, eldest daughter of James Wolfe Murray, Lord Cringletie. He died at his home at 119 George Street, Edinburgh, on 13 February 1855, aged fifty-two. The greater portion of Dennistoun's collection was sold at Christies on 14 June 1855 (list reprinted in the first volume of the 1909 edition of 'Memoirs of the Dukes of Urbino', pp. xix-xxviii). Several of the paintings are now in public collections. Of the illuminated manuscripts, the Ghislieri book of hours is in the British Library (Yates Thompson MS 29), and several items were in the collection of Kenneth, Lord Clark, and were sold at Christies on 3 July 1984. 


@@@@@


doc= 7506


Denny, Sir Anthony (1501-1549), courtier, was born on 16 January 1501 at Cheshunt, the second son of Sir Edmund Denny (died 1520), a Hertfordshire landowner who became a baron of the exchequer in the early years of Henry VIII, and his second wife, Mary (died 1507), daughter of Robert Troutbeck of Bridge Trafford, Cheshire. He was educated at St Paul's School, London, and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he does not seem to have graduated. He began his public career in the service of Sir Francis Bryan, a favourite of the king, on diplomatic missions to France, and in the late 1520s found a modest informal employment in the royal household. His formal connection with the privy chamber can be traced as early as May 1533; an indenture of 28 May 1536 identified him as 'of the privy chamber', and a grant of 9 September described him as groom. He became a yeoman of the wardrobe in 1536 and was entrusted with the privy purse informally in the same year. He is recorded as gentleman of the privy chamber about the beginning of 1539, when he replaced Bryan as the second chief gentleman, and as deputy groom of the stool. A client of Thomas Cromwell's, Denny was informally entrusted with the keepership of Westminster Palace at least two years before his formal appointment on 20 September 1538. He was named keeper of the privy purse on 24 April 1542. As keeper of the privy purse Denny handled substantial amounts of royal money, making massive withdrawals from and deposits in the king's coffers. He may have represented Ipswich in the parliament of 1535-6. 
As the 1540s progressed Denny became ever closer to King Henry. He was one of the first courtiers whom Henry took into his confidence in lamenting his nuptial contract with Anne of Cleves. In 1544 he accompanied the king to Boulogne, and was knighted there on 30 September, after the city's capitulation. Denny had hitherto been junior to Sir Thomas Heneage in the privy chamber, but henceforward his influence exceeded Heneage's, especially after 20 September 1545 when Denny, along with John Gates (the husband of his sister Mary) and their assistant William Clerk, was licensed by the king to affix the royal stamp -- the sign manual -- on all documents emanating from the monarch. Occasioned by Henry's growing infirmity, this was a transfer of authority which gave great influence to the men who wielded it. Then in October 1546 Heneage retired from service and Denny replaced him as first chief gentleman and groom of the stool. Denny often exchanged gifts with the king. On new year's day 1537 Queen Jane Seymour gave him a gold brooch (presumably intended for his wife), and at the beginning of 1545 Denny presented the king with a clock designed by Hans Holbein. 
In the context of the last months of Henry's reign it was of considerable importance that Denny was a patron of humanist letters and a firm friend to religious reformation, praised as such by men like Nicholas Wentworth and Roger Ascham. A pupil of John Colet at St Paul's, he recovered and restored the lands and buildings of Sedbergh School in Yorkshire, which belonged to his alma mater of St John's, Cambridge, and saved part of the library of Waltham Abbey from destruction. Most of his associates were humanists, committed to Erasmian pietism and the cause of learning, and Denny himself was moderate in the expression of his religious views, which never conflicted with his loyalty to and friendship with the king. His sympathy with the reformed faith did not prevent his taking notice of heretical books as a loyal government servant. Both the protestant humanist Sir John Cheke and the Catholic Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, wrote in his praise. But of Denny's own protestant allegiance there can be no doubt. In 1544 he and the king's physician, William Butts, saved Richard Turner of Canterbury, accused of 'free and bold preaching against popish errors' (Sil, 'King's men', 22), from prosecution. A friend of Archbishop Thomas Cranmer and a supporter of the evangelically inclined Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, in 1546 Denny supported the archbishop's recommendations against the 'vain ceremonies' of traditional religion, and after his death was hailed as 'an enemy to the Pope and his superstition' (Dowling, 63). 
In his religious stance Denny undoubtedly had the support of his wife. 
Denny's influence continued into the following reign. He was named to the privy council on 31 January 1547, and to the privy chamber as groom of the stool on 30 April. That four months later he was replaced by Sir Michael Stanhope as keeper of the privy purse and first gentleman of the privy chamber may, paradoxically, have represented promotion, the desire of Seymour, now protector and duke of Somerset, to utilize the services of a veteran for more important affairs. During the Scottish campaign of 1547 Denny was appointed by Somerset to remain with the king in London, thus acting as a surrogate for the protector. In the same year he represented Hertfordshire in parliament. In January 1549 he was one of the MPs on the parliamentary committee which examined the protector's brother, Lord Seymour of Sudeley, accused of treason, and signed the council's order for his execution. In late July he and John Gates accompanied the marquess of Northampton on his unsuccessful expedition to suppress Robert Ket's Norfolk rebellion. But he was taken ill shortly afterwards, and died at Cheshunt on 10 September 1549. He was buried in St Mary's Church there. 
Denny's lands, which were principally concentrated in the counties of Essex, Hertfordshire, and Suffolk, consisted mainly of former monastic properties, notably those of Hertford and Cheshunt priories and Waltham and St Albans abbeys. His Hertfordshire lands, which had once belonged to St Albans, covered some 20,000 acres. His revenues from his estates amounted to over $700, while his income from his offices amounted to at least $200. His will made provision for five sons and four daughters (and also named an illegitimate son, William). It also shows his concern for humanistic principles of education, in his instructions to his wife that she should bring up their children so that 'the commonwealth may find them profitable members and not burdens as idle drones be to the hive' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 2.28). His heir was his eldest son, Henry, who married Honora, daughter of William Grey, thirteenth Lord Grey of Wilton, and was the father of 


@@@@@


doc= 7507


Edward Denny, first earl of Norwich (1569-1637). Educated at Cambridge, Edward became a groom of Elizabeth's privy chamber, and in 1590 or 1591 married Mary, daughter of Thomas Cecil, first earl of Exeter, Burghley's eldest son. In 1602/3 he was high sheriff of Hertfordshire, and in that capacity welcomed James I at Royston in 1603. His demeanour so pleased the new monarch that James presented Denny with the gloves from his own hands, as an earnest of future favour. Knight of the shire for Essex in the first session of parliament of 1604, on 27 October he was made Baron Denny of Waltham. His only child was his daughter, Honora, who in 1607 married James Hay, second earl of Carlisle; the marriage was said to have been arranged by the king, while the bride was regarded as a great heiress. No doubt it is a sign of her father's wealth that in 1617 he entered into a contract to collect heriots and reliefs falling due to the crown. On 17 October 1626 Denny became first earl of Norwich. He died on 24 October 1637, and was buried at Waltham Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 7508


Denny, Henry (1803-1871), entomologist, was for forty-five years curator of the museum of the Literary and Philosophical Society in Leeds. Before his appointment he had published on the genus 'Pselaphus' ('Monographia Pselaphorum et Scydmaenorum Britanniae, or, An essay on the British species of the genera Pselaphus of Herbst, and Scydmaenus of Latreille', 1825). His studies were to follow this direction for the rest of his life, and, while performing his duties as curator, he made himself a leading authority on the subject of parasitic insects. 
Denny was the first salaried curator of the Leeds museum, and was dedicated to the institution. The entomologist William Kirby (1759-1850), to whom Denny dedicated his first monograph, tried unsuccessfully to secure for the latter employment as illustrator on a serial entomological publication. In 1842 the British Association for the Advancement of Science made a grant to Denny of 50 guineas for the purpose of assisting him in the study of British 'Anoplura'. That year he published 'Monographia Anoplurorum Britanniae, or, An essay on the British species of parasitic insects belonging to the order Anoplura of Leach'. He died at Leeds on 7 March 1871, and a fund amounting to $883 was raised by subscription for the benefit of his widow, Ann, and their younger children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7509


Denny, Sir William, baronet (d. 1676), poet, was born in Norwich, the son of Sir William Denny (died 1642), who was recorder there, and his wife (died 1631). He was educated at Norwich School, Norfolk, and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he matriculated on 17 February 1620 and was a fellow commoner in 1621, before graduating BA in 1623. On 2 November 1621 he was admitted to Gray's Inn. In his youth Denny contributed to a range of literary works. Ralph Knevet's 'Rhodon and Iris', first acted at Norwich at the Florists' Fete on 3 May 1631, included his introductory verses. His 'Encomiastick to his worthy friend Mr Robert Dover' of 151 lines, the fourth poem in 'Annalia Dubrensia' (1636), provides a lively detailed account, supported by appropriate and accurate classical allusions, of the Cotswold Olimpick games which he had attended. Later he contributed to Edward Benlowes's 'Theophila' (1652). 
On 3 June 1642, on the death of his father, Denny was created a baronet by Charles I. However, the following year he was imprisoned at Windsor Castle by parliament for plotting in the royalist cause. By 1649 he had married Catherine Young. In 1653 his 'Pelecanicidium, or, The Christian adviser against self murder together with a guide and the pilgrims passe to the land of the living' was published. This treatise of 318 pages sets out in a serious manner how to lead a worthy life. The same year he drafted 'The Shepheards Holiday', a pastoral poem first published in Henry Huth's 'Inedited Poetical Miscellanies' (1870). In 1654 there was a proposal that he should become governor of Yarmouth, Norfolk, but his fortunes did not improve and he died in great poverty in June 1676. He was buried on 19 June at St Giles Cripplegate, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 7510


Dennys, John (d. 1609), poet, was the son of Hugh Dennys (died 1559?) and Katherine (died 1583), daughter of Edward Trye of Hardwick, Gloucestershire. He is known to have resided in the neighbourhood of Pucklechurch, Gloucestershire, in 1572 and was married to Elianor (or Helena), daughter of Thomas Millet of Warwickshire, with whom he had a son, Henry. 
Dennys was author of 'The Secrets of Angling', the first extant fishing poem in English, which was published posthumously in 1613. Before the publication of Sir Henry Ellis's 'A Catalogue of Books on Angling' (1811) and the investigations of Thomas Westwood and Canon Ellacombe, the author of 'Secrets' was known only by the initials I. D. (from the title-page), which resulted in various attributions of authorship. Six stanzas of the poem (B7'r'- 'v') were quoted with inaccuracy of both text and authorship by Izaak Walton in 'The Compleat Angler' (1653-76). In the first edition, the author is identified as 'Jo. Da'. This error was absorbed into the text in the second edition (1655), and wrongly expanded to 'Jo. Davors Esq.' in the third edition (1661), as it remained in subsequent editions. Dennys's poem was prefaced by commendatory verses 'In due praise of this praiseworthy skill and worke' by 'Jo. Daues'. This man was probably a relative of Dennys, whose great-grandmother was Agnes, daughter and coheir of Sir Robert Davers, Danvers, or Daues. 
In 'The Angler's Sure Guide' (1706), Robert Howlett ascribed 'The Secrets of Angling' to 'that great practitioner, master and patron of it [angling], Dr. 'Donne'' (Howlett, iii). Sir John Hawkins, who knew of the existence of Dennys's poem but had 'never been able to get a sight of it', was attracted to this particular attribution, but rejected it as erroneous (Walton, 152-3). Authorship was settled when the entry for 'The Secrets of Angling' by John Dennys was found in the Stationers' registers (23 March 1613). The poem's reference to 'sweet 'Boyd'', a brook fed by a rivulet that runs through the parish of Pucklechurch, provides collateral evidence for Dennys's authorship (Ellacombe, 1). 
There seem to have been four editions of 'The Secrets of Angling' between 1613 and 1652. In 1614 Gervase Markham published a prose paraphrase of the poem in 'The Pleasures of Princes', an appendix to 'The English Husbandman'. Initially, Markham made no mention of his debt to Dennys; however, in later reprints (for example, 'Country Contentments', 4th edn, 1631) he acknowledged that this work was originally 'written in a small Treatise in Rime, and now for the better understanding of the Reader, put into Prose, and adorned and inlarged' (Poynter, 117-18; French, vi). Dennys's work proved popular in the nineteenth century, when extracts from it were frequently republished, with a new edition of the whole text published in 1883 by Thomas Westwood (reissued in 1970). 
John Dennys died in 1609 and was buried at St Thomas's, Pucklechurch. The burial place of the Dennys family is at the upper end of the north aisle. 


