@@@@@


doc= 89568


Braybrooke, Neville Patrick Bellairs (1923-2001), writer and editor, was born at 22A Devonshire Street, London, on 30 May 1923, the only child of Patrick Philip William Braybrooke, journalist and biographer, and his first wife, Lettice Marjorie, 'nee' Bellairs (1890-1986), who had been a nurse before her marriage. His father left his mother when Braybrooke was three; by his father's second marriage Braybrooke had a half-sister, whom he met in later years. He did not see his father again until a chance encounter in the 1950s. He was brought up by his mother, who after her conversion to Roman Catholicism had her son rebaptized in that faith, giving him the additional names of Ignatius Anthony. He was educated at St Benedict's School, Ealing, and at Ampleforth College, where his fees were paid by a woman friend of his mother and he was one of the poorer pupils. 
At Ampleforth, Braybrooke showed a keen interest in literature and the theatre. In his last year he became an associate editor of a little magazine, 'The Wind and the Rain', founded originally in aid of the Red Cross by a fellow pupil, Michael Allmand, who was subsequently killed in the Second World War. After he left school Braybrooke continued to edit this. Called up into the army, he served as a private in the Royal Army Service Corps. Because of the ill health of his mother, in 1943 he was given a compassionate posting to Kensington barracks, opposite his home in Kensington Church Street. At this time he formed a close attachment to Elizabeth King (later Elizabeth Rosenberg), sister of the novelist Francis King. She worked with him on 'The Wind and the Rain', co-edited two volumes of translated verse, and founded with him a small publishing firm, the Phoenix Press. This issued for the first time in England the autobiography of Mahatma Gandhi, 'The Story of my Experiments with Truth' (1949), for which they had high hopes. Unfortunately sales were very small, and after a few years the Phoenix Press had to close. Braybrooke continued to edit 'The Wind and the Rain' as a quarterly until 1951. For a time he also worked on a political and economic magazine, 'Soundings'. 
In 1953, with the help of his mother, Braybrooke bought a small house, partly occupied by tenants, in Gardnor Road, Hampstead. On 5 December 1953 he married June Guesdon Orr-Ewing, 'nee' Jolliffe (1920-1994), the writer Isobel English ['see 'Braybrooke, June Guesdon]. Although she was divorced, by a technicality they were able to marry in the Roman Catholic church, of which Braybrooke was a communicant member all his life. There were no children of the marriage, but Braybrooke had a stepdaughter, Victoria Orr-Ewing ('b'. 1943). In 1969 they bought Grove House, Castle Road, in Cowes, Isle of Wight, and divided their time between this handsome but ramshackle house and the one in London. After his wife's death in London on his birthday, 30 May 1994 -- he wrote a poem, 'Two Birthdays', in 1995 -- Braybrooke was eventually persuaded to sell the Hampstead house and thus for the first time in his life to have money. With characteristic generosity and family feeling he bought houses in Yorkshire for both his stepgranddaughters, while he continued to live in Cowes with his stepdaughter. 
Braybrooke's first publication was a small volume about London, 'This is London', in 1953. This was followed in 1959 by 'London Green', about the London parks, and his only novel, 'The Idler' (which was not a success) in 1961. A play for the BBC, 'The Delicate Investigation', followed in 1969, and poems in 1986, 1989, and 1995. At the time of his death he had just completed a biography of the novelist Olivia Manning, a close friend, on which he and his wife had been working together for some years. He contributed articles and reviews to 'The Independent', 'The Guardian', 'The Times', the 'Times Literary Supplement', 'The Observer', 'New Statesman', 'Sunday Times', 'Sunday Telegraph', 'The Spectator', and 'The Tablet'. Many of these were syndicated in periodicals in other countries. In 1958 he edited a symposium for the seventieth birthday of T. S. Eliot; in 1960 'A Partridge in a Pear Tree: a Celebration for Christmas'; in 1962 'The Wind and the Rain: an Easter Book'; in 1966 'Pilgrim of the Future: a Teilhard de Chardin Symposium'; in 1975 'The Letters of J. R. Ackerley'; and in 1989 'Seeds in the Wind: 20th Century Juvenilia from W. B. Yeats to Ted Hughes'. 
As a magazine editor Braybrooke was inspired, securing as his contributors not only little-known or promising writers, but also many distinguished ones, who contributed for a pittance. His later editing, for instance of the Ackerley letters, was slow but meticulous. As a writer his output was small. Many years of research went into the life of Olivia Manning, and the writing of it was very slow, but it was published late in 2004. 
In later life the ambitious, go-ahead, and industrious young man became the leisurely, unworldly man of letters. Braybrooke was very widely read, the owner of a vast library, with a quirky interest in the odd, the out-of-the-way, and the little known -- reflected in the annual Christmas alphabets which for several years he contributed to 'The Tablet', the fruit of much reading and ingenuity. As a young man he was willowy -- his mother used to say that a puff of wind could blow him away -- and very good-looking, indeed beautiful. In later life he became very overweight, lame, and arthritic, but never lost his look of boyish innocence or his charm. He was a devoted son, husband, and stepfather, and a kind and generous-spirited friend to many. Early in 2001 it was clear that he was far from well, but he refused to seek medical advice until he had completed his last book. When finally he did so, cancer was diagnosed, and he died, after surgery, at St Mary's Hospital, Newport, Isle of Wight, on 14 July 2001. A requiem mass was celebrated on 25 July in St Thomas of Canterbury Church, Cowes, and he was buried the next day, 26 July, in his wife's grave in Hampstead cemetery. He was survived by his stepdaughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 89571


Mansfeld, (Peter) Ernst (II) von, count von Mansfeld in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (c.1580-1626), soldier and military entrepreneur, was born in Luxembourg, the illegitimate son and thirteenth child of the imperial general Count (later Prince) Peter Ernst (I) von Mansfeld-Friedeburg (1517-1604), who was at that time governor of the Spanish duchy of Luxembourg. His mother was Anna von Bentzerath. Since he was born out of wedlock his claim to his title and to noble status was doubtful, but he was apparently legitimized about 1607. He was brought up as a Catholic, a faith which he probably never officially abandoned, even when fighting for protestant princes. 
When he was barely fifteen years old Mansfeld went to Hungary to fight against the Turks under the command of his elder half-brother Karl ('b'. 1543). Subsequently he fought for the Spanish in Flanders. However, when his petition to be granted some of the estates of his late father was rejected in 1610 by the Habsburg authorities he decided instead to serve the newly formed protestant union, an alliance of German protestant princes and cities which sought and later achieved association with the rulers of the United Provinces, Britain, and France. In practice, he spent the mid-1610s fighting the Habsburgs in northern Italy on behalf of Charles Emmanuel (I), duke of Savoy. 
As central Europe began to slide into the conflict which became known as the Thirty Years' War, in August 1618 Mansfeld was appointed commander of a small army of about 3000 men initially paid for by Savoy but at the disposal of James VI and I's son-in-law Frederick V, the elector palatine, who, as the most prominent and militant member of the protestant union, spearheaded the German resistance to Habsburg power and recatholicization. Following Frederick's election by the estates as king of Bohemia in August 1619, Mansfeld fought against the imperial forces which sought to reimpose a Habsburg candidate. After the comprehensive defeat of Frederick's supporters in Bohemia at the battle of the White Mountain on 8 November 1620, Mansfeld was outlawed by the emperor Ferdinand as a rebel and traitor. None the less, having been reinforced, he moved back with a much larger army to Frederick's territory of the Lower Palatinate, under threat from Habsburg forces. In October 1621 he relieved the fortress of Frankenthal, then occupied Hagenau in Alsace, and on 27 April 1622 won a victory against the Catholic general Jean 'tSerclaes, count of Tilly, near Wiesloch. He thoroughly devastated Hesse-Darmstadt and other neighbouring dominions friendly to the emperor. By this time 'illustrious' (Cogswell, 242) Mansfeld enjoyed a high reputation as a sort of protestant hero in England, where his exploits were closely followed, and he was cultivated by several English diplomats. Equally, he was widely feared by Catholic princes because of his ruthlessness. Capitalizing on the latter, he had already opened negotiations with Habsburg commanders with the objective of changing sides, and he could not prevent the troops of the Catholic league from overrunning the Palatinate. 
Dismissed by Frederick V in July despite the fact that he had still up to 30,000 men under his command, Mansfeld found new employment in the Dutch republic. On the way to the Netherlands he defeated a Spanish army at Fleurus in August 1622. The Dutch sent him to East Friesland, whose ruler was in league with the Habsburgs; it was plundered and totally devastated by his ill-paid and undisciplined mercenaries. Early in 1624 he dismissed his troops and went together with his brother-in-arms Christian of Brunswick and a number of his officers to The Hague to await a new command. Since it appeared that James I was looking for a general who was able to recruit an army which could be used to liberate the Palatinate or at least to put pressure on the emperor, in April Mansfeld travelled to England and approached the king. James, who had hitherto displayed extreme caution over direct military involvement on Frederick's behalf to the disappointment of many of his subjects, gave Mansfeld a commission to recruit troops in England as well as abroad and promised to pay him $20,000 monthly provided France also supported his expedition. As Mansfeld was not English his actions could be disavowed if necessary, while the expenditure required was comparatively small as the 'condottiere' was accustomed to work on a very small budget, relying mostly on plunder to finance his army. Moreover, unlike most other generals in protestant service, the otherwise unreliable Mansfeld had at least won one or two victories against Catholic armies in the past. 
Mansfeld duly recruited up to 15,000 men in England and on the continent in autumn and winter 1624-5. His army was shipped to the Netherlands, after earlier plans to disembark the troops in France had to be abandoned due to French resistance, and assembled near Gertruidenberg and Heusden in March 1625. Despite the fact that James had expressly instructed that the army should not be used directly against Spain, Mansfeld co-operated with the Dutch in trying to relieve the siege of Breda. This project failed, partly because his troops had already been much diminished in number by malnutrition, disease, and mass desertions. As Mansfeld's expedition had been financed by parliamentary subsidies this waste of money was later blamed in parliament on the militantly anti-Habsburg stance adopted by the then Prince Charles and the duke of Buckingham in the aftermath of their return from Spain and the pressure they had exerted on a reluctant James. 
With the remnants of his army -- about 5000 men -- in October 1625 Mansfeld joined the king of Denmark in northern Germany, supported intermittently by English and French subsidies. Defeated by the imperial general Albrecht von Wallenstein at Dessau bridge in April 1626 after a hard-fought battle, he nevertheless recruited new troops with relentless energy, invaded Silesia, and finally joined the prince of Transylvania in Hungary in his fight against the emperor. Abandoned by this new ally, he disbanded the remnants of his army and tried to reach Venice via Bosnia. On his way he fell ill and died near Sarajevo, probably in Rakovica, on 29 November 1626 NS, and was buried at Split. One of the most unscrupulous and reckless military commanders of the period, who regularly sold his services to the highest bidder, he had failed to achieve his real objective, to conquer or to be granted a principality of his own in the Holy Roman empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 89573


Eadie, Ellice Aylmer (1912-2001), barrister and civil servant, was born on 30 June 1912 at Edmonton, St Patrick's Hill, Cork, the daughter of Robert Thomas Hearn (died 1952), Church of Ireland clergyman, later bishop of Cork, and his wife, Dr Mary Ellice Horn, 'nee' Cummins, a skin specialist, and the first woman in Ireland to become a fellow of the Irish Royal College of Physicians. An aunt was the first woman in Ireland to qualify as a professional engineer. The family was distinguished in sport, too: three of Ellice's aunts played, at the same time, for the Irish hockey team, and later a nephew, Dan Hearn, played rugby for England. 
Ellice Hearn was educated at Cheltenham Ladies' College and in 1931 went to Oxford to read law at St Hugh's College. There being no law tutor at St Hugh's at that time, her moral tutor was Agnes Headlam-Morley, who later became the first woman to hold a full professorship at Oxford, the Montague Burton chair of international relations. Hearn was taught by some of the greatest academic lawyers of the generation. In his end-of-term report C. H. S. Fifoot described her as having first-class ability; H. G. Hanbury regarded her as 'really good', and Ivy Williams thought her 'painstaking and intelligent' (register, St Hugh's College, Oxford). In Michaelmas term 1933 she was awarded the Winter Williams law scholarship for women, and in 1934 graduated with a first-class degree in jurisprudence. She then embarked on the degree of bachelor of civil law, again being placed in the first class in 1935. In December 1935 she took the first part of the bar examination, being placed in the first class in constitutional law, legal history, and elements of the law of contract and of the law of tort; she was placed in the second class in criminal law and procedure. She was awarded a special prize of $50 for the best examination in constitutional law and legal history. In June 1936 she was placed in the first class (second in order of merit) of the final bar examinations and was awarded the Lord Justice Holker senior scholarship ($200 a year for three years). On 26 January 1937 she was called to the bar by Gray's Inn and was awarded the Arden scholarship of $150 for three years. These were very significant distinctions at a time when very few women read law or were called to the bar. 
Ellice Hearn commenced pupillage in 1937 with Milner Holland and R. G. Metcalfe, both of Lincoln's Inn, and she stayed on with Milner Holland as his 'devil' when her pupillage was completed. She also gave tuition to women law students at Oxford during this period. Despite her distinction in qualifying for the bar, she did not achieve a tenancy, or perhaps did not seek one, but instead joined the office of parliamentary counsel in 1939. During this, her first spell of drafting, she became assistant to Harold Kent, later the Treasury solicitor. In his memoirs, 'In on the Act' (1979), he recorded that, despite her academic record, 'she was astonishingly modest, even diffident' and he praised her as 'a fellow professional at least as good as I was' (pp. 142-3). She was the first woman lawyer to join the office of parliamentary counsel. 
Ellice Hearn served in the WAAF from 1941 until leaving as a flight officer in 1946. Her wartime activities are unknown but some assumed that she worked for the intelligence services. She would have been an unlikely recruit to a fighting role. On 4 December 1946 she married John Harold Ward Eadie (1908/9-1995), who was then working as a personnel officer for the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, but who was later the director of a pet food company. Of Canadian descent, he was the son of Harold George Eadie, and the former husband of Edith Constance, 'nee' Parker. The marriage turned out to be a successful and happy, albeit an unlikely, one: he was a large man with a large jovial personality to match, interested in sport; she small and slightly built, well groomed but shy and retiring. They had no children, but they were a much loved aunt and uncle to her nephews and niece, and a favoured honorary aunt and uncle to the children of friends. 
In 1946 Eadie joined the Board of Trade solicitor's department. She returned to the office of the parliamentary counsel in 1949. She was described as a thoroughly good person, and a fine lawyer and draftsman; she encouraged new recruits, including Edward Caldwell, later first parliamentary counsel. She was promoted to deputy counsel in 1956, thus becoming the first woman lawyer to reach under-secretary rank in the civil service, and was promoted further to become the first woman parliamentary counsel (deputy secretary rank) in 1968. She was appointed CBE in 1965. 
Between 1960 and 1965 Eadie was heavily engaged in revising rules of court. She drafted the Supreme Court (general) rules in 1960 and by 1965 had produced the matrimonial causes (amendment) rules and revised the Supreme Court rules (the 'White Book'). From 1965 to 1969 she was attached to the Law Commission, and thus found herself the architect of family-law reforms generated by the Labour government returned in 1964. These had been set out by Lord Gardiner, the new lord chancellor, in a book he had edited shortly before taking up office, 'Law Reform Now' (1963). Among the family legislation she brought into being were the 'Divorce Reform Act' 1969, which aimed to reform radically the law of divorce, and the 'Matrimonial Homes Act' 1967, which protected the right of the non-owning wife to remain in the matrimonial home. She drafted the 'Family Law Reform Act' 1969, which reduced the age of majority from twenty-one to eighteen and introduced blood testing to establish disputed paternity. She also drafted the 'Matrimonial Proceedings and Property Act' 1970 which introduced more generous support for the divorced spouse. After returning to parliamentary counsel's office in 1969 she worked on the 'Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act' 1970, the 'Highways, Licensing, and Attachment of Earnings Acts' 1971, and the 'Superannuation, Affiliation Proceedings, and Maintenance Orders (Reciprocal Enforcement) Acts' 1972. Her last project was the bill for the 'Friendly Societies Act' 1974. 
Always interested in the church, Eadie became involved in drafting church legislation when on her retirement in 1972 she was appointed standing counsel to the general synod, again a first for a woman. She was as greatly liked and respected in this later role as she had been as a parliamentary counsel. She drafted the ecclesiastical offices (age limits) measure of 1974, requiring Church of England bishops to retire at seventy, and the patronage (benefices) measure of 1976, which modernized the way in which incumbents were appointed. After retiring in 1978 she remained very busy, involved, as she had been all her life, in a range of church activities, keeping up with her wide circle of friends and family, and an active member, and at one time treasurer, of the New Cavendish Club in London. Widowed in 1995, she remained active, continuing to visit London and elsewhere from her flat in Hyde Street, Winchester, Hampshire. Becoming increasingly frail, she moved to the Flowerdown Nursing Home, 50 Harestock Road, Winchester, and died there peacefully of bronchopneumonia and cerebrovascular disease on 31 March 2001. Because of her standing in draftsmanship at a time of radical law reform Eadie had unexpectedly become a champion of women seeking protection and freedom after failed marriages and a role model for other women in the law. 


@@@@@


doc= 89577


Gershevitch, Ilya (1914-2001), scholar of Iranian languages, was born Ilja Gerschewitsch on 24 October 1914 in Zurich, the only child of Aron (Arkadi) Gerschewitsch (1891- 'c'.1926), a medical student, and his wife, (Rose) Mila Mirov (1889-1975), a pianist. Stranded in Germany on the outbreak of war in 1914, his Russian parents had fled to Switzerland, where they lived in straitened circumstances. His father became too ill to finish his medical studies and died from tuberculosis when Ilja was still a child; his mother supported the family by teaching the piano and playing for dances. As a schoolboy in Locarno and Lugano, Gerschewitsch learned to play the piano and cello and at one time seemed destined for a musical career. Nevertheless in 1933 he enrolled as a student of classics at the University of Rome, where he received his introduction to Indo-European comparative philology and obtained the degree of 'dottore in lettere' in 1937. He was baptized a Roman Catholic at St Peter's Basilica, Rome, on 29 March 1934, though in later life he ceased to regard himself as a member of the church. 
In 1938 Gerschewitsch came to England on what was intended to be a short visit, but, as he later recalled, he soon decided that England was the most civilized country he had seen and the one in which he would like to spend the rest of his life. Abandoning his possessions in Rome, and now spelling his name Ilya Gershevitch, he enrolled at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London as a student of W. B. Henning, a charismatic teacher whom he revered both as a man and as a scholar. Under Henning's guidance he turned his attention to the Iranian branch of the Indo-European family of languages, obtaining his second doctorate in 1943 from the University of London with a thesis on Sogdian, the language of pre-Islamic Samarkand. 
In 1947 Gershevitch became a British citizen. In 1948 he was appointed to a new lectureship in Iranian studies at Cambridge and in 1962 was elected a fellow of Jesus College. In 1965 he was promoted to reader. Once settled in Cambridge, he found university and especially college life so congenial that he never left, despite tempting offers from the United States, where he spent a couple of years as a visiting professor during the 1960s. On 29 June 1951 he married Elisabeth Marie (Lisbeth) Syfrig ('b'. 1925), a Swiss nurse, daughter of Josef Syfrig of Lucerne. They had one daughter, adopted in 1958. 
The 1950s were a busy and productive decade for Gershevitch. His 'Grammar of Manichean Sogdian' and 'The Avestan Hymn to Mithra' -- two books which transformed the study of the languages concerned -- appeared in 1954 and 1959 respectively. In 1956 he and his wife undertook a journey to southern Iran to record the unknown dialects of Bashkardia, a region which scarcely any European had previously penetrated and which, as they subsequently discovered, was reputed to be 'the most ill-famed of the Shah's dominion on account of the hostility of its inhabitants' (Gershevitch, 213). Unfortunately the Bashkardi grammar on which Gershevitch laboured for many years was never completed, nor did he publish the Ratanbai Katrak lectures which he gave at Oxford in 1968. In fact he never wrote another book, but presented his many original ideas and discoveries in the form of articles. Some of these were collected in his 'Philologia Iranica' of 1985, which included a bibliography of his publications up to that date. Often witty, and occasionally whimsical, these articles were simultaneously dense and wide-ranging; they covered a remarkable variety of topics within Iranian studies, including Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, and Achaemenian history, as well as a large number of languages: Old Persian and Elamite, Sogdian and Bactrian, Persian and Ossetic, among others. 
On his appointment at Cambridge, Gershevitch drew up a syllabus covering seven Iranian languages and then set about mastering each of them himself. He demanded equal dedication from his students, throwing them in at the deep end and taking it for granted that they would pick up for themselves whatever languages might be required for reading the secondary literature. Although he almost always wrote in English, he spoke many European languages fluently; his Italian was particularly admired. Russian was of course his mother tongue, though he did not visit Russia until 1960. In due course he received honours from many countries: he became a fellow of the British Academy in 1967 and later a corresponding member of the Danish Academy (1982), the Accademia dei Lincei (1987), and the Russian Academy (1992). In 1971 he received an honorary doctorate from Bern, and endeared himself to his audience by his fluency in Schwyzerdutsch (Swiss German). 
After his retirement in 1982, at a time of cuts in university funding, Gershevitch's post was abolished, despite rigorous lobbying in which he played a full part. In retirement he continued his scholarly work, though he was severely hampered by failing eyesight during his last years. He died of heart failure at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 11 April 2001; his body was cremated at Cambridge on 20 April. He was survived by his wife, Lisbeth, and their daughter. In accordance with Gershevitch's wishes, his library was presented to the newly founded department of Iranian studies in Ravenna. His Bashkardi notes and recordings were deposited at the Ancient India and Iran Trust in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 89648


Penlez, Bosavern (1726-1749), wigmaker and convicted rioter, was born near Exeter. His father was a native of Jersey, and was purportedly educated at Oxford University, although details of his time there have not been found. After Oxford, Penlez's father took holy orders and secured a small preferment near Exeter. He died while his son was young, and so his father's friends arranged for Bosavern to be apprenticed to a barber and peruke maker in Exeter under the auspices of the Sons of the Clergy. Bosavern Penlez served his full term, 'with Honesty and Integrity' according to the ordinary of Newgate's account, and went to London about 1747. He served under several masters there, two of whom were prepared to vouch for his good character at his trial at the Old Bailey in September 1749. 
Penlez's historical significance lies in his participation in the Strand riots of July 1749 and the controversies that arose from it. The riots began on Saturday 1 July, when three sailors from the man-of-war 'Grafton' were entertained at the Crown tavern near St Mary in the Strand and complained that the prostitutes there had robbed them of their watches, thirty guineas, four moidores, and a banknote worth $20. They protested to the landlord, but were unceremoniously ejected from the tavern. Vowing revenge, the sailors returned with their shipmates and proceeded to gut the tavern, throwing the goods, beds, and clothes of the house in the street and burning them on a bonfire. Soldiers from the Tilt Yard were called in, but they arrived too late to prevent the destruction of the moveables in the house. On the following evening the tars returned again, this time attacking the Bunch of Grapes, another bawdy house a few doors to the east. Then, around midnight, they moved to the Star tavern opposite Devereux Court, and quite close to Temple Bar. The landlord of this tavern was one Peter Wood, who had run a respectable alehouse between 1745 and 1748 before turning it into a brothel. It was on the testimony of Wood, his wife Jane, and their servant-cum-shoemaker James Reeves, that Bosavern Penlez was indicted under the 'Riot Act' of 1715 for attempting to demolish a house. 
Penlez was not present when the attack on the Star first started. He had been drinking much of the day with three different friends, one of whom was celebrating his birthday. Penlez was probably very drunk when he fell in with the crowd at the Star. He was identified as smashing up the fore-parlour of the bawdy house and threatening the landlord on the stairs. He was not arrested on site, unlike some others indicted under the 'Riot Act', but was discovered asleep in Carey Street by the watch with a bundle of linen caps, aprons, ruffles, and handkerchiefs by his side. These articles were later identified by Jane Wood as belonging to the house. For the theft of these items, which some felt had been planted on him, he was also indicted for a capital felony. 
Henry Fielding -- the Bow Street magistrate who examined the rioters -- feared that the bawdy house riots would escalate into an attack on property in general. On his advice the duke of Bedford decided to prosecute most of the rioters under the 'Riot Act' rather than for the theft of articles stolen from the bawdy houses. Of the six so indicted one died in prison and two had a finding of 'ignoramus' on their indictments, including one gentleman, Edward Wrench, who was alleged to have verbally incited the mob to destroy the brothels. Of the three left, Benjamin Lander had a reasonably compelling alibi, leaving two -- Penlez and John Wilson, a journeyman shoemaker -- who were found guilty and sentenced to death. In coming to this decision, however, the jury recognized that the two journeymen had been convicted on the testimony of disreputable people; at the trial the collector of the scavenger tax declared he 'would not hang a Cat or Dog upon their Evidence' (Old Bailey proceedings). The members of the jury were likely to have seen Penlez and Wilson as reckless youths mixed up in an enterprise not of their making. Indeed the few sailors taken up in the disorders had been rescued from the roundhouse by their fellows. Consequently the jury, mindful of the testimonials on behalf of the two men at the trial, put in a plea for mercy. So too did many inhabitants of St Clement Danes, in a petition to the duke of Newcastle several weeks after the trial, to be followed by further petitions to the king from various other parishes in the vicinity of the Strand. 
Wilson was reprieved at the eleventh hour; Penlez was not. According to contemporary accounts he accepted his fate and begged his friends to resist any rescue attempt at the gallows. Rumours of such plans were rife, for in the tumbrils taking Penlez to Tyburn were sailors convicted of other capital crimes, and it was widely anticipated that seamen armed with bludgeons and cutlasses would plausibly try to save them from the noose, or failing that, from dissection by the surgeons. As it happened, Stephen Theodore Janssen, the sheriff in charge of the executions of October 1749, defused the situation by first refusing an armed guard to accompany his officers, and then by handing over all the bodies of the condemned to their friends and relatives. Penlez himself was buried at St Clement Danes at a service attended by hundreds; his funeral was paid for by public subscription. 
Penlez was executed on 18 October 1749, but the debate over his fate was far from ended. Representations to the MPs for the city of Westminster had been made to intercede on his behalf, especially to Granville Leveson-Gower, Viscount Trentham, whose brother-in-law was the duke of Bedford, secretary of state for the southern department. Trentham declined to help, and his refusal cost him support when he stood for re-election in Westminster a month after Penlez's execution. Trentham's re-election was supposed to be a foregone conclusion, but after heavy polling and a protracted scrutiny he only scraped home by some 170 votes. Throughout the polling 'Penley's ghost' emerged from a portable coffin to harangue the electors about the young man's fate. Not even Fielding's pamphlet vindicating the government's decision to hang Penlez, and published just four days before the election began, was able to contain the widespread feeling that a reckless youth was sacrificed at the altar of social order -- especially when it became clear that the attacks on bawdy houses remained the sole focus of the riots, both on the Strand and further east, and that the threat of anarchy was minimal. 
To many, including John Cleland, author of 'The Case of the Unfortunate Bosavern Penlez', the attacks on houses of ill repute were simply rough justice, ridding neighbourhoods of public nuisances that were difficult to contain through the normal legal channels. Such attacks, it was argued, could not be construed as treasonable, and the youthful impetuosity of a Penlez should not have to pay the price for disorders that stemmed essentially from the more brazen behaviour of the demobilized seamen. In the end the Penlez affair, besides highlighting the plebeian fear of bodily dismemberment at death and the volatile mood of Tyburn at the mid-century, was an instructive lesson about the balance of judicial terror and mercy that characterized the practice of eighteenth-century criminal law. 


@@@@@


doc= 89650


Thrift, John (d. 1752), public executioner and murderer, is of unknown origins and nothing is yet known of his life before he became the common hangman of London. He could not write his own name. His wife, whom he had married by 1748, was named Mary. For much of the 1740s he lived in a house on the Coal Yard, a street in St Giles-in-the-Fields which ran eastwards off Drury Lane and parallel to High Holborn. 
Thrift was probably the executioner who, on his first day of office at Tyburn on 10 March 1735, accidentally drew the cart from beneath the gallows before the caps had been pulled over the faces of the condemned. He was certainly in office by 24 May 1736. He hanged four men at Tyburn that day; returning home, he seems to have got into a row with one Mary White. He was committed to Newgate for knocking her down and stealing a pocket containing 3's'. 6died He was released a fortnight later, and she was gaoled in his place for false accusation. In January 1741 he was again committed to prison for assault, although the case seems to have come to nothing. 
Thrift's office and role in the theatre of execution gave him a particular place in the imagination of Londoners. He was Jack Ketch, the nickname given to all London's hangmen after the notorious late-seventeenth-century executioner. He presided at the execution days of felons held up to eight times a year at Tyburn and usually twice a year on Kennington Common, following the Old Bailey sessions and the Surrey assizes respectively. He cut a striking figure at the hanging, drawing, and quartering of convicted traitors, 'dress'd in a white frock, with a knife and steel by his side, and a drawn scymetar in his hand' ('London Morning Advertiser', 21 Jan 1743). The aftermath of the 'Forty-Five gave him a particularly prominent role. He executed nine Jacobites on Kennington Common on 30 July 1746, among them Francis Towneley. On 18 August he beheaded the earl of Kilmarnock and Lord Balmerino on Tower Hill. Kilmarnock had been assured that Thrift was 'a good sort of man' ('Gentleman's Magazine', 16, 1746, 393). Already dosed to stop himself from fainting, Thrift burst into tears when he came to ask the earl's forgiveness. Nevertheless, he was almost able to take Kilmarnock's head off, and certainly to kill him, with one blow. Balmerino was less fortunate: the first blow was too shallow; it took a second to render him insensible and a third to sever the head. On 9 April 1747 Thrift executed the eighty-year-old Lord Lovat, the last public beheading in Britain. 
In July 1736 Thrift was beaten up by the Tyburn crowd when he attempted to hang again Thomas Reynolds, who had revived after being cut down and put in his coffin. Inevitably Thrift became caught up in the conflicts that arose over the fate of the bodies of the hanged, between those who sought to rescue the corpse and the surgeons who wanted bodies for dissection. The limited evidence appears to show him siding more with the popular defence of the integrity of the corpse, but is ambiguous. In November 1741 he was summoned before the court of the Barber-Surgeons' Company, and charged with 'obstructing the bodys being brought from Tyburne to the Hall for dissection and threatning to prevent the Company's measures for obtaining the same' (Young, 358). However, his obstructionism may have been swayed as much by the competing demand of hospitals and private surgeons (far greater than the four bodies a year due to the company) as by the hostility of the crowd. Two years later the Barber-Surgeons gave him his Christmas box. 
In March 1748 Thrift and his wife played an equally ambiguous part in the arrest of John Walker, who had helped rescue the body of Francis Hill on the day of execution, only to steal it that night. Mary Thrift went to Hill's sister, telling her that 'she heard my brother was sold to a surgeon, that his head was off'. Together the two women went to the surgeon's house, where they found the coffin, upon which 'stood the man's head like a barber's block, but not defaced'. Mary Thrift took out a warrant against Walker, and when she and her husband confronted him, he confessed. For the Thrifts there was no doubt an element of self-interest; Walker's body-snatching had deprived the hangman of his right to the victim's clothes, a right acknowledged not only by Mary Thrift but by the dead man's sister, who recognized that 'Mr. Thrift had nothing for executing him' ('Old Bailey Proceedings', 20 April 1748). Moreover, Mary Thrift may have been so active in pursuing the matter because John had already been approached by Hill's sister, who clearly thought that the hangman was involved in the disappearance of the body. 
Although his name does not appear among those, over thirty in all, who have been identified as thief-takers in mid-eighteenth-century London, it seems likely that on occasion Thrift deployed his authority and knowledge to perform some of the parts associated with that trade: making the occasional arrest, appearing as a witness, acting as a broker between criminals and the authorities, and using his position to shield thieves and to help fence stolen goods. In June 1748 he arrested Elizabeth Haymour for stealing forty shillings from a lodger in her master's house and heard her confession before the magistrate. Five years earlier Thrift had testified at the trial of the thirteen-year-old Evy (or Evan) Evans for stealing silver spoons. The boy had tried to sell one of the spoons to a silversmith, telling him that he had found it in the street. Thrift swore that Evans had come to his house and said that 'he would give me a shilling to go with him to get the bowl of a spoon which was stopped, and to say I was his father' ('Old Bailey Proceedings', 29 June 1743). Even as he told it in court, Thrift's story only makes sense if Evans had some reason to believe that he was somebody who could help in fencing stolen goods. In 1750 a hostile commentator posited Thrift as a potential successor to Jonathan Wild, the notorious thief-taker general of thirty years before. 
On the evening of 11 March 1750 four Irish friends were walking past Thrift's house in the Coal Yard. According to his testimony the men made accusations that Thrift was a thief: 'that is Jack Ketch, he stole a gold watch, and two silver spoons, and has broke out of Newgate... there was ten guineas reward for taking of me'. Words turned to blows. The Irish witnesses later claimed that they were innocent victims of Thrift's violence; Thrift and his allies claimed that they attacked him with sticks. The quarrel culminated in Thrift getting a scimitar out of his house and chasing two of the Irishmen across Drury Lane. He caught up with them at Short's Gardens, where one, David Faris, slipped on some dung. There, in front of the large crowd which had gathered, Thrift hacked away, inflicting five wounds to the head and one to the left wrist. Thrift surrendered himself to the constable who, 'afraid of a mob... bid him walk before' and carried him before the magistrate Henry Fielding. His victim died of his wounds eight days later ('Old Bailey Proceedings', 25 April 1750). 
Thrift was tried at the Old Bailey on 25 April 1750. Despite his efforts to muddy the matter as to whether he had even struck the fatal blows, he was found guilty and sentenced to death, commuted to fourteen years' transportation a month later. His fate inevitably acquired a political edge. A cartoon, 'Squire Ketch in Horrors, or, The Sneering Apparitions', gleefully showed Thrift in the condemned cell recoiling in terror as his Jacobite victims confronted him, led by the three lords, their grinning severed heads in their hands. Thrift himself played the Jacobite card as he begged the cabinet for a pardon: 'The persons... who sought the quarrel with your petitioner were some Irish papists whose only pretence was his having done his duty in beheading the rebell Lords' (TNA: PRO, SP 36/113, fol. 62'r'). 
Thrift eventually received a full pardon, but only in mid-September, almost five months after his conviction. The opposition journal 'Old England' acidly hinted at the political motives behind its granting. The murder was no doubt a loyal pre-emptive strike. His prosecutors were 'Irish, native Irish of the old stock; consequently Papists; consequently Jacobites', and 'the taking off another Jacobite, an inveterate enemy to the present establishment, was in truth no more than pursuing the business of my hero's occupation'. Pardoned, Thrift 'lives 'in terrorem' to all Jacobites' ('Old England', 22 Sept 1750). 
Thrift was quickly reinstated, whipping two women at the cart's tail in late September. On 3 October he hanged twelve felons at Tyburn, among them the highwayman James Maclaine. John Thrift died on 5 May 1752, presumably in his parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields. He was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden, on the evening of 11 May. A hostile crowd followed the hearse, 'so displeased with his being buried there, that the attendants of the funeral... were afraid that the body would be torn out of the coffin' ('Covent-Garden Journal', 16 May 1752). For safety they took the coffin into the church, and only about 8 p.m. did they feel able to bury him in the graveyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 89656


Gibbs, William (1790-1875), businessman and religious philanthropist, was born on 22 May 1790 at 6 Calle de Cantarranas, Madrid, Spain, the second son of Antony Gibbs (1756-1815), merchant, and his wife, Dorothea Barnetta, 'nee' Hucks (1760-1820). The judge and politician Sir Vicary Gibbs was his uncle. His father had begun in the wool export trade in Exeter in 1788, but had rapidly fallen into debt and moved to Spain to establish an agency for wool merchants in Britain and elsewhere. William Gibbs's childhood was divided between Britain and Spain; he attended first a school run by Charles Lloyd in Exeter, and then from 1800 Blundell's School in Tiverton, Devon, before joining his father's business in Cadiz in 1802. Both William Gibbs and his elder brother were withdrawn from school early, and never attended university; this was a consequence of their father's precarious finances, and sacrifice was a perpetual theme of Gibbs's career. He moved to Bristol in 1806 as an assistant clerk to Gibbs, Bright and Gibbs, in which his uncle and cousin, both George Gibbs, were partners. Two years later he joined his father and his elder brother, (George) Henry Gibbs (1785-1842), in a new London trading company, Antony Gibbs & Son, becoming a partner in 1813, when the business became Antony Gibbs & Sons. 
Gibbs returned to Spain in 1813 to manage the Cadiz branch of the firm, which had become compromised by William Branscombe, the Gibbs' partner there, an honourable but easygoing man who had become complaisant with the toleration of smuggling shown by the Cadiz customs officers. Gibbs rejected a suggestion from his brother that the Cadiz office should close, and instead successfully restored the firm's reputation for probity. Through the Cadiz house Gibbs imported British and imperial manufactures and foodstuffs into Spain, where stocks of both had been severely depleted by the Peninsular War and the Francocentric continental system of trade imposed by Napoleon; initial overwhelming success was checked once competitors were able to establish themselves and the Spanish government introduced tariffs designed to deflect British imports. In 1818 he set up a sister business, Gibbs, Casson & Co., in Gibraltar, before returning to London in 1822. 
From London Gibbs and his brother extended the business to the Pacific coast of South America, opening a trading post in Lima in 1822 and two more posts in Santiago and Valparaiso in 1826. The Gibbs brothers closed their Cadiz house in 1827 and concentrated on taking advantage of the independence of the former Spanish colonies in South America. From 1832 the business was constantly in profit, with Henry and William Gibbs and their other partner, Henry's brother-in-law Charles Crawley, dividing $20,000 a year for the next decade. In London the Gibbs brothers became investors in the Great Western Railway, as did their cousin George Gibbs in Bristol; in 1833 the inaugural meetings of the London and Bristol committees of the railway were held in Gibbs offices. 
Gibbs's confidence in his prosperity was perhaps best expressed in his marriage, on 1 August 1839, at St Mary the Virgin, Flaxley, Gloucestershire, to (Matilda) Blanche Crawley-Boevey [
Gibbs's wealth increased dramatically after 1842, when the firm's representatives in South America signed contracts with the government of Peru for Antony Gibbs & Sons to be the sole importers of guano to Britain. Bird manure had been used as a fertilizer in Peru for centuries, as the arid conditions of the Peruvian coast and nearby islands prevented fermentation of the organic matter, leaving it both dry and rich in nitrogen and phosphorus. It was also lightweight and could be carried easily by farmers onto high ground previously little cultivated. Peru sought a market in Britain for the guano, but while the Gibbs agents in South America had made substantial loans to Peru against sales, the firm's previous attempt to import guano into Britain had ended with the bulk of their stock being dumped unwanted in the Thames. Gibbs described the adoption of the guano contracts as an 'act of insanity' (Mathew, 39) in the face of oversupply and the falling price of both the product and wheat. He expected difficulty in making a profit from the venture, and began an aggressive marketing campaign. This centred on two pamphlets of testimonials published in 1843 and 1844, emphasizing guano's potency as a fertilizer, one including an endorsement from the chemist and popularizer of science Andrew Ure. 
Initial results were highly successful in most parts of the British Isles, and many farmers found themselves dependent on the commodity. Prices rose as the initial shipments of 126,900 tons were exhausted. Following the departure of William Myers in 1849, who had also had a share in the guano monopoly, Gibbs had sole possession of the trade, and during the 1850s could make as much as $100,000 a year from a monopoly that covered most of the world outside the United States and Asia. Further contracts for nitrate extraction were signed in the 1850s, and Gibbs diversified into copper, silver, tin, wool, and bark, as well as artificial fertilizers. These proved necessary when the guano market declined as superphosphates, which were more appropriate for Britain's root vegetable crop, came onto the market. In addition to his South American business Gibbs opened an office in Melbourne in 1853 and subsequently began the Blackbull Shipping Line, transporting passengers and cargo to and from Australia. 
Gibbs's principal residence was always his town house in London; he moved from Hyde Park Street to Gloucester Place in 1849, and to the more substantial 16 Hyde Park Gardens in 1851. However, in 1843 he had bought Tyntes Place, near Wraxall in Somerset, a few miles to the west of Bristol. The rural location was not far from the Bristol Channel but also within a few hours of London by train. The house had been built less than thirty years before, and had been remodelled by Robert Newton of Nailsea shortly before Gibbs purchased it. By the 1850s Gibbs had renamed it Tyntesfield. 
In 1854 Gibbs commissioned John Gregory Crace to redecorate both 16 Hyde Park Gardens and Tyntesfield. This began a process by which Tyntesfield was gradually reinvented as one of the foremost examples of Victorian Gothic design. In the principal rooms Crace installed wood panels and gold inlays, with oil-varnished woodwork and mouldings and Gothic fireplaces among the many other additions throughout the house. Gibbs himself began collecting paintings, both works by nineteenth-century British painters and old masters, many of the latter on devotional subjects. 
Gibbs retired from Antony Gibbs & Sons in 1858, leaving his nephew Henry Hucks Gibbs in charge of the firm. Gibbs at first retained $1,200,000 of capital in the firm, reduced on his nephew's insistence to $1,000,000, though this still burdened the company with potentially crippling interest payments to William Gibbs as Henry Hucks Gibbs turned the business towards merchant banking after the loss of the guano contract in 1861, to some criticism from a cautious William. William Gibbs thenceforward concentrated largely on philanthropy, though he remained formally the head or 'prior' of the firm until his death. His piety was most strongly expressed in his sponsorship of the construction of a series of churches intended for Oxford Movement clergy, including in 1847 St Michael and All Angels at Clifton Hampden, Oxfordshire, where his brother Joseph Gibbs was rector, and in 1856 St Mary the Virgin, Flaxley, replacing the church where he was married; at both the architect was George Gilbert Scott. His concern for the poor of his parish in Paddington led him in 1861 to construct a new church, St Michael's, of which Rohde Hawkins was the architect. He also paid for the repair or building of churches in his ancestral county of Devon -- where in 1859 he bought Pytte, the house at Clyst St George owned by the family from 1560 to 1789 -- and for almshouses in Exeter and Exwick, as well as contributing to the restoration of Bristol Cathedral (begun 1867) and Exeter Cathedral (begun 1870). He acquired several advowsons, including Otterbourne, Hampshire, associated with John Keble's living of Hursley; and at the suggestion of their mutual friend Sir John Coleridge provided upwards of $30,000 for the construction of the chapel at Keble College, Oxford. 
The most enduring architectural monument to Gibbs's Anglo-Catholic outlook and his wealth was the rebuilding of Tyntesfield between 1863 and 1865, with John Norton as architect and William Cubitt & Co. as builders. Crace contributed to the new interiors. The house doubled in size, with two new wings, an extra floor, towers, and other architectural features dramatically reshaping the roof in an irregularly stepped shape. Some exterior walls remained plain while others were decorated with a mixture of Gothic and naturalistic carvings. Gibbs had initially resisted the external ornamentation on the grounds 'that English taste among the superior orders is averse to rich and sumptuous effects' (Miller, 87), but was won round by Norton, whose designs intended to offer the illusion that the house was the work of several different historical periods, emphasizing the restoration of architectural continuity as Gibbs's religious faith emphasized the Church of England's rediscovery of its Catholic traditions. Charlotte M. Yonge, novelist and a cousin of Blanche Gibbs, described it as 'like a church in spirit' ('Tyntesfield', 7); each evening closed with prayers, after which the patriarch Gibbs in his chair bade each family member and guest goodnight in turn. The estate was extended by the purchase of two adjoining properties, enhancing Gibbs's claim to the paternalist oversight of Wraxall village, and probably cheering Henry Hucks Gibbs, who had encouraged his uncle to withdraw capital from the business to invest in land. A chapel, designed by Arthur Blomfield, was added between 1872 and 1877, though opposition from the patron of the nearby church in Wraxall prevented it from fulfilling Gibbs's wish that it should function as an estate church, and neither regular services nor burials were held there. None the less it was hailed by Yonge as the necessary culmination of the Tyntesfield project, giving 'a character to the household almost resembling that of Little Gidding' (Hall, 25 April 2002, 117), the Huntingdonshire home of Nicholas Ferrar and his family in the reign of Charles I much idealized by nineteenth-century Anglo-Catholics. 
William Gibbs died at Tyntesfield on 3 April 1875 and was buried at All Saints, Wraxall, on 9 April, his coffin being carried to the church by relays of thirty estate workers rather than in a carriage. His widow, Blanche, inherited Tyntesfield and continued her husband's Christian philanthropy, although she turned it away from church building and towards more socially active projects. She built and endowed St Michael's Home for Consumptives, Axfield (1876-8), and bought the site for a convalescent home in Woking, both managed by the Anglican sisterhood of St Peter, Kilburn. She also added to Wraxall a village club, a convalescent home, and a temperance inn, the Battle Axes. She endowed Keble College with a scholarship fund in 1881; her sons also contributed to the fabric of the college. Tyntesfield remained a centre for the entertainment of a wide network of family members and friends, largely with the same religious sympathies. Blanche Gibbs died at Tyntesfield on 22 September 1887, of uterine cancer, and was buried on 29 September 1887 at All Saints, Wraxall. 
Tyntesfield remained with Gibbs's descendants until the death of his great-grandson George Richard Lawley Gibbs, second Baron Wraxall, in 2001. Knowing that the estate could not support itself, Wraxall left the estate to all nineteen of his father's descendants, intending that they should share the benefits of a sale. Assessment of the house and its collections, despite depletions, revealed that not only was it by then unique as a large Victorian Gothic house which had escaped major alterations or demolition during the twentieth century, but that many domestic artefacts from the daily lives of William and Blanche Gibbs and their servants still remained in the house. It could be argued that Tyntesfield was without rival not only architecturally, but as a record of life in a large Victorian household. A campaign run by Save Britain's Heritage raised over $3 million from the public to add to a grant of $17.4 million from the National Heritage Memorial Fund which, with further grants and private donations, allowed for the successful purchase of the house by the National Trust in June 2002, and its rapid opening to the public to help fund as well as draw attention to the process of conservation. 
William Gibbs's period at the helm of Antony Gibbs & Sons transformed the finances of the business and the Gibbs family. Gibbs had pursued a line of business thrust upon him by his associates in South America because abandoning it would have exposed the company and family to a greater risk; the rewards allowed him to go beyond the family's goal of clearing his father's debts and honour and enabled him to pursue the life of a model Christian gentleman and head of household. This was not a life of inward-looking piety, but a practical attempt to contribute towards the regeneration of Christian England. The differences in emphasis between the philanthropy of William and Blanche Gibbs perhaps reflects different gender roles, William renewing the material structure of the church while Blanche supported the nursing of the sick and the moral reinforcement of the communities in her care. While their paternalism and religiosity might have seemed remote from the concerns of the early twenty-first century, in preserving Tyntesfield the National Trust chose to protect and exhibit an architectural expression of the Gibbs' familial and religious ideals. 


@@@@@


doc= 89662


Jacob, Sarah (1857-1869), victim of self-starvation, was born on 12 May 1857 at Llethr-neuadd farm, Llanfihangel-ar-arth, Carmarthenshire, the third daughter of Evan Jacob (1830-1895), a tenant farmer, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Williams (1830-1907). She attended the national school at Pencader but in February 1867 fell ill and suffered fits before becoming unconscious for a month. She received medical attention from a local surgeon, Henry Harries Davies, who admitted that he did not know the cause of her illness. A second doctor was consulted in April, before Davies returned and attended to Sarah for a further two weeks. Although he believed her to be on the road to recovery, she remained bedridden and refused all but a little milk food. Over the coming weeks she became increasingly weak and skeletal and lost most of her hair. By 10 October she had stopped eating and drinking altogether and her parents vowed never to attempt to feed her again unless requested by their daughter. In November Evan Jones, vicar of Llanfihangel-ar-arth, was summoned to her bedside for the first time. Although he was initially extremely sceptical of the extraordinary claims made about Sarah, he soon became a regular visitor at Llethr-neuadd and was later to form a very different opinion of her situation. 
News of Sarah Jacob's remarkable story soon became public knowledge and by the summer of 1868 several Welsh-language publications, notably 'Seren Cymru', had featured articles discussing the 'miraculous case' of the young girl. In February 1869, however, following the publication of a letter by Evan Jones in 'The Welshman', the story of the 'wonderful little girl' who had gone without food and drink for sixteen months attracted the attention of the English press. In his letter Jones had issued a challenge to members of the medical profession to come and see Sarah for themselves and conduct their own investigations into her situation. A stream of visitors soon began arriving at Llethr-neuadd as the case of the Welsh Fasting Girl became the subject of intense public speculation and debate. The English medical journal 'The Lancet' was particularly critical of the whole affair and voiced grave concerns about the credibility of Sarah's story. In a bid to silence the critics, a group of local men, including Evan Jones and Dr Harries Davies, met at Llanfihangel-ar-arth on 15 March 1869 with the intention of devising a scheme to watch Sarah day and night for a fortnight and prove that her claims were not an elaborate deceit. In the event, however, the watch was denounced as an amateurist sham and, despite concluding that Sarah had not taken any food or drink during the fortnight, the exercise failed to convince the sceptics. 
During the summer of 1869 visitors continued to arrive at Llethr-neuadd, bringing small gifts and money for Sarah Jacob and her family. Sarah, who had taken to wearing ribbons in her hair, was now said to be adorned by the various trinkets and garments which were left for her at her bedside. In August she was paid a visit by an eminent London physician, Robert Fowler (1828-1886), who published his observations in 'The Times' on 7 September. Fowler suggested that there was a psychological explanation for Sarah's illness and concluded that she suffered from 'simulative hysteria'. In his opinion, she was a 'night feeder' who had successfully deceived her parents and others around her. He also suggested that she should be admitted to hospital and force-fed. 
Fowler's diagnosis refuelled the controversy surrounding the case and after much debate in the Welsh and English press, Sarah Jacob's parents gave their permission for a second watch to be placed over their daughter. Four trained nurses from Guy's Hospital, London, were appointed to carry out the task and arrived at Llethr-neuadd on 9 December 1869. A committee comprising seven local doctors was also established to supervise the watch. On 17 December 1869, a little over a week after the arrival of the nurses, Sarah died in her bed in the farmhouse at Llethr-neuadd. She was probably buried at Llanfihangel-ar-arth cemetery on 24 December 1869, aged twelve. 
An inquest into Sarah Jacob's death was convened on 21 December 1869 and concluded that she had died of starvation. During the inquest it was also revealed that there were signs that she had been eating and drinking secretly, either with or without her family's knowledge. After consultations with the law officers of the crown and the Treasury solicitor, a government prosecution was brought against the adults who had allowed her to die: her parents, and the committee of medical men who had overseen the final watch over her, were summonsed on charges of unlawful killing. The Carmarthenshire magistrates threw out the charges against the doctors -- though criticizing them for having acted foolishly -- but committed Sarah's parents for trial. Charged at Carmarthen assizes in July 1870 with 'having caused the death of their child, through their culpable abstention from giving her food' (Cule, 122), they were found guilty of manslaughter after a trial which lasted a week. The judge, Sir James Hannen, stated that they had persisted in a fraudulent deception, and risked the death of their child in order to escape exposure. Evan Jacob was sentenced to a year's hard labour at Swansea gaol while his wife, Hannah, received a six-month sentence. 
Although other cases of fasting women were reported during the Victorian period, Sarah Jacob's tale received an unusual amount of publicity and aroused much controversy. Robert Fowler, the doctor who wrote a detailed account of Sarah's case, asserted that the degree of public interest in it was unmatched since that of Mary M'Avoy in 1816 (Fowler, 257). It continues to attract attention and divide opinion. The portrayal in the English press of her monoglot Welsh-speaking parents as superstitious, ignorant, and cruel people, contrasted sharply with the depiction of the health professionals who attended to her as trustworthy, responsible, and reputable. The case not only exposed a clash between two very different cultures and ways of life, but also highlighted the contemporary conflict between science and faith. In 1873, shortly after Sarah Jacob's death, the disorder of anorexia nervosa was formally named and described by the physician Sir William Gull. 


@@@@@


doc= 89673


Rubinstein, Michael Bernard (1920-2001), solicitor, was born on 6 November 1920 at 16 Ladbroke Terrace, Kensington, London, the son of Harold Frederick Rubinstein (1891-1975), solicitor and playwright, and his wife, Lina Naomi, 'nee' Lowy. Educated at St Paul's School, he served in the Royal Engineers and then the Royal Artillery throughout the Second World War. Demobilized as a captain he studied law before joining the family firm of Rubinstein, Nash & Co in 1948. He remained with the firm (subsequently Rubinstein, Callingham, then Rubinstein, Callingham, Polden and Gale), specializing in defending the interests of publishers and authors, until he retired in 1994. His military service left him with hearing in only one ear but his lifelong commitment to music and the education of young musicians was unabated. He was a director of Youth and Music and a governor of the Purcell School, and successively a trustee, chairman, and vice-president of the Society for the Promotion of New Music. With characteristic irony, his book about music was entitled 'Music to my Ear' (1985). On 1 July 1955 he married (Edna) Joy Smith Douthwaite ('b'. 1927/8), a ballet dancer and teacher (under the name Joy Boulter), and daughter of George Smith Douthwaite, electrical engineer. There were two sons and two daughters of the marriage. 
Rubinstein was best known for representing the leading publishing houses of his era, including Chatto and Windus, Sidgwick and Jackson, Hodder and Stoughton, Jonathan Cape, Victor Gollancz, and Penguin, then independent companies yet to be swallowed up by publishing conglomerates. His most notable triumph was his successful defence in 1960 of Penguin Books when the latter was prosecuted under the 'Obscene Publications Act' (1959) for publishing the unexpurgated text of D. H. Lawrence's 'Lady Chatterley's Lover'. This was the first prosecution of a novel under an ostensibly liberalizing act of parliament to amend the law of obscenity and to protect literature. While the prosecution floundered in a time warp of witnesses cheerfully asserting that they did not have to read the book to know it was obscene, and prosecuting counsel asking the jury whether they would want their maidservants or wives to read the book, Rubinstein concentrated on rallying the literary establishment to prove that its publication was justified in the public interest. Thirty-five witnesses testified to its merits. Rubinstein had the delicate task of finding a sexually unimpeachable female witness who could testify that she had read the book and remained uncorrupted. Penguin's triumphant acquittal signified an end to such prosecutions of books where a defence of literary merit could be raised. Within a year Rubinstein's grateful clients, Penguin, had sold two million of one of Lawrence's lesser works. The outcome gave particular satisfaction to Rubinstein since his father's defence thirty years previously of 'The Well of Loneliness' by Radclyffe Hall, a novel with lesbian themes, had failed. Rubinstein deposited the papers from the 'Lady Chatterley' trial at Bristol University, and the trial was the subject of a number of books and articles on censorship. 
In 1962 Rubinstein successfully defended book publishers against an attempt by the registrar of restrictive practices to abolish the net book agreement. The agreement had been in operation since 1900, allowing the book trade to fix the price at which books had to be sold to the British public -- a measure then felt by the majority of the publishing industry to safeguard small bookshops, and to enable the publication of a more eclectic range of quality books. It collapsed over thirty years later when major publishers withdrew. In 1997 the restrictive practices court found the agreement to be against the public interest. The ending of the agreement strengthened large book store chains, but led to the closure of many small independent bookshops. 
Rubinstein also defended many publishers against an increasing tide of libel actions. Most notable was the scornful dismissal by an English jury in 1964 of a claim by Dr Wladislaw Dering against Leon Uris and his publishers William Kimber for the account in Uris's 'Exodus' of Dering's experiments on prisoners at Auschwitz. The trial lasted eighteen days and Rubinstein assembled twenty-two witnesses. As the book had exaggerated the number of such experiments, Uris was found guilty of libel, but Dering was awarded a contemptuous half a penny in damages. He had to pay $20,000 costs but had paid only $3000 when he died a year later. Rubinstein estimated that the action cost ten times what it would have cost to settle out of court, but insisted that it had to be defended on principle. It was a set-back for opportunist plaintiffs and deterred many such claims in the next decade. Rubinstein cared strongly about the balance to be struck between freedom of speech and protection of reputation, and his knowledge of libel laws led to him being appointed a member of the lord chancellor's committee on defamation from 1971 to 1974. The committee's sensible suggestions for reform were eventually incorporated into the 'Defamation Act' (1986). Rubinstein wrote about the shortcomings of libel law in his book 'Wicked, Wicked Libels' (1972). 
Rubinstein found himself in the public eye in 1979 when he held a press conference for the surveyor of the queen's pictures, Sir Anthony Blunt, when the latter was unmasked as the 'fourth man' in the Cambridge spy ring centred round Kim Philby. Upset by newspaper reports about him, Blunt asked Rubinstein if he had any legal recourse. Rubinstein wisely advised that he had destroyed his good name and had no chance of successfully bringing proceedings. 
Rubinstein's wide range of interests produced large numbers of haikus, an even larger number of letters to the broadsheet newspapers, and lively conversation at the Garrick. As a young man he had frequently spent weekends at Great Amwell, Hertfordshire, studying the works of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky with Maurice Nicoll. In later life he listed amongst his recreations 'experiencing right hemisphere mentation' and 'ruminating' ('WW'). He wrote a number of esoteric monographs on subjects dear to his heart, including 'Nasrudrin on his Toes and Other Feats' (1999, on Sufism) and 'The Cart-Ruts on Malta and Gozo' (1984). A man of Judaeo-Christian outlook, he was honorary secretary of a Jewish society to aid Arab refugees. He died on 12 January 2001 at the Lister Hospital, Stevenage (near his home in Benington, Hertfordshire), of multi-organ failure. He was survived by his wife, Joy, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89687


Miranda, (Sebastian) Francisco de (1750-1816), campaigner for Spanish American independence, was born on 28 March 1750 in Caracas, Venezuela, the eldest of ten children of Sebastian de Miranda Ravelo (1721-1791), an entrepreneurial merchant who had emigrated to Venezuela from the Canary Islands, and his wife, Francisca Antonia Rodriguez de Espinosa (died 1777), a member of a prominent Creole family. Miranda was baptized on 5 April 1750 in the metropolitan cathedral in Caracas. He was educated at home by a Jesuit priest, Narciso Yepez, and attended the Academy of Santa Rosa before entering the Royal and Pontifical University of Caracas in 1762, where he specialized in the study of law. He graduated as a bachelor of humanities in 1767. 
In 1771 Miranda's father purchased a captaincy in the Spanish army for his restless son. Miranda crossed the Atlantic, where he entered the princess's infantry company on 7 December 1772, and was sent to the Spanish garrison at Melilla in north Africa. Temperamentally disinclined to obedience, Miranda was a subversive presence who always thought he was more intelligent than his commanders. He openly admired his Moorish opponents, read the 'Koran', and came to identify with their desire to rid their soil of a foreign military presence. His experiences while serving in Europe and north Africa awakened an anti-colonial consciousness, which fused with his tremendous hubris and led him to believe he could lead a glorious movement to emancipate his own American countrymen from Spanish tyranny. He was reprimanded on several occasions for insubordination and was also imprisoned, for example on the Algerian campaign of 1775 after he complained that incompetent senior officers were being decorated just for their status while men of lower rank but greater ability were ignored, and in summer 1777 at Cadiz. An important friend made at this time was John Turnbull, a young English merchant based at Gibraltar, through whom Miranda began to expand his knowledge of the English-speaking world. 
Anxious to return to America and start down his path to greatness, Miranda requested a transfer to the Spanish fort at Cuba and set sail for the Caribbean on 28 April 1780. Immediately after his arrival Miranda participated in the expedition that retook Pensacola from the British occupiers. Working under the governor, Juan Manuel Cagigal, he co-ordinated the Cubans' efforts to supply the North American patriots, sending critical financial aid to Admiral de Grasse in the Chesapeake. In August 1781 Cagigal sent Miranda to Jamaica to negotiate an exchange of prisoners with the commander of the British station there. The friendships he made among the British officers in Jamaica enhanced his already pronounced Anglophilia, and rumours started to circulate that he had been recruited as a British spy. Although the charges were never proven, Miranda had become so transfixed by the idea of Spanish American independence that he decided to defect and seek foreign allies for his scheme. He slipped out of his barracks in Cuba in the middle of the night on 1 June 1783 and embarked for the United States. 
Having turned himself into a fugitive from Spain, Miranda spent the next two years travelling throughout the United States, following a route that took him through Charleston, Philadelphia, and New York to Boston. He was a purposeful traveller, visiting most significant battle sites of the American War of Independence and talking with many important military and political leaders of the new nation. Miranda became particularly close to Alexander Hamilton, Henry Knox, and Samuel Adams, and also briefly met George Washington and the marquis de Lafayette, whose fame made him jealous. He consciously sought out people and experiences that would help him understand the vast political experiment taking place around him in order to gain valuable lessons for Spanish American independence, and recorded his observations in a highly detailed diary. 
Miranda next sought to publicize himself and his cause in Britain, arriving in London on 1 February 1785. From his American friends he had letters of introduction to several British public figures, and worked to expand his acquaintance, calling on the former prime minister the earl of Shelburne, Joseph Priestley, Samuel and Jeremy Bentham, Francis Egerton, third duke of Bridgewater, and many others, and travelled to Edinburgh in an unsuccessful attempt to meet Adam Smith. In August he and Colonel William Steuben Smith, son-in-law of the American minister in London, John Adams, embarked on the grand tour of Europe. They arrived at The Hague and then travelled through the Dutch republic and Westphalia to Prussia, reaching Berlin early in September, where they witnessed and were impressed by the splendour and discipline of Frederick the Great's military on parade. After travelling with Smith to Prague, Budapest (where they met Joseph Haydn), and Vienna, Miranda ventured alone to Italy where he held secret meetings with Spanish American Jesuits who had been exiled 'en masse' by Charles III of Spain in 1767. Many Jesuit exiles had written or were writing natural and geographic histories of their home regions, and thus played a substantial role in the formation of national identities in South America. From there he went to Greece (arriving in May 1786) and Turkey to visit all the sites of classical antiquity and take notes on their contemporary military practices and weaponry. 
In October 1786 Miranda headed northward to the Crimea. In early 1787 he encountered Prince Grigory Potemkin and the Russian empress, Catherine the Great, on their famous tour of the Ukraine. He quickly became a favourite of the empress, and spent a year in Russia discoursing with her on the economic possibilities for Russia in Alaska and California that would be opened up by Spanish American independence. Delighted with her dashing young protege, Catherine made him a Russian count, and guaranteed that he would receive sanctuary in all her embassies, if danger should ever threaten him. Miranda travelled across Scandinavia where, in Sweden late in 1787, he conducted a month-long affair with Catherine Hall, wife of a wealthy British merchant in Goteborg. One tradition alleges that Miranda chose the colours of the flag of independent Venezuela to commemorate Catherine's beauty: 'yellow for her hair, blue for her eyes, red for her lips' (Racine, 98). He proceeded through Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland (where he discussed American independence with Edward Gibbon), and Italy, ending his grand tour in France. He arrived in Paris in May 1789 as the estates general met for the first time since 1614. He was appalled at the luxury of the court while the mass of the people suffered in poverty, but was inspired by the humbling of the French royal family, who were from the same Bourbon dynasty as the king of Spain. He returned to London that summer full of energy and ideas and determined to spread liberty to his own continent. 
Miranda settled in his former lodgings at 104 Pall Mall and began negotiating with the British government. In 1790, with the encouragement and participation of the prime minister, William Pitt, he drew up a plan for the establishment of an independent state in Spanish America with British military assistance. Pitt's principal immediate interest was in obtaining Miranda's knowledge of South America, whether acquired at first hand or from his correspondents or books, in order to increase the British government's grasp of commercial and diplomatic opportunities there. Miranda eventually realized that his enthusiasm for a British invasion of South America was not shared by his host government, ended his discussions with Pitt, and left for Paris in March 1792. 
Miranda's negotiations with the French revolutionary government earned him that August a commission as field marshal in the French army, which he accepted on the understanding that the French government would promote the cause of Spanish American independence indefinitely, and that they accepted that this was Miranda's primary calling in life. In autumn 1792 he was one of the commanders of the French army of the north in its conquest of the Austrian Netherlands. Although Miranda was a competent military leader, his best efforts were doomed by disrupted supply lines and the political intrigues of his superiors. His association with the moderate Girondins did not endear him to the more radical Jacobins. He was accused of military incompetence and anti-revolutionary ideas and tried in May 1793. He was unanimously found not guilty, but when the Jacobins established their ascendancy in July, Miranda was rapidly rearrested and held without trial until January 1795. 
Miranda remained in France, but was the frequent victim of political persecution by the conservative administration of the Directory, for whom he was a dangerous radical. In December 1797 he convened a meeting of Spanish American exiles who drew up the 'act of Paris', a declaration proposing Spanish American independence under British protection, and an alliance between Spanish America, Britain, and the United States against France. 
Miranda left for London in January 1798 and renewed his acquaintance with Pitt. He also travelled, and while on a tour of northern England, in 1800 or 1802, he met and probably married Sarah (1774-1847), daughter of John Andrews, a shoemaker in Market Weighton, Yorkshire, and his wife, Diana, sister of Stephen Hewson, portrait painter. They are known to have had two children, Leandro (1803-1886) and Francisco (1806-1831). 
Miranda's scheme for British intervention in Spanish America to some extent complemented British aspirations for the end of Spanish rule on the continent, but despite support from the Pittite MP and naval officer Home Popham, and the secretary to the Admiralty, Sir Evan Nepean, a planned expedition to the Caribbean in 1804 did not take place. The renewal of hostilities in Europe that year meant that the British government became focused on the European theatre of war; Miranda recognized this and turned to his old friends in the United States. In December 1805 he secured an audience with President Thomas Jefferson and the secretary of state, James Madison, both of whom expressed their interest, even tacit approval, but whose diplomatic sensibilities prevented them from extending any official support. Private investors were more enthusiastic and outfitted a ship for him, which he sentimentally named the 'Leander' after his young son. Dozens of idealistic and unemployed young men volunteered to join the Miranda expedition which left New York on 2 February 1806 and, after spending much of February and March in Haiti and then calling off at various points in the Caribbean, finally landed at La Vela de Coro in Venezuela on 3 August 1806. Far from being received as liberators, however, Miranda's dishevelled and demoralized mercenaries met with little interest from the local inhabitants and he retreated to his ship in less than a week. While several of his unfortunate young followers were captured by Spanish royalists, tortured, and even executed, Miranda hovered, the focus of rumour and speculation, in Trinidad until late 1807 when he sailed home to his young family in London. The whole distasteful episode became a minor controversy in American politics when opponents of Jefferson and Madison later tried to tie the illegal and abortive invasion to their administration during an election campaign. 
For Miranda, however, the 'Leander' expedition turned into a propaganda coup. Aggressively pursuing a public relations campaign in England, James Mill, Jeremy Bentham, and Miranda collaborated on books called 'South American Independence, or, The Emancipation of South America, the Glory and Interest of England' (1807) and 'Additional Reasons for Our Immediately Emancipating Spanish America' (1808). As a result his London home at 27 Grafton Street (later renumbered 58 Grafton Way) became a beacon for disaffected Spanish American patriots and their English supporters and admirers, who included not only Bentham and Mill but Lady Hester Stanhope and William Wilberforce among many others. In the summer of 1810 representatives of autonomous 'cabildos' (local town councils) from Caracas and Buenos Aires came to London to solicit recognition; the men lodged with Miranda and participated in the so-called Grafton Street symposium, during which the shared vision of continental emancipation was earnestly discussed. Simon Bolivar, one of the Venezuelans, admired his famous countryman and persuaded Miranda to return to America. He left London for the last time in October 1810 and arrived in Caracas on 10 December. Miranda was elected to the national congress as the representative of the remote province of Pao and was present when the congress officially declared the first republic on 5 July 1811. By then sixty-one years old, Miranda was a marginalized and distrusted figure in independent Venezuela. His Patriotic Club permitted women and mulattos to join as members, which disturbed the Venezuelan male land- and slave-owning elite. He took charge of a military expedition against the town of Valencia, whose leaders opposed the revolution, but this led some in Caracas to fear that Miranda was leading a Jacobin coup. Following a devastating earthquake in Caracas on 26 March 1812, on 3 April Miranda was named generalissimo for life and head of state with sweeping powers over the army and the state. This appeared to be further proof of a soaring ambition which reduced his appeal to the younger generation of more moderate, republican patriots. 
Later that year, in the wake of a successful campaign by royalist forces which Miranda had underestimated, Simon Bolivar decided that Miranda was turning dangerously despotic and needed to be stopped. Following the royalist capture of his fort of San Felipe, near Puerto Cabello, he negotiated a ceasefire that would turn over Miranda to his Spanish enemies. He was arrested in August while trying to leave for London. The betrayed Miranda was allowed a written appeal in March 1813, but this was denied and he was taken in chains to the Spanish port of Cadiz, where he survived for four years in the dank prison of La Carraca. His health failed dramatically during those years and he died at La Carraca on 14 July 1816, four months after a severe stroke. Miranda was buried in an unmarked grave outside the prison walls; his bones were dug up during renovations in 1875 but have since been lost. 
Francisco de Miranda was not an exceptional military talent, nor was he a gifted diplomat or an innovative thinker. Rather, he was a master propagandist and tireless promoter of the one idea that animated his entire life: Spanish American emancipation. His reputation has undergone several transformations. In the years immediately after his death Miranda was portrayed as a victim of Spanish tyranny and hero of the patriot movement; in subsequent decades, however, his fame was subsumed by the cult of the great and heroic Bolivar. He was remembered elsewhere: in Paris the Arc de Triomphe listed him as one of the commanders of the victorious army of the north. He eventually found a place in South American mythology as the 'precursor' of independence, to Bolivar's 'liberator', a role established by the middle of the nineteenth century. There is a major avenue named after him in Caracas, and a Venezuelan province also bears his name. In 1895 a cenotaph was established in his memory at the National Pantheon, Caracas: the tomb is held open by a soaring eagle, awaiting the repatriation of Miranda's remains. In London he was commemorated by a bronze statue in Fitzroy Square; his former home at 58 Grafton Way was acquired by the Venezuelan government in 1978 to become a museum and the core of a cultural centre. 


@@@@@


doc= 89688


Pitt, Hester, countess of Chatham and 'suo jure' Baroness Chatham (1720-1803), political wife, was born in London on 8 November 1720, the sixth child and only daughter of Richard Grenville (1678-1727) and his wife, Hester, 'nee' Temple, subsequently 'suo jure' Countess Temple ('bap'. 1684, died 1752), daughter of Sir Richard Temple, third baronet, of Stowe, Buckinghamshire. 
Details of her education are unknown, but from her earliest years she was at the heart of a political network, a place she held throughout her life. Her brothers George Grenville and Richard Grenville, second Earl Temple, and their cousin George Lyttelton formed the 'Cobham cousindom' along with Hester's future husband, William Pitt (1708-1778). Her childhood appears to have been happy, spent with her devoted brothers at Stowe and the Grenville estate of Wotton Underwood, also in Buckinghamshire, and visiting Bath and Tunbridge Wells, riding horses, and developing her zeal for politics and business affairs. There is some evidence that she attracted a number of suitors, including her cousin, Richard Berenger, but she remained unmarried until she was thirty-three years old, when romance blossomed with the forty-six-year-old Pitt, whom she had known for over twenty years. Although the marriage was perceived by many as an astute partnership, allowing political allies to become brothers, it was not a loveless, tactical match. The couple's letters were full of declarations of their affection, and their pain when apart from one another; Hester wrote to him just before their wedding: 'the thought that I am in possession of your heart is a pleasure and flattery beyond every other' (Williams, 1.242). The couple married on 16 November 1754 at her house in Argyle Street, and they enjoyed a ten-day honeymoon at West Wickham, Kent, the home of her first cousin Gilbert West and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Bartlett. 
The marriage was a happy one, and they formed a strong partnership, moving to a house at Hayes, Kent, in 1756. Lady Hester Pitt (as she was known until 1761) was an important political confidante to her husband and later her son, and their letters were full of political news. In 1755, for example, she helped the countess of Bute to sell tickets for the opening night of a play written by a shared ally, while their husbands discussed how to prevent war on the continent. While she often played the role of political wife with a great deal of naivety, especially when soothing relations between her husband and her brothers, it is unclear whether this was deliberate or affected. She recognized the importance of maintaining support from her allies for the future of their children, while staying loyal to her husband; Horace Walpole noted: 'Is this a peace patched up by Livia for the sake of her children?' ('The Letters of Horace Walpole', 7.241). 
It was not only for political reasons that Lady Hester felt the need to maintain the support of her family and friends; they were an important source of loans and income to the Pitts. William had an extravagant nature, but was without a large independent income on which to base his expenditure; as early as 1755 Lady Hester's brother Earl Temple felt obliged to give them $1000 a year after Pitt had been dismissed as paymaster-general. Following Pitt's resignation from office in 1761 the couple welcomed the gift of an annual pension of $3000, which was not only to be paid for his lifetime, but also for that of Lady Hester and their eldest son. Pitt was also the recipient of a number of posthumous benefactions, including a sizeable legacy from Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, and in 1765 the estates of Sir William Pynsent who, according to Hester, had never met Pitt. This legacy gave them the property of Burton Pynsent, at Curry Rivel, Somerset, which became her favoured residence until her death. Despite this good fortune, her financial acumen was tested as she dealt with the many debts that her husband incurred. 
It was not only financial concerns that fell to Hester; during her husband's illnesses she would take on a number of his political duties. Walpole recognized her potential as a politician soon after the marriage, and joked in 1757 that the wives of parliamentarians, including Hester, should 'take the government upon themselves instead of their husbands' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 21.53). She gained a great deal of respect for her capable manner; the banker Thomas Coutts, for example, described her as 'the cleverest 'man' of her time in politics and business' (Williams, 2.244). As part of the settlement on Pitt's resignation from office in 1761, she was created Baroness Chatham in her own right, which was in part a recognition of her own political acumen as well as of Pitt's status and her membership of the Grenville dynasty. The award was unpopular, and she was called by the public Lady Cheat'em. She became countess of Chatham by courtesy when her husband was created an earl in 1766. While her husband was ill she wrote a large number of letters on his behalf to fellow politicians, including the duke of Newcastle and her husband's kinsman Thomas Pitt, first Baron Camelford. This was particularly important during the Chatham administration of 1766-8, when Chatham's poor health deteriorated yet further; when members of the cabinet were unable to gain their leader's guidance they applied to his wife instead. She not only took over his correspondence and acted as his link to the political world, but also met senior politicians on his behalf. The duke of Grafton, encouraged by George III, contacted Lady Chatham in October 1768 to discuss the removal of the earl of Shelburne from office. Their long meeting and her loyal and diplomatic answers indicate that she was an able, but not always willing, politician. 
Evidence suggests that Lady Chatham preferred domestic affairs. The Pitts were devoted parents of their two daughters and three boys, whom William Pitt called Hester's 'sweet little race' (Birdwood, 7). Although William was concerned with the care of their children, his political responsibilities often kept him away from home. However, Lady Chatham recognized the need to manage the domestic world without him, and she wrote of her acceptance that his responsibilities 'claim all your care for poor England and that she is a rival I must submit to' (ibid., 8). Their eldest child was Hester (1755-1780), who later married Charles Stanhope, third Earl Stanhope. In 1756 she gave birth to John (1756-1835) ['see 'Pitt, John, second earl of Chatham], and then Harriot (1758-1786); when, having married Edward James Eliot, Harriot died in childbirth with her first child, Harriot Hester, Hester took the baby granddaughter into her home. Hester enjoyed a very close relationship with her second son, William Pitt (1759-1806), known as Pitt the younger. The couple's youngest son was James Charles (1761-1780), whose death in the West Indies caused Hester much sorrow. Hester spent a great deal of time with all the children at Hayes, and she was largely responsible for their upbringing, although when her husband suffered from ill health his welfare was her priority. She wrote of her distress at Chatham's recurrent illness, admitting that it made her 'a very suffering miserable person' (BL, Add. MS 59490, fol. 26). His death in 1778, although not unexpected, caused her great distress, and she wrote that 'the blessings with which heaven had alleviated the bitterness of sorrow are felt by me as they ought' (ibid., fol. 67). She was left without a regular income, as her pension was often in arrears, and had to cover the expenses of two sons just as their careers were being launched. 
In her widowhood Lady Chatham continued to be part of the political world through her son William Pitt the younger. She had always expected great things of him, writing a few weeks after his birth: 'I cannot help believing the little William is to become a personage' (Ayling, 248). They continued to have a close relationship after his father's death, and it was he who hurried down to Burton Pynsent to comfort her in 1780 following the death of James Charles. Hester exercised a great deal of influence over Pitt the younger, and he often sought her advice and reassurance on matters personal and political, especially in his early years. In turn, Pitt often managed his mother's affairs, particularly when their concerns needed representation in parliament. Although her husband's debts of $20,000 were settled by parliament at his death, her income was often insufficient, and she was dependent on loans and gifts to cover her expenses, many of which came from her second son. He frequently wrote of politics in his letters to his mother, indicating that he not only believed his mother was interested, but that he also welcomed her opinion. She was keen to use his position in society to help her friends and relations, many of whom were also her creditors, and she often wrote to him to request placements, jobs, or promotions for them. 
Lady Chatham also had a wide circle of influential friends including Maria Beckford, 'nee' Hamilton, wife of her husband's political ally William Beckford, Frances (Fanny) Boscawen, and Elizabeth Montagu, who took it upon herself to entertain the young Pitt children by offering to take them to concerts and the theatre. Her closest female friend was Catherine Stapleton (1733-1815), who cared for the orphaned children of Lady Chatham's brother, George Grenville, and who lived with Lady Chatham in Burton Pynsent as a companion from about 1782 onwards. Lady Chatham also had the company of two of her granddaughters in her latter years, the orphaned daughter of Harriot and the eldest daughter of her first child, Hester, the traveller Lady Hester Stanhope (1776-1839). Lady Chatham died at Burton Pynsent on 3 April 1803, and was buried near her husband in Westminster Abbey on 16 April 1803. 


@@@@@


doc= 89689


Bernstorff, Andreas Gottlieb von, Baron Bernstorff in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1649-1726), politician and diplomat, was born on 2 March 1649 NS in Ratzeburg, then in the duchy of Saxe-Lauenburg, in northern Germany, the second son of Andreas von Bernstorff (1604-1655), a canon of Ratzeburg Cathedral and courtier in Wolfenbuttel, and his wife, Anna Elisabeth, the daughter of Detleff von Bulow, the last dean of Ratzeburg. The marriage produced nine children; only Bernstorff, his elder brother Christian Rudolph (1645-1664), two younger brothers, and a younger sister survived beyond infancy. Bernstorff was sent to the 'Gymnasium' in Gottingen in 1662 with his elder brother, where he remained until his brother's death in 1664, at which point he succeeded to the headship of the family and to its estates in Mecklenburg. In spring 1665 Bernstorff went to the University of Helmstedt, where he studied law. Bernstorff left Helmstedt in 1668 and spent a year learning about the practice of imperial law at the imperial chamber court (the high court of the Holy Roman empire) in Speyer; there he was supervised by an uncle who was a jurist. Bernstorff travelled widely in Europe between 1669 and 1670, visiting Paris, Rome, and Vienna. 
Late in 1671 Bernstorff entered the service of Christian I, duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, where he acted as an adviser to the duke's new wife, Elisabeth Angelique de Montmorency. The duke and duchess's marriage deteriorated rapidly and Bernstorff was dismissed early in 1673. He entered the service of Georg Wilhelm of Brunswick-Luneburg, duke of Celle, whom he had encountered on previous diplomatic missions and who belonged to the same dynasty as his father's former employer at Wolfenbuttel. Bernstorff was sent to both Kassel and Heidelberg on diplomatic missions and accompanied Georg Wilhelm on campaign against Louis XIV. 
In November 1675 Bernstorff returned to Celle and married Johannette Lucie von Sinold (1653-1706), the daughter of Johann Helwig von Sinold (called von Schutz) and his wife, Anna Barbara, 'nee' von Fabricus. Bernstorff's new father-in-law was chancellor of Celle and effectively Georg Wilhelm's chief minister. When his father-in-law died in June 1677, Bernstorff took over his official position and duties. Bernstorff was closely involved in the marriage negotiations for Georg Wilhelm's only daughter, Sophia Dorothea, and her cousin Georg Ludwig, the eldest son of Ernst August, duke of Calenberg (Hanover), later George I, king of Great Britain. This union offered the prospect of reuniting all the territories of the junior branch of the house of Brunswick. 
Bernstorff's opposition to the growth of Louis XIV's power was clear from his resistance to French attempts to gain north German allies in the 1680s. In May 1688 Hans Willem Bentinck, later earl of Portland, visited Celle to seek Georg Wilhelm's support, should his master, William of Orange, stadholder of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, decide to intervene militarily in Britain against its Catholic and pro-French king, James II and VII. Georg Wilhelm and Bernstorff were willing to allow troops from Celle to be used in the defence of the United Provinces to replace any Dutch forces deployed across the channel. William himself visited Celle in August 1688, three months before his successful invasion of England. Bernstorff, like many of his generation, regarded William's intervention as crucial for tipping the European balance of power against France. 
During the Nine Years' War Bernstorff ensured that Celle sided with William III against Louis XIV. He established a strong working relationship with William, whom he saw in the Low Countries in 1691. Bernstorff's expertise in European affairs was supported by an extensive network of informants in other courts; both helped contribute towards the strengthening of the alliance against Louis XIV. Bernstorff was also keenly interested in preserving the protestant succession to the British thrones. Not only would the restoration of James II and VII upset the balance of power in France's favour, but as a servant of the duke of Celle, Bernstorff was also anxious that the senior protestant heir, Sophia of the Palatinate (married to Georg Wilhelm's brother Ernst August of Calenberg), should be guaranteed the succession in Britain if William, his wife, Mary II, and her sister Anne left no descendants. However, Ernst August's determination to remain neutral in the Nine Years' War hampered Bernstorff's efforts to secure north Germany for the alliance. Ernst August was seeking recognition for Calenberg as the ninth electorate of the Holy Roman empire and believed that French support was vital to the achievement of this aim. Through agreements in 1691 Bernstorff ensured that Celle supported Ernst August's campaign to gain the electoral hat (achieved in December 1692) in return for Ernst August breaking his links with France and committing troops to the war against Louis XIV. 
In 1694 Bernstorff purchased the estate of Gartow from Georg Wilhelm. The purchase was to prove a point of contention between Bernstorff and the elector of Brandenburg (king of Prussia from 1701), who laid claim to the territory. The general hostility that Bernstorff would later display towards Prussia is probably attributable in part to this personal dispute. 
Bernstorff met William III again in London in 1696, and was closely involved in the negotiations at Celle in 1698 between William III and Georg Wilhelm, which in part dealt with the question of the British succession. William III was accompanied by John Robethon, his private secretary. Bernstorff's diplomacy was rewarded by the 'Act of Settlement' of 1701, which named Sophia as heir presumptive to the English throne; the provision was extended to the whole of Great Britain by the 'Act of Union' of 1707 between England and Scotland. In contrast to Sophia and her adviser, the philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Bernstorff was concerned not to interfere too much in British domestic politics, as he was cautious of endangering the Hanoverian succession. 
Georg Wilhelm died in 1705. Bernstorff, joined by Robethon who had been in the service of Celle since William III's death in 1702, entered the service of Georg Ludwig, son of Sophia and Ernst August, who had been elector of Hanover since Ernst August's death in 1698, and now inherited Celle as well. Bernstorff was preparing to move from Celle to Hanover when his wife died in January 1706. In the course of their marriage she had given birth to four daughters and five sons. Of these, only the daughters and one son survived infancy. In September 1706 Bernstorff's son and heir, Andreas August, also died. Bernstorff subsequently made his son-in-law and cousin Joachim Engelcke von Bernstorff, who had married his second daughter, Charlotte Sophie, his heir. 
Bernstorff's influence grew rapidly in Hanover. The death of Franz Ernst, Count Platen, in 1709 made Bernstorff officially the most senior Hanoverian minister but this merely confirmed the existing situation. Hanover was an active member of the grand alliance against Louis XIV in the War of the Spanish Succession. Relations with Anne and the ministry of Marlborough and Godolphin had been good. However, the 1710 general election allowed Anne to appoint a tory ministry keen to make a separate peace, and relations with Hanover began to worsen. Bernstorff used Hans Kaspar von Bothmer to monitor the situation in London closely. 
Bernstorff became George I's chief German minister in London in 1714. He had established relationships with some leading whigs, especially with William, Baron Cowper, and his wife, Mary; the intelligence and opinions he gathered may have helped shape George I's preference for an administration where whig postholders were in a majority. Bernstorff, along with Bothmer, Robethon, the new king's German mistress Melusine von der Schulenburg, and his half-sister Sophia Charlotte von Kielmansegg, were mistrusted for their influence. Particular concern was expressed about the control that 'the old baron', as Bernstorff was known, wielded over patronage. After the unhappy experience of William III and his Dutch favourites, British ministers were keen to ensure that control over British patronage remained in British hands. Among the ministers, Charles, second Viscount Townshend, and Robert Walpole also complained that 'the Germans' were exploiting their proximity to the king to line their own pockets. 
Bernstorff's foreign policy was designed to ensure Hanoverian security and to facilitate territorial expansion, where possible. The decline of Sweden in the latter years of the Great Northern War (clear to observers by 1714) offered the prospect of gaining territory in northern Germany at Swedish expense. Sweden's other enemies wanted British naval support in the Baltic, and Bernstorff was happy to oblige. This led to claims that British resources were being misused to support Hanoverian ends, and that Bernstorff was protecting his estates in Mecklenburg from the encroaching armies of Peter the Great. Mistrust of German influence was one reason behind the whig split of 1717, which saw Townshend and Walpole leave the government. Townshend, Walpole, and their allies attacked Bernstorff and their former colleagues vigorously in parliament. Evidence cited by Ragnhild Hatton suggests that Bernstorff attempted to mediate between Townshend and Walpole and the king, but these efforts were unsuccessful in an atmosphere where one MP, Heneage Finch, Lord Guernsey, could tell the Commons in April 1717 that it was a pity that Britain was governed by a 'Mecklenburg squire' (Hatton, 202). 
Between 1716 and 1719 Bernstorff and George's British secretary of state James, first Earl Stanhope, were both involved in schemes to bring peace to southern and northern Europe. Bernstorff was a strong supporter of the Vienna alliance of January 1719, negotiated by Saint-Saphorin, which aimed to unite Hanover, Austria, and Saxony to prevent either Prussian or Russian expansion into Poland. An alliance with Austria and Saxony also reduced the threat to Hanover. Bernstorff's anti-Prussian views played a part here but how far this led to a break between the king, Stanhope, and himself is unclear. Stanhope's and Bernstorff's peace plans diverged, with Stanhope favouring closer co-operation with France and Prussia, as opposed to Austria. More generally Stanhope's vision was broader than the predominantly north German concerns of Bernstorff, and this caused tension between them. When George I returned to London from Hanover in October 1721, Bernstorff remained in Germany. The view that he had been disgraced does not bear scrutiny -- he continued to correspond with leading political figures and was treated with respect when George visited Hanover again in 1723. Bernstorff resigned his Hanoverian ministerial post in 1723. He died, after a short illness, on his estates at Gartow on 6 July 1726. 


@@@@@


doc= 89690


Bothmer, Hans Kaspar von, Count Bothmer in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1656-1732), courtier and diplomat, was born on 10 April 1656 NS in Lauenbruck, in the Celle portion of the duchy of Brunswick-Luneburg, northern Germany, the eldest son of Julius August von Bothmer (1620-1703), nobleman, and his wife, Margarethe Eleonore (1638-1729), the daughter of Hans von Petersdorff and his wife, Anna Dorothea. Hans Bothmer's parents had eighteen children but only six of his younger brothers and one younger sister survived beyond infancy. 
Bothmer was sent to St Michael's School in Luneburg in 1670, accompanied by his brother Rudolf Ulrich (1657-1686). Another brother, Johann Friedrich (subsequently a general in the Hanoverian army), was sent to fight against Louis XIV of France in Alsace in 1674. Rudolf Ulrich was also allowed to join a regiment but, despite his request to follow his younger brothers to war, Bothmer's father insisted that he complete his education. In June 1676 Bothmer joined his father in Buxtehude in Bremen, where his father was in charge of the barracks. 
In April 1677 Bothmer was suggested as a potential companion for Celle's envoy to the peace conference at Nijmwegen. He accepted this invitation and an offer of accompanying Lorenz Muller, a privy councillor to Georg Wilhelm, duke of Celle, on a mission to London in October 1677. Bothmer was able to observe the celebrations for the marriage of William of Orange and Mary, later William III and Mary II. He saw Charles II in church and commented that 'the clothing of the preachers and the church ceremonies were nearly all catholic in style, the only difference being that they were sung in English rather than Latin' ('Erinnerungen', 6). 
During 1680 and 1681 Bothmer travelled in France and Holland. He then returned to the court of Georg Wilhelm in Celle and he was appointed as a gentleman of the household to Georg Wilhelm's daughter, Sophia Dorothea, when the latter married her first cousin Georg Ludwig in December 1682. The groom was heir to the dukedom of Calenberg (or Hanover) and ultimately elector of Hanover and, as George I, king of Great Britain. 
Bothmer's first important diplomatic mission was to Copenhagen and Stockholm in the winter of 1683-4. On 27 June 1684 NS Bothmer married Sophie Ehrengard von der Asseburg (1668-1688), daughter of Christoph Christian von der Asseburg, in the Herrenhausen Palace, near Hanover. The marriage produced a son and a daughter, neither of whom reached adulthood. In 1685 Bothmer was sent as the diplomatic representative of both Celle and Calenberg to Berlin, where he remained until 1690. His wife died in Berlin in October 1688. From 1690 to 1696 Bothmer again served both Celle and Calenberg in Vienna. 
Bothmer's father was raised to the rank of imperial 'Freiherr' (baron) in November 1696. On 28 December 1696, in Dresden, Saxony, Bothmer married again. His second wife, Gisela Erdmuthe (1669-1741), was the widow of Count Taube and the daughter of Ludwig Gebhard von Hoym and his wife, Katherina, 'nee' von Schonfeld. Bothmer and Gisela's daughter, Sophie Charlotte (1697-1748), was twice married, first to Count Heinrich von Reuss (1696-1722) and subsequently to Count Georg Wilhelm von Erbach (died 1757); she was one of the wealthiest heiresses of her generation. 
Bothmer's diplomatic career continued with a posting to The Hague. While there he undertook a number of special missions. He was an envoy to the congress of Ryswick (Rijswijk) in 1697 and in 1698 was sent to Paris to resume diplomatic relations between Celle and Louis XIV. A secondary aim of this mission was to win Louis's recognition for the new Hanoverian electorate, established by Emperor Leopold I in 1692, but not recognized by all European powers. 
With the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1702 and the formation of the grand alliance, Bothmer's position in the Dutch republic became even more important for maintaining links between Celle and her military allies. After the union of Celle and Hanover on the death of Georg Wilhelm in 1705, Bothmer retained his post in the Dutch republic. Bothmer was also able to use his position at The Hague to keep an eye on events across the North Sea in Great Britain, and ensure that his new master's claim to the British and Irish thrones (established in England by the 'Act of Settlement', 1701, and extended by the 1707 'Act of Union') was not undermined. He maintained contacts with the leading whig supporters of the Hanoverian succession. 
From 1711 Bothmer spent increasing amounts of time in London. Georg Ludwig of Hanover was worried about the prospect of a separate peace between Britain and France and the collapse of the grand alliance. Bothmer expressed Georg Ludwig's dissatisfaction at the potential peace to Anne. Bothmer could only protest against, not deflect, the treaty of Utrecht. He was, however, rewarded for his service to Hanover when he and his family were raised to the rank of 'Reichsgraf' (imperial count) in November 1713. His role in London was enhanced in 1714, and he was present there during Anne's final illness (28 July - 1 August 1714). He needed to be close to Kensington Palace, as he held one of the lists of George's proposed regents. The list, conveyed by Bothmer, was opened at a meeting of the privy council on 1 August 1714, within hours of Anne's death. Bothmer's contribution to the composition of the list has probably been overestimated but his local knowledge was undoubtedly useful to the new king. 
Bothmer remained in London after 1714 as an adviser. He was part of a group, with Andreas Gottlieb von Bernstorff and John Robethon, known as the 'Hanoverian junto'. It was claimed that this group sought to make excessive financial gains at Britain's expense, and that they pursued policies that were contrary to British interests. Bothmer was less willing than Bernstorff to argue with the king and remained more of the courtier and diplomat than forceful minister. Like Bernstorff, Bothmer attended many of the meetings connected with the attempts to bring peace to both southern and northern Europe through a series of alliances from 1716 to 1719. Bothmer had a more favourable disposition towards Prussia than Bernstorff. During 1719, when James, first Earl Stanhope, secretary of state for the northern department, was urging George to ally with Prussia, against Bernstorff's wishes, Bothmer wrote frequently to the British envoy in Berlin, Charles Whitworth, who was negotiating the alliance. 
The supposed influence of the Hanoverian junto declined after 1720 and by 1724 Bothmer was complaining to Bernstorff, now in semi-retirement in Germany, that George no longer asked his British ministers to consult his German ministers over German affairs. Bothmer maintained good relations with a number of British diplomats. His broader Anglophilia can be seen in the castle he built at Bothmer, near Klutz in Mecklenburg, as his ancestral seat, between 1726 and 1732. The Hanoverian architect Johann Friedrich Kunnecke furnished Bothmer with a building that displays clear English and Dutch influences. In London Bothmer was resident from 1720 in the house that later became 10 Downing Street. He died there on 2 June 1732; in his will he requested that his body be buried in Germany. 


@@@@@


doc= 89694


James, John Angell- (1901-2002), surgeon, was born in Odiham, Hampshire, on 23 August 1901, the fourth of five children of John Angell James (1864-1953), medical practitioner, and his wife, Emily Cormell, 'nee' Ashwin (1862-1958). An elder brother was Manley Angell James (1896-1975), awarded a VC in 1918 for bravery during the German 'spring offensive'. 
When the family moved to Bristol, Angell-James (it is not clear at what point he began hyphenating his name) attended Bristol grammar school and the University of Bristol, where he qualified MB ChB with first-class honours in 1924. Also in 1924, at Guy's Hospital, London, he qualified MB BS with a distinction in medicine. Following junior medical appointments in Bristol and London, he gained membership of the Royal College of Physicians of London and an MD of London University in 1927, before specializing in ear, nose, and throat surgery. Enthusiasm for his speciality was sparked when house surgeon in Bristol to J. P. Harty, who had succeeded the internationally renowned Patrick Watson-Williams, ranked by Angell-James as 'one of the fathers of British rhinology' (unpublished autobiography). He obtained the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons of England in 1928. The same year he was appointed honorary ear, nose, and throat surgeon to the Bristol Royal Hospital for Children and clinical assistant at the Golden Square Throat Hospital, London. In 1929 he also became assistant ear, nose, and throat surgeon at the Bristol Royal Infirmary and clinical teacher to the university. A former medical student recalled his excellence as a teacher and surgeon who radiated a strong sense of dedication. On 28 June 1930 he married Evelyn Miriam Everard (1905-1998), daughter of Francis Over Everard, electrical engineer. They had a son, Roger ('b'. 1932), and two daughters, Rosemary ('b'. 1935) and Jennifer ('b'. 1937). 
During the Second World War Angell-James worked for the Emergency Medical Service from 1940 to 1942 before joining the Royal Army Medical Corps as a major at the head injuries unit in Oxford and subsequently in military hospitals in North Africa and Italy. Promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1945, he was adviser in otorhinolaryngology to the Middle East forces based in Cairo until demobilization in 1946. Establishment of the National Health Service in 1948 granted him consultant status to the Children's Hospital and the United Bristol Hospitals until his formal retirement in 1966; additionally he attended district hospitals at Melksham, Clevedon, Malmesbury, and Tetbury. Enthusiasm for his speciality motivated him to visit important centres abroad, including in 1927 the Allgemeine Krankenhaus in Vienna where Adam Politzer had initiated an otolaryngology service in 1861, and a fact-finding tour in 1935 to New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, Harvard, and the Mayo Clinic. He visited Mischele Arslan of Padua in 1955 to purchase the pioneering Arslan-Federici ultrasonic apparatus for research in Bristol, and Niels Riskaer of Copenhagen in 1958 to observe hypophysectomy by a naso-transethmoid route. 
Angell-James is chiefly remembered for refining the trans-nasal approach to the pituitary for hypophysectomy, principally undertaken for secondary carcinoma of breast origin. After trials to devise a safe anatomical route assisted by binocular vision and specifically designed instruments, he commenced this sophisticated operation in 1960, achieving 345 hypophysectomies by 1965. Metastatic pain was often relieved rapidly and of 287 breast cases, remission for a year or more assisted forty-six patients. Few surgeons became adept at this meticulous procedure. By 1974 he reported on 401 hypophysectomies of which 343 were for breast cancer. His other operative forte, the management of Meniere's disease by ultrasound, followed research on sheep and refinement of Arslan's ultrasonic apparatus by physicist colleagues; this was applied to the inner ear after surgical exposure through the mastoid bone. Of 279 procedures in 1969, he reported vertigo and tinnitus diminished significantly while hearing loss responded less well. Of Angell-James's many other publications, his account of the rise of otorhinolaryngology from 1543 to 1961 provided a valuable historical summary. 
One of few surgeons to receive the fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of London (in 1965), Angell-James was also an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, chairman of both the specialist advisory committee in otorhinolaryngology and the editorial committee of the 'Journal of Clinical Otolaryngology' and Hunterian professor of the Royal College of Surgeons of England; he was made a CBE in 1967. Recognition of his work and influence was acknowledged by many invitations to lecture and receive awards including the Horne memorial prize of the British Medical Association (1962), the Colles medal of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (1963), the Yearsley lecture and medal (1966), the Wilde memorial lecture (1966), and the Dalby and Harrison prizes of the Royal Society of Medicine (1963 and 1968). He was elected president of the British Association of Otolaryngologists (1966-9), the Bath, Bristol and Somerset branch of the British Medical Association (1968-9), the International Collegium Oto-Rhino-Laryngologicum (1974), and the Otolaryngological Research Society (1978). He was awarded honorary membership of the South African, Irish, and German Otolaryngological societies, the British Medical Association, and the Royal Society of Medicine. 
Angell-James purchased Litfield House, Clifton Down, Bristol, in 1936, for multi-specialist private practice. Among those who consulted him were Queen Mary, Winston Churchill, Colonel Gaddafi of Libya, and numerous actors and singers. He rarely invoiced friends, colleagues, or former service personnel. Some six feet one inch tall, he played hockey for Bristol University and for Gloucestershire, retaining his fitness later by sailing, tennis, gardening, hunting, fishing, and shooting. He purchased a farm in 1950 to keep prize Guernsey cows which sometimes he milked before attending patients, and he also kept pedigree pigs and prize bulls which he often loaned to other farms. He exhibited regularly at the Bath and West and Royal shows, winning a silver medal at an International Dairy Event for his novel calf and lamb resuscitator. A committed Christian, he was churchwarden at Falfield, Gloucestershire, for many years. Following a stroke and pneumonia he died at Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, on 19 June 2002. He was survived by his three children. The residue of his private practice clinical notes, X-rays, operative films, books, and surgical instruments, stored in the old dairy, were assessed in 2012 and significant instruments were donated to the Historic Instrument Collection of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. 


@@@@@


doc= 89695


Ashmore, Sir Peter William Beckwith (1921-2002), naval officer and courtier, was born on 4 February 1921 at 5 Coombe Villas, Saltash, Cornwall, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Lieutenant (later Vice-Admiral) Leslie Haliburton Ashmore (1893-1974), naval officer, and his wife, Tamara, 'nee' Tamara Vasilyevna Schutt (died 1972). His mother was Russian, and his parents had married at Balaklava during the intervention in 1919. Peter and his elder brother Edward ('b'. 1919) accompanied their parents as their father's naval service took him to Germany, Malta, and South Africa, where he commanded a sloop operating from Simonstown. After a difficult time at Western Province preparatory school the Ashmore brothers returned to Britain to Yardley Court School, at Tonbridge, Kent. At their own request Peter and Edward (who rose to be first sea lord and chief of defence staff) entered the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth. Peter joined in 1934 and came out top of his year, winning the king's gold medal. He was appointed midshipman in 1938 to the cruiser 'Dorsetshire' on the China station, where his father commanded her sister ship HMS 'Kent'. On the outbreak of the Second World War, the 'Dorsetshire' was sent to the Indian Ocean to hunt German pocket battleships. 
Returning to the UK for sub-lieutenant's courses, in which he again came out top, Ashmore was in January 1941 appointed to the destroyer 'Kipling', one of six ships in Lord Mountbatten's 5th flotilla. Sent to the Mediterranean, the flotilla was involved in the operations around Crete following the German invasion in May 1941. 'Kelly', the flotilla leader, and 'Kashmir' were bombed and sunk but 'Kipling' rescued 279 men, including Mountbatten. After the death of 'Kipling''s first lieutenant, Ashmore took over the tactical direction of the destroyer and played a key role in driving off further attacks, for which he was awarded the DSC. He was also mentioned in dispatches after his ship sank a U-boat off Tobruk. In March 1942 'Kipling' was involved in the second battle of Sirte, helping hold off a much more powerful Italian surface fleet from a Malta-bound convoy. Two months later her luck ran out when she was sunk by German bombers; Ashmore was among the survivors rescued by the destroyer 'Jervis'. He was next sent to the escort destroyer 'Melbreak', operating in the channel, and then to the new cruiser 'Royalist', which was involved in carrier strikes in Norwegian waters, including attacks on the battleship 'Tirpitz'. 'Royalist' then moved to the Mediterranean for the invasion of southern France and operations in the Aegean. Towards the end of the war Ashmore was appointed executive officer of the destroyer 'Tartar', which was deployed to the Indian Ocean, where he saw action against the Japanese and was again mentioned in dispatches. 
Ashmore had great personal charm and in January 1946 became, with Wing Commander Peter Townsend, an equerry to George VI. He accompanied the royal family on their tour of South Africa and was noted for his quiet efficiency. He was appointed MVO and an extra equerry to the king when he left the palace to resume sea service in 1948. He commanded the frigate 'Loch Fada' before joining the staff at Dartmouth, his period of service there being shortened by early promotion to the rank of commander in 1951. On 18 October the following year he married Patricia Moray Buller, daughter of Admiral Sir Henry Buller and his wife, Lady Hermione Stuart; the queen, Princess Margaret, and Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, acted as witnesses. There were three daughters and one son of the marriage. 
Following appointments in the Admiralty and command of the cadet training carrier 'Triumph', Ashmore was in 1957 promoted captain and appointed deputy director of the Staff College at Greenwich. From 1960 to 1961 he commanded the Dartmouth training squadron as captain (F) in the frigate 'Urchin'. Attendance at the Imperial Defence College was a prelude to being appointed director of naval plans in 1963. This was a difficult period for the navy, with the creation of a unified Ministry of Defence in 1964 being closely followed by a major defence review. Ashmore did his best to save the carrier programme but failed. Promoted rear-admiral in 1966, he became flag officer, Admiralty interview board, and then in 1967 chief of staff to the commander-in-chief, western fleet. Appointed CB in 1968, he was promoted vice-admiral in 1969. The following year he was appointed chief of staff at NATO headquarters, southern Europe. Again times were difficult, with Dom Mintoff ejecting the allies from Malta, but Ashmore was able to ensure that the transfer of NATO headquarters to Naples went smoothly. He was knighted KCB in 1972. 
Offered promotion to admiral and appointment as British military representative with NATO in Brussels, Ashmore decided instead to accept the post of master of her majesty's household. He took up his appointment in 1973 and retired in 1986. During this time he was responsible for all the royal palaces and accompanied the queen on royal tours. He received unwelcome publicity in 1982 when an intruder, Michael Fagan, gained access to the queen's quarters through a window in Ashmore's office. Nevertheless his term of office was widely regarded as highly successful. He was appointed KCVO in 1980. After retirement to Sundridge, near Sevenoaks, Kent, he busied himself with church work, fund-raising for an old people's home, and presiding over the local branch of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution. He died of a stroke on 31 July 2002 at the Kent and Sussex Hospital, Tunbridge Wells, and was survived by his wife and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89708


Ronald William Brown (1921-2002), politician, was born on 7 September 1921 at 5 North Peabody Square, Southwark, London. He was educated at elementary school in south London, then went on to study engineering at Borough Polytechnic. During the war he served as a gunner in 156 (Pathfinder) squadron of the RAF, and always counted himself lucky to have survived. On 28 October 1944 he married (with his brother, George, as a witness) Mary Matilda Munn ('b'. 1921/2), who was serving in the NAAFI. She was the daughter of George Alfred Munn. They had two daughters and a son. After demobilization he returned to Borough Polytechnic as a lecturer in electrical engineering, eventually becoming principal of its industrial training school. He was active in Labour politics, serving as leader of the opposition on Wanstead and Woodford borough council from 1953, then as leader of Camberwell borough council from 1956 and Southwark borough council in 1964. He beat the trade unionist Clive Jenkins to become Labour candidate for Shoreditch and Finsbury in 1963 and was duly elected in 1964; he sat for the reconstituted seat of Hackney South and Shoreditch from 1974. There were allegations of nepotism when his brother let slip that he had helped him in the selection contest for this safe Labour seat. 


@@@@@


doc= 89713


Cowan, William Maxwell (1931-2002), neurobiologist, was born on 27 September 1931 in Johannesburg, South Africa, the son of Adam Cowan, a structural engineer, and his wife, Jessie Sloan, 'nee' Maxwell. His parents had recently moved from Scotland to South Africa in search of jobs. He studied medicine at the University of the Witwatersrand (graduating BSc in 1951), where a vacation job looking after psychiatric patients started his lifelong interest in the brain. An opportunity to continue in research and teaching took him to Hertford College, Oxford, where he was guided into neuroanatomy by Sir Wilfrid Le Gros Clark. He obtained his DPhil in 1956, then completed his clinical medical course in Oxford (graduating BM BCh in 1958). From 1958 to 1966 he was a university lecturer in anatomy and fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford. Meanwhile, on 31 March 1956, he had married Margaret Sherlock, a 26-year-old nursery school teacher, and daughter of William Thomas Sherlock, tailor. They had two sons, David and Stephen, and a daughter, Ruth. 
In 1965 Cowan spent a sabbatical year at Washington University, St Louis, Missouri, and subsequently, after two years as an associate professor at the University of Wisconsin in Madison, was invited back to Washington University to become professor and head of the department of anatomy, a post he held from 1968 to 1980. In the latter year he moved to the Salk Institute, San Diego, California, as professor, becoming vice-president in 1982. In 1986 he returned to Washington University as provost, but left in 1988 when he was appointed vice-president and chief scientific officer of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, a post he held until 2000. On retirement he was made a distinguished professor at the Salk Institute, only the fourth person to be awarded that honour. 
Cowan's research involved elucidation of the structure of the brain, and its development. His first work was a study of how nerve fibre connections reach the cerebral cortex from the thalamus. In the course of this he worked with Tom Powell on the interrelationships of the thalamus and corpus striatum, and later with Geoff Raisman on the fibre connections of the hippocampus. The investigation of how the brain is organized was always dependent on developing methods of tracing nerve fibres through the immensely complex network of the brain. Cowan learned from Le Gros Clark that these connections can only be traced by experimental methods, the first of which was to study the pathways marked out by the distribution of the degeneration engendered by making small areas of damage in specific locations. Cowan used, and indeed extended, a number of these mapping techniques, such as retrograde degeneration (loss or shrinkage of nerve cells when the fibres arising from them are damaged at a distance), and orthograde degeneration (break-up of nerve fibres when they are disconnected from their parent cells). His work showed examples of how both these effects could cross from one nerve cell to another along a chain of connections (transneuronal degeneration), and he was one of the early pioneers of the study of connections by electron microscopy of orthograde degeneration, thus taking the analysis down to the level of precision of the individual synapses by which one nerve cell communicates with another. Always aware of the limitations of mapping by degeneration techniques, he was one of the first to espouse the newly found method of introducing into the brain tracer substances to be carried along intact nerve fibres to distant destinations in both orthograde and retrograde directions. Throughout his career he recruited and trained a galaxy of highly talented young people, virtually all of whom went on to outstanding careers of their own, and who contributed to establishing the definitive methodology for using radioactive amino acids, or non-radioactive substances, such as lectins, as orthograde tracers, and enzymes such as horseradish peroxidase and multiple fluorescent coloured dyes as retrograde tracers. 
Cowan's initial interest in degeneration led him to a major new field. Whereas adult nerve cells and fibres degenerate when damaged, during normal development there is major loss of nerve cells and nerve fibres which is not a result of damage. Cowan played an important part in showing that the brain develops by sculpting down from an initially much larger set of nerve fibres and connections. His contact with Rita Levi-Montalcini and Viktor Hamburger in St Louis introduced him to the principle of nerve growth factors, and the concept that one of the elements in this sculpting down is the competition between nerve cells for a limited supply of growth factors. Work with James Fawcett showed that another element is the effect of external stimuli which lead to the remodelling of connections into the most adaptive pattern for the specific environment in which the individual finds itself. 
Cowan was always dedicated to education, and over and above their scientific training, he played a keen and fatherly role in helping his proteges face the challenges and problems of their lives. His interests and knowledge spread far beyond neuroanatomy, and this enhanced his effectiveness as a communicator. The sustained enthusiasm, tireless energy, and incisive thought he brought to the fabric of scientific communication and to the development of the scientific community were outstanding, at least matching the impact of his own personal research. In 1969 he took over the editorship of the 'Journal of Comparative Neurology', raising it from obscurity to be one of the foremost neuroscience journals of its time. Subsequently he became editor-in-chief (1980-87) of the new 'Journal of Neuroscience', which became the flagship of the newly formed American Society of Neuroscience, of which he was president (1977-8). From 1978 until his death he was co-editor of the 'Annual Review of Neuroscience', in which he was proactive in identifying larger topics of historical importance, many of which involved compiling research and individual contributions which had never before been made accessible. In 1993 he became co-chairman with Jim Watson of the Dana Alliance, which formulated the objectives of the 'decade of the brain', and was subsequently active in promoting public understanding of brain research, including through his vice-chairmanship of the European Dana Alliance. 
One of the key conceptual advances in which Cowan was a leader was the realization that the separate ways of studying the nervous system -- anatomy, physiology, pharmacology, psychology, development -- could not be adequately advanced as isolated disciplines. During his time in St Louis he effectively united the departments of anatomy and physiology, and he was one of the most effective proponents of the new, inclusive discipline called neuroscience, or neurobiology. Possibly his outstanding contribution during his period at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute was to integrate the newly burgeoning molecular biological approach with the existing, older disciplines already included in neuroscience. 
Cowan (who published as W. Maxwell Cowan, and was known to friends as Max) was one of the most eminent neuroanatomists of his day; he trained some of the most important scientists of the next generation, and he made a virtually unparalleled contribution to the recruitment to and dissemination of the study of the brain. He was elected a foreign associate of the US National Academy of Sciences in 1981, and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1982. He died at his home in Rockville, Maryland, USA, of prostate cancer on 30 June 2002, and his funeral service was held at the Fourth Presbyterian Church, Bethesda, Maryland, on 6 July. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89725


Fitzpatrick, Sir (Geoffrey Richard) Desmond (1912-2002), army officer, was born on 14 December 1912 at Fir Grove, Ash Vale, near Aldershot, Hampshire, the only child of Brigadier-General Sir (Ernest) Richard Fitzpatrick (1878-1949), army officer, and his wife, Georgina Ethel, younger daughter of Thomas Robison. His father entered the Loyal North Lancashire regiment in 1899, served in the South African War and First World War, was national chairman of the British Legion (1943-7), and was knighted in 1946. 
Fitzpatrick was educated at Eton College (1926-30) and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1931-2). In September 1932 he was commissioned second lieutenant into the Royal Dragoons, then still horsed and armed with swords (though also with rifles). Promoted lieutenant in September 1935, from 1938 he served as an intelligence officer in Palestine on counter-insurgency operations during the Palestinian Arab revolt. He was awarded an MC in 1939. 
In December 1940 the Royals were moved to Egypt, and in early 1941 they were trained on armoured cars at Abbasia, near Cairo. They were equipped, 'faute de mieux', with South African Marmon-Herrington mark III armoured cars, thinly armoured and weakly armed. The Royals served -- with Fitzpatrick, promoted captain in September 1940, as adjutant -- in the Syrian campaign against the Vichy French in 1941. In December of that year they joined the Eighth Army in the western desert, where they functioned as a reconnaissance regiment, first with their Marmon-Herringtons, then with better Daimler and Humber armoured cars. Fitzpatrick attended the Middle East Staff College in Haifa, Palestine, and in June 1942 was appointed brigade major of 2nd armoured brigade. He had a key role in planning for the battle of El Alamein in November 1942, and it was due to his work over many weeks that the brigade's advance to assembly then battle went successfully. During the battle he was based at tactical headquarters and often under heavy fire, and thanks to his efforts much valuable intelligence was sent back, which enabled commanders to plan effectively. He was appointed MBE and promoted major in 1943. He also served in Italy in 1943. On 22 April 1944, during a brief period of home leave, he married Mary Sara Campbell (1917-1996), an ATS officer and only daughter of Sir Charles Campbell of Auchinbreck, twelfth baronet, army officer; they had one daughter, Sara ('b'. 1948), and one son, Brian ('b'. 1950). 
After serving as GSO1 at 1st United States corps and at the War Office, in October 1944 Fitzpatrick rejoined the Royals at Hilvarenbeek in the Netherlands, where he commanded A squadron and successfully countered German attacks by sorties. Promoted temporary lieutenant-colonel in January 1945, from early 1945 he commanded the 8th King's Royal Irish Hussars, part of the 7th armoured division ('desert rats'), in the Netherlands and Germany. In April 1945 the 8th hussars, in Grant tanks and scout cars, captured Tostedt, then successfully manoeuvred and fought to the River Elbe. They subsequently captured the concentration camp at Belsen and the prisoner-of-war camp at Fallingbostel, freeing thousands of prisoners of war and internees. Fitzpatrick was awarded the DSO in 1945. 
After the war Fitzpatrick, promoted local colonel in January 1949 and brevet colonel in July 1951, held staff appointments and was an instructor at the Staff College, Camberley. Promoted substantive lieutenant-colonel in October 1952, he commanded the Royal Dragoons in the canal zone, Egypt, in 1952-3, where they participated in security operations against Egyptian terrorists. Promoted colonel in December 1953, he served first at headquarters, northern army group, then (from 1957 to 1959) as chief of staff, 1st (British) corps, British army of the Rhine. Promoted major-general in 1959, he was selected by Lord Mountbatten to be the first assistant chief of defence staff (1959-61) during the formation of the centralized Ministry of Defence and defence staff. 
Contrary to the old stereotype of the dragoon officer, Fitzpatrick was clever, clear-minded, and able to reduce complex problems to their essentials, with a reportedly photographic memory and a shrewdly realistic if cynical approach to controversial issues. According to his 'Times' obituarist, he was 'a master tactician in the corridors of power', 'a superb chairman of committees', 'almost too clever to be a good mixer, [who] could be over sarcastic at times', but 'a brilliant raconteur and a charming host' ('The Times', 17 Oct 2002). He was so successful in serving Mountbatten that in 1962 he was appointed director of military operations at the War Office, when the army was overstretched by operations in Aden, Borneo, the Gulf, and the Caribbean. He played a major part in the aircraft carrier replacement and Polaris debates within the defence staff, and was involved in the British intelligence assessment of and response to the 1962 Cuban missile crisis. In 1964 he was appointed chief of staff of the British army of the Rhine. Knighted KCB in 1965 and promoted lieutenant-general in April that year, he was general officer commanding-in-chief, Northern Ireland, from 1965 to 1966 and vice-chief of the general staff from 1966 to 1968. 
Promoted general in October 1968, Fitzpatrick was commander-in-chief of the British army on the Rhine and commander of the northern army group from 1968 to 1970. His appointment surprised some, as he had previously commanded neither a division nor a brigade. Nevertheless he dealt effectively with international problems. From 1964 he was the last colonel of the Royal Dragoons and contributed to their successful amalgamation in 1969 with the Royal Horse Guards to form the Blues and Royals, of which he became deputy colonel (1969-74). His final army post was as deputy supreme allied commander, Europe, at NATO headquarters (SHAPE) at Mons, Belgium, from 1970 to 1973. 
Having retired from the army in 1973, from 1974 to 1979 Fitzpatrick was lieutenant-governor of Jersey, where he indulged his passion for sailing. From 1979 to 1998 he was colonel of the Blues and Royals, and gold stick to the queen. In retirement he lived at Belmont, Otley, Suffolk, where he enjoyed fishing and shooting. His first wife died in July 1996, and on 15 May 1998 he married Lettice Mary Errington ('b'. 1915), the posthumous and only daughter of Captain Edward Stafford-King-Harman and widow first of Colonel Robert Lomer and then of Major George Errington. He died at the Suffolk Nuffield Hospital, Ipswich, on 12 October 2002, of heart failure. He was survived by his second wife and the two children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 89731


Hern, William Richard (1921-2002), racehorse trainer, was born on 20 January 1921 at Holford, Somerset, the eldest surviving son of William Roderick (Roy) Hern, a gentleman farmer, and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Mullens. He was educated at Norfolk House preparatory school, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, and (from 1935 to 1938) at Monmouth School. After failing his army entrance exam he went to Millfield School, Somerset, for a year and then to Jesus College, Cambridge, for two terms to read engineering. In December 1940 he was called up and served with the North Irish horse as a tank commander in north Africa and Italy, where he organized an impromptu race meeting in Ravenna and was later wounded in the neck. After demobilization with the rank of major in 1946 he took a three-month course at Porlock Vale riding school, Somerset, stayed on as an instructor, and helped to coach the 1952 Olympic equestrian team. In 1952 a wartime comrade, Major Michael Pope, now a racehorse trainer at Blewbury, Berkshire, took him on as his assistant. On 9 October 1956 Hern married Sheilah Joan Davis (1926/7-1998), secretary, and daughter of Robert James Green Davis. There were no children of the marriage, which lasted until her death. 
In 1957 Hern moved to Lagrange, Newmarket, to become private trainer to Major Lionel Holliday, for whom he won the 1962 St Leger with Hethersett. That year he was champion trainer, the second youngest man to be so since the war. (He was champion trainer again in 1972, 1980, and 1983.) In 1962 he moved to West Ilsley, Berkshire, at the invitation of Sir John (Jakie) Astor to replace the recently retired Jack Colling. Astor sold the stables to Michael Sobell and Arnold Weinstock in 1969, but Hern remained there as their trainer, though he was allowed to take on other horses. These included Brigadier Gerard, an outstanding animal, beaten only once in eighteen outings in three seasons and capturing some of the biggest prizes on the British turf. Hern also began to train for the queen and in 1974 saddled Highclere to win her the One Thousand Guineas, followed by Dunfermline's Oaks and St Leger in her silver jubilee year. In 1982 her purchase of the West Ilsley stables rendered Hern her tenant, with his rent partly determined by his winnings as a trainer. 
Several factors contributed to Hern's success as a trainer, including patience with his charges and attention to detail. He was a disciplinarian, a vital quality in a racing yard, but also gave and earned loyalty, though he was criticized for not resigning when the stable jockey Joe Mercer was sacked by Weinstock. Above all he was a horseman in all senses of the word. He could spot an incipient lameness or ailment well before others and take remedial action. From the owners' perspective he was a man of integrity. He had little time for the press, maintaining that what happened with his horses was a matter solely for himself and the owners. Known to punters as the Major, his racecourse persona was that of the army officer on parade, but at home and with friends he was less aloof, enjoying parties and contributing ribald and profane ditties to the entertainment. 
Hern loved hunting. He had followed the hounds from childhood and continued until 1984, when he fell while out with the Quorn and broke his neck. Henceforth he was confined to a wheelchair, from which he continued to conduct his training operations. Four years later, however, he underwent major heart surgery, which led to a bitter controversy in British racing. While Hern was recuperating, Lord Carnarvon, the queen's racing manager, decided not to renew his lease at West Ilsley. He considered that Hern was unfit to continue training. Ultimately, after intercession from the trainer Ian Balding, Hern was allowed a further year at West Ilsley and then another season sharing the stables with William Hastings-Bass, a godson of Lord Carnarvon. Many in racing, especially the race-going public, were appalled at the treatment of Hern and there were emotional scenes at Newmarket in 1989 when Nashwan, trained by Hern, won the Two Thousand Guineas. Nashwan went on to win the Derby, the last of Hern's sixteen domestic classic victories, as well as the Eclipse Stakes and the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Diamond Stakes. Nashwan's owner, Sheikh Hamdan bin Rashid al-Maktoum, Dubai's finance minister, built the Kingwood stables at Lambourn specifically for Hern to move into. 
Hern retired from training at the end of the 1997 season and was made CBE in 1998 (to add to his CVO of 1980) as well as being given honorary membership of the Jockey Club. Following his wife's death (from cancer), he was reunited with an early love, Patricia (Pat) Wykeham-Fiennes, the widow of Richard Shedden. They had met at Porlock but Hern's financial prospects at the time had ruled out marriage. He continued to own shares in a handful of horses and, despite failing health, took an interest in their performances almost to the day of his death. He died on 22 May 2002 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, from septicaemia and a urinary tract infection, leaving an estate valued at just over $1 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 89740


Amies, Sir (Edwin) Hardy (1909-2003), dressmaker and fashion designer, was born on 17 July 1909 at 70 Delaware Mansions, Elgin Avenue, Maida Vale, London, the elder son and eldest of the three children of Herbert William Amies, a surveyor for London county council who later became the council's principal resident agent for the Beacontree housing estate, and his first wife, Mary, 'nee' Hardy (died 1938), who worked as a saleswoman for London court dressmakers until the birth of her daughter and second child in 1915. 
Hardy Amies came from a modest middle-class background and grew up in a suburban environment. His early years, when the family lived in Middlesex, were uneventful. He was close to his maternal grandmother, whom he credited with an artistic sensibility and admired for her energy and resourcefulness, and to his mother, who he felt had a natural sense of quality and had enjoyed a successful business career in spite of her shyness and lack of confidence. He attended Latymer Upper School in Hammersmith as a day boy from 1918 to 1920, when his family moved to Barking for his father to take up his appointment at Beacontree. He then became a boarding pupil at Brentwood School until 1926. His schooling left a favourable impression on him and although he had no talent for field sports he made his mark on the stage in school theatricals and learned what he considered the invaluable knack of getting on with people. English was his best subject. 
When he left school Amies wanted to become a journalist and on the advice of R. D. Blumenfeld, the editor of the 'Daily Express', he went abroad to learn French and German from 1927 until mid-1930 instead of taking a university degree. He mastered both languages and came back from Germany, where he worked as a sales agent for a small but ambitious ceramic wall tile factory, with an enthusiasm for travel and music, and an interest in business. He then joined W. and T. Avery in Birmingham, selling industrial weighing machines in the hope that he might be posted abroad, but three years later an unexpected job offer changed the direction of his career. A vivid description of a dress written by Amies prompted a former employer of his mother to offer him the post of designer at Lachasse, a sportswear shop in Mayfair. Undeterred by his complete ignorance of practical dressmaking, Amies boldly seized the opportunity. 
Lachasse had been set up in 1928 as an offshoot of Gray and Paulette Ltd. The firm specialized in made-to-measure tailoring and classic casual clothes. When Amies joined in January 1934 he replaced the designer Digby Morton, whom Amies credited with reformulating the suit, creating a versatile and feminine garment chic enough to wear in London but sufficiently sporty and understated for smart country events. Amies followed his lead and was promoted to managing designer in 1935. He learned from Morton and from the skilled workforce at Lachasse and was soon rewarded by export orders from the United States of America, where London-designed clothes were in demand. British 'Vogue' (in April 1937) praised Amies's use of traditional woollen fabrics and his facility with colour and pattern, which injected wit and novelty into his designs, but noted the comparatively static line of his suits which by the late 1930s incorporated the slightly low waist that became a characteristic of his style. 
Amies's evolutionary approach was just what his upper-class English customers wanted. They were looking for clothes that were in tune with fashion but would work for them over a number of years, that were smart and stylish but not ostentatious, and that were perfectly fitted and immaculately made, comfortable, and hard-wearing. In order to sustain and build Lachasse, Amies had to understand the values and lifestyle of the firm's clientele. He was helped by his friends Alexis and Ann ffrench, who, he said, 'guided [him] out of the styles and habits of [his] middle-class upbringing into the idiom of English upper-class life' ('Still Here', 166), and by the interior decorator and eighteenth-century specialist, John Fowler. Social acceptability was important to Amies professionally and personally. Clients at Lachasse included society figures such as Mrs Ernest Guinness and the actresses Celia Johnson, Heather Thatcher, and Virginia Cherrill. 
The designer whom Hardy Amies most admired was Captain Edward Molyneux, whose meticulously constructed clothes were characterized by their severe elegance and expensive-looking simplicity, lightened by a subtle use of colour and detail. Molyneux was good-looking and socially as well as professionally successful. His strikingly decorated Paris flat was featured in the news media and he enjoyed the luxuries of a wealthy man. Amies was also elegant and debonair, with a taste for good living, and like Molyneux he was to prove a highly successful businessman. 
By 1939 turnover at Lachasse had doubled, but Amies's request to design under his own name was rebuffed. Restless and frustrated, he found that the Second World War offered an escape and a new challenge. In 1939 he joined the intelligence corps before transferring in 1941 to the Special Operations Executive, where in November he joined the Belgian section as training and recruiting officer. He was promoted major in 1942, and became acting section head in August 1943 and head in January 1944, with the rank of lieutenant colonel. Although aware that his was a 'soft' war in comparison with that of others, it was still a 'bitter' experience that he felt affected his character ('Just So Far', 91, 94, 99). In 1946 he was nominated an officier de l'ordre de la Couronne by the Belgian government for his war service. 
Amies had left Lachasse in 1941 but maintained a commercial presence in London during the war selling under his own name through the house of Worth, and designing for projects that fed into the war effort to raise money through exports. The Incorporated Society of London Fashion Designers, which was set up in 1942 to promote and support the interests of London couture, and of which Amies was a founding member, played a key role in the export drive. Membership of the society would later offer him important public relations and export opportunities. He was co-vice-chairman of the society with Victor Stiebel in 1954 and with Digby Morton in 1955, and chairman in 1959-60. 
Following his demobilization, Amies lost no time in setting up his own fashion house, buying the lease of 14 Savile Row, which had once been home to the playwright Richard Brinsley Sheridan, and which lay in the heart of London's West End tailoring district. Hardy Amies Ltd was incorporated on 28 December 1945. Amies recruited experienced staff from Lachasse and Worth, and in 1947 he was the first London couturier to employ a press officer. The publicity material generated by the house emphasized its Englishness and its youthful, progressive approach, qualities that Amies personified in his appearance and attitude. 
In the immediate post-war years Amies concentrated on developing his business in London and bolstering his commercial links with department stores in the USA and Canada. Acutely aware of the competition couture faced from high quality ready-to-wear, he launched a boutique line in 1950 with a three-point selling plan aimed at export buyers, selected retail provincial buyers, and the general public. The boutique line included ready-wear coats, suits, dresses, and jackets that were offered with one fitting instead of the traditional three included in the price. Although made from similar materials to a couture suit, a boutique suit was designed with fewer details and less handwork and cost approximately 50 per cent less. By 1952 the boutique line accounted for a third of the company's turnover. Three years later Amies moved into ready-to-wear, offering tailored clothes in traditional fabrics but at a lower price point. In 1958 Kenneth (Ken) Fleetwood (1934-1996), who was a graduate of St Martin's School of Art and Design, joined the house. He eventually became head designer, specializing in romantic evening gowns and bridal wear. In 1968 he and Amies designed the costumes for Stanley Kubrick's film '2001, a Space Odyssey'. In his private life he was Amies's partner. 
Amies received his first orders from Princess Elizabeth, the future Queen Elizabeth II, in 1950, when she selected a small group of clothes for her Canadian tour. He went on to make clothes for her 1951 and 1953 overseas tours and in 1955 he successfully applied for a royal warrant. This was the start of a long relationship that brought immense prestige to the house and gave Amies enormous personal satisfaction. The queen's patronage brought him international standing, attracted clients at home and abroad, and guaranteed his acceptability in the highest echelons of society. He created a lasting image for the queen that reflected her rank and dignity and enhanced her presence without distancing her from the public. His patriotism and knowledge of history served him well in his role as royal dressmaker. His services to the queen were recognized in 1977 with appointment as CVO and in 1989 with a knighthood (as KCVO). He also designed for Diana, princess of Wales, and Princess Michael of Kent. Other clients included the duchess of Buccleuch, the duchess of Marlborough, Lady Diana Cooper, Diana, Lady Delamere, Vivien Leigh, Mrs Julian Fellowes, and Sally Burton. 
The longevity of Amies's career, which encompassed a huge shift in women's fashion from the polite, well-mannered clothes of the 1950s to the fast changing, youth-oriented styles of later decades, was rightly seen as one of the designer's greatest achievements. He owed his survival to his shrewd business sense and to his willingness to innovate and diversify. He continued to make the occasion-specific, refined, classic couture clothes that his core clientele demanded, but he capitalized on the skills of his staff to build up a thriving ready-to-wear business and, crucially, to move into menswear. 
Menswear was also changing in the 1950s and 1960s and there was an increasing demand for more informal, youthful styles with a fashionable edge. In 1958 Amies started designing silk ties for Michelsons. He went on to work for such firms as Radiac, designing high-quality cotton shirts, but his breakthrough came in 1961 when he was invited to become a design consultant for Hepworths, the Leeds-based, middle-market, multiple tailoring group. Designing menswear gave Amies more freedom to express his taste and the opportunity to design for men born into a socio-economic class similar to his own. He wanted men to enjoy clothes and feel confident and at ease in them, and he wrote his short but pithy 'ABC of Men's Fashion' (1964) to help them, and especially young men, achieve this. Amies admired the casual, athletic styles sold in America and the body conscious but tasteful clothing the Italians excelled at, and he tried to incorporate these qualities into the classic English suits he designed for Hepworths. His aim, which he felt he achieved, was to bridge the gap between Savile Row and the high street. By 1964 the annual turnover of his menswear was about $15 million, compared with $0.75 million for womenswear. His success led to a string of licensee agreements selling menswear and some womenswear across the world from Canada and the USA to Australia and the Far East. 
In 1973 Amies sold Hardy Amies Ltd to Debenhams to generate capital and to develop the ready-to-wear business. The venture was not a success, and Amies bought the business back in 1980. He continued to play an active role in the company into his late eighties but in May 2001 he sold Hardy Amies Ltd to Cardington plc (the company was subsequently re-named the Luxury Brands Group). The couture house came with licences in forty-four product categories and 160 trademarks around the world. Amies finally retired at the end of 2001, aged ninety-two. 
Amies believed that his contribution to the history of women's fashion was to 'help create the British suit, the London suit, when it was a fashion commodity' ('The Times', 3 January 1984). His design aesthetic reflected his respect for tradition and the controlled informality and understated elegance of English style, but Amies lived for the present. The greatest influences on his work were sportswear and athleticism, and while appearance and manners were important to him, he had a very rational approach to dress. When the straight jacket came back into fashion for women in the early 1950s, he commented, 'Underneath that straight jacket there is an impression of a very youthful and lithe body, but also a feeling of freedom, of being able to get around and cope with life, with shopping and housing and husband problems, and so on. In other words it is an expression of this day and age' (H. Amies, 'Wool in Fashion', 1954). In his old age he lost touch with the pulse of contemporary fashion, misunderstanding the creative drivers that informed it, and disliking what he considered the blatant over-exposure of the body. 
Amies was internationally recognized, and during his long career he received many honours. He won the 'Harper's Bazaar' award in 1962 and in 1964 he received the 'Sunday Times' special award, the 'Ambassador Magazine' award, and was elected a royal designer for industry. He became a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1965 and in 1989 he won the British Fashion Council hall of fame award. He was a talented writer and published two engaging and informative autobiographies, 'Just So Far' (1954) and 'Still Here' (1984), which he followed in 1994 with 'The Englishman's Suit'. He had great curiosity and was well read, teaching himself about history, art, and music. He also took great pleasure in his homes, particularly the Old School at Langford, his house in the Cotswolds, where he created a beautiful garden planted to reflect the seasons like 'an opera in four acts' ('World of Interiors', April 2002). He was a keen and competitive tennis player, but also enjoyed the more reflective pastime of needlepoint. 
Hardy Amies had a complex personality. He was patronizing, arrogant, pompous, and notoriously snobbish, but he was also quick-witted and intelligent, thoughtful, amusing, and excellent company. He was not an innovative designer and he set style above fashion. He was primarily a businessman with the intelligence, vigour, and discipline to be alert to change and to embrace new markets. His achievement was to run a profitable and professional global business on the back of his well-deserved reputation for creating refined, wearable, and skilfully made couture clothes. Known to the world as the queen's dressmaker and (by the end of his career) London's longest-surviving couturier, his contribution to the menswear industry was equally significant. He died of old age on 5 March 2003 at his home, The Old School, Langford, near Lechlade, Gloucestershire. He was cremated and his ashes interred in a plot at St Matthew's Church, Langford. His partner, Ken Fleetwood, predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 89752


Mactaggart, William Alexander (1906-2002), woollen manufacturer, was born at Braeside, Weensland Road, Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 17 August 1906, the son of William Alexander Main Mactaggart, businessman, and his wife, Margaret Jane, 'nee' Cooper. He was educated at St Mary's preparatory school, Melrose, and then at Sedbergh School, where he was advised 'I don't think we will make much of a scholar of you, I think your time would be better spent following some other pursuit' (private information). He took up rugby, playing for two seasons at centre in the first fifteen and remaining an enthusiast for the rest of his life. He first played for the Greens, Hawick Rugby Football Club, on new year's day 1924, and he served as its president during its centenary year in 1972. 
On leaving school, instead of joining the family woollen business of Mactaggart Brothers, Mactaggart was apprenticed to Robert Pringle & Sons, which manufactured underwear largely for the domestic market. This was a common practice before returning to a family firm, but he chose to stay and was appointed a director in 1932 and joint managing director in 1933. Three years later he persuaded his colleagues to change the company's name to Pringles and to diversify into fashion knitwear, including sweaters. Between 1926 and 1933 he served with the King's Own Scottish Borderers territorial army battalion and on the outbreak of war he was put in command of the Hawick air training corps. He later served from 1942 to 1945 with the Royal Army Service Corps in France, Belgium, and the Netherlands where he developed his considerable managerial and organizational skills. 
On demobilization Mactaggart's fellow managing director, Arthur Oddy, left to join a competitor, Ballantynes, and Mactaggart found himself in sole charge of Pringles, with a workforce of 200. With the home market still controlled by rationing, he responded to the government's call to export. During the next four years he claimed to have travelled round the world four times in search of new business and renewing contact with pre-war customers and suppliers. His industry paid off and Pringles became a byword for high-quality knitwear, gaining two royal warrants and two queen's awards for industry. The company bucked the trend of the decline in British textile manufacture. Its twin-sets, sweaters, and cardigans (mostly featuring a distinctive diamond pattern) were worn by film stars like Deborah Kerr and Margaret Lockwood, and the firm cornered the market in fashionable knitwear for golfers. In 1964 Mactaggart was appointed CBE in recognition of his contribution to the woollen trades. He had a very 'hands-on' style of management, regularly walking the shop floor and talking to the workforce. He attributed the firm's success under his leadership to the team spirit these visits engendered. He once claimed that 'At Pringle we never give orders: just ask for things to be done -- and expect them to be done' ('The Herald', 10 June 2002). By the time he retired in 1969 Pringles employed over 2000 people and had a turnover in excess of $5 million, mostly in exports. After his retirement, Pringles continued to expand in the 1970s and 1980s, building in particular on its share in the market for golfing knitwear, though its reputation as the manufacturer of the preferred leisurewear of many football hooligans was an unwelcome accolade, and the company suffered a decline in the 1990s. In 1998 Pringles shut its 280-worker Berwick plant and cut jobs at its Hawick plant, but a takeover in 2000 by Hong Kong-based S. C. Fang & Sons resulted in a reinvigoration of the company and a swift return to profitability. 
Mactaggart's other great passion, besides rugby, was horseriding, and he hunted with the Buccleuch, of which he served as chairman from 1969 until 1981. He was proud of the borders' tradition of common riding. Indeed, he had been elected cornet for Hawick in 1930 and then married the cornet's lass, Marjorie Laing Innes (1908/9-1998), daughter of Harry Scott Riddell Innes, hosiery manufacturer, on 30 June 1932; they had two sons, Bruce and Alan, and a daughter, Claire. Making his family home at Lilliesleaf from 1946, Mactaggart served as an elder in the parish church for almost fifty years. When the church was restored in 1966 he and his wife donated three stained-glass windows. 
Marjorie Mactaggart died in 1998 and Mactaggart himself died at the Borders General Hospital, Melrose, on 23 May 2002, following a stroke. He was survived by his three children. After his death a former provost of Hawick wrote of him: 'Few men have served Hawick so well or have endeared themselves so completely to our townspeople as William Mactaggart has done. He has been a patron and provider for many years and his interests have been so widespread that he has touched in some way the lives of each and every one of us. Despite his achievements, Willie has always been truly a man of the people, and possibly his finest quality was his ability to communicate and enjoy friendships with others in different walks of life. (private information)' 



@@@@@


doc= 89774


Edwards, Sir George Robert (1908-2003), aircraft designer and industrialist, was born on 9 July 1908 at 12 The Parade, Highams Park, Walthamstow, Essex, the son of Edwin George Edwards (1872-1938), a tobacconist and confectioner, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (1872-1908), daughter of Robert Freeman. His mother died shortly after his birth. 
After attending private, preparatory, and council schools, the young Edwards encountered his first test of bureaucracy when the application for him to attend a grammar school was rejected because he was three days too old. Thus he was referred to the Walthamstow Technical Institute Engineering and Trade School which, fortuitously, provided his first introduction to engineering and the entree to a part-time University of London engineering degree course. Spending the first seven years of his professional career from 1928 as a technical engineer in the London docks, he gained a sound practical engineering grounding and election to associate membership of the Institution of Structural Engineers, a professional qualification for which he had studied at the West Ham Municipal College. On 19 October 1935 he married Marjorie Annie (Dinah) Thurgood (1908-1994), a clerk, also from Highams Park, and daughter of John Lawrence Thurgood, clerk. It proved a particularly close and mutually supportive marriage. They had one daughter, Angela ('Dingle'). 
Edwards was fortunate to begin his aviation career in 1935 with Vickers (Aviation) Ltd at Weybridge, Surrey, working under the paternal leadership of two of Britain's most accomplished contemporary engineers -- Rex Pierson and Barnes Wallis, chief designer and chief structures designer respectively. The first aircraft types on which Edwards worked were Pierson's Air Ministry G4/31 military, general-purpose, biplane and monoplane prototypes that prefaced the long-distance record-breaking, single-engine Wellesley bomber for the Royal Air Force -- embodying Wallis's intricate lightweight geodetic ('basketweave') form of airframe construction. This resulted in his developing an enduring devotion to serving the needs of the RAF throughout the ensuing four decades. He soon became a group leader, and his first main responsibility was the design of the tail unit on the Vickers B9/32 prototype, the forerunner of the prolifically produced and widely deployed Wellington and Warwick twin-engine geodetic bombers of the Second World War. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, Edwards was given the responsibility to devise a special version of the Wellington to destroy Hitler's first 'secret weapon' -- the magnetic mine, which posed such a threat to allied shipping in the Thames estuary. Edwards's solution, a 'detonation without impact' device, was visually identifiable by a 48 foot duralumin ring mounted underneath the aircraft, encasing an electromagnetic coil energized by a generator driven by an auxiliary engine inside the fuselage. Charged with the imperative need to get this imaginative concept into service within three months, Edwards had to report progress with photographs every night to the then first lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. The device was successfully deployed in the Thames estuary, and later in the Suez Canal, Mediterranean harbours, and the Near East, until the Admiralty had devised its own means of degaussing the hulls of its ships and a highly efficient minesweeping capability. 
Edwards's success led to his being appointed to the key position of experimental manager of Vickers-Armstrongs shortly before the devastating bombing raid on the parent Vickers factory at Brooklands on 4 September 1940. As a result of the latter he was given the added responsibility of establishing an autonomous dispersal facility in the nearby, wooded Foxwarren Park. The principal projects with which he was charged were: the construction of the prototypes of the F7/41 'Metal Mosquito' twin-engine, high-speed, high-altitude fighter, Vickers's first stressed-skin aircraft design; the big, four-engine Windsor geodetic bomber; the high-altitude, pressure-cabin Wellington (a British first); the Whittle Wellington jet engine test-bed aircraft; and the prototype of the immediate post-war Viking civil airliner adaptation of the Wellington -- as well as the development of Barnes Wallis's bouncing bombs and other special war weapons. 
In 1940-41 Edwards undertook an important role in a part-time secondment to Lord Beaverbrook's Ministry of Aircraft Production, working as part of a team of expeditors to accelerate the development and production of new types of British and American aircraft in other British aircraft factories. He was also a member of the Anglo-American Farren mission which sequestrated valuable research information from Germany at the end of the war. Collectively, Edwards's broad range of wartime assignments stood him in a commanding position immediately after the war when Vickers, largely at his instigation, chose wholeheartedly to embrace all-metal, stressed-skin airframe construction and the British-invented gas-turbine engine. 
When Rex Pierson was made chief engineer of the whole of the Vickers-Armstrongs aviation group (which included Vickers-Supermarine) in September 1945, George Edwards succeeded him as chief designer. Aircraft developed under his technical direction during the next fifteen years included the Vickers Viking, Valetta, Varsity, Viscount, Valiant, Vanguard, VC10, and Super VC10 -- a family progression that was unique in the western world. In 1953 he was appointed a director, general manager, and chief engineer, before becoming managing director of Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) Ltd later that year, following the untimely death of Sir Hew Kilner. 
While studying the recommendations of the prescient wartime Brabazon committees for the wholly new civil aircraft types with which British industry should proceed after the war, Pierson had already conceived a metamorphosed Wellington to become the 'interim' Viking with which to establish the newly formed British European Airways (BEA). The prototype was first flown on 22 June 1945, only six weeks after VE-day. The Viking began commercial service with BEA on 1 September 1946 and was also adopted by the reconstituted royal flight. The experimental Rolls-Royce pure-jet powered Nene Viking was the world's first airliner to be powered exclusively by jet propulsion. A total of 163 Vikings were built, with some continuing in service until the early 1970s. From the Viking came directly the military Valetta, the RAF's first truly multi-role transport aircraft, of which 263 were built. The Varsity multi-engine flight crew and navigational trainer derivative followed, with 163 being built, the type remaining in service for twenty-five years. The out-turn of the Viking genus thus ran to nearly 600 aircraft, so providing an essential bridge of work in progress until a new-generation airliner could be realized. 
Pierson's imaginative response to the Brabazon committees' recommendations for the medium-range European airliner category was the Vickers VC2, powered by four propeller-turbine engines. This resulted in the separate type IIB that Edwards brought to service -- with his inspired choice of the Rolls-Royce Dart engine and the first use of a pressurized cabin in a British transport aircraft. Named Viscount, the prototype was first flown on 16 July 1948. It was initially rejected by BEA as being too small, in favour of the 'safe option' of the piston-engined Airspeed Ambassador; however, Edwards's unshakeable faith and the staunch support of Sir Hew Kilner at Vickers, Sir Alec Coryton, controller of supplies (air), and Cyril Musgrave, under-secretary (air), at the Ministry of Supply, rescued this evidently promising, if untried, concept from demise and obscurity, to be reborn in enlarged form. Meanwhile the second prototype was adapted for experimental test flying with the Rolls-Royce Tay pure-jet engine and was used by Boulton Paul for the development of electrically signalled, power-actuated flying controls for Edwards's already gestating Valiant V-bomber. It thus became the world's first transport aircraft to fly with such a control system and pioneered the use of 'fly-by-wire' controls, later universal in civil and military aircraft. 
With support now from Peter Masefield, who took over as chief executive of BEA in 1949, the Viscount 630 prototype operated the world's first turbine-powered airliner scheduled service to carry fare-paying passengers on 29 July 1950 -- between London and Paris. The airline then began the world's first sustained propeller-turbine airliner service with the enlarged Viscount 701 on 18 April 1953. The real market breakthrough, however, was the acceptance of turbine power with the Viscount in North America -- initially with Trans-Canada Airlines and then in the key American domestic market. The sixty-plane order from Capital Airlines of Washington, DC, in 1955 constituted Britain's largest single dollar-earning export order in any field up to that time. Under Edwards's ever determined leadership and drive, 438 Viscounts were sold to more than sixty operators in forty countries -- airlines, air forces, governments, corporate businesses, and individual owners -- two-thirds of them in valuable export-earning markets. The Viscount dramatically pioneered the benefits of fast, smooth, 'over-the-weather', gas-turbine powered air transport throughout the world. 
Most emblematic of George Edwards's prowess as a chief designer and programme leader was the urgently produced 'all-electric' four-jet Valiant -- the first of the RAF's much vaunted V-bomber nuclear deterrent force of the 1950s and 1960s. It was first flown on 18 May 1951, and 104 were built in record time. Successfully deployed by RAF Bomber Command in the Suez campaign of 1956, the Valiant also live-tested Britain's own nuclear weapons in Australia and at Christmas Island in the Pacific in 1956 and 1957 respectively, pioneered in-flight refuelling for large aircraft in the RAF in 1958, and air-tested the original Bristol Siddeley Pegasus vectored-thrust engine, used in the revolutionary Harrier vertical take-off and landing aircraft. 
While the Viscount led to the Vanguard second-generation turboprop airliner, so the Valiant led to the V1000, the world's first large, long-range, non-stop, transatlantic jet transport project. Although, like its American and Russian counterparts, the Vanguard was overtaken by the pure-jets, it notably incorporated large-scale use of integrally machined airframe structural components, a technique which went on to become the principal method of airliner structural design and manufacture on both sides of the Atlantic. The government cancellation of the V1000 in November 1955, due to the extraordinary volte-face of the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), six months before the prototype was due to fly, was, Edwards said: 'The biggest setback the industry has suffered' (Edwards, 'British aerospace industry'). This left the world market wide open to the American Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8, with large US domestic launching orders. 
Nevertheless, BOAC again turned to Vickers and Edwards to produce an aircraft specifically capable of meeting the airline's demanding 'medium-range empire' routes to Africa and the Far East. His rear-engined, large-area, high-lift, 'clean-winged' VC10 and Super VC10 were powered by four Rolls-Royce Conway engines, the world's first dual-flow, 'bypass', or 'turbofan' power plant. More than half the weight of the airframe structure was machined from the solid. Although BOAC's still vacillating procurement policies severely truncated the production out-turn to only fifty-four aircraft, the VC10 was the largest aircraft type ever to go into series production in Britain. It was the most popular of all the first-generation big jets and was also adopted by the Royal Air Force, with which a large fleet continued in the strategic transport and aerial refuelling tanker roles for more than forty years. 
When Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) Ltd was incorporated in the newly formed British Aircraft Corporation (BAC) in 1960, Edwards initially served as executive director (aircraft) under the founding chairmanship of Lord Portal, the wartime RAF leader, before becoming chairman and managing director of BAC (Operating) and managing director of the main, BAC (Holdings), board in 1963, and chairman of BAC following an internal reconstruction in 1968. He thus had overall responsibility for the development and production of BAC's complete range of civil and military aircraft, guided weapons, and space communications satellite programmes. 
Edwards had led the highly advanced Vickers-English Electric TSR2 supersonic bomber and reconnaissance aircraft project from 1958, which was effectively the catalyst of the creation of BAC two years later. The programme was precipitously cancelled by the Labour government in April 1965, just as quantity production was about to begin. This left Edwards with the daunting task of reconstructing the still fledgling industrial grouping. Meanwhile Hunting Aircraft had contributed an imaginative small twin-jet airliner design which Edwards's team at Weybridge evolved into the BAC One-Eleven, the world's first successful 'tailored-for-the-job' regional jetliner, which penetrated the American domestic market (just as the Viscount had done) ahead of the home-grown product. 
Edwards became a central figure in the conception, technical development, and industrial leadership of the huge collaborative aviation programmes in Europe. The Anglo-French Concorde, the world's first (and at the time of Edwards's death only) successful supersonic airliner, became the foundation of this great new aeronautical venture. He was the original architect of the programme and the only member of the Anglo-French governmental and industrial management team to serve from the signing of the bi-national treaty agreement in November 1962 through to the start of service in January 1976, including bridging the industrial hiatus of the drastic truncation of the programme in the wake of the global oil crisis in 1973-4. 
In the late 1960s Edwards was also centrally involved in setting up the Anglo-French Sepecat Jaguar military aircraft programme, leading to the development of a supersonic strike and advanced training aircraft. Then came the Anglo-German-Italian Panavia Tornado, a variable-sweep wing, multi-role combat aircraft, of which nearly 1000 were built for the air forces of the three sponsoring nations and the Saudi air force. In the early 1960s Edwards had already been a prime mover in producing a complete, new, British-manufactured air defence system for Saudi Arabia -- including BAC Lightning supersonic fighter and Strikemaster trainer aircraft. This was the most important order ever placed with BAC, leading to further massive orders for British industry in later years. 
Edwards retired at the end of 1975 after forty years of involvement in many of the most significant and successful British and world aerospace technical and industrial achievements. He handed over the company in excellent technical and commercial shape, his fifteen-year leadership having enabled it to thrive despite all the political, economic, and technological upheavals that had beset and transformed the aerospace industry worldwide. 
Appointed MBE in 1945 and CBE in 1952, Edwards was knighted in 1957, in recognition of his leading contribution to the inauguration of the jet age of both civil and military aviation. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1968 (and awarded its royal medal in 1974), he received eight honorary doctorates and numerous awards. The most significant of his many major national and international honours came in 1971 when the queen bestowed upon him the Order of Merit -- the highest honour in the sovereign's personal gift -- in recognition of his outstanding contribution to British and world aeronautical engineering. 
Complementing his professional life, Edwards always maintained strong and fruitful involvements in the affairs of the principal aeronautical professional bodies on both sides of the Atlantic, most notably the Royal Aeronautical Society. In his presidential year (1957-8) his presidential address presciently and accurately predicted the advent of a supersonic airliner. He was also a leading figure in the foundation of the University of Surrey, of which he became the first pro-chancellor, in 1966; in the formation of the Royal Air Force Museum, Hendon; as patron of the Brooklands Museum Trust; and as a deputy lieutenant of the county of Surrey. 
Always leading a balanced personal life with proper time and regard for his family and personal interest and pursuits, Edwards particularly enjoyed cricket and painting, which continued to be the twin staples of his twenty-seven-year retirement. The former had early led him to recommend that the critically enabling 'back-spin' be applied to Barnes Wallis's 'dambusting' bombs to achieve the sustained bouncing effect which proved so decisive in May 1943. His talent for painting was rewarded with a winning framing in the Royal Academy summer exhibition in London in 2000. The bedrock of his personal life was his fifty-nine-year marriage to Dinah, and in retirement he took great pleasure in his grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
Humanity, compassion, and unfailing good humour made Edwards an exceptionally well-rounded man with a legion of friends. He was able to relate with equanimity to everyone within his exceptionally wide compass -- from his immediate associates through to the monarch. He died at his home of more than thirty-five years, Albury Heights, White Lane, Guildford, Surrey, on 2 March 2003, of bronchopneumonia and cerebrovascular disease; his funeral was on the 10th at St Martha on the Hill, Guildford. He was survived by his daughter, Angela, his wife having predeceased him. 
One of the most outstanding figures in the development of the global aerospace industry, Edwards -- affectionately known to his professional colleagues simply as GRE -- was the most widely accomplished and highly regarded British aircraft designer and industrial leader after the original pioneers, and of world stature. Entering the industry in 1935 at the dawn of the technological revolution from the biplane to the monoplane, his forty-year aviation career embraced not only his profound contribution to aircraft design but also the leadership and direction of British industry in the jet age, through large-scale domestic and European industrial integration and collaboration, and into the supersonic era. He played a key role in the generation of leading-edge technologies and standards, the realization of a whole new travel experience throughout the world by air, and key elements of national and international defence. In turn, this resulted in the provision of many thousands of high-calibre and rewarding jobs, and hugely valuable commercial and export benefits for Britain. 
Edwards's career spanned some of the most demanding situations in British and world affairs, in which the aeronautical industry -- with its inseparable sibling, defence -- was always a crucially important dynamic. It ranged from the large-scale re-equipment and expansion of the Royal Air Force to meet the huge demands of the Second World War, through the pioneering launch of the jet age in the immediate post-war period, to the reshaping of the British and European aviation industries in the 1960s and 1970s. Edwards played an important part in each of these developments. Simultaneously his many seminal papers delivered to leading professional organizations on both sides of the Atlantic, and in the academic domain that he did so much to foster, were also influential and appreciated. 
Prince Philip, duke of Edinburgh, perhaps best summed up Edwards's outstanding aeronautical career at the time of the latter's retirement when he said: 'Sir George Edwards is one of those exceptional men who have stamped their genius on the course of events. His achievements have earned him a place among the great company of pioneers and innovators of World aviation' ('Airframe'). A man of enormous ability and resolve, he was able to comprehend and realize some of the largest and most complex engineering industrial undertakings of the time. Consistently contesting powerful competition and the ever present dichotomy of reconciling the short-term objectives of the political system with the long-term ones of the aerospace business, he was always sustained by his iron will and simplistic motto: 'Never give up'. 


@@@@@


doc= 89780


Richman, Stella (1922-2002), actress and television producer and executive, was born at 7 Tredegar Square, Mile End, London, on 9 November 1922, the daughter of Jacob Richman, leather merchant, and his wife, Leoni, 'nee' Jgelnik, both of eastern European Jewish descent. After attending Clapton County Secondary School for Girls, she went on the stage. On 2 August 1949 she married the actor-manager Alexander de Moro Sherriff (Alec) Clunes (1912-1970), who had started and was running the Arts Theatre Club in London's West End. There were no children of the marriage, which was dissolved in 1954. 
Richman began her career in television by playing small parts, including three lines in the BBC series 'The Quatermass Experiment'. The coming of commercial television gave her the opportunity for a new career, first as a story editor with the nascent ATV, from 1960. She immediately revealed a sure instinct for finding and nurturing young writers, many of whom were to make significant contributions to the evolving medium: among them were Alun Owen, Clive Exton, Julian Bond, Frederic Raphael, Ken Taylor, and Trevor Griffiths. Richman's need to find scripts for a weekly slot allowed her, and she her stable, a rare freedom to invent. Since they often wrote a play one week and were 'on the floor' with it the next, her novices learned their trade with unprecedented urgency. Under the demanding but indulgent aegis of Lew Grade, Richman's 'boys' (few females wrote television drama in the early days, though Richman was soon to be sponsoring work by Edna O'Brien and Marguerite Duras) were in at the creation of a range of material -- from 'kitchen sink' to social comedy -- which would later be seen by some as contributing to a 'golden age' of British television. Her progress was clinched, in 1963, by an anthology series, 'Love Story', which she produced just before joining Rediffusion Television as head of series. 
In 1953 Richman had met Victor Brusa, who came of a family of restaurateurs and with whom she founded and ran the White Elephant Club in Curzon Street, Mayfair. As her contacts in the world of show business expanded, the White Elephant became renowned as the rendezvous of choice for emblematic figures of 'the swinging sixties'. Richman (who was on first-name terms with many of her guests) contrived an apparent ubiquity which enabled her to combine show business with the restaurant trade and take pleasure, it seemed, in both, as well as in her daughter, Cookie, and son, Paul, with Brusa, whose name she took by deed poll. Victor Brusa's death in 1965, as the result of falling down stairs at the White Elephant, was a blow which she survived, in public, by working even harder. On 20 September 1967 she married Alec Hyams, an import company director seven years her junior, and son of Hyman Hyams, fruiterer; they divorced in 1976. 
In the 1960s and 1970s Richman's career continued and prospered. In 1968 she initiated a new televisual form with 'A Man of our Times' by Julian Bond, a series which anatomized the private and professional life of, in this case, a middle manager at a critical moment in his marriage and career. It was an elastic format which Richman used on several notable occasions, culminating in 1976 with 'Bill Brand', in which Trevor Griffiths traced the virtually 'a clef' story of a left-wing Labour politician wrestling with party and conscience. In 1970 Richman had moved to London Weekend Television where she became programme controller and was the first woman to be given a seat on the board of a television company. She was, however, not happy in a largely administrative role and, in 1972, she resigned to set up an independent production company, Stella Richman Productions, with David Frost. The company (which claimed to be the first independent television production company in Britain) produced important series, of which the most memorable was 'Jennie', Julian Mitchell's account of the life of Winston Churchill's mother, Lady Randolph Churchill. 
Throughout this time Richman continued to be a vivid and vigilant presence at the White Elephant and at the White Elephant on the River, opposite Dolphin Square, Pimlico, where Sunday brunches were spread with the generosity which was a mark of her style. After Victor Brusa's death she set up a charity in his name which provided holidays for disadvantaged children. She edited a series of cookbooks, with recipes from famous hands, as part of her fund-raising. The White Elephant Club was sold in 1988, but the charity continued to function, and more than 20,000 children had benefited from it by the time of her death. 
Stella Richman was a small, neat woman, always feminine but never coy. Her word was her bond. She sustained remarkable success in television without making enemies or forgetting the friends who could always rely on her for clear and disinterested counsel. She was elected a fellow of the Royal Television Society in 1982. Having been an eclectic pioneer, she came to regret what she saw as the formulaic rigidity and witless content which commercial considerations later imposed on the 'independent' network. Her Jewish origins may somewhat explain her respect for the written word. If she knew the limits of the medium and the business, and played adroitly within them, she always disdained to pander to the lowest common denominator. She remained at once modest and authoritative, spirited and feminine, until her sudden death, from emphysema and heart failure, at Hammersmith Hospital, London, on 24 May 2002. She was survived by her daughter, Cookie, and son, Paul. 


@@@@@


doc= 89793


Whetstone, (Norman) Keith (1930-2002), journalist, was born on 17 June 1930 at 51 Holywell Avenue, Monkseaton, Northumberland, the younger son of Albert Whetstone, journalist, and his wife, Hannah Elizabeth (Anne), 'nee' Hubbard. His parents both came from Nuneaton in Warwickshire, his father the son of a hatmaker and his mother the eldest daughter of the company secretary at a brickworks. They had moved north in 1928, seven years after their marriage, so that Albert Whetstone could work for the 'Newcastle Chronicle' and 'Sunday Sun'. They later moved to Coventry, where Albert Whetstone rejoined the staff of the 'Midland Daily Telegraph', forerunner of the 'Coventry Evening Telegraph'. He later became editor of the 'Coventry Standard', the company's weekly title, and a Saturday morning orator, proclaiming a radical agenda from a soapbox in Nuneaton market. Whetstone was educated at Bygate Lane infants' school, Monkseaton, Northumberland (later made famous by the television series, 'The Likely Lads'), and King Henry VIII Grammar School, Coventry. Evacuated in the wartime air-raids, he was billeted in the country town of Alcester with a childless couple whose kindness he later repaid as they grew old. At school his great love was rugby union. For three seasons he played for the first fifteen, the last as captain. He also played for Warwickshire schools, and later for Coventry Extra Firsts and the Old Coventrians. Much later, as his sons followed him through the same school, earning the same rugby colours, he actively supported the school, the sport, and the old boys' association, whose president he became. 
Following his father into journalism had to wait on the navy. Whetstone's elder brother, Tony ('b'. 1927), later a rear-admiral, was already serving in submarines when Whetstone himself joined the Royal Navy in 1949-50 for his national service. As a young journalist on the 'Coventry Evening Telegraph' in 1951, he was recalled because of the Korean War. On 6 December 1952 he married Monica Joan Clayton ('b'. 1930/31), the daughter of William Allan Clayton, company director, of Leamington Spa, and they set up home in Plymouth. He decided not to apply for a permanent commission, and on his demobilization at the end of 1952 joined the 'Western Morning News' as a reporter, though he remained in the RNVR, retiring as a lieutenant-commander in 1965. He and his wife had three sons, Bill, Neil, and Alastair. 
After three years as a journalist in Plymouth, Whetstone returned in 1955 to the midlands as a sub-editor on the 'Birmingham Post', the first of many posts he held on Iliffe newspapers over the next thirty years. In 1958 he rejoined the 'Coventry Evening Telegraph' as theatre critic, leaving to edit the 'Cambridge Evening News' in 1964 but returning in 1970 as editor. Ten years later he was appointed editor of the 'Birmingham Evening Mail' and a director of Birmingham Post and Mail Ltd. From 1984 to 1986 he was editor-in-chief of both the morning and evening papers before retiring as a precautionary ill-health measure at the age of fifty-six. 
Throughout his career Whetstone set nothing higher than the work of the reporter and the 'sub'. From his tobacco tin he would fish scraps of paper on which were noted stories culled from his wide circle of friends and contacts. As a grammarian he had few equals. He was immensely well-read and frequently exercised a phenomenal memory. But it was the quality of his judgement and the soundness of his integrity that won him advancement. He was trusted by everyone. When an Iliffe newspaper needed to be rebuilt on safer footings, Whetstone was the chosen man. When the public interest had to be served by the breaking of a story, nothing would compromise his principles, neither a treasured association, nor friendships he would be compelled to jeopardize. Journalism was his passion, and he was thrilled to see it shared by others, especially the young. Even from his retirement home at Prayssac, Lot, France, he would travel to run exam centres in the west midlands and return with armfuls of papers to mark. Invariably he thought standards to be falling. Things were never as good as they had been, but his enthusiasm as a guardian of professional values went undiminished. 
Throughout his career Whetstone fought for the freedom of the press, not for its own sake, but for the benefit of the public. He did much to make the Guild of British Newspaper Editors (later the Society of Editors) a lobbying force. He was chairman of its parliamentary and legal committee and in 1976-7 its national president. From 1980 to 1986 he was a member of the Press Council (later succeeded by the Press Complaints Commission). He also served on the D-notices committee, which advised editors on the reporting of defence and security issues. In 1983 he was appointed OBE for services to journalism. 
Unlike his father, Whetstone was driven not by change but by conservatism. Even when the past seemed undeserving of respect, he gave it. To that extent he could be exasperating. But he was kind, honourable, generous, hospitable, supportive, loyal, charming, and gifted, even as a plumber, electrician, and joiner. His happiest times came with companionship and a good story, whether in the wardroom, the dressing room, or the dining room -- and with the clunk of metal type in a page of the next edition. He died on 1 September 2002 from prostate cancer at Walsgrave Hospital, Coventry, near his second home at Meriden, and was cremated on 9 September. He was survived by his wife, Monica, and their three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 89804


Heim, Bruno Bernard (1911-2003), archbishop of Xanthos and papal diplomatist, was born in Olten, Switzerland, on 5 March 1911, the son of Bernard Heim, stationmaster, and his wife, Elisabeth Studer-Heim, teacher. He had one brother, Karl, to whom he remained very close until Karl's death in the early 1980s. Heim was educated by the Benedictines at Engelberg, where he first developed an interest in heraldry, and to which he left his heraldic library. In 1938, after studies in Rome, he was ordained priest for the diocese of Solothurn. Back in Switzerland he worked for two years with Polish and Italian refugees before being recalled to Rome to study canon law at the Pontificia Accademia Ecclesiastica, the Vatican's institution for the training of its diplomats. Meanwhile he continued his heraldic studies. 
Heim's diplomatic career began in Paris, where he was appointed to the nuncio, Archbishop Angelo Roncalli. From Paris he was sent to Vienna and then to Bonn as charge d'affaires. In 1958 Roncalli was elected pope as John XXIII and immediately sought advice from Heim about the papal coat-of-arms. The design was to incorporate the lion of Venice (where Roncalli had been patriarch), but when Heim sent his first design Roncalli complained that the lion was too severe. The two of them finally agreed on a lion on whose face a smile is discernible. Many other commissions followed, including from John XXIII's three successors as pope, Paul VI, John Paul I, and John Paul II. The last of these proved the most difficult for Heim. John Paul II insisted on keeping the arms he had had in Cracow, which incorporated the letter M (for the Virgin Mary). Heim argued that letters are not traditionally used in heraldry, but the pope was adamant, and so the papal arms appeared with a large and quite severe M in one quarter. Heim was well respected among heraldists worldwide, and was proud to have been elected patron of the Cambridge University Heraldic and Genealogical Society. His book on ecclesiastical heraldry, 'Heraldry in the Catholic Church' (1978, revised and enlarged 1981), was widely regarded as the authority on the subject. 
Heim's first appointment as papal representative was to Scandinavia (1961-9), with the title of archbishop of Xanthos, a long-defunct diocese. When people asked him where this was, Heim -- often accused of a lack of sense of humour -- would reply, 'Most of it is now in the British Museum' (private information). He did valuable work in Scandinavia, especially in building bridges with other churches, as he did in his next appointment as pro-nuncio in Egypt (1969-73). His fluency in a number of languages helped him greatly wherever he was posted. 
In 1973 Heim was appointed apostolic delegate to the court of St James and took up residence in Wimbledon. The title 'delegate' indicated that there were not full diplomatic relations between the Vatican and the court of St James but, partly as a result of Heim's efforts, the two parties normalized diplomatic relations not long before the pope's visit to England, Scotland, and Wales in 1982. Thus Heim became the first apostolic pro-nuncio (as the Vatican calls its ambassadors) to the United Kingdom. 
Pope John Paul II came to England in May 1982, but Heim did not regard it as anything like the climax of his work in London. It was noticed that the pope did not seem to engage his representative in the sort of private conversations one might expect, but relations between the two were not the best. Heim had been critical of what he saw as the Holy See's intransigence, above all in moral matters, and at one point the cardinal-prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith had asked Heim to put his views on paper. To Heim's chagrin (and with consequent damage to his reputation with the pope) Cardinal Seper seems to have shown to the pope what Heim had intended to be a first draft. 
Heim's pastoral concern meant that he was always available to any priest who wanted to talk. He was also careful not to be seen to interfere in the work of the Catholic bishops in the countries for which he was responsible. In this way he earned great respect among them. By the time he left London in 1985 he had been responsible for the appointment of many of the bishops in England, Scotland, and Wales. It was one of those appointments that gave him the greatest satisfaction. When Cardinal John Carmel Heenan, archbishop of Westminster, died in November 1975, the succession created great problems for Heim. It was clear that one of the obvious candidates might not actually be welcomed by all in Westminster. And so Heim began the search for a successor -- one of the most important and sensitive tasks of a papal representative. The bishop of Leeds, William Gordon Wheeler, suggested that Heim might consider the abbot of Ampleforth, the relatively unknown Basil Hume. Heim set about the complex task, made more challenging because another important diocese, Liverpool, had also become vacant. But Heim saw the path of wisdom and Hume was ordained as archbishop of Westminster in March 1976. Heim had asked to be one of the ordaining bishops. In his retirement he always insisted that this was what he regarded as his greatest service to the church. 
In retirement in Switzerland Heim continued to live in the family home, designing and painting coats of arms. He paid his last visit to England in June 2001. When his wheelchair was halted at the immigration desk, the woman at the desk asked him the purpose of his visit. He beamed broadly and said, somewhat to her astonishment, 'On Friday I am having lunch with the queen mum!' (private information). Heim died in Olten, Switzerland, on 18 March 2003, and was buried from the parish church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 89807


Hird, Dame Thora (1911-2003), actress and broadcaster, was born on 28 May 1911 at 49 Cheapside, Morecambe, Lancashire, the younger daughter and youngest of three children of James Henry Hird, theatrical manager, and his wife, Mary Jane, 'nee' Mayor, mezzo-soprano and actress. She described her family life in one of her autobiographies as 'one of the happiest in the world' ('Scene and Hird', 2), and in it were the roots of her self-confidence and of her disinclination to be overawed or bullied by anyone. 
Hird's background made a theatrical career seem almost inevitable. She first appeared on stage at the age of eight weeks, when her mother, playing the part of an innocent maid seduced by the young master in a Victorian melodrama, carried her on to the stage of the Royalty Theatre, Morecambe, as proof of his wrongdoing. The family lived in a house adjoining the theatre, which her father managed, and from where she could hear what was happening on the stage, including her mother's performances. At three she learned tap dancing, at four she sang for a concert in aid of injured troops in the First World War, at eight she danced in a George Hall benefit concert (named after a local celebrity), and at fourteen she left school, had walk-on roles at Morecambe Pier Pavilion, and appeared with the John Riddings Opera Company for a season of 'The Bohemian Girl' on Morecambe Central Pier. Ever practical, when the season's stage work was over, she attended night school four nights a week to study French, cookery, bookkeeping, accounts, English grammar, shorthand, and typing. She became a cashier at Lancaster and District Co-operative Society's branch in Queen's Square, Morecambe, and kept this job for ten years, studying the ways of her customers and determining to use them one day on stage. While the Co-op was still her day job, she built up a theatrical career, beginning with the Morecambe repertory company at the Royalty Theatre. The burning down of Central Pier in 1933, followed by the musical event to open the renovated Winter Gardens, led to her meeting James 'Scottie' Scott, a drummer five years her senior, whom she married on 3 May 1937, after a three-year engagement. The son of James Scott, also a musician, her husband became her business manager, house-husband (before the term had been invented), and sometimes the sole carer of their only child, Janette. 
Hird's first part in repertory at the Royalty Theatre was in Eden Philpotts's 'Yellow Sands'. The play was about twins, one dominant, the other little more than an echo of what the other said. Playing the echo, Hird began to show how her flair for attracting human sympathy could make even negative characters compellingly individual. During the Second World War her husband joined the RAF and she became a civilian clerk at the RAF headquarters and billeting office at the local Clarendon Hotel, rehearsing with the repertory company in the lunch hours and appearing on stage in the evenings. In 'As You Are' she played the sixty-year-old mother-in-law of the heroine. The comedian and ukelele player George Formby was in the audience, and decided he would like her to play the same part in his forthcoming film of the play. She was offered a contract at $10 a week and $10 a day when she worked; she replied that she did not fancy getting paid when she was not working -- an unusual, but for her characteristic, objection which was brushed aside with incredulity. 
Hird and Formby did not in fact appear together as planned. Instead, in 'The Black Sheep of Whitehall' (1941), a vehicle of the equally popular comedian Will Hay, she played Hay's secretary. Also in 1941 she appeared with Hay and Michael Redgrave in 'The Big Blockade', in which she played a buffet barmaid at a German railway station. She played an ATS girl in 'Next of Kin', and a horsey landgirl in 'Went the Day Well' (both 1942). Her life took on a pattern of films punctuated by repertory theatre work. She made as many as seven films a year, including 'The Foreman Went to France' (1941), 'Two Thousand Women' (1944), and 'The Courtneys of Curzon Street' (1947); and she played Dirk Bogarde's mother in 'Once a Jolly Swagman' (1948). She made over 100 films altogether. The consistent thread that clearly emerged was her success at portraying idiosyncratic younger women or women older than her real mother. She did this in 1950s films including 'The Quatermass Xperiment' (1955), 'Simon and Laura' (1955), and 'Sailor Beware!' (with Peggy Mount, 1956); in the 1960s she was in John Osborne's 'The Entertainer' (1960) and 'Rattle of a Simple Man' (1964). 
Hird's stage career also grew steadily rather than sensationally. In 1944 she appeared for the first time on the West End stage as Mrs Gaye in 'No Medals' at the Vaudeville Theatre, though her first major role did not come until 1948, when she appeared in 'Flowers for the Living'. In 1949, in the West End, she played Emmie Slee in 'The Queen Came By', and in 1960 she played the same part in the BBC television production, with her daughter Janette Scott playing Kitty Tape. Hird did not neglect even more populist ways of reaching a live audience -- though in 1966 she was reported to have turned down West End offers to play a thirty-two-week season of twice-nightly shows, 'London Laughs', at the London Palladium, appearing with the comics Harry Secombe and Jimmy Tarbuck and the popular pianist Russ Conway. 
Though she thrived in the theatre, Hird was remembered most in her own lifetime for the television series in which she starred, especially with the comic actor Freddie Frinton as her husband in 'Meet the Wife' in the 1960s, but also in 'The First Lady' (1968-9), in which she played a formidable independent councillor on a northern council controlled by Labour; 'In Loving Memory' (1969 and 1979-86), in which, as Ivy Unsworth, she ran an undertaking firm with her gormless nephew; 'Hallelujah!', in which from 1981 she was a well-intentioned and energetic but often blundering Salvation Army captain; 'Last of the Summer Wine', in which from 1986 to 2003 she played Edie Pegden, who remorselessly nags her car mechanic husband Wesley; and the religious series 'Your Songs of Praise Choice' (1977-83), which became 'Praise Be!' (1984-93). 
Hird's association with four highly individual writers helped give her career added distinction. The first was Walter Greenwood, who had become famous with his play about unemployed Lancashire cotton workers, 'Love on the Dole' (1933). In the mid-1950s Hird was in his 'Saturday Night at the Crown', first at Oldham Rep (1953), then at Blackpool, then on tour. She improvised some of the comedy as she played Ada Thorpe, a woman who was tiddly in the last act. She cut a pork pie in half, dropped the meat from one half on the floor, gave her husband the empty crust, then visibly had second thoughts, picked the meat up from the floor, and put it in his crust. Greenwood wrote 'Happy Days' (1958) for her, and in the 1970s she appeared in 'Saturday Night at the Crown' in the Perth festival in Australia, playing Ada for the thousandth time on her second night in Perth. 
The second writer to write parts that suited Hird admirably was Alan Bennett, also from northern England. She starred on television in Bennett's 'Me, I'm Afraid of Virginia Woolf' (1978), and in his 'Intensive Care' (1982). When the BBC presented a Bennett series of monologues entitled 'Talking Heads' she starred in 'Cream Cracker under the Settee' as an old woman resisting plans to put her in a home who falls, sits staring under the sofa, and finds the cracker which she sees as gratifying proof of the inefficiency of her cleaner. This won her the BAFTA best actress award in 1988, her first BAFTA award. For Bennett's second 'Talking Heads' series in 1998 she again won the BAFTA best actress award for 'Waiting for the Telegram', in which a 94-year-old woman bitterly and ramblingly regrets evading sleeping with her boyfriend on the night before he goes off to die in the First World War. 
The third writer to favour Hird's homely but far from passive playing was Deric Longden, who wrote an autobiographical play about his first wife, Diana, produced for television as 'Wide-eyed and Legless' (1993). Hird later appeared in Longden's 'Lost for Words' (1999) playing his mother, who dies after three strokes. For this she yet again won the BAFTA best actress of the year award and collected an American International Emmy award for best drama for the production's team -- while in the wheelchair she sometimes used by then because of her painful arthritis. 
The fourth writer who found Hird an elegant interpreter was Victoria Wood. In 1994, in Wood's 'Pat and Margaret', Hird was a northern woman busy dominating her son and daughter-in-law. With Eric Sykes and Dora Bryan, she played a cameo role in Wood's 'Dinnerladies' (1999), as one of the whacky parents of the main characters. 
Hird's health declined in later years, and she underwent two double hip replacements, but this did not prevent her completing seventeen years with 'Songs of Praise Choice' and 'Praise Be!' It was 'Praise Be!' that best summed up the woman she was: she often said that she supposed she had been a Christian since she was small, but had not realized it until later. For 15 million viewers, every Sunday, she interviewed people about their religious beliefs as well as presenting her favourite hymns and those of viewers. She aimed to be genuinely nice to everyone, and was appreciated both by the public and the establishment. She was appointed OBE in 1983, was made an honorary DLitt by Lancaster University in 1989, and was made a dame in 1993. Her other awards included the Pye female comedy star award (1984), the Royal Variety Club's award for outstanding contribution to the world of entertainment, the British Comedy lifetime achievement award (1998), the Help the Aged award, and the Woman of the Year award. She was the first woman member of the Royal Television Society's hall of fame (1993). In 1999 a newspaper poll dubbed her the second most popular person living, after the queen mother. None of this adulation blunted her sharp eye for the business in hand, whether for radio, television, charities, Christianity, or her daughter Janette or her grandchildren. Even in her eighties she regularly visited the Star and Garter Home at Richmond to see some of those disabled in war; she helped many other charities, and founded the Thora Hird Charitable Trust. She wrote three volumes of autobiography, 'Scene and Hird' (1976), 'Is It Thora?' (1996), and 'Not In the Diary' (2000). Her other books were 'Thora Hird's 'Praise Be!' Notebook' (1990), 'Thora Hird's 'Praise Be!' Year Book' and 'Thora Hird's 'Praise Be!' Christmas Book' (both 1991), 'Thora Hird's 'Praise Be!' Prayer Book' (1992), and 'Praise Be! I Believe' (1993). 
Hird died at Brinsworth House retirement home, Staines Road, Twickenham, Middlesex, on 15 March 2003 after a stroke, a uniquely formidable but disarming show business phenomenon whose death caused many of her fans at all social levels to experience not a remote but a highly personal awareness of loss. She was survived by her daughter, Janette, her husband having predeceased her in 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 89811


Brasher, Christopher William (1928-2003), athlete, journalist, and businessman, was born on 21 August 1928 in Georgetown, British Guiana, the son of William Kenneth Brasher, a Colonial Office engineer, and his wife, Katie Howe Brasher. His family moved to Jerusalem and then, when Brasher was seven years old, to England. He was educated at Oakley Hall preparatory school, Rugby School, and St John's College, Cambridge, where he studied geology. His interest in athletics flourished at Cambridge, where he specialized in middle- and long-distance track events, and represented both the university and the Achilles Club. He gained his athletics blue, and performed well at the 1951 world student games in Luxembourg, winning the gold medal in the 5000 metres and the silver medal in the 1500 metres. He also gained experience in international travel and outdoor exploration while at Cambridge, working as a geologist in two Arctic expeditions, to Baffin Island in 1948, and to Spitsbergen in 1949. 
On graduation in 1951 Brasher joined Mobil Oil as a management trainee, while also pursuing his promising athletics career. He concentrated on the 3000 metre steeplechase for the 1952 Helsinki Olympics, coming eleventh in the final. With a generous leave allowance from Mobil, he developed a more thorough approach to training, particularly through working with the Austrian coach Franz Stampfl. This relationship, and his links with fellow Achilles Club athletes Roger Bannister and Christopher Chataway, led Brasher to be part of the British attempt at the first sub-four minute mile. Stampfl worked with Brasher and Chataway on their pace-making skills that were to become central to Bannister's attempt on the record. In June 1953 Brasher paced Bannister in a race at Motspur Park, but Bannister's time of 4 minutes 2 seconds (which would have been a new British record) was disallowed after Brasher merely ran on the spot for the penultimate lap (thus contravening the British Amateur Athletic Board's rule that no athlete was supposed to enter a race unless he intended to complete it and try to win it). For the rest of 1953 and into 1954 the pair, with Chataway and sometimes supervised by Stampfl, trained in London, while in December 1953 Brasher took Bannister to Scotland on a climbing holiday to break the monotony of their track work. This work paid off on 6 May 1954 in an Oxford University v. Amateur Athletics Association meeting at the Iffley Road track in Oxford. Working to a careful plan, Brasher took the pace for the first half mile, reaching that mark in 1 minute 58.2 seconds before passing the pace to Chataway. Bannister won the race in the record time of 3 minutes 59.4 seconds and subsequently stressed Brasher's significance in laying the foundation for the record: 'We seemed to be going so slowly. Impatiently, I shouted 'faster'. But Brasher kept his head and did not change the pace... He made success possible' (Bannister, 165). Brasher himself later confessed that while his main role was as pace-setter for Bannister, he had dreamed of rewriting the script and trying to win the race. He also claimed that, despite the greatness of Bannister's success, he felt like 'a nonentity, a fraud... My one moment of fame, and I'd achieved it riding on somebody else's back' ('The Independent'). 
After this race Brasher switched back to the 3000 metre steeplechase as his main event. He represented England at the 1954 British empire and Commonwealth games in Vancouver, and began to make more of a mark in 1955 and 1956, in both domestic and international meetings, consistently being placed second behind John Disley. He was selected for the 3000 metre steeplechase in the 1956 Melbourne Olympics, and, despite being ranked behind both Disley and Eric Shirley, approached it as scientifically as he could, ensuring that he had the lightest spikes available, having contact lenses made in case of rain, and training with Stampfl in Australia to help his acclimatization. He also drew on his sense of determination: as Chataway said of him, 'He is five per cent ability and ninety-five per cent guts' (Rowland). He won the final in 8 minutes 41.2 seconds, breaking both the Olympic and the British record in the process, and winning Great Britain's first Olympic men's track gold medal since the Berlin Olympics of 1936. However, his moment of glory was delayed as the race officials claimed that he had obstructed the Norwegian runner Ernst Larsen during the race. Brasher lodged an appeal, which was backed by Larsen and a number of other competitors, and he had his victory confirmed three hours after breaking the tape. The delay meant that the medal ceremony took place on the following day. Brasher filled some of the time with a celebratory lunch with some British journalists, and claimed that he received his medal 'blind drunk, totally blotto, with an asinine grin on my face... breathing gin fumes over the French member of the International Olympic Committee' ('The Independent'). 
Brasher retired from track athletics after the Melbourne Olympics, and in 1957 he left Mobil to join 'The Observer' as sports editor, a post he held until 1961, when he went freelance. On 28 April 1959 he married Shirley Juliet Bloomer, a 24-year-old championship tennis player, and daughter of Arthur Hugh Bloomer, garage proprietor. They had a son and two daughters. He maintained his interest in walking and mountaineering, taking part in Sir John Hunt's expedition to Karakoram in 1962, and later became enthusiastic about the Scandinavian sport of cross-country compass running, which he helped to popularize under the name of orienteering in the UK, setting up the British Orienteering Federation in 1966. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s he distinguished himself as a journalist, through his work at the BBC on such reportage programmes as 'Tonight' and 'Man Alive', his columns for 'The Observer', and his published diaries of the Olympic Games of 1960, 1964, 1968, and 1972. In all of these he was able to combine his knowledge of sport with an eye for the social and political changes that were taking place in and around the Olympic movement. His disgust at the more nationalistic elements of the games, and later at the prevalence of performance-enhancing drugs, led him to some scathing attacks on the movement. In 1968, for example, he likened his involvement with the Olympics to a 'love affair... with this woman who transforms pure physical effort into an experience of spiritual beauty', but concluded that '[n]ow she is a raddled old tart' (Rowland). His journalism won him much praise, and he was voted British sports journalist of the year in 1968. 
In the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s and 1980s Brasher's multitalented character as 'a buccaneer of the second Elizabethan age' ('The Observer') came to the fore, as he extended the range of activities in which he was involved. He was head of general features at BBC Television from 1969 until 1972, and diversified into business in 1971 by setting up the Sweat Shop in Twickenham with his former track rival John Disley, as a supplier for runners and orienteers. This later became a successful chain. The shop acted as a distributor for a number of specialized athletics products, including Fleetfoot shoes, and Brasher designed a new lightweight walking boot, known as the Brasher Boot. Alongside these business ventures, which were later to make him a millionaire when he sold the Fleetfoot franchise to Reebok, he maintained his journalism, working as a freelance in both print and broadcast media, for which he was given his second British sports journalist of the year award, in 1976. He also built on his deep love of outdoor recreation in this period by organizing walks, races, and expeditions both in the UK and abroad, and by setting up and part funding lobbying organizations to protect tracts of countryside. His lobbying, investment, and fund-raising activities helped to protect parts of Snowdonia from development, while his work in Scotland with the John Muir Trust (founded in 1983) established a model of a community-based conservation organization. 
Despite these achievements Brasher's most notable organizational and commercial triumph of this period came in 1981, when he organized the first London marathon. He had enjoyed social running since his retirement from the track, particularly with clubs such as his local club, the Petersham-based Ranelagh Harriers, and he ran the New York city marathon in 1979. He was impressed with the scale of the race, and with the fact that it welcomed runners of all abilities, ages, and backgrounds, thus diluting the marathon's elite sporting reputation and making it a civic, multicultural occasion. Returning to London, he wrote passionately on the race in his column in 'The Observer': 'Last Sunday millions of us saw a vision of the human race happy and united, willing their fellow human beings to a pointless but wonderful victory over mental doubts and bodily frailty. I wonder whether London could stage such a festival. (Bryant, 55)' At a time of rising interest in personal fitness Brasher saw the mass marathon as 'the great suburban Everest' (ibid., 13) and, working with Disley again, set about lobbying the political and police authorities at home for a London marathon. After some resistance, and with Brasher working hard to guarantee commercial sponsorship from Gillette so that the Greater London council did not have to pay for the race, the inaugural London marathon took place in March 1981. Brasher, aged fifty-two, completed the course in 2 hours 56 minutes. The success of the first race, which made a surplus of $12,000, helped to lay the foundation for one of the world's most popular marathons, and Brasher remained involved with its organization for over a decade. This involvement was, at times, controversial, most notably over allegations that Brasher and Disley were using the marathon to promote their sports shoe business. In 1991 the journalist Duncan Campbell wrote this story up, and it was featured in the 'New Statesman' and on a Channel 4 television documentary. Brasher and Disley contested the story, and were awarded substantial damages when the assertions were taken back after a four-year legal battle. 
Brasher maintained his various interests throughout the 1990s and into the new century. He reported on the 1992 Barcelona Olympics for the 'Sunday Times', although his antipathy towards many aspects of the games kept him away from Atlanta in 1996. His business interests led him to serve as Reebok UK's chairman from 1992 until 1994, and he continued to lobby for the preservation of open spaces, helping to inaugurate the Petersham Trust. He also gained many honours in this period, including the golden boot (1990) and the golden eagle (1999) from the Outdoor Writers' Association, the Ron Pickering award for services to British athletics (2002), and a sports industry lifetime achievement award (2003). He was made CBE in 1996, having turned down a state honour during Margaret Thatcher's premiership in protest at her lack of investment in sport. He died of cancer on 28 February 2003 at his home, the White House, Chaddleworth, Berkshire, and was survived by his wife and their three children. There was a period of silence at the start of that year's London marathon as a mark of respect. 


@@@@@


doc= 89815


Kirk, Geoffrey Stephen (1921-2003), Greek scholar, was born at 11 Park Terrace, The Park, Nottingham, on 3 December 1921, the younger child and only son of Frederic Tilzey (Ferdie) Kirk, an educational administrator, and his wife, Enid Hilda, 'nee' Pentecost (1893-2002). His father, 'a dashing and affectionate figure' (Kirk, 2), had been awarded the MC in the First World War, and in mid-career became a factory manager. His mother had read natural sciences at Cambridge and worked for a time after her marriage as a technical research chemist in Nottingham. The family lived for some years at Radlett in Hertfordshire, where Kirk had his early schooling. At Rossall School (1935-40) he developed a serious interest in classics, and in 1939 he won a scholarship to Clare College, Cambridge. 
After taking part one of the classical tripos in one year (1940-41) Kirk left for service in the Royal Navy, which lasted until 1945 and which he later described as 'one of the most dramatic as well as the most fulfilling epochs of my life' (Kirk, 195). After serving with coastal forces in Britain, he decided to try for a posting to the eastern Mediterranean: 'my contact with the Classics so far, at school and at Cambridge, had made a curiously deep impression... I loved the idea of ancient Greece and had a romantic desire to have a hand in liberating its modern successor: all very Byronic, in a modified middle-class sort of way. (Kirk, 77-8)' He served in the Levant schooner flotilla, eventually captaining one of the caiques that carried out dangerous missions in occupied waters, including several landings in Greece. He much later published a memoir which gave a detailed account of these experiences, but made no mention of the award of the DSC in 1945. 
After demobilization Kirk returned to Cambridge to take part two of the classical tripos; the teachers who meant most to him were Nicholas Hammond and F. H. (Harry) Sandbach, and his distinguished first in 1946 earned him the offer of a research fellowship at Trinity Hall. As a research fellow he spent two years working abroad. He had already identified his main field of study as pre-Socratic philosophy, but he grasped the opportunity to extend his range. At the British School at Athens in 1947-8 he wrote a long article on ships in early Greek vase painting, his first publication. He spent 1949-50 as a Commonwealth Fund fellow at Harvard, and the links he formed then with American classical scholarship remained strong for the rest of his career: he returned to Harvard as a guest lecturer in 1958, held a chair at Yale in 1965-70, and was Sather professor at Berkeley in 1968-9 and Mellon professor at Tulane in 1979. In 1950 he married Barbara Helen Traill, an artist who shared his interest in buildings, furniture, and fine art. They had one daughter, Lydia, who became a cathedral mason. His first spell at Cambridge in a permanent post (as a teaching fellow of Trinity Hall) lasted from 1950 to 1965; from 1951 he concurrently held a series of university appointments (as assistant lecturer, then lecturer from 1952 and reader from 1961). This was rapid promotion at a period when a lectureship was the career grade. Election as a fellow of the British Academy in 1959 and the award of a LittD in 1965 reflected the impact made by his publications, notably 'Heraclitus: the Cosmic Fragments' (1954), 'The Presocratic Philosophers' (with J. E. Raven, 1958), and 'The Songs of Homer' (1962), which together established his international reputation. 
In 1971 Kirk took up a chair of Greek at Bristol, where for two years he overlapped with his old mentor Nicholas Hammond. This appointment was soon followed by election to the regius chair of Greek at Cambridge, Kirk's final post, which he held from 1974 to 1982, with a fellowship at Trinity. In 1979, as president of the Hellenic Society, he led a delegation to Greece to celebrate the society's centenary. He was the driving force in ensuring that the scattered activities of the classics faculty were brought together in a new building on a single site, creating an academic community for the growing numbers of graduate students. The move to Cambridge also coincided with upheavals in Kirk's personal life: in 1975 his first marriage was dissolved, and on 4 September that year he married Kirsten Oda Ricks, the daughter of Harald Jensen, corn merchant, and former wife of Christopher Ricks, later professor of English at Cambridge; he thus became stepfather to her four children. They lived for some years, both during Kirk's tenure of the chair and after he retired, at Woodbridge in Suffolk, where he kept up his interest in sailing; later they moved to Bath. The last major achievement of his academic career was the large-scale 'Iliad' commentary in six volumes (1985-93), of which he was general editor, as well as the author of the first two volumes. The project brought out Kirk's capacity for strategic thinking: Nicholas Richardson, one of his collaborators, later praised his 'combination of firm editorial policy with generous flexibility' ('The Guardian', 5 May 2003). 
Kirk was a highly creative person who could stimulate the intellectual energy and imagination of others as well as doing pioneering work himself, particularly in his younger days, when he was remembered as coming as a 'breath of fresh air' to post-war Cambridge (private information). He was adventurous and wide-ranging in his intellectual interests: his work on myth, for example (particularly 'Myth: its Meaning and Function in Ancient and Other Cultures', 1970), showed how much he owed to anthropology, and he had a strong interest in diverse oral traditions. He had a remarkable gift for sensing what were the most significant areas of research and for joining up scholarly expertise across the disciplines -- philosophical, archaeological, literary, linguistic -- in such a way as to make his ideas accessible to less informed readers. He wrote with great clarity, making a point of avoiding a heavily erudite style, but showing acute critical judgement. 
A handsome man with a memorable speaking voice, great vitality, and a wonderful wit, Kirk could be a charmingly irreverent colleague, and he made many friends. His dislike for pomposity and self-importance was often invigorating, but his sardonic humour and impatience with those he found boring or pretentious could also make him combative in personal relations. In print he managed his aggression admirably and had no taste for pedantic polemic, but he did not always show the same patience face to face, and this may have been one of the reasons why he never felt a deep vocation for teaching. Despite his many achievements there was a curious ambivalence in his view of himself, partly arising from self-doubt about his role as an academic, and reinforced perhaps by his wartime experience of a different way of living. In retirement he suffered increasingly from depressive illness, and his later years were often stressful and unsettled. He died on 10 March 2003 at Copper Beeches nursing home, Heath Mount, Rake, West Sussex, of heart failure. He was survived by his second wife, Kirsten, his daughter from his first marriage, and his four stepchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 89820


Miller, Sir (Oswald) Bernard (1904-2003), department store chairman, was born at 16 Victoria Road, Fulham, London, on 25 March 1904, the son of Arthur Miller, a park keeper and later civil servant, and his wife, Margaret Jane, 'nee' Jones. He was educated at Sloane School, Chelsea, and then Jesus College, Oxford, where he won the Stanhope prize in 1925 for his work on Robert Harley, earl of Oxford (published the same year) and graduated with a first-class degree in 1927. He considered a career in teaching or the civil service (having passed the entrance exam) but instead joined John Lewis, the London department store. 
The invitation to join John Lewis had come from Spedan Lewis, the son of the founder of the business, who was about to launch a business partnership (an experiment in profit-sharing and industrial organization). Miller, who had an interest in Owenite ideals, found Lewis's partnership congenial. On first meeting, he was also entranced by Lewis's 'absolute dynamism', and later recalled: 'At times one thought that this man must be crazy, but one was swept along' (Macpherson, 21, 24). Miller began his career on the shop floor, selling silk, an experience which provided a taste of department store work. In this role he met the patriarch himself, John Lewis, whose animus towards his son's policy of employing graduates led Miller to don a disguise whenever the elder Lewis visited the store. Within two years Miller was helping Spedan Lewis create the partnership's new constitution. Miller had a dual role as company secretary and as financial controller of the business. On 25 August 1931 he married Jessica Rose Marie ffoulkes (died 1985), a 24-year-old buyer at John Lewis and daughter of Arthur Fisher ffoulkes, medical doctor. They had three sons, two of whom were to join the partnership. 
In 1935 Miller became a director. While Spedan Lewis concentrated on refining the partnership's constitution, Miller handled the running of the business. During the Second World War his responsibilities broadened, as he became the partnership's general inspector. He had to deal with bomb damage to the flagship Oxford Street store and the absorption of the ailing Selfridge Provincial Stores Group (composed of fifteen stores and 4000 employees). In the early 1950s the partnership countered the impact of the Korean War by buying imported goods at high prices, but this later backfired when the business was left with a vast stock of overpriced goods. The staff bonus -- a key feature of the partnership -- was cancelled until the mid-1950s, and pay cuts were introduced. Against this difficult backdrop Spedan Lewis crystallized his ideas for the irrevocable Second Trust Partnership in 1950, when he announced formally that Miller would succeed him as chairman in 1955. 
Miller marked his accession as chairman with a programme of rebuilding at the Oxford Street store and with the first purpose-built Waitrose supermarket in London. He acquired a printing works for textiles and introduced computerized stock control. What should have been a smooth transition, however, was upset by the actions of the partnership's founder. Spedan Lewis was unable to adjust to his diminished role in the business and fought a sustained rearguard action against the policies of his successor. Miller was subject to a campaign of criticism through the partnership's 'Gazette', in which Lewis described his protege as unintelligent and obstinate. Miller endured the campaign patiently and remained on friendly terms with Lewis, secure in the knowledge that the partnership's council would vote down any attempt by Lewis to take up the reins again. 
After the late 1950s the partnership's profitability grew. Profit distributions returned in 1955 (when 8 per cent was paid to the partners -- that is, the employees), and such distributions were to average 13.5 per cent during Miller's chairmanship. He continued to modernize the constitution of the partnership to increase managerial accountability, and under him the Oxford Street store continued to develop. He also led a major move into supermarkets, via the Waitrose chain. Between 1950 and 1972 (when Miller retired and relinquished the chairmanship to Spedan's nephew Peter Lewis) the partnership's performance was impressive: the number of partners grew from 12,000 to 20,000 and sales expanded from $28m to $140m, while the number of Waitrose supermarkets grew from three to forty-three. This performance led economists and social commentators to ponder the impact of the partnership's business philosophy. That the partnership under Spedan Lewis and Miller was a success could not be gainsaid; on the other hand, it was also a period of expansion for other retail businesses. 
Miller replaced Spedan Lewis's intimidating and driven management style with his own brand of quiet conviction. Like Lewis, however, he cut a conservative and well-groomed figure, had no interest in amassing riches, and was devoted to the partnership ideal. He served on a number of government bodies (such as the Monopolies Commission, from 1961 to 1969), and was pro-chancellor of Southampton University from 1983 to 1990. His knighthood in 1967 was for public service. His liking for the arts was shown in his chairmanship of the Glyndebourne Festival Society. He died of cancer of the prostate at Sutton Manor nursing home, Sutton Scotney, Hampshire, on 23 February 2003. He was survived by his three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 89821


Needham, Roger Michael (1935-2003), computer scientist, was born on 9 February 1935 at 262 Vicarage Road, King's Heath, Birmingham, the only child of Leonard William Needham ('c'.1905-1973), a university lecturer in chemistry, and his wife, Phyllis Mary, 'nee' Baker ('c'.1904-1976), both of 99 Middle Park Road, Selly Oak, Birmingham. His parents met as chemistry students at the University of Birmingham. He was brought up in Sheffield and educated at Doncaster grammar school. He went to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1953 as a scholar to study mathematics. In his own words, Needham discovered 'five years of mathematics is too much for anybody' (personal knowledge), so in his third year he switched to philosophy. This early training in marshalling arguments engendered the clarity and precision that became the hallmark of his publications and lectures. As an undergraduate Needham met Karen Ida Boalth Sparck Jones (1935-2007), whom he married on 10 June 1958; she was the daughter of Alfred Owen Jones, college lecturer. Both had an interest in language which led them to work together on 'automatic language processing' at the Cambridge Language Research Unit. As his introduction to computing Needham took the diploma in numerical analysis and automatic computing in 1957 at the Cambridge University Mathematical (later Computer) Laboratory. He obtained his PhD in 1961 with a thesis on automatic information classification and retrieval; this was the foundation for his lifelong interest in computer algorithms and data structures. While research students he and Karen built their own single-storey wooden house in Coton, Cambridge, in which they lived for most of their married life; they also bought their first boat. 
Following his PhD Needham joined the team working under Maurice Wilkes building a successor to the early EDSAC (electronic delay storage automatic calculator) computers. The project was a collaboration with International Computers and Tabulators Ltd (ICT, later International Computers Ltd, or ICL), and was based on a modified design of the Atlas computer which became known as TITAN (Atlas 2 in its commercial form). TITAN was initially intended to operate as a 'batch processing system', but early in the project Wilkes visited the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he saw an example of 'time sharing', where users worked interactively at online terminals. Wilkes recognized this as the way of the future and returned fired with enthusiasm for having TITAN adopt this model. The task was challenging, requiring a complete revision of the operating system design. Needham made a major contribution to this project, carrying it to a successful conclusion; this enabled TITAN to provide the Cambridge University central computing service through to the early 1970s and established Needham as a leading operating systems researcher. The scheme he invented that made it impossible for user passwords to be stolen from the system remained generally in use on contemporary systems at the time of his death. 
By the early 1970s Needham had become Wilkes's right-hand man, being made reader in 1973, succeeding Wilkes as laboratory head on his retirement in 1980, and becoming professor of computer systems in 1981. The period from 1975 to 1990 was a golden age: the Computer Laboratory grew in strength, funding was adequate, and government involvement in academic matters was benign. Needham gave vigorous leadership to a series of projects and through them mentored many generations of research students who went on to hold significant positions in academia and industry. First came the Cambridge CAP computer and its operating system, and then the Cambridge model distributed system based on the pioneering Cambridge ring local area network developed by Wilkes and David Wheeler. This project developed a very early example of client-server computing, foreshadowing later 'thin-client' systems. From 1977 to 1984 Needham established a close relationship with the Xerox research centre in Palo Alto, California, working as a visiting consultant. Palo Alto was the cradle for much of the development of personal computers and networks. Needham worked on the design of file servers, large-scale electronic mail systems, and then the research for which he was best known, the design of cryptographic protocols for authentication. He first published on this topic with Michael Schroeder in 1978, continuing with seminal work on using mathematical logic for showing the correctness of authentication protocols in collaboration with Mike Burrows and Martin Abadi, at that time working at the DEC systems research centre in California. 
As a senior academic Needham was drawn into the university and wider activities. He served on university and national bodies like the University Grants Committee. He became the first Cambridge University pro-vice-chancellor in 1996. Working with the vice-chancellor, Alec Broers, Needham developed his existing role in fostering strong relationships between Cambridge University and industry, becoming known as one of the 'godfathers' of the economic growth of the Cambridge region as a centre for hi-tech research and development. But while he enjoyed these activities he hankered for new challenges, and mindful of the university's retiring age he happily seized the opportunity to set up and run Microsoft's first overseas research laboratory in Cambridge in 1997. As the first managing director of Microsoft Research Ltd he set the tone of the laboratory which continued after his death: long-range research, done by the best people given a free hand. 
Needham's work was widely recognized. He became a fellow of the Royal Society in 1985 and of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 1993 -- he particularly enjoyed the latter, having always regarded himself as a practical man. He was a fellow of the British Computer Society and, from 1994, of the Association for Computing Machinery. He won the Institution of Electrical Engineers' Faraday medal in 1998. He was appointed CBE in 2001. He was a fellow of Wolfson College, Cambridge, from 1965 until his death. 
Needham was a plain speaker, an entertaining conversationalist with a puckish sense of humour, and, for someone with his breadth of knowledge, a man remarkably tolerant of those with less understanding. Outside work his passions were reading, sailing, and politics. He was a left-leaning South Cambridgeshire district councillor for many years. As Needham's career developed so too did his wife Karen's: she continued in the area of language and information processing. They took great interest in each other's research, discussing projects together and commenting on each other's papers and lectures. Visiting the Needhams' home was always a delight, for the hospitality and discourse offered and to share in their pleasure in books, old and contemporary, on many subjects, and in their varied and intriguing objects, some collected and others Karen's artistic handiwork. 
Needham was diagnosed with cancer late in 2002 and died at his home, 9 Long Lane, Willingham, Cambridge, on 1 March 2003. He was survived by his wife. They had no children. After his death Microsoft sponsored an annual Roger Needham prize, to be awarded by the British Computer Society for a distinguished research contribution in computer science by a young UK-based researcher. As a memorial the University of Cambridge named the building occupied by the Microsoft Cambridge research laboratory the Roger Needham Building. This news was given to Needham by Sir Alec Broers at an event organized to celebrate Needham's fifty years' association with Cambridge, attended by many of his friends and colleagues, a few weeks before his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 89822


Faith, Adam (1940-2003), singer and actor, was born Terence Nelhams Wright on 23 June 1940 at 4 Churchfield Road East, Acton, London, the third of five children of Alfred Richard (Alf) Wright (later Nelhams), coach driver, and Ellen May (Nell) Nelhams, cleaner. He was brought up on a council estate in Acton and attended John Perryn Secondary Modern School. As a teenager he supplemented the family income with a paper round and by helping his mother clean factories in the evening. In 1955 Terence Nelhams saw James Dean in 'Rebel Without a Cause' and copied his clothes and mannerisms. Having left school at the age of fifteen he found employment as a messenger boy for the Rank Organisation and moved into the cutting rooms. 
Following the popularity of Lonnie Donegan's 'Rock Island Line', some workmates formed a skiffle group, the Worried Men. Nelhams was the lead singer and they performed at the pivotal 2 I's coffee bar in Old Compton Street. When the BBC broadcast a live edition of the teenage programme '6.5 Special' from the 2 I's the producer Jack Good recognized Nelhams's potential. It was Good who suggested that Nelhams call himself Adam Faith, combining the names of two of Good's friends, Adam Freemantle and Nicholas Faith. Faith prepared for his first solo TV appearance by lying in the bath in his jeans so they would be skin-tight. When the format of '6.5 Special' changed Faith became a resident on the revamped programme, 'Drumbeat!', performing rock and roll with the sullen look of the day. However, when he smiled wistfully he entered young girls' hearts and his singles made the charts. 
'What Do You Want', written by Johnny Worth (from 'Drumbeat''s resident vocal group, the Raindrops) and arranged by John Barry, was released by EMI's Parlophone label in November 1959. The presiding influence was Buddy Holly's 'It Doesn't Matter Anymore', with John Barry emulating its pizzicato strings. It topped the UK charts for three weeks. The team followed it with another number one, 'Poor Me', and a number two, 'Someone Else's Baby'. The B-side of that third single, 'Big Time', about a London boy wanting to be successful, was written by Lionel Bart. Bart knew that making records was about communication: 'Adam had an incredible voice. He could just about make it as a singer but his voice was very distinctive, especially the way he said 'bay-beh'. Everybody thought they could sing as well as he could, and that's why he made it' (private information). Fans copied Faith's brushed-forward hairstyle, and he appeared in a film set in Soho, 'Beat Girl' (1960), although he subsequently called it 'a disastrous teenage exploitation movie which bore little or no relation to Soho or the youth it was supposed to represent' (private information). The score included an atmospheric top ten single, 'Made You', which was banned by the BBC for its sexual connotations. Faith showed his dramatic skills in 'Never Let Go' (1960) and fans squirmed when a villainous Peter Sellers shut his hand in a car door. 
In December 1960, against the advice of his management, Faith appeared on the BBC's interrogative television programme, 'Face to Face'. It was anticipated that the host, John Freeman, would expose his shallowness, but Faith held his own, claimed that Dvorak and Sibelius were his favourite composers and 'The Catcher in the Rye' his favourite book, and, in an astonishing revelation for its time, not only admitted to pre-marital sex but said he enjoyed it. Faith commented: 'The BMA had a committee to look at the morals of today's youth and they asked me to appear before them. They thought I was the Voice of Youth but I could only speak for myself. It prompted the BBC to get Ludovic Kennedy to chair a discussion between myself and the Archbishop of York. The public was surprised that a working-class pop star could talk. (private information)' Another reaction was even more surprising: Faith's parents got married so that they would not be an embarrassment to him. 
Although he had a string of hit records, the quality of Faith's work was erratic. The nadir was his 1960 Christmas record, 'Lonely Pup (in a Christmas Shop)'. He also rejected good material, including Lonnie Donegan's 'Have a Drink on Me' and Mitch Murray's 'How Do You Do It?' In 1962 Faith copied Eden Kane's hully-gully rhythm for the top ten single 'Don't That Beat All', but he was losing ground. At first he was outselling his new labelmates, the Beatles, but 'Baby Take a Bow' was feeble compared with 'Love Me Do'. He changed his style, working with a beat group, the Roulettes, and a new songwriter, Chris Andrews, in the hope of forestalling the inevitable decline. 'The First Time' and 'We Are in Love' were good examples of British beat and Andrews wrote an entire album for Faith, 'On the Move' (1964). The same year Faith made his best record when he covered Burt Bacharach's 'Message to Martha', which became his last top twenty hit. Faith then moved into cabaret but hated it: 'I didn't think that I was giving value for money. The music, the clubs, the environment didn't appeal to me and there was no way I could do it justice. I told my manager, 'I'll work when I have to but I'm never going to sing again'. (private information)' Although Faith was a long way from being the best of Britain's rock and roll singers, he was easily the best actor among them. His performance alongside Donald Sinden in 'Mix Me a Person' (1961) showed his potential, and in the late 1960s he went into repertory and learnt his craft. He was supported by the dancer Jacqueline (Jackie) Irving, whom he married on 19 August 1967. She was the daughter of William Henry Irving, aircraft skinner, and at the time of their marriage was aged twenty-four. Their son, Heathcliff, died within hours of being born; their daughter, Katya, was born in 1970. In 1968 Faith did well in a touring version of 'Night Must Fall' with Dame Sybil Thorndike. His performance as 'Billy Liar' in the stage version of the film, in 1969, prompted its authors, Keith Waterhouse and Willis Hall, to create the television series 'Budgie' (1971-2), in which Faith played a small-time London crook living on his wits but always outmanoeuvred by Charlie Endell, played by Iain Cuthbertson. The phrase, 'Leave it out, Hazel', entered the language. In 1973 Faith suffered serious injuries in a car crash. He was told he would be left with a limp, but with typical resolve he regained his normal stance. The psychological effect was more damaging: apart from an appearance in the David Essex film 'Stardust' (1974) he was reluctant to act for some years. 
Faith was also successful as a manager. Dave Courtney, who had played drums for Faith, asked him to vet a contract for a new artist, Leo Sayer. When Faith heard Sayer's songs, he tore up the contract and said, 'Dave, you and I are going to manage this boy. He's too good to give to anybody else' (private information). To finance the venture, Faith negotiated a deal for a comeback album with Warner Brothers. He made 'I Survive' (1974) with just half of his allocated budget (but with guest appearances from Paul and Linda McCartney) and used the remainder to finance Sayer. To save costs, Faith held business meetings in the tea-room at Fortnum and Mason's. Courtney and Faith produced Sayer's first hits -- 'The Show Must Go On' and 'One Man Band' -- at Roger Daltrey's studio, and Daltrey was so impressed that he recorded Sayer's 'Giving It All Away', a top ten record produced by Faith. Daltrey and Faith acted together in 'McVicar' (1980). Faith eventually made more money from managing Sayer than he had from his own singing career, but the relationship ended in acrimony, Sayer suing Faith for mismanagement and winning large damages in an out-of-court settlement. 
In 1978 Faith organized an all-star album, 'Puttin' On the Style', to resuscitate the career of his friend Lonnie Donegan. In 1983 he toured in a revival of 'Alfie', directed by Alan Parker. During the early 1980s he also presented the first video review programme, 'Video Video', for Channel 4, and conducted an affair with the tennis star Chris Evert, which almost wrecked his marriage. In 1986 he had open-heart surgery for blocked arteries, but he recovered quickly and the following year went into a West End musical, 'Budgie' (based on the television series), which had been created for him. Its lyricist, Don Black, commented, 'When a musical doesn't work, it doesn't work and we never got the book right. It was too violent, and it was about abortions and the seedy low-life in Soho. People preferred '42nd Street' and the big blockbusters' (private information). 
Faith gained something of a reputation for investing his money wisely, and by the late 1980s was writing financial columns for the 'Daily Mail' and 'Mail on Sunday'. In one infamous column he claimed he could make anyone a millionaire in six months. With a financial adviser, Roger Levitt, he formed a company to look after the money of celebrity friends. Much to Faith's embarrassment, Levitt was arrested for fraud in 1990, and Faith himself was discredited and lost an estimated $7 million. He lost further large sums in the Lloyd's insurance scandals of the early 1990s. In 1999 his digital station, the Money Channel, attracted few viewers. The station closed with debts of $32 million and Faith was declared bankrupt in 2002. 
Meanwhile Faith's acting career continued. In 1992-4 he starred alongside Zoe Wanamaker in the BBC drama series 'Love Hurts', which ran for three series. He said his character 'changed my relationship with the public. For the first time, they were looking at me as a man instead of a young pop kid who was growing old' (private information). A touring production of 'A Chorus Line' was successful and he wrote his autobiography, 'Acts of Faith', in 1996. In 2002 he appeared in a BBC comedy series, 'The House that Jack Built', with Gillian Taylforth. He was touring in 'Love and Marriage' and considering a further series of 'Love Hurts' and concert appearances when he died from a heart attack at the North Staffordshire Royal Infirmary, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, on 8 March 2003. He was survived by his wife, Jackie, and daughter, Katya. 


@@@@@


doc= 89831


Sheene, Barry Stephen Frank (1950-2003), racing motorcyclist, was born on 11 September 1950 at the Royal Free Hospital, St Pancras, London, the only son and younger of the two children of Frank Sheene and his wife, Iris Ada, 'nee' Claley. Sheene's childhood home was a flat at the Royal College of Surgeons, where his father was the resident engineer. He attended St Martin-in-the-Fields School in London. He was not academic, and left at the age of fifteen without any qualifications. He was steeped in the culture of motorcycle racing from an early age. At the Royal College of Surgeons his father, a former motorcycle racer himself, had the use of a workshop, in which he exercised his considerable skills as a motorcycle tuner. Through his father Sheene became accustomed to the racing life while still a young teenager. At the age of seventeen he test rode his father's machines. His natural talent for high speed riding was immediately obvious, and racing became inevitable. He was soon winning races. 
In 1970 Sheene bought at great expense an ex-works Suzuki 125 machine on which, as a private entrant racing against works teams, he came a close second in the 1971 125 cc world championship. In motorcycle racing 'works' or 'factory' bikes are owned, run, and continuously developed by their manufacturers, usually large corporations. Works bikes tend to be very much better than privately entered bikes, and generally the most talented riders are employed to ride them. The difference between works bikes and privateer bikes was significant to Sheene's career. In 1972 he became a works rider for Yamaha in the 250 cc and 350 cc classes. It was a disappointing year. In 1973 he became a works rider for Suzuki. That year he won the world F750 championship. 
Sheene made himself famous far beyond the confines of motorcycle racing. He was before his time in seeing and taking the benefits of celebrity. A spectacular accident in 1975 at the Daytona Speedway in Florida played a significant part in his fame. He suffered serious injuries in the accident, in which he was flung from his machine at about 180 m.p.h. Film of the accident was broadcast around the world. It appeared impossible that he could have survived. But six weeks after the accident Sheene returned to racing, still injured. By the end of 1977 he was twice -- in consecutive years -- world champion in the blue riband 500 cc class of motorcycle road racing. The accident at Daytona, and Sheene's extraordinary will to race again, caught the public imagination. By 1977 he was internationally famous, and hugely popular. He emphasized his working-class origins and spoke with a cockney accent. He became a media personality, featuring in advertisements and making frequent television appearances. 
Sheene was a serious challenger for the 500 cc world championship for several years after 1977, but he did not win it again. Opinion differed on the reasons for this. His performance in 1978 was inconsistent, which he put down to a viral illness he had contracted. By the late 1970s a wave of talented American riders had come to the 500 cc world championship. They brought new techniques to road racing derived from American dirt track racing. Some claimed that this gave them an advantage over Sheene. In 1979 Sheene's relations with Suzuki became strained, and he rode a Yamaha for the next three seasons. The Japanese factory was slow to let him have works bikes, and when he did get them they were always a step behind the works Yamahas ridden by his great rival, the American Kenny Roberts. 
In 1982 Sheene's Yamahas were good enough to make the world championship a real possibility. But in July of that year he had another horrifying accident, at the Silverstone circuit. He rode at about 165 m.p.h. straight into a fallen machine, of which he had no warning. He nearly died. Among many other injuries, his legs were virtually severed from his body. His legs were rebuilt using metal buttresses, plates, and screws. Soon after the accident he announced that he would race again. He made a determined recovery; by November 1982 he was walking unaided. Nevertheless he never got works bikes again. The factories were sceptical that he could overcome his injuries; they underestimated him. He had some spectacular rides in 1983 and 1984 on privateer Suzukis. In 1984, on a very underpowered machine, and having lost time at the start through mechanical problems, he took a brilliant third place in the South African grand prix. It may have been his best ever ride. He struggled on through 1984, but with only ever more outdated privateer bikes available for 1985, he retired at the end of the season. By then he had become a multiple British champion. He was appointed MBE in 1978. 
The search for speed from bikes such as Sheene raced made their power delivery abrupt, and the bikes themselves very difficult to ride. The bikes were also prone to seizing, their engines failing and locking up, often causing the rider to crash. There was a knife edge between riding the bikes fast enough to be competitive, and riding them too fast and crashing -- usually at speed. Sheene rode on the edge for years. His invariably competitive performances throughout his career put him among the greatest ever motorcycle road racers. After almost thirty years his fastest grand prix lap -- in the 1977 Belgian race, at an average speed of 135 m.p.h. -- had not been bettered; motorcycle circuits became slower (and safer) in the years after that. 
Falling from a motorcycle at high speed is always dangerous, but during Sheene's career many of the circuits on which he raced still lacked basic safety precautions. Riders died unnecessarily; too many others were seriously injured. Sheene was influential in improving riders' safety. He pressed for safer circuits and for improvements to existing circuits. The Imatra circuit in Finland, based substantially on public roads, involved riders traversing a railway crossing at high speed. Sheene was vocal in his criticism of such circuits. He was concerned to improve riders' personal protection, devising an early form of the body armour that later saved many riders from serious injury. His interest in improving conditions for riders went so far as destroying the unsanitary toilet block at the 1977 Finnish grand prix. The organizers had refused to build new ones. Sheene and others, presumably out of exuberance, poured high octane fuel into the toilets. Only Sheene had the nerve to ignite it. He expected a fire but was unprepared for the explosion which ripped the building apart. Fortunately no one was injured; improved facilities were quickly constructed. 
Sheene faced real danger with cheerful optimism. That shone out particularly in a television film by the documentary film-maker Frank Cvitanovich, made at the time of the Daytona crash. In the film Sheene appeared almost to believe himself immortal, and destined for glory. His youthful self-belief was very appealing. He cultivated a playboy image for himself, which in the 1970s made him glamorous. But in reality he had his feet firmly on the ground. While he enjoyed his wealth, owning large homes, a series of expensive cars, and light aircraft, he always had a stable home life. He kept very close to his parents, and quite early in his career he formed a long-term relationship with the glamorous model Stephanie McLean, whom he married on 16 February 1984. She was the daughter of Frederick Harrison, transport manager. There were two children of the marriage. 
In the late 1980s Sheene emigrated with his family to Queensland, Australia, where he was a successful television commentator and property developer. He had declared that he would not return to racing, and for many years he held to that. But in 1998 he began participating in races for classic bikes. Although the bikes were based on old designs, the racing was fast and serious. Sheene was still highly competitive, beating talented younger riders on many occasions. In 2002 he was diagnosed with cancer of the oesophagus and upper stomach. He refused chemotherapy or invasive surgery, instead trying a number of alternative therapies. In media interviews he made light of his illness. In September 2002, while suffering from cancer, he won the last race he rode. Among others he defeated Wayne Gardner, the 500 cc world champion in 1987. Sheene remained a brave and passionate racer to the end. He died from his illness at his home in Carrara, on the Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia, on 10 March 2003. He was survived by his wife, Stephanie, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89834


Smithson, Peter Denham (1923-2003), architect, writer, and teacher, was born on 18 September 1923 at 14 Lambton Road, Stockton-on-Tees, the only child of William Blenkiron Smithson (1888-1972), commercial traveller in drapery, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Denham. He studied at the grammar school in Stockton-on-Tees and the King's College School of Architecture (1939-42 and 1945-8) in Newcastle upon Tyne, then part of Durham University. During the latter part of the Second World War he served with the Royal Engineers and Queen Victoria's Own Madras Sappers and Miners, before returning to Newcastle as a student and then a studio assistant. He attended the Royal Academy Schools in 1948-9 under Albert Richardson, when he discovered the work of Mies van der Rohe. 


The Smithsons married on 18 August 1949. They joined the schools division of the London county council the same year and rented a flat in Bloomsbury from the architect and critic Theo Crosby. In May 1950 they won a competition for a secondary school at Hunstanton, which enabled them to start their own practice. The school's plan was traditional and compact, a contrast to looser forms then popular, having a central hall between two courtyards, around which were set classrooms and laboratories. The welded steel frame, then novel in Britain, was designed on the plastic principle that there is no weak point. Mies and the golden section are unmistakable influences. Hunstanton was also the built manifestation of Peter Smithson's early fascination with Renaissance central planning as expounded by Rudolf Wittkower in public lectures in 1948, and seen in the couple's unplaced competition entry for rebuilding Coventry Cathedral in 1950-51. The Smithsons insisted that Hunstanton School be photographed empty, which highlights the startling quality of the exposed steel ceilings and pipework, and a Braithwaite water tank which prompted a fashion for industrial components such as patent glazing. The school was hated by most teachers, and by architects committed to providing for occupants' needs rather than architectural niceties. 
By the time of Hunstanton's completion in 1954 the Smithsons preferred brick, concrete, and timber to steel for their natural finishes and greater availability. They planned a house in Fitzrovia, with materials left 'as found', including a corrugated iron roof and unplastered internal walls. Peter had christened himself Brutus at college, a name which stuck with his contemporaries although it was hated by Alison. It was while designing this house that they conceived the New Brutalist movement, perhaps as a response to articles in the 'Architectural Review' (1947-8) on Swedish architecture which described a 'New Empiricism'. The term first appeared in a feature on the Smithsons' unbuilt house in 'Architectural Design' for December 1953, and was widely adopted when Crosby published a 'manifesto' by the Smithsons in the same magazine in January 1955. Yet the two sides were closer than is commonly supposed, and the Smithsons emphasized the work of Frank Lloyd Wright and Japanese timber traditions. The term was rapidly debased to become associated with heavy concrete structures alien to most of their work. After a visit to Japan in 1960 the Smithsons' work softened further, and they increasingly saw buildings as neutral spaces to be filled by the occupants' possessions. Their domestic work included converting houses in Limerston Street and Gilston Road, London, as offices and accommodation for themselves and their three children, Simon ('b'. 1954), Samantha ('b'. 1957), and (Alison) Soraya ('b'. 1964). 
Hunstanton's success heralded the Smithsons as 'the bright young hopes of the profession' ('Architects' Journal', 21 Jan 1954). Yet only limited success followed: a brick house in Watford for Derek Sugden (1954-6), and small additions for other friends. As a weekend retreat for themselves, they rebuilt a farmworker's cottage to classical proportions, its new and reused materials honestly expressed. Perhaps it was their reputation for being 'difficult', as well as a desire to keep their office small, which kept them short of work. Yet clients found them efficient and solicitous of their needs. Peter Smithson taught at London's Architectural Association from 1955, becoming master of the fifth year in 1957-60. Much of the Smithsons' renown came through competition entries, their radical ideas realized only a decade later -- often in the work of others. Their entry for housing at Golden Lane in the City of London (1952) introduced the concept of 'streets in the sky', which they considered more neighbourly and more akin to traditional housing than the newly fashionable point blocks. By the time the Smithsons realized a version at Robin Hood Gardens, Docklands (1968-72), the Greater London council imposed a different brief, fashions had changed, and the building was vandalized. For Sheffield University in 1953 they put lecture halls into a separate block from the faculty buildings, linked by a raised walkway, as became common in British universities in the 1960s. The Smithsons also produced grandiose town-planning projects. Their ideas on high-level roads, pedestrian walkways, and spine buildings were influential through Peter's teaching, and included a third-placed entry for remodelling central Berlin in 1957-8. Their association with such ideas tended to overshadow their more sensitive ideas for ground-level routes in historic cities, including Cambridge and Jerusalem, and imaginative landscaping such as at Robin Hood Gardens. 
The Smithsons' entry for the competition for Churchill College, Cambridge (1958), led to their largest built commission: offices for 'The Economist' magazine in St James's Street, London, with a bank and extensions to Boodle's Club (1959-63). Each element was realized as a separate tower arranged around a new, raised piazza. The complex has a serene quality thanks to its careful proportions and expensive stone finishes, and also succeeds as a new piece of townscape within a historic setting, linking new and old elements. A similar single tower at St Hilda's College, Oxford (1966-8), provided study bedrooms concealed by timber screens 'like a yashmak' to create 'a girl's place' (Vidotto, 128). The Smithsons lost two important jobs in the mid-1960s, which seems to have limited their careers decisively. They turned down a commission for offices for 'The Times', offered through 'The Economist''s editor, Geoffrey Crowther, because they were invited in late 1963 to build a British embassy in Brasilia. The Smithsons produced a linear, low design suited to a hot climate, but cutbacks and policy changes led the government to terminate the project in 1968. 
In the early 1950s the Smithsons were associated with the Independent Group, based around the Institute of Contemporary Arts in Dover Street. An article for the Royal College of Art in 1956 shows their interest in Americana and ephemera, which extended from advertisements to a friendship with Charles and Ray Eames and a fascination for Christmas cards and flags. They worked with the sculptor Eduardo Paolozzi and the photographer Nigel Henderson on the exhibitions 'Parallel of Life and Art' in 1953 and 'Patio and Pavilion' in 1956, the latter a contribution to the 'This is Tomorrow' show at the Whitechapel Art Gallery which sought to link art and architecture. A House of the Future for the Ideal Home Exhibition of 1956 offered innovative furniture and appliance designs as well as space-age outfits for its actor-occupants. 
The Smithsons were the chief British representatives of the post-war generation who set out to reform the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne, or CIAM, a platform for modern architects founded in 1928 and subsequently dominated by Le Corbusier and Siegfried Giedion. In 1959 CIAM folded, to be replaced by Team 10, a small ideas forum of like-minded architects from across western Europe that included the Smithsons among its core members. These discussions inspired their interest in 'mat' building or neutral, flexible space, seen in Brasilia and their later work at Bath University (1978-90), coinciding with Peter's years as visiting professor there. In return Team 10 introduced the Smithsons to an international audience, which was extended through their writings. In the 1950s they published their schemes in the 'Architects' Year Books', and they wrote extensively for 'Architectural Design' between 1955 and 1975. They recast these projects and articles as books. In 1968 the couple produced a lament to the Euston Arch, an indication of their interest in historic fabric developed by Peter Smithson in his lectures, and writing on Bath (including 'Walks within the Walls: a Study of Bath', 1971). Perhaps this owed much to the influence of Crosby, who was then coming to reject modernism entirely. In the 1980s the Smithsons secured small commissions from Axel Bruchhauser, manager of Tecta furniture in Bad Karlshafen, Germany. After Alison's death these were continued by Peter, who also compiled two volumes of the couple's work, 'The Charged Void' (2001 and 2005), the second published posthumously. Alison Smithson died at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Chelsea, London, of breast cancer, on 14 August 1993. Peter Smithson died on 3 March 2003 at his home, Cato Lodge, 24 Gilston Road, Chelsea, London, of heart disease and a sudden stroke. They were survived by their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89835


Spiegl, Fritz (1926-2003), musician and humorist, was born on 27 January 1926 at Zumdorf, Austria, near the border with Germany, the son of Rudolf Spiegl, a Catholic agricultural merchant and soda water manufacturer, and his Jewish wife, Josefine, 'nee' Geiringer. He attended a local Catholic school where, he remembered, the teachers were 'either priests or Nazis -- or both' ('The Independent', 31 March 2003). When the Nazis moved into Austria a cousin living in Vienna contrived to get Spiegl included in the 'Kindertransporte' which, over a period of nine months, transported to safer countries almost 10,000 children who were considered to be at risk, primarily because they were Jewish. In Britain, Captain David Margesson (chief whip in Neville Chamberlain's government, and then, from 1940 to 1942, secretary for war under Churchill) and his American wife, Frances, took charge of Spiegl at their Northamptonshire home, helped him to learn English, and sent him to Magdalen College School in Oxford. He quickly became a better master of the English language, and its rules and exceptions to rules, than some of his English contemporaries. 
In 1941 Spiegl was apprenticed as a typographer and designer with the advertising agency Colman, Prentis, and Varley. There he met a girl who played the flute and inspired him to take it up. By 1946 he was good enough to enter the Royal Academy of Music. Two years later he became principal flute in the Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra (which in 1957 became the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra). He remained with it for fifteen years, by which time Liverpool had become, and was to remain, his home. He facilitated his own departure from the orchestra in 1963 by deliberately playing a wrong note: an outrage that was forgiven by 1988, when he was made an honorary life member of the orchestra. Over the years he also played for the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, the Halle Orchestra, and the BBC Northern Symphony Orchestra. Within a few months of joining the Liverpool Philharmonic Spiegl had formed two other musical groups, the Liverpool Music Group and the Liverpool Wind Ensemble. For the Liverpool Music Group he revived Donizetti's opera of 1824, 'Emilia di Liverpool'. 
According to Spiegl, that other musical gadfly Gerard Hoffnung had stolen from him the idea for his 1950s comedy concerts at the Royal Festival Hall. He himself fought his corner with comic concerts in London and Liverpool which included 'Nuts in May', 'Midsummer Madness', and the 'April Fool' concerts. His musical rampages included 'Psalm 123-and-a-half', 'An Old Person's Guide to Contemporary Music', 'Liszt Twist', and 'Overture to the Magic Carpet'. In 'A Concerto for Motor Car and Orchestra' at the Albert Hall, Lord Montagu of Beaulieu, owner of a vintage car museum, took part by sounding the horn of a vintage car when prompted by his score-reading passenger. 
On 1 April 1952 Spiegl married Bridget Katharine Fry, a 24-year-old pianist and harpsichordist, and daughter of Rowdon Marrian Fry, physician. They wrote several books together, and had three daughters. The marriage was dissolved in 1969, and on 8 December 1976 Spiegl married Ingrid Frances Romnes, a 27-year-old publishing designer, and daughter of Haakon Werner Romnes, a mechanical engineer. 
Spiegl's tongue-in-cheek pugnacity could sometimes create difficulties. In 1977 he denounced popular music in 'The Guardian', claiming that it was beneath serious criticism. Its defenders responded by saying that Spiegl had no right to criticize any music when he was the composer of the 'banal' music for the popular television series 'Z Cars', which began in 1962. In fact it was his first wife, Bridget, who had won the commission to write the signature tune. Spiegl had radically 'arranged' an old Liverpool-Irish ballad, 'Johnny Todd' by, among other things, giving it an Ulster pipe band. His recording of the tune entered the top ten when released as a single, selling 200,000 copies in its first week. Spiegl also composed and conducted the medley of historic tunes from various parts of the United Kingdom, including 'Rule Britannia', 'Greensleeves', 'Scotland the Brave', 'Men of Harlech', the 'Londonderry Air', and 'What Shall We Do with the Drunken Sailor?', which was regularly broadcast as the early morning introduction to BBC Radio 4 from the early 1970s, and which provoked public protest on its behalf when in 2006 the BBC's managers proposed to discontinue it in favour of more news bulletins. 
From the mid-1960s Spiegl produced much journalism and many books. He wrote regularly for a number of newspapers and magazines, including, eventually, 'The Guardian', 'The Independent', 'Private Eye', 'The Oldie', and 'BBC Music Magazine'. In 1970 he began writing a column for the 'Liverpool Daily Post'. For the 'Daily Telegraph', from 1989, he wrote the 'Usage and Abusage' column. He was also a prolific writer of letters to newspapers, denouncing those who wrote 'days' when they meant 'daze', or vice versa; chiding Tony Blair for sloppily talking of the 'enormity' of Labour's majority in 1997; correcting anyone who assumed that all slave-owners were white; and dismissing the theory that creme brulee came from Scotland by citing a cookery book dated 1738, written for Louis XV by a musical chef who liked singing his own recipe. In 1965 he founded the Scouse Press as a publishing firm and himself co-wrote for it, with Frank Shaw and Stan Kelly, its first book, 'Lern Yerself Scouse'. In 1986 he published 'The Joy of Words' and in 1987 'Fritz In-Words and Out-Words'. At the very end of his life he was correcting the proofs of his book 'Contradictionary: an A-Z of Confusibles, Lookalikes and Soundalikes' (2003) -- as ever a dedicated, ingenious, and instructively facetious presence. He died on 23 March 2003 at the Royal Liverpool University Hospital, following a heart attack. He was survived by his second wife, Ingrid, and the three daughters of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 89837


Tait, Sylvia Agnes Sophia (1917-2003), biochemist and endocrinologist, was born in Tumen, Siberia, on 8 January 1917, the daughter of James William Wardropper, a Scottish agronomist, and his wife, Ludmila, a Russian who had graduated in mathematics from the University of Moscow. The family returned to England in 1920 via Vladivostok. Thereafter Sylvia had a conventional English upbringing. She attended the local secondary school, Ealing County School for Girls, and in her more senior years studied mainly languages. She had considerable trouble in establishing her citizenship because of her birthplace in Russia but eventually was officially recognized as British. After leaving school she spent a short period at King's College, London, but soon transferred to University College, where she eventually took an honours degree in zoology in 1939. On 6 April 1940 she married Anthony James Carey Simpson, a 22-year-old fellow zoology student at University College, then serving as a pilot officer in RAF Coastal Command. Sadly, after winning a DFC (and promotion to flight lieutenant) he was killed in action near Bergen, Norway, in October 1941. 
After the death of her first husband Sylvia Simpson joined John Zachary Young in Oxford and worked on nerve regeneration. A colleague at that time was Peter Medawar, just starting his work on transplantation immunity. After three years in Oxford she took up a more permanent post in the Courtauld Institute at the Middlesex Hospital Medical School as assistant to Peter Claringbould Williams, head of the biology unit. At first she was part of a team working on synthetic analgesics but she later worked on oestrogens. The animal house in the Courtauld was exceptional in that it was very well equipped with surgical and rat-breeding facilities and constant temperature rooms. This was largely due to the work of Charles Dodds on reliable oestrogen bioassays. She took no part in the original work on stilboestrol but the Courtauld animal house continued to carry out bioassays of oestrogen, usually under her supervision. This was the foundation of her expertise in bioassay, a critical skill of major importance for her subsequent work on aldosterone. 
In 1948 a clinician, B. Lewis, in the department of medicine, read a paper by Ralph Dorfman and colleagues and afterwards decided to propose a bioassay for adrenal mineralocorticoids using the effects on Na24 excretion in adrenalectomized rats. Lewis separately approached Sylvia Simpson and a medical physicist in the physics department, James Francis Tait (1925-2014), to suggest that they collaborate. They both accepted Lewis's suggestion, thus founding the extremely successful collaboration which later resulted in their great achievement in 1953, the discovery, isolation, and characterization of aldosterone. That period was one of explosive activity in endocrinology, where the characterization of most adrenal steroids, culminating in the isolation and clinical study of cortisol by Philip Hench, Edward Kendall, and Tadeus Reichstein (for which they were jointly awarded the Nobel prize for physiology or medicine in 1950) was crowned by Sylvia Simpson and James Tait's achievement in isolating aldosterone. Sylvia Simpson's rigorous development of an adequate bioassay based on James Tait's isotopic expertise was crucial, and this was applied to the chromatographic analysis of adrenal extracts. It rapidly became apparent that a previously unrecognized but extremely potent adrenal steroid existed, responsible for sodium and potassium regulation. Simpson and Tait's success was not without considerable difficulties. Many of the techniques involved were still at a very early stage of development, and the Middlesex Hospital medical school, like most of the other London medical schools, suffered from the legacy of financial pressures from the Second World War. But despite these difficulties, Simpson and Tait were brilliantly successful and their major discovery established the existence of a specific salt-retaining, potassium-excreting hormone now known to be the main hormonal factor in controlling salt metabolism. They collaborated with Tadeus Reichstein in Basel in the final structural elucidation of the new hormone; they further proceeded to demonstrate its physiological importance and its secretion by the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal. Their discovery preceded that of their several intense competitors in the United States and was a seminal event recognized by their joint election to the Royal Society in 1959. By then Simpson and Tait (the son of Herbert Tait, marine engineer) had married, on 1 September 1956, at Ealing register office. Thereafter Sylvia used the surname Tait in her publications. 
In 1958 the Taits were persuaded to join the Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, by Gregory Pincus, who was then involved in the development of the contraceptive pill. The reason for their move to the United States was connected with the turbulence caused by the reorganization of the London medical schools under the pressure of financial stringency. During this period the Taits also spent several months at the Howard Florey Institute in Melbourne, collaborating with Derek Denton and John Coghlan. Denton had developed a unique and novel preparation involving the transplantation of the adrenal to the neck of sheep, which allowed the continued detailed study of hormonal secretion. This was a scientifically extremely productive period and the Taits both enjoyed the more relaxed social life of Melbourne. They returned to the Middlesex in 1970, without enthusiastic support from Dodds, as co-directors of the Biophysical Endocrinology Unit, until their retirement in 1982. 
Sylvia Tait was universally popular among her colleagues in the scientific community because she managed to combine marked scientific rigour with charm and an ability to express disagreement without the faintest trace of antagonism. She and her husband richly deserve the high place they hold in the history of endocrinology. The Taits were both maritally and scientifically completely complementary and were one of the most successful examples of husband-wife scientific collaboration. The joint recipients of many honours, they lived in retirement in East Boldre, near Brockenhurst, Hampshire, where they continued to write scientific papers until shortly before her death. She died at Lymington Hospital, Lymington, Hampshire, on 28 February 2003. She was survived by her husband. She had been invited to make a presentation at a major conference at the Royal Society in April 2003 to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the isolation of aldosterone. In the event, her address was given by John Coghlan. 


@@@@@


doc= 89839


Williamson, Malcolm Benjamin Graham Christopher (1931-2003), composer, was born in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, on 21 November 1931, the son of George Williamson, an Anglican clergyman, and his wife Bessie, 'nee' Wrigley. Simultaneously with his education at Barker College, Hornsby, New South Wales, from 1943 he studied the piano with Alexander Sverjensky at the New South Wales State Conservatorium of Music in Sydney. Although he composed from a very young age, serious composition studies began with Eugene Goossens, also at the conservatorium, in 1949. 
Williamson, however, was determined to travel and in 1950 sailed for London. Stimulated by the 'new' European music of Schoenberg, Stravinsky, and Boulez, he settled in London permanently, and in 1953 undertook further composition studies with Erwin Stein, a former student of Schoenberg, and Elisabeth Lutyens, an exponent of serialism. He published his first pieces, two motets for unaccompanied three- and four-part choir, in 1954. Absorbing twelve-tone music, he combined it with a kind of modality and became fascinated with the French composer Olivier Messiaen, whose explicitly Catholic music resonated with Williamson's own recent conversion to Catholicism in 1952. Williamson remained profoundly influenced by Messiaen and developed his organ playing technique specifically in order to play this composer's works. During these early years in London he worked as a proofreader for a publishing firm and as a shop assistant in Harrods. 
In 1955 Williamson's performance abilities paid off, and he was appointed assistant organist at the Church of the Immaculate Conception, Farm Street, London, a position he held until 1958. His expert keyboard playing was also useful in terms of promoting his compositions, and he was able to give the first performances of his own piano sonata no. 1 at the Aldeburgh festival and 'Fons Amoris' for organ at the Royal Festival Hall in 1956. In 1958 he had what was to become a typical year of musical contrasts: he was appointed organist for St Peter's, Limehouse, supplemented his income by working as a Soho nightclub pianist, and performed as soloist for his piano concerto no. 1 at the Cheltenham festival. On 9 January 1960, at Stepney register office, he married Dolores Irene Daniel ('b'. 1930), daughter of Jacob Daniel, a retired department store director. They had one son and two daughters. 
By the beginning of the 1960s Williamson was determined to become a full-time composer and embarked on perhaps his most productive decade. In 1960 he completed his symphony for organ, his piano concerto no. 2, and his first Hammer Horror film score, for 'The Brides of Dracula'. Writing prolifically and attracting wider notice, in 1963 he first really made an impact with the critical and popular success of his first opera, 'Our Man in Havana', premiered at Sadler's Wells Theatre on 2 July. Based on Graham Greene's novel set in pre-revolutionary Havana, his lively, rhythmic, and tuneful opera displayed more than a passing influence from contemporary musicals. Now a successful composer, for the next few years he received high-profile commissions, including a violin concerto for Yehudi Menuhin and the 1965 Bath festival and a sinfonietta for Sir Adrian Boult and the inauguration of BBC Radio 3. In the midst of this popularity he asserted his 'Australian-ness' at the Conference on Music and Education in the Commonwealth at the University of Liverpool in 1965: 'when I think about it, I am certain that my music is characteristically Australian, though I have never tried to make it so. We Australians have to offer the world a persona compounded of forcefulness, brashness, a direct warmth of approach, sincerity which is not ashamed, and more of what the Americans call 'get-up-and-go' than the Americans themselves possess. ('The Times', 4 March 2003)' By the late 1960s, however, Williamson began to lose what previously had been the almost unanimous support of the critics, who began to describe his music as 'too glib', 'too populist', 'too uncritical', and 'too diffuse' ('The Guardian'), despite continued audience success with a new form which he called 'cassations' -- miniature concert-operas for children, with audience participation. Originally conceived as a way of introducing his own children to opera, the cassations were used at a summer school for children with disabilities and led him to further work with hospitals in Tanzania and Zambia. From 1970 his broadening interests led him to undertake a number of international residencies, including as composer-in-residence and honorary fellow at Westminster Choir College, Princeton, New Jersey (1970-71), where he was made an honorary doctor of music, as creative arts fellow in Scandinavian literature at the Australian National University (1974-81), and as composer-in-residence at Florida State University (1975). 
In October 1975 Williamson, a non-Briton, was controversially appointed the nineteenth master of the queen's music, succeeding Sir Arthur Bliss, and the following year he was made CBE. (Hostile critics put his appointment down to his friendship with the prime minister, Harold Wilson.) A wave of official appointments followed, including president of the Birmingham Chamber Music Society (1975), and to the University of London Choir (1976), the Purbeck Festival of Music (1976), the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra (1977), Sing for Pleasure (1977), and the British Society for Music Therapy (1977). If it was expected that an Australian master of the queen's music with more 'get-up-and-go' was to reinvigorate the position, a very public disappointment unfolded during the queen's 1977 silver jubilee, when problems between Williamson and the conductor Bernard Haitink resulted in Williamson's commissioned work, his symphony no. 4, remaining unfinished and unperformed. This event marked a turning point with the British concert-going public, and Williamson never regained the level of support he previously enjoyed in the United Kingdom. Even his church music, which combined his own deeply felt but idiosyncratic religious themes with popular idioms, was now described as 'vacuous', 'shallow', and 'insincere' ('The Guardian'). 
Continuing support, however, was forthcoming from Australia, eager to acknowledge its famous international composer. In 1982 Williamson travelled to Sydney to be the Ramaciotti medical research fellow at the University of New South Wales, where he was guest speaker at an international seminar on mental handicaps. The monumental symphony no. 6, commissioned to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, was performed and broadcast, utilizing all seven of the corporation's orchestras. Both Sydney and Melbourne universities awarded him honorary doctorates. In 1984, taking Australian landscape and history as its inspiration, he wrote his symphony no. 7 for string orchestra to mark the 150th anniversary of the state of Victoria, and in 1985 his 'Lento for Strings' for the Philharmonia of Melbourne. In 1987 he was appointed a member of the Order of Australia for services to music and the mentally handicapped. For Australia's 1988 bicentenary celebrations he composed 'The True Endeavour' for speaker, chorus, and orchestra, based on texts by the Australian historian Manning Clark. This was followed by 'The Dawn is at Hand' (1989), a five-movement choral symphony derived from the Aboriginal poems of Oodgeroo Noonuccal (whose son made Williamson his blood brother). In 1989 he was given the Sir Bernard Heinze award for his outstanding contribution to music in Australia. 
Back in the United Kingdom, Williamson did nothing to re-endear himself to the British public with his outspoken and provocative comments. When Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber was commissioned to write the music for the royal pageant celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the queen's coronation (1993), overlooking Williamson himself as master of the queen's music, Williamson's description of his rival as a 'cabaret composer', who does not write 'real music' ('The Times', 4 March 2003), was seen to be in poor form, especially in the light of Williamson's own excursions into popular styles of music. 
After 1995, and an expressive and well-reviewed song cycle, 'A Year of Birds', for soprano and orchestra (to poems by Iris Murdoch), a series of strokes left Williamson progressively unable to compose and, finally and tragically, unable to speak. Two staunch supporters remained: his publisher and partner Simon Gerald Edmund Campion (Williamson and his wife had divorced in 1978) and the conductor Christopher Austin, who from 1994 was responsible for regular performances of Williamson's music. He died on 2 March 2003 at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, from cardiac failure. He was survived by his partner, Simon Campion, and by the three children of his marriage. He left behind more than 120 published works, including seven symphonies, four concertos for piano, concertos for organ, violin, and harp, chamber music, operas, and a repertory of church and vocal music, all imbued with a range of absorbing preoccupations which included literature, history, Jewish music, jazz, religion, music therapy, and animal welfare. 


@@@@@


doc= 89844


Garrison, Lenford Alphonso (1943-2003), historian and educationist, was born in St Thomas, Jamaica, on 13 June 1943, the son of Ernest Samuel Garrison, builder. He had three brothers and one sister. His father and mother migrated to Britain in 1952 and 1953 respectively, and went to live in Uverdale Road, Chelsea, where the young Len joined them in 1954. While at secondary school in London he pursued an interest in photography which he reinforced with a part-time job as projectionist at a cinema in Clapham Junction. On leaving school he studied photography at Regent Street Polytechnic and the London College of Printing, and worked as a specialist in medical photography first at the Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine (1962-6), then at the Maudsley Hospital (1966-71). He also worked as a freelance photographer, frequently taking photographs of Caribbean families to send to their relatives back home. In 1971 he went to Ruskin College, Oxford, where he studied for a diploma in development studies and wrote a dissertation on the Rastafarian movement. From there he went to the University of Sussex where in 1976 he took a degree in African and Caribbean history. Much later, in 1992, he gained an MA in local history at Leicester University. On 28 July 1973 he married Loretta Young, a 25-year-old fellow student from Brixton, and daughter of Owen Young, welder. This marriage ended in divorce, and on 17 December 1987 he married Marie Beverley James, a 34-year-old teacher, and daughter of Peter Leroy James, farmer. They had one son, Tunde. 
After graduating from Sussex, Garrison began his engagement with the field that was to shape and define his life's work. During the late 1960s and early 1970s the black migrant communities had begun to throw up various forms of political organization, which were largely informal and based on community activism. These focused around a clutch of black bookshops in the major cities, a small group of community centres, and the activities of charismatic individuals. Garrison set out to be involved with the meetings and personalities who shaped the events; and wherever he went he began to collect mementoes -- photographs, posters, minutes, and reports, gradually building up a collection which outlined the organizational shape of the black communities. 
Garrison's own experience as a schoolboy, his engagement with the black communities, and his research on the attitudes of young black people in Britain alerted him to the lack of provision in the educational system for black pupils who had recently migrated, or whose parents had migrated, from the Caribbean. As the difficulties of integrating them in the educational structure became apparent, the authorities who ran inner city schools and the teachers who worked in them began demanding materials and textbooks dealing with the history and background of their African and Caribbean pupils. Garrison set out to fill the vacuum. In 1977 he founded the Afro-Caribbean Education Resource, and remained its director for the next eleven years. He began by pioneering education packs at Dick Sheppard School in Brixton. The project was supported by the inner London education authority and later the Greater London council. Soon its materials began to be used all over the country, making a major contribution to the development of a multicultural curriculum. The Afro-Caribbean Education Resource also spawned a series of schemes for older children and young adults, the best-known of which was the Black Youth Annual Penmanship Awards. The awards provided prizes and support for original and creative writing, and, in the process, became a platform which helped to launch the careers of several young black professionals, such as Clive Davis (the 'Sunday Times' music critic), Nicola Williams (the novelist and barrister), and Michael McMillan (the playwright). 
In 1988 Garrison went to Nottingham as director of the Association of Caribbean Families and Friends, a project funded by the local authority. This gave him the opportunity to expand the reach of his work and to create a new network. At Nottingham he established one of the first effective mentoring projects, and in another innovative move persuaded the King's Fund to back a scheme for supporting the carers of orphaned and abandoned black children. He also established the East Midlands African Caribbean Arts. One high point of his tenure was an exhibition at the city's museum, 'The Black Presence in Nottingham' (1993), which attracted a notable and unusual interest among the black community in the region. 
In 1997 Garrison returned to Brixton to devote more time to the Black Cultural Archives (BCA), which he had co-founded in 1981, and which had just joined with Middlesex University to create the Archive and Museum of Black History. His own contribution to the collection was immense. In a sense he had been assembling the BCA since he was a student. Every black activist of any kind knew him, because he would turn up everywhere, taking photographs, making notes, and collecting documents; and his knowledge of the black British community was exceptional. The BCA collection came to form a unique record of black migrant life at the moment when the identity of the black British community was beginning to emerge. Apart from such gems as the most complete musicology of Samuel Taylor Coleridge there were handbills, flyers, posters, programmes, minutes, and records of a wide range of events, including political meetings, art exhibitions, concerts, plays, and community meetings about education, welfare, and politics. 
Len Garrison was unwavering and sincere in defence of his work, and never gave the impression that it was a stepping stone to official and establishment acceptance. He was arguably the most important figure in the black British community's exploration and understanding of its own history in this country. His work in creating and developing materials based on the experience of African and Caribbean pupils gave a major impetus to the development of a multicultural curriculum in British schools. His interests were sometimes unexpected. He served as a voluntary gallery guide at the Tate, and he had a passionate interest in visual culture. He was also a poet: his volume 'Beyond Babylon' (1985) was well received. To his friends and family, as well as to the young people who benefited from his work, he was loving and generous. He remained immensely active to the end; he suffered a heart attack while attending a meeting of the management committee of the BCA in London on 18 February 2003, and was pronounced dead on arrival at King's College Hospital, Denmark Hill. He was buried on 13 March at Wandsworth cemetery following a funeral service at Brixton Seventh-Day Adventist Church. He was survived by his wife, Marie, and their son, Tunde. 


@@@@@


doc= 89853


Lewcock, Constance Mary (1894-1980), suffragette and socialist, was born at 7 West Street, Horncastle, Lincolnshire, on 11 April 1894, the only child of Thomas Henry Ellis (died 1898), who owned a draper's shop in the town, and his wife, Emily Mary, 'nee' Lessware. A precocious and, on her own admission, slightly spoilt girl, she read widely and joined a circulating library. However, her father's death when Connie was four affected her deeply. She regarded her mother's remarriage to a Methodist minister as a betrayal and loathed her stepfather who, she considered, thought about nothing but money and power. When they moved to Slough, she stayed with her aunt who ran the shop in Horncastle. There Connie developed into a lonely and wilful adolescent who was a natural rebel; she took up smoking but gave it up once the sight of a woman smoking in public had ceased to be shocking. After attending a dame school Connie won a scholarship to the grammar school in Horncastle where she remained until seventeen. Disappointed at her failure to win a place at university, she obtained employment as an uncertificated teacher at $50 per annum at Esh Winning in co. Durham. There she taught a class of seventy-eight children from 1912 to 1914. 
Connie Ellis had become an ardent women's suffragist at fourteen when she heard a speaker on the promenade at Dunoon: 'it was like St Paul; it was conversion... she made me feel that equality and freedom were the most important things in life', she recalled (Lewcock and Harrison, interview, 15 April 1976). Towards the end of 1913 she visited the Women's Social and Political Union shop in Newcastle to offer her services: 'you're 'not' to get arrested', she was promptly told (ibid.). She served her apprenticeship as speaker and chairman at suffrage meetings throughout co. Durham, using the techniques she subsequently employed as a trade union and Labour Party organizer. At an Independent Labour Party (ILP) meeting at Cornsay colliery she met a sympathetic miner, Joss Craddock, who noticed the bruises she had acquired through being thrown out of meetings. Subsequently he accompanied her, placing himself behind her to keep the stewards at bay, saying: 'gan on hinney, ah can keep these buggers here all night' (Lewcock and Harrison, interview, 15 April 1977). Her work for the WSPU coincided with the climax of militancy in 1912-14. She was involved in an unsuccessful attempt to set fire to a pier of Durham Cathedral, but the most notorious episode in her career occurred in the summer of 1914 when, aged twenty, she was responsible for burning a wooden railway building at Esh Winning, an action she later described as 'the perfect crime'. She instructed the loyal Joss Craddock to set an inch of lighted candle in the centre of a tin lid containing flammable bicycle solution and to leave behind him some hairpins and a handkerchief bearing a 'C'. Meanwhile she attended a meeting several miles away observed by at least thirty people. Though the police felt unable to prosecute, she was summoned by the education secretary for Durham who insisted that she gave up her political work: 'we don't think it's good for the image of teachers' (Lewcock and Harrison, interview, 15 April 1976). On refusing, she received one month's notice, which expired at the end of July 1914. 
The outbreak of the First World War accelerated Ellis's transition from militant suffragist to Labour Party activist. Although she had previously accepted the leadership of Emmeline Pankhurst without criticism, Ellis rejected her increasingly right-wing, pro-war stance and felt that the suffrage campaign had effectively ended. On a visit to Newcastle she found herself drawn into a meeting for women munitions workers, and as a result was invited to undergo training with the Federation of Women Workers in London. On her return she went to Middlesbrough to organize munitions workers, and in 1917 she was employed by the ILP in its anti-war campaign in Cleveland at a weekly wage of $2. In August 1918 she was charged with making seditious speeches because she had accused meat suppliers to the troops of making excessive profits. Tried at Guisborough, she was given the option of a $5 fine or one month in prison; to her regret the ILP paid the fine. 
Connie Ellis first met her husband, William Best Lewcock (1891-1960), at an ILP meeting at Chopwell on May day 1914. The son of Thomas Lewcock, a coalminer, he also became a miner; educated at Ruskin College, Oxford, he was a conscientious objector during the war. He and Connie were engaged for four years before marrying at Horncastle Congregational Church on 6 August 1918; they had three children, Sheila, Peter, and Cynthia. 'If you marry Will, you'll always be second to the Cause', a friend had warned her. 'I should hope so', was Connie's characteristic reply (Lewcock and Harrison, interview, 15 April 1976). After the war Will who, as a conscientious objector, found it impossible to gain employment, became a Labour Party agent. This led the family to move to Stroud and thence to Newport, Monmouthshire, where Connie served as a councillor from 1927. In this period she had no paid employment but worked as an unpaid secretary and speaker for Will. In 1934 Will was promoted to regional organizer for the Labour Party, first in York and then in the north-east from 1941 to 1955. After retiring, he served on Newcastle city council from 1956 until his death in 1960. 
From 1960 until 1971 Connie Lewcock represented the Benwell ward on Newcastle city council, acting as chairman of the housing management committee and the parliamentary and general purposes committee and vice-chairman of the finance committee. Her lifetime of public service was recognized by the award of an OBE in 1966. She died at Newcastle upon Tyne General Hospital on 11 November 1980 after suffering an accidental fall outside the front door of her home in West Denton. Sir Jeremy Beecham, the former council leader, paid tribute to her as a remarkable character, an inspiration to the Labour movement, and as a humanizing element in local government ('Newcastle Evening Chronicle', 11 November 1980). 


@@@@@


doc= 89855


Jenner, Henry (1848-1934), librarian and promoter of the Cornish language, was born on 8 August 1848 at Union Hill, St Columb Major, Cornwall, the elder son and eldest of the six children of Henry Lascelles Jenner (1820-1898), curate of St Columb, and his wife, Mary Isabel (1819-1900), daughter of Captain William Finlaison RN, of Thurso, and his wife, Marion. Sir Herbert Jenner-Fust (1778-1852) was his paternal grandfather. From 1852 the family was settled in Kent, where Jenner's father held a living (in 1866 he was consecrated bishop of Dunedin, New Zealand, but the diocese rejected him because of his high-church views). Between 1858 and 1865 Jenner attended St Mary's College, Harlow, Essex, a school for sons of more extreme Anglo-Catholics, where 'the discipline was... irregular, the scholarship inaccurate, and everything... ramshackle' (Jenner, 'George Knottesford Fortescue', 15). It was none the less here that he first discovered specimens of written Cornish and determined to learn all he found. 
Jenner returned to Cornwall in 1867, during a break from work as a schoolteacher. One of his excursions was to Paul churchyard, where he studied the Cornish wording on the monument to Dolly Pentreath, widely supposed to have been the last Cornish monoglot. On 4 January 1869 he became a clerk in the court of probate in London, and soon began studying Cornish material in the British Museum library. On 5 July 1870 he was appointed as assistant in the British Museum's department of manuscripts. Through his work and his active social life he became acquainted with major society figures, including Dickens, Ruskin, and Gladstone. He joined the Philological Society in 1871 and read his first paper ('The Cornish language') on 21 March 1873. In 1875 he visited west Cornwall to research the remains of Cornish still used by some local people. 
On 12 July 1877 Jenner married Kitty Lee Rawlings ['see below']. He had consulted her father during fieldwork on Cornish and in 1873 had begun a correspondence with her. Their honeymoon was the first of many tours together on the mainland of Europe, where they made several eminent contacts. Also in 1877 Jenner discovered lines from an unknown play in Cornish of 'c'.1400, the 'Charter Fragment' (on the back of what is now BL, Add. Ch. 19491). On 27 December 1877 he attended the commemoration at Paul of the centenary of Dolly Pentreath's death. The Jenners' only child, Cecily Katharine Ysolt (later Sister Mary Beatrix Jenner of the order of the Visitation) was born on 21 June 1878. 
Helped by his wife in the field of sacred art, Jenner collaborated with Walter de Gray Birch on 'Early Drawings and Illuminations' (1879). In the same year, he secured a transfer to the British Museum's department of printed books. On 1 March 1883 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and later served on its council. His adaptation of space-saving moveable shelving at the museum library in 1887 earned him a $100 gratuity from the relieved trustees. His final promotion was to the post of assistant keeper in 1900, and his last major professional task was to help reorganize the reading room reference books in 1907. 
A tory and a committed Jacobite, Jenner and his wife were involved with the Order of the White Rose (OWR), a society of Stuart sympathizers of which he was chancellor, conducting the order's rituals. (The Jenners first visited Scotland in 1892, and Scots Gaelic was one of his many languages.) He also actively supported 'The Royalist', a journal which ran from 1890 to 1905, and organized several exhibitions at the New Gallery, Regent Street, including the Stuart exhibition in 1889: it was said that Queen Victoria snubbed him because of the legitimist views promoted by these exhibitions. He withdrew from active involvement with the OWR before the First World War but remained fervently royalist and right-wing. 
At the turn of the twentieth century, at the instigation of Louis C. R. Duncombe Jewell (later known as Ludovick C. R. D. J. Cameron), Jenner resumed his Cornish studies after a gap of over twenty years. On 15 August 1901 the short-lived Cowethas Kelto-Kernuak (Celtic-Cornish Society) was formed, with Jenner as vice-president responsible for the language. In 1903 he joined the Celtic Association and was made a bard of the Breton gorsedd (bardic assembly), taking Gwaz Mikael (Servant of Michael) as his bardic name. Both the Jenners felt a great affinity for Brittany, acknowledging Breton as the language closest to Cornish. His address to a Breton audience was, he thought, fairly well understood and probably the first set speech in Cornish for two centuries. His principal achievement, however, was 'A Handbook of the Cornish Language' (1904), which is widely seen as the beginning of the Cornish revival. The book's preface contains Jenner's most often quoted dictum: 'Why should Cornishmen learn Cornish?... The question is a fair one, the answer is simple. Because they are Cornishmen' (p. xi). Shortly after publication Jenner delivered the address 'Cornwall: a Celtic nation' before the Pan-Celtic Congress at Caernarfon, and Cornwall was accorded membership of the congress. 
Jenner retired from the British Museum in May 1909, and he and his wife went to live in her home town of Hayle, Cornwall, in a house that they renamed Bospowes ('The dwelling of rest' in his own translation). He now focused on Cornish affairs, acting as Cornwall's main representative to the wider Celtic world. Bospowes became a cultural and social centre for the Cornish revival movement, and Jenner became known as the foremost authority on Cornish matters. Much of his scholarly work was channelled through the Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society (president, 1916-21) and the Royal Institution of Cornwall (president, 1921-3). He also encouraged younger workers in the field, notably Robert Morton Nance, who revered Jenner as his mentor and successfully carried on his mission. Even at this period, however, Jenner maintained that 'Cornish will not be revived as a spoken language, nor will there ever again be a Cornish literature' ('The Celtic Conference, 1917', 1918, 97), a prediction amply invalidated by events. On 15 July 1920 he was made an honorary MA by the University of Wales. 
Nance, backed by Jenner, formed the first Old Cornwall Society (OCS) at St Ives in 1920, with Jenner as president. He became founder and president of the Hayle OCS on 10 February 1923 and president of the Federation of Old Cornwall Societies at its foundation in 1924. The first issue of the OCS journal 'Old Cornwall' appeared in April 1925. In 1927 he was appointed honorary St Petrock lecturer in Celtic studies at the University College of the South-West. On 7 August 1928 eight Cornish people were initiated as bards of the Welsh gorsedd. They and the Jenners formed the nucleus of the modern Cornish gorsedd (Gorseth Kernow), first held on 21 September 1928 at Boscawen-Un near St Buryan (probable site of one of the ancient British gorsedds). Jenner, who had composed the Cornish gorsedd ceremony in 1907, was installed as first grand bard, taking the Cornish equivalent (now usually written Gwas Myghal) of his Breton bardic name. 
Even as Jenner's health began to fail seriously, his activities included climbing Trencrom to light the annual midsummer bonfire (1931), presiding over the first Celtic congress to be held in Cornwall, in Truro (1932), and attending the first church service in Cornish for 250 years, at Towednack (1933). He had lived as a devout Anglo-Catholic but late in 1933 was formally received into the Roman Catholic Church. On his deathbed he intimated that the whole object of his life had been to inculcate in the Cornish people a consciousness of their Cornish identity. He died from uraemia on 8 May 1934 at Bospowes and was buried in the cemetery of the church of St Uny, Lelant, on 12 May. His memory is honoured by the award of the Jenner medal for Cornish scholarship, first conferred in 1936. 
Jenner's extensive writings included scholarly articles across the whole range of Cornish themes, Celtic and Arthurian research, liturgiology, manuscript and royalist studies, and poems, songs, and hymns in various languages. While highly cultured, he possessed a humorous and convivial side, was interested in music and amateur dramatics, and was familiarly known as Harry or Hal. Physically he was tall and well-built, an imposing, patriarchal figure (particularly in full beard and bardic robes), reflecting his strong personality and intellect as well as his enormous influence over the Cornish movement and iconic status within it. It has been observed that much of the ethos of the movement's early period constituted a middle-class, apolitical harking back to a semi-mystical, pre-industrial, Catholic Cornwall. None the less, without the vision and prodigious work rate of the pioneers, notably Jenner himself, the platform from which the movement has expanded and matured would not have existed. Jenner was able to combine his romantic vision of Cornwall with genuine scholarship, while his conviction of separate Cornish nationhood and his local patriotism went along with loyalty to Great Britain and the empire. He retains a unique position within the history of the Cornish revival. 

Kitty Lee Jenner (1853-1936), author and artist, was born on 12 September 1853 at Hayle Foundry, Cornwall, the elder daughter of William John Rawlings (1815-1890), engineering agent, and his wife, Catherine (1822?-1879), daughter of John Hambly, engineer and ironmonger, and his wife, Catherine. W. J. Rawlings, the father of two sons by a second marriage in 1882, was highly cultured and financially successful. In 1867 he commissioned a large family house named The Downes, on the outskirts of Hayle. His daughter received a home education and from 1873 studied art in London, at the National Art Training School, South Kensington, and the Slade School of Fine Art. By this time she had apparently converted from Anglicanism to Roman Catholicism, though her marriage to Henry Jenner took place in St Erth parish church. 
Kitty Lee Jenner's artwork included European sketches and domestic watercolours, but greater recognition came as a writer. The first of her six novels (published under the name Katharine Lee) was 'A Western Wildflower' (1882), and perhaps the most interesting was her last, 'When Fortune Frowns: being the Life... of Gilbert Coswarth, a Gentleman of Cornwall, how he Fought for Prince Charles in... 1745 and 1746' (1895). Other publications included 'In the Alsatian Mountains' (1883; a description of a tour with her husband in 1882), three books on Christian art and symbolism published in the first decade of the twentieth century, and the poems in 'Songs of the Stars and the Sea' (1926). She was made a bard of the Welsh gorsedd in 1904; her bardic name was Morvoren. Her work was initially more widely known than her husband's, a position that was reversed with the progressive enhancement of his status. The couple functioned as a devoted partnership of interests and priorities. She died from myocarditis on 21 October 1936 at Bospowes and was buried with her husband at Lelant on 24 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 89863


Laidlaw, Daniel Logan (1875-1950), soldier and piper, was born in Little Swinton, near Berwick-upon-Tweed, Berwickshire, on 26 July 1875, one of the three sons of Robert Laidlaw, a quarryman and later engine driver, of Coldingham, Berwickshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Robert Logan of Jedburgh. Educated at Berwick-upon-Tweed national schools and Lesbury, Northumberland, where he was a miller's apprentice, he joined the army on 11 April 1896, serving in India in the 2nd battalion, Durham light infantry. Claimed out by his eldest brother, he joined the King's Own Scottish Borderers and served in that regiment as a piper until 11 April 1912. On 11 April 1906 he married Georgina Mary (died 1947), daughter of Robert Harvie, of Kilburnie, Ayrshire, at the Baptist Church, Alnwick, Northumberland. They had three sons (Andrew, John, and Victor) and three daughters (Margaret, Georgina, and May). After his Indian service, in which he took part in plague duty in Bombay from 22 March to 1 May 1908, Laidlaw entered the reserve on 11 April 1912, finding employment as a canteen manager at Alexandria, Alnwick Co-operative Stores, and with Messrs D. and D. H. Porter of South Doddington, a firm of horse-breeders. In Alnwick he was also an assistant scoutmaster. 
At the outbreak of the First World War Piper Laidlaw re-enlisted in the 7th battalion, King's Own Scottish Borderers, on 1 September 1914 and went to France in the following June. He earned lasting renown on the first morning of the battle of Loos, 25 September 1915. At 6.30 a.m., as his battalion stalled in the trenches after heavy artillery fire from the German guns, and as gas wafted back from British cylinders, Lieutenant Young cried out 'For God's sake, Laidlaw, pipe them together!' Laidlaw promptly scaled the parapets and marched up and down, playing the regimental march, 'Blue Bonnets over the Border'. Suitably inspired, the battalion dashed out of the trenches and Laidlaw followed. Wounded by shrapnel in the left ankle and leg, he hobbled onwards, changing the tune to 'The Standard on the Braes of Mar'. Once the battalion had made its way to the third line of German trenches, Laidlaw scrambled back to his lines amid the dropping shells. Promoted corporal for distinguished service in the field (25 September 1915), he was dubbed the 'Piper of Loos' in the Scottish press and his feat of arms was compared with that of Piper George Findlater VC, who had piped the Gordon Highlanders onwards, despite being wounded at the battle of Dargai (20 October 1897). 
On 18 November 1915 Laidlaw's citation for the award of the Victoria Cross appeared in the 'London Gazette', commending his 'absolute coolness and disregard of danger' in the battle. Interviewed in Lord Derby's hospital at Winwick, near Warrington, he was photographed extensively and his portrait painted for the illustrated press. Modestly he received an address from the citizens of Alnwick, and a gold-mounted walking stick, a cheque for $5, and war stock to the value of $60 from a fund raised by the 'Berwick Journal' and the 'Berwickshire News'. After George V decorated Laidlaw with his Victoria Cross at Buckingham Palace on 3 February 1916 he received a gold watch from the Worshipful Company of Musicians at the Mansion House on 28 February 1916, and played the pipes at various wartime concerts. He also received the French Croix de Guerre (with palm), the 1914-15 star, British war medal (1914-20), victory medal with oak leaf for mention in dispatches (1914-19), and later the King George VI coronation medal (1937) and the defence medal (1939-45). Promoted sergeant-piper on 12 October 1917, he was demobilized on 3 April 1919. 
If never quite the celebrity that Findlater became, Laidlaw gained more publicity than many contemporary winners of the Victoria Cross, with his portrait appearing in paintings, book illustrations, and the endorsement of tobacco products. He appeared at various formal gatherings for holders of the Victoria Cross: a garden party at Buckingham Palace (26 June 1920), dinner in the royal gallery at the House of Lords (9 November 1929), and the Second World War victory parade in Whitehall and subsequent dinner at the Dorchester hotel (8 June 1946). He also piped at the head of marches to the Cenotaph in the 1930s, notably on 25 September 1932, when he marched alongside Findlater VC and Pipe-Major D. Anderson (Croix de Guerre) to commemorate the battle of Loos. 
However, Laidlaw struggled to find work after the war, enduring long periods of unemployment. He sought assistance from the King's Own Scottish Borderers Association and received support from a public fund to educate his youngest son. Laidlaw piped in two films, the 'Guns of Loos' (1929) and 'Forgotten Men' (1933), accompanied a troupe of highland dancers on a tour of Norway in 1934, and piped for the Scottish Country Dancing Club in London. Just before the Second World War he became the sub-postmaster of Shoresdean and then head warden of the ARP in Norham and Islandshires district. Laidlaw died at Shoresdean, near Berwick-upon-Tweed, on 2 June 1950, and was buried in St Cuthbert's churchyard, Norham, Northumberland, where a memorial headstone, organized by the King's Own Scottish Borderers Museum and members of the Laidlaw family, was placed over his grave on 2 June 2002. At a ceremony at the Loos Museum, Belgium, on the ninetieth anniversary of Laidlaw's action, his grandson, Victor, donated his Victoria Cross and other medals to Scotland's National War Museum in Edinburgh Castle. 


@@@@@


doc= 89866


Byerley, Robert (bap. 1660, d. 1714), racehorse owner, army officer, and politician, was baptized on 27 March 1660, the fourth (but second surviving) son of Anthony Byerley ('bap'. 1619, died 1667), landowner, of Middridge Grange, Heighington, co. Durham, and his wife, Anne (died in or after 1690), daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Hutton (died 1639), justice of the common pleas, of Goldsborough, near Knaresborough, Yorkshire. The Byerley family had been established as landowners in co. Durham and the North Riding of Yorkshire for several generations. During the Civil War, Anthony Byerley had been the colonel of a royalist cavalry regiment known as 'Byerley's Bulldogs' (Surtees, 312), and at the Restoration he was nominated to the proposed Order of the Royal Oak. Robert Byerley inherited Middridge Grange on the death of his elder brother, also Anthony, in 1674; he also enjoyed Goldsborough Hall, inherited by his mother. 
Byerley matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 2 March 1677, but did not take a degree. According to 'Thoroughbred Racing Stock and its Ancestors', by Lady Wentworth, he served with the Austrian army at the siege of Vienna in 1683, where he captured a fine charger from the Turkish forces. This horse is allegedly the same as 'the Byerley Turk', one of the foundation sires of the thoroughbred horse. Lady Wentworth described her source only as 'a careful Austrian authority' (Wentworth, 173). The Swedish equine-breeding historian C. G. Wrangel stated that 'three Turkish stallions were captured at the siege of Vienna, among those the Byerly Turk' (Wrangel, 34). (Although the horse's name is entered in the general stud book as 'Byerly' he is generally known under the spelling of his owner's name, Byerley.) Of these three horses John Evelyn noted in his diary on 17 December 1684 that: 'They trotted like Does, as if they did not feele the Ground; for this first Creature was demanded 500 Ginnies, for the 2nd 300, which was of a brighter bay, for the 3d 200 pound, which was browne, all of them choicely shaped but [the last two] not altogether so perfect as the first. In a word it was judg'd by the Spectators (among whom was the King, Prince of Denmark, the Duke of Yorke and severall of the Court Noble persons skilled in Horses, especialy Monsieur Faubert & his sonn & Prevost, Masters of the Accademie and esteemed of the best in Europe), that there were never seene any horses in these parts, to be compared with them. (Evelyn, 'Diary', 4.399)' Although it remains uncertain that the Byerley Turk was one of these three (the 'browne'), Evelyn's description conveys the interest and status fine horses held (and still hold) among royalty and the nobility in Europe. In late seventeenth-century aristocratic and army society horseracing -- a favourite pastime of Charles II -- was a keen sport, and there was a demand for sires with speed, stamina, and courage. The Byerley Turk was one of three foundation sires (the other two being the Darley Arabian and the Godolphin Arabian) from whom all subsequent thoroughbred progeny descend. The ancestry of all modern thoroughbreds can be traced back to one of those three stallions whose qualities much improved the racing capacity of their descendant bloodstock. It remains possible, however, that Byerley purchased the horse after it had been imported to Britain, or that it was actually bred in Yorkshire or co. Durham, perhaps sired by a stallion imported by Oliver Cromwell known as Place's White Turk, who stood at stud at Dinsdale, co. Durham. 
Byerley was elected unopposed to the House of Commons as member for co. Durham in March 1685. That year he became a guardian of his thirteen-year-old cousin Mary Wharton (1671/2-1727), daughter and heir of Philip Wharton, of Edlington, Yorkshire; her mother was Byerley's mother's sister. In June that year Byerley raised an independent troop of horse at Doncaster to defend the throne of James II against the rising of James Scott, duke of Monmouth. He was commissioned captain on 19 June 1685, fought at Sedgemoor on 6 July 1685, and was involved in the capture of Monmouth after the battle. At the end of the month Byerley's troop was incorporated into the new 9th regiment of horse, the queen dowager's, and Byerley received a regular commission. This was continued when the regiment was redesignated as the 6th dragoon guards in 1686. 
Byerley's royalist background cast him as a tory, but he was listed among the opposition and was among the members 'closeted' by James II in an effort to convince them to vote in favour of repealing the 'Test Act' and penal laws. He refused and was removed from the commission of the peace in Durham as a result. He was re-elected to the Commons for co. Durham in December 1688 and again in the election to the convention in January 1689. That year he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 6th dragoon guards on the recommendation of the duke of Schomberg, and became colonel on 30 December 1689 following the death of Viscount Hewett. 
Byerley commanded his regiment in William III's 1690 campaign in Ireland. At the spring 1690 race meeting at Down Royal, then at Downpatrick, co. Down, the prize of a silver bell was awarded following a race won by 'Captain Byerley's charger' (Down Royal racecourse website). This horse was probably the Byerley Turk. According to horseracing tradition, when reconnoitring the countryside before the battle of the Boyne on 1 July 1690, Byerley and his company were discovered by a troop of James II's cavalry, but the speed of his mount helped him elude capture. 
In November 1690 Byerley's ward, Mary Wharton, was kidnapped when travelling with Byerley's mother by Captain James Campbell, younger brother of Archibald Campbell, tenth earl of Argyll. Campbell forced her into marriage, apparently to acquire her inheritance. Mary was set free within two days, but in August 1691 she gave birth to a son, named Thomas Wharton, son of James Campbell. Her marriage to Campbell was annulled by act of parliament in December 1691. Byerley married Mary Wharton on 17 March 1692; they had five children. 
Byerley had resigned his commission on 31 January 1692, citing ill health, bringing his horse home with him. Byerley's politics remained tory and he returned to the Commons, moving to represent Knaresborough from 1695. Although never a Jacobite, he was reluctant to accede to the association affirming William III's right to the throne, and although he eventually took the oath in May 1696, he was removed from the commission of the peace for Yorkshire. He became increasingly active in the Commons, perhaps motivated by an ongoing dispute over the accounts of his former regiment. Both the regiment and Byerley claimed that each owed the other substantial sums, and the matter was disputed before the commissioners for accounts in 1696-7. From at least the 1699-1700 session he established a reputation as a vocal critic of the alleged financial abuses of the whig ministry. He was a leading member of the select committee on the impeachment of the junto lords in 1699. In May 1701 the whig MP Sir Richard Cocks described Byerley as 'the most party and ill-natured man in the House' (Cruickshanks and Harrison). In 1702 he was elected on the tory list to the commission of accounts. He was identified by Sir William Trumbull as one of the 'secret committee' of leading tories in the 1703-4 session, and the next year supported Nottingham's investigation of the supposed Jacobite conspiracy, the 'Scotch plot'. Whig pressure, citing the unresolved questions about his management of his regimental accounts in 1690, removed him from the commission of accounts in 1704. On 22 February 1705 the Commons finally cleared Byerley of financial impropriety, following his exoneration by the commission for military debts. Perhaps in consequence of this he was less active in parliament between 1705 and 1710. He regained some prominence during Robert Harley's tory-dominated administration, becoming a member of the extreme tory society, the October Club, in 1711, and was appointed a commissioner of the privy seal in January 1712. He died on 1 May 1714, at Goldsborough Hall, and was buried in the chancel at St Mary the Virgin, Goldsborough, on 3 May. He was survived by his wife, who died on 26 February 1727, and their children. 
None of Byerley's children left descendants, in contrast to the extensive progeny of his horse. Byerley does not seem to have bred racehorses himself, but he either hired out the stallion as a stud or leased it to another for breeding purposes. Although the Byerley Turk does not seem to have been systematically paired with mares from good breeding stock, the horse sired several top racers and brood mares before its unrecorded death, probably in the first decade of the century. His sons included Basto, Black Hearty, Grasshopper, and Jigg. Basto is known to have been owned by the second duke of Devonshire; Black Hearty by the second duke of Rutland; Grasshopper by Rutland, and then by Sir Roger Mostyn; and Jigg by Mostyn. Under these aristocratic owners, the first three were celebrated for their performances on the turf; the fourth stood as a stallion and was the great-grandsire of King Herod, bred by Prince William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, about 1758. King Herod established the sire line responsible for making the Byerley Turk the head of one of the three male lines from which all thoroughbred horses descend. The Byerley Turk's descendants had already proved they and other Arabians could dominate the match races, run between two horses over several miles, popular in the early part of the century. The stamina displayed by the Arabians contributed towards the rise of the more intensely competitive shorter races between several three- or four-year-old horses which were established in the later eighteenth century. King Herod's grandson Diomed was the first winner of the Derby in 1780. Diomed was exported to the United States in 1798 and became the ancestor of the principal Byerley Turk line in that country; a Byerley Turk line was also established in France. 
In the celebrated portrait by John Wootton (private collection) the Byerley Turk is held by a groom in oriental dress; the inclusion of a lean greyhound in the foreground provides an animate symbol of the stallion's conformation and speed. Robert Byerley was an energetic middle-ranking politician and army officer of some ability; but it was the qualities of the horse, as transmitted to its descendants, that preserved his name for posterity. 


@@@@@


doc= 89869


Acheson, Roy Malcolm (1921-2003), epidemiologist, was born at 67 Eglantine Avenue, Belfast, on 18 August 1921, the elder son of Malcolm King Acheson (died 1962), medical doctor, and his wife, Dorothy Josephine, 'nee' Rennoldson 'd.' 1976. He was originally named Malcolm Roy, but later reversed his forenames. His brother, (Ernest) Donald Acheson (1926-2010), later became chief medical officer of England and Wales. Acheson was educated at Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh, then went on to Trinity College, Dublin, in 1938, with the intention of following his father into the medical profession. However, he discontinued his premedical studies there during the Second World War and spent five years from 1940 as a volunteer with the North Irish horse in north Africa. He took part in the battle of Longstop Hill in Tunisia and also served in Italy. He was commissioned in 1944 and left the army as a lieutenant. After returning to Trinity after the war, he completed his clinical studies at Brasenose College, Oxford, qualifying in 1951. In 1953, and while working under Alice Stewart, he devised the 'Oxford method' for assessing maturation of bone growth. He proceeded to his doctorate of medicine in 1954. Meanwhile, on 16 March 1950, at St Vincent's Roman Catholic Church, in Altrincham, Cheshire, he married a 22-year-old fellow medical student, Fiona Marigo, daughter of Thomas Vincent O'Brien, medical practitioner. They had two sons, Malcolm and Vincent, and a daughter, Marigo. 
In 1955 Acheson received simultaneously a Radcliffe travelling fellowship from the University of Oxford on the strength of a paper on tuberculous meningitis and a Rockefeller travelling fellowship, the beginning of a fifty-year association with the Rockefeller Institute. He spent a year in the United States at the Harvard school of public health and Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. He then returned to Ireland as a lecturer in the department of social medicine at Trinity College, where he was awarded a fellowship in 1957 and received his doctorate of science in 1962. From 1959 to 1962 he was a senior lecturer and then reader in social and preventative medicine in a joint appointment between Guy's Hospital and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. 
In 1962 Acheson was recruited to the faculty of the Yale medical school as an associate professor to establish a new division of chronic disease epidemiology. During ten resident years there (he was made a full professor in 1964) he developed an enviable programme of teaching and training with a particular research interest in the field of musculoskeletal diseases, particularly arthritis. He wrote papers on gout, osteoarthritis, and the prevention of hypertension, and latterly on medicine in society, medical education, and the organization of medical care. He was also actively involved in undergraduate activities as a fellow of Jonathan Edwards College from 1966 to 1975. As a result of his time and appointments in America he became a naturalized American citizen in 1967. 
Nevertheless in 1972 Acheson returned to London, to establish the Centre for Extension Training in Community Medicine at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, of which he remained director for four years. This was an especially important development. Following reorganization of the National Health Service (NHS) and local government, the roles of public health personnel were transformed. In addition to traditional duties, new responsibilities for planning and integration of local NHS clinical services were imposed. This offered possibilities of local health improvements -- but risks too of weakening overall concern with community preventative and health-promoting services. The school organized personal training and retraining proficiencies in health services management and economics, as well as refresher courses in epidemiology, to ease the transition to the new order. Acheson became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1972, and was a fellow of the Faculty of Community Medicine and of the Faculty of Occupational Medicine. In 1974 he became professor of health service studies at London University. In 1976 he moved on again, to Cambridge, where he was the founding professor of community medicine in the developing clinical school there; he also became a fellow of Churchill College. He was made an emeritus professor on his retirement in 1988. 
Over many years, Acheson participated in several of the Rockefeller Foundation's initiatives. Probably the most important was his organization of the week-long seminar at Cambridge in 1979 that launched the International Clinical Epidemiology Network (INCLEN). A group of distinguished British and foreign academics introduced young clinicians from medical schools in the developing world to the potential power of epidemiology for evaluating their health services and allocating their limited medical resources. INCLEN continued to flourish at the time of Acheson's death, having trained some 500 faculty members from about 50 institutions in 26 countries. Acheson also organized a broad-based seminar at the Rockefeller Foundation's Bellagio Study and Conference Center that resulted in an important volume on public health education, 'A History of Education in Public Health' (1991). He was an early member of the International Epidemiological Association, another effort initiated by the Rockefeller Foundation, serving for many years as the association's secretary, organizing many of its meetings and seminars, and editing or co-editing many of its published volumes. He served as adviser and consultant to many organizations and government agencies, including the Pan-American Health Organization, the World Health Organization, and the US National Institutes of Health. 
Acheson was a keen rugby player in his youth, and later took up golf, tennis, choral singing, and ornithology. He listed 'meditating in the bath' among his recreations in 'Who's Who'. With a 'mischievous twinkle in his eye and a ready smile', he 'loved a good joke and although a stickler for protocol he deplored pomposity. At times he seemed shy but could become angry in matters that moved him deeply' ('The Lancet', 19 July 2003). In retirement he lived at 21 The Cliff, Roedean, Brighton. His marriage was dissolved in 1990. He died at Dane House nursing home, 52 Dyke Road Avenue, Brighton, on 2 April 2003, of cancer of the prostate, and was survived by his three children. He had accomplished much in many different ways and his influence on the teaching of epidemiology and public health, in particular, was profound. Nevertheless, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that in some of his many activities he might have achieved even more than he did, particularly if he had been able to devote more time to his research on musculoskeletal disorders -- an area barely attracting attention when he worked in it and ripe for substantial advances. 


@@@@@


doc= 89875


Chadwick, Lynn Russell (1914-2003), sculptor, was born on 24 November 1914 at 66 Station Road, Barnes, Surrey, the elder child and only son of Verner Russell Chadwick, mechanical engineer and designer of solid-fuel furnaces, and his wife, Margery Brown, 'nee' Lynn. He was educated at the Sacred Heart School and Beverley School, Barnes, and Merchant Taylor's School, London, where he received extra tuition in watercolour and oils by his art master, K. P. F. Brown. He was taken on regular visits to the Tate Gallery and to the G. F. Watts Gallery, Surrey, by his parents. In 1932 he was sent to Vouvray to improve his French and visited Oscar Wilde's grave, designed by Jacob Epstein, in Pere Lachaise cemetery, Paris, having already been shown Epstein's controversial 'Rima' in Hyde Park. In his late teens he had met the sculptor, Wilfred Dudeney, and, inspired by the idea of working alone in a studio, wanted to become an artist, but his parents steered him towards the more secure profession of architecture. 
Chadwick's headmaster arranged for him to join the architectural practice of an Old Merchant Taylor, Donald Hamilton, as a trainee architectural draughtsman, in 1933. After working for the emigre architect Eugene C. Kaufman, he joined the engineering firm of Rodney Thomas. Thomas designed showrooms and trade-fair exhibition stands for Ascot Water Heaters, and Chadwick's association with him was pivotal for his transition to becoming a sculptor. Having attended evening classes in architecture at Regent Street Polytechnic, Chadwick found that he did not have the temperament to become an architect. 
During the Second World War Chadwick worked first on the land in Herefordshire, a reserved occupation, before enlisting with the Fleet Air Arm in 1941. He was commissioned in 1942, later becoming a temporary lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. He trained in the USA and Canada, where he met (Charlotte) Ann Secord (died 1997) of Toronto. They married in 1942, and had one son. After qualifying as a pilot, Chadwick served on convoy duties in the North Atlantic until his demobilization in 1944. 
From 1944 to 1946 Chadwick rented a house at 2 Cheyne Row, Chelsea, London, and returned to work for Rodney Thomas (who had set up the firm Arcon, designing prefabricated buildings) and continued to work on exhibition design. Thomas had been making 'mobile sculptures', balancing balsa wood shapes, making them rock: these inspired Chadwick to make a piece of his own, suspending thin, irregular, ungeometric balsa wood shapes on aluminium wire. Both Thomas and Chadwick were at the time unaware of the American artist Alexander Calder's work of the late 1930s. 
In 1946 Chadwick and family moved to Gloucestershire, first to Fisher's Cottage, near Stroud, and then to a remote cottage at Pinswell, near Cheltenham, in 1947, where Chadwick had space to work as a freelance designer. Having in 1946 won a textile design competition initiated by Zika and Lida Ascher, he was asked to produce an additional ten designs a year and he also designed furniture. He now began to concentrate on making mobiles as decorative features for exhibition stands, including the Aluminium Development Association's stand at the builders' trades fair of 1947 and the Morris Furniture Co. (Glasgow) stand at the British industries fair in 1948. He later referred to his mobiles as 'research into space and volume' (Ritchie, 70). 
In 1949 Gimpel Fils Gallery showed a mobile piece by Chadwick in the window of the gallery during its summer exhibition, and another mobile was exhibited with the London Group. His first solo 'Exhibition of Mobiles' was held at Gimpel Fils in 1950. The mobiles were mainly composed of slate and wood, often hand-painted different colours, hanging and supported on stands. The Festival of Britain of 1951 provided a great opportunity for architects, designers, and artists. Chadwick received three commissions: Jane Drew (partner and wife of Maxwell Fry) invited him to make a mobile for her Riverside Restaurant, Misha Black commissioned a piece for the Regatta Restaurant's garden, for which he made 'Stabile (Cypress)', and an Arts Council commission resulted in 'Fisheater' (Tate Gallery, London). Chadwick realized that he would need to weld in order to create the latter two large, ambitious projects, and took a four-week welding course at the British Oxygen Company's welding school. 
Chadwick was one of eight young sculptors included in 'New Aspects of British Sculpture' at the twenty-sixth Venice Biennale in 1952, the so-called 'geometry of fear' exhibition, the much quoted phrase used by Herbert Read in his introduction to the exhibition catalogue ('New Aspects of British Sculpture', British Council, 1952). Chadwick had now progressed from mobiles and stabiles: two of his 'balanced sculptures' were included in this critically acclaimed exhibition, organized and toured by the British Council, which exposed Chadwick to an international audience. In 1953 Chadwick entered the Unknown Political Prisoner International Sculpture Competition. He departed from the spiky insect-like forms which had identified his work so far to create something more abstract and solid. He was given an honourable mention and won a prize. In his statement in 'The New Decade: 22 European Painters and Sculptors' (1955), Chadwick said: 'these constructions have become armatures for the solid shapes -- the iron frames of the construction still delineate the mass and act as lines of tension'. Until the mid-1950s Chadwick produced unique pieces, mainly using welded iron, but he now began to cast his work in bronze. 'Teddy Boy and Girl' (1955) is an example of his new interest in pairs of human figures which became his main preoccupation, rather than birds and beasts. 
In 1956 Chadwick represented Great Britain at the twenty-eighth Venice Biennale. Several pieces were made using stolit, a mixture of iron filings and gypsum that he used to fill the iron armature and that could be chiselled and filed down when dry. Several American private collectors and institutions lent work they had already acquired, including the Museum of Modern Art, New York, which lent 'Inner Eye' (1952). Chadwick, 'one of the revelations of the Biennale' ('The Observer', 24 June 1956), surprised some British critics by winning the international sculpture prize, beating Giacometti and others whose reputations were firmly established while Chadwick 'had not shown more than his paces' ('Financial Times', 19 June 1956). The British Council subsequently toured the exhibition around Europe, a version being shown at the Arts Council's gallery in London in 1957. Chadwick's first commercial solo exhibition in New York was held at the Saidenberg Gallery the same year. His success in Venice led to a number of commissions in Britain, Europe, and America. Nevertheless, his work was not always appreciated. In 1957 the Air League of the British Empire commissioned Chadwick to make a piece commemorating the first double crossing of the Atlantic by the R34 airship, to be placed outside Frederick Gibberd's long-haul terminal building at London Airport. However a heated public debate ensued, led by Lord Brabazon who likened Chadwick's proposal to 'a diseased haddock' ('The Times', 15 July 1958). The commission, which Chadwick had developed from 'The Stranger' (1954), was withdrawn. 
In 1958 Chadwick bought the substantial 'Strawberry Hill gothick' Lypiatt Park, near Stroud, Gloucestershire, which he restored and redesigned, and where he lived for the rest of his life. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 27 April 1959 he married the 21-year-old Frances Mary Jamieson, daughter of Samuel Jamieson, radio engineer. They had two daughters, but separated, and Frances committed suicide in 1964. 
In 1960 Chadwick had joined the Marlborough Gallery, initially with a contract. 'Watchers' (1960), a group of three block-headed figures, began a new phase. He also began his 'Elektra' series, sometimes highly polishing the bronze of the faceted surfaces. In 1962 he was invited to work in the Italsider SpA steelworks workshop at Cornegliano, before participating in the Festival dei Due Monde, Spoleto. There he created one of his most abstract works, 'Two Winged Figures', made to his specification, using steel plate. He also got to know David Smith and Alexander Calder, who were participating in the open-air sculpture project. 
On 5 July 1965 Chadwick married (Yvonne) Eva Reiner, the 31-year-old daughter of Gabriel Etienne Reiner. They had one son. Eva helped catalogue Chadwick's work, put his affairs in order, and promoted his work, enabling him to dispense with a formal contract with a dealer, though he continued to exhibit at the Marlborough Gallery for many years. In 1971 the Chadwicks opened a foundry, allowing him to be involved in all stages of the casting of his work. His groups of seated or reclining figures or cloaked male and female couples were immediately identifiable and were his main preoccupation for the next two decades. 
In the 1960s the spotlight moved away from Chadwick and some of his contemporaries to the 'new generation' of sculptors in Britain, but his work was always in demand abroad, particularly in Europe and the United States, and he continued to lead a disciplined, 'metronomic' life. In the 1980s he employed a specialist technician to enable him to realize large pieces in sheet-steel for Palm Beach airport, Florida, and for the Citroen factory at Le Ponant, near Paris. He was also invited to participate in a survey of sculpture during the Venice Biennale of 1988. In 1989 the Chadwick foundry was taken over by Rungwe Kingdon, who was later given the exclusive right to cast Chadwick's work. Eva Chadwick collaborated on a monograph with Dennis Farr, first published in 1990. In 1991 Chadwick was given a major survey exhibition by the Yorkshire Sculpture Park, covering his work from 1951 to 1991. 
Chadwick was an attractive, tall, strong, bear-like man. At the height of his success he 'assumed a persona notably un-English in its rackety, carefree, demonstrative abandon', but in his studio 'during the long spells of solitary work... he has a melancholy and self-distrustful side' (B. Robertson, 'Private View', 1965, 90). Rather than analysing his work he preferred to pursue his own ideas and explore different techniques: he was not an intellectual. Throughout his career he was 'independent and self-sufficient to a very remarkable degree' (Bowness). Uninterested in the London art 'scene', he always welcomed visitors to Lypiatt Park, where he used his architectural background to create a beautiful, uncluttered environment in which to set off his work. Photographs of the interior by Lord Snowdon appeared in 'Private View' (1965). Despite initially being against the idea of placing sculpture outside, where he felt it had to compete with nature, he gradually began to place work in his grounds during the 1970s. In 1988 he acquired extra land adjoining his own, where he sited more of his work. Never having been to art school, and having chosen not to teach in one, he did not have the camaraderie of his peers and possibly lacked confidence with fellow artists. When asked by Alan Bowness, director of the Tate Gallery, whom he would like to be present at a lunch to celebrate his seventieth birthday, Chadwick claimed that he had no friends to invite. 
Chadwick's sight began to fail in 1996. He died of heart failure at Lypiatt Park on 25 April 2003 and was buried in the pinetum there. He was survived by his wife, Eva, their son Daniel (also a sculptor), and the three children of his earlier marriages. In September 2003 Tate Britain mounted a retrospective exhibition of his work, planned while he was alive. 


@@@@@


doc= 89876


Coxeter, Harold Scott Macdonald (1907-2003), mathematician, was born on 9 February 1907 at 1B Holland Park Road, Kensington, London, the son of Harold Samuel Coxeter, manufacturer of compressed gases and surgical instruments, and his wife, Lucy, 'nee' Gee, painter. Originally named Macdonald Scott Coxeter, he was always known as Donald. 
Coxeter was fascinated by the patterns of numbers from an early age. His mother noticed, when he was two or three, that he became entranced by the columns of numbers printed on the financial pages of the newspapers. This juvenile fascination was soon replaced by an interest in cones, triangles, and symmetrical geometric objects of all sorts. Yet it seemed, at first, that the young Coxeter's talents lay elsewhere. He became an accomplished pianist and, as a child, composed piano pieces, a string quartet, and, when he was twelve, an opera. He also created his own language, Amellaibian, a cross between Latin and French, and filled a 126-page notebook with information on the imaginary world where it was spoken. At St George's School, Harpenden (which he attended after King Alfred School, London), he harboured hopes of becoming a composer. But his appreciation of the beauties of symmetry turned him towards mathematics. Convalescing in the school sanatorium with chickenpox, he found himself lying next to John Flinders Petrie, son of the Egyptologist Sir William Matthew Flinders Petrie. The two began chatting about H. G. Wells's 'Time Machine' and about why there were only five Platonic solids, and passed the time contemplating the possibility of other dimensions. A few years later Coxeter won a school prize for an essay on how to project geometric shapes into higher dimensions. Impressed with his son's talents, Coxeter's father took him to meet the philosopher Bertrand Russell, who concluded he was brilliant and put him in contact with the mathematician E. H. (Eric Harold) Neville. The latter, when he met the young prodigy, deemed his school inadequate, and suggested that he drop all subjects save mathematics and German (since the best mathematicians were German), and recommended him a private tutor in mathematics. 
In 1926 Coxeter won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was one of only five students selected by Ludwig Wittgenstein to attend his philosophy of mathematics classes. After graduating with a first he took a doctorate under H. F. (Henry Frederick) Baker in 1931, winning the Smith's prize the same year. Other significant alumni of the Cambridge school of geometry founded by Baker included Patrick du Val, W. L. (William Leonard) Edge, Sir William Hodge, T. G. (Thomas Gerald) Room, J. G. (John Greenlees) Semple, and J. A. (John Arthur) Todd. In 1931 Coxeter was elected a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1932-3 he was a Rockefeller Foundation fellow at Princeton, and in 1934-5 a Procter fellow there. On 20 August 1936, at the Holy Sepulchre Church, Cambridge, he married Hendrina Johanna (Rien) Brouwer (died 1999), the 25-year-old daughter of Leonardus Gerrit Brouwer. They had one son, Edgar, and one daughter, Susan. 
In 1936 Coxeter took up a post as assistant professor at the University of Toronto, where he remained for the rest of his academic career. During the Second World War he was asked by the American government to work in Washington as a code-breaker. He accepted, but then backed out, partly because of his pacifist views and partly for aesthetic reasons: 'The work didn't really appeal to me,' he explained, 'it was a different sort of mathematics' ('Globe and Mail'). At Toronto he became an associate professor in 1943, a full professor in 1948, and emeritus professor after his retirement in 1980. He was editor of the 'Canadian Journal of Mathematics' from 1948 to 1957. He held numerous visiting professorships, and was president of the Canadian Mathematical Congress in 1965-7 and of the International Mathematical Congress in 1974. His honours included nine honorary doctorates, election as FRS in 1950 (and the award of the society's Sylvester medal in 1997), and appointment as a companion of the order of Canada in 1997. 
Coxeter was creatively active to the end, publishing twelve books and more than 200 articles, several in collaboration with others. His first significant paper was 'The pure Archimedean polytopes in six and seven dimensions' in 1928. In 2001, with Branko Grunbaum, he published 'Face-transitive polyhedra with rectangular faces and icosahedral symmetry'. His last paper was finished in 2003. His publications included 'Non-Euclidean Geometry' (1942), which ran to six editions by 1998, and (with William O. J. Moser) 'Generators and Relations for Discrete Groups' (1957), which ran to four editions by 1980. He also published an 'Introduction to Geometry' (1961 and 1969), and edited the eleventh (1939) to thirteenth (1987) editions of W. W. Rouse Ball's 'Mathematical Recreations and Essays'. In all his work, no detail was omitted, and his treatments of a subject were canonical. For every geometric figure, its associated group and connections with other configurations were always given. 
In 1938 Coxeter co-authored a monograph, 'The 59 Icosahedra'. The three stellated forms of the dodecahedron had long been known through Kepler (1619) and Poinsot (1809). Bruckner (1900) and Wheeler (1924) first described various stellations of the more complex icosahedron, but it was not until Coxeter's work that a full description of all fifty-nine stellated icosahedra was published. This study thus completed the description of the stellated forms of the Platonic solids. Another question of completion concerned the enumeration of the set of uniform polyhedra -- that is to say, polyhedra that have congruent vertices consisting of regular polygons, including the star forms. Coxeter, with J. C. P. (Jeffrey Charles Percy) Miller, discovered twelve such forms between 1942 and 1944, but it was not until 1954 that he, Miller, and Michael Longuet-Higgins wrote the monograph 'Uniform Polyhedra'. In this beautifully crafted paper, with its exquisite illustrations, Coxeter conjectured that the full set of seventy-five uniform polyhedra there presented was complete, but he was not able to offer a proof. It was only with the advent of computers that, twenty-one years later, it was shown that they had indeed been correct. 
'Coxeter groups', generated by reflection patterns, as in kaleidoscopes, played an important part in many areas of mathematics and physics. Coxeter's work on polyhedra and their symmetries, such as the tesselation of a sphere by triangles, helped the American engineer and architect Buckminster Fuller to develop geodesic domes in the late 1940s, and led Sir Harry Kroto and two scientists at Rice University, Houston, to the 1996 Nobel prize-winning discovery of the carbon-60 molecule, the Buckminsterfullerene, known popularly as the buckyball. The shape of a soccer ball, it is in fact a truncated icosahedron, obtained by taking slices at each of the twelve vertices of an icosahedron, which has twenty triangular faces and is one of the five Platonic solids. The result is a figure with twelve pentagonal and twenty hexagonal faces, sixty vertices, and ninety edges. 
Coxeter's interest in music, and its relationship with mathematics, remained with him throughout his life. In the preface to his book 'Regular Complex Polytopes' (1974) he wrote: 'I have made an attempt to construct it like a Bruckner symphony, with crescendos and climaxes, little foretastes of pleasures to come, and abundant cross-references. The geometric, algebraic and group-theoretic aspects of the subject are interwoven like different sections of the orchestra.' Coxeter was also interested in art. At the International Congress of Mathematicians in Amsterdam in 1954 he met the artist Maurits Escher, each having an enormous influence on the other, art and mathematics becoming one. Coxeter inspired the Dutchman's circle limit etchings, in which motifs become smaller towards a limiting circle. Some of Coxeter's conceptions also bore fruit in John Robinson's abstract sculptures; Robinson's 'Firmament' (1997), built from mutually tangential spheres, was presented to Coxeter on his ninetieth birthday. 
Despite, or perhaps because of, his appreciation of the aesthetics of mathematics Coxeter never used a calculator or computer and wrote all his papers in pencil so that he could go back and correct them. He travelled to work by bus and could often be seen wandering around the university campus carrying a pineapple, which he used in his classes to illustrate natural symmetry. His students adored him, though they were sometimes surprised by his other-worldliness. When a female student announced that she would not be attending one of their regular meetings because she was about to give birth, he gave her a complex 50-page draft of a paper for her to look through if she 'had nothing else to do in the labour room' ('Globe and Mail'). 
Coxeter remained active to the end, both writing and attending conferences. After the death of his wife, Rien, in 1999 he was accompanied on his travels by his daughter, Susan. A gaunt, bird-like, ascetic-looking man, he attributed his longevity to his vegetarianism, standing on his head (even at the age of ninety) for fifteen minutes each morning, a daily exercise regime of fifty press-ups, a nightly cocktail of Kahlua, peach schnapps, and soya milk, and an abiding fascination with his subject. He lived latterly at 67 Roxborough Drive, Toronto, Canada. He died in Toronto on 31 March 2003, and was survived by his son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 89879


Drew, Joanna Marie (1929-2003), gallery director, was born in Naini Tal, India, on 28 September 1929, the only daughter of (Francis) Greville Drew (1892-1962), army officer, and his wife, Sannie Frances, 'nee' Sands (1903-1969), painter, daughter of Charles Sands, policeman in India. She had an older brother, Anthony. Her early childhood was spent in India, but with time back in England when her father did a stint at the War Office in London from 1930 to 1934, and again when he assumed the western command from 1938 to 1940. She remained close to her mother and brother throughout her life, and lovingly commemorated her mother's work as an artist in a book produced with her nephew John Drew before her own death. 
From the ages of ten to thirteen Drew attended Edinburgh Ladies' College. Given her background she took for granted that she would be parked at boarding school but, unusually, she was allowed to choose one for herself, and chose Dartington Hall. She felt herself privileged to be there, forged lifelong friendships, and forever viewed Dartington as a magical place. On leaving at the age of fifteen, she studied at the Ballet Rambert school for six months, but found it a merciful release when her knee gave out. Thinking she needed a decent qualification, her father ensured she was fitted up with a maths tutor, taught embroidery, and sent to Lausanne to improve her French. Her fluency in French and love of France never left her. 
In the autumn of 1946 Drew enrolled in a new course in the history and practice of art jointly established by the University of Edinburgh and Edinburgh College of Art. Never under any illusion that she would be an artist, she nevertheless revelled in the course. Her belief in the importance of artistic practice -- she never lost the urge to draw in order better to understand a work of art -- and her contempt for those who only read books, were born, along with her legendary ability to reconcile the two. Her involvement in the University Art Society also set her professional course. With a few fellow students she succeeded in organizing two extraordinary exhibitions -- one of French and one of British modern painting -- borrowing major pictures from Douglas Cooper and Roland Penrose, and trundling them to Edinburgh by the carload. It was the first time the work of many modern painters had been seen in the city. 
While working at Dartington as school secretary during the summer of 1952, Drew heard on the grapevine of a job going as a junior exhibition organizer at the Arts Council of Great Britain. Thinking herself a rank outsider with none of the then requisite Bloomsbury/Arts Council connections, she was astonished to be offered the post (a success she put down to having worn for the interview a straw hat piled with a riot of artificial roses and cherries that had been created by her mother). At that time, the Arts Council had a virtual monopoly on the provision of exhibitions throughout the country, and a missionary zeal in bringing contemporary art to the provinces. In any given year, Drew could be working on up to six shows simultaneously, for spaces as varied as the Royal Academy, the Tate, and the Victoria and Albert Museum (all then without exhibition-making abilities of their own), museums and galleries regionally, and the premises of the Arts Council's headquarters at 4 St James's Square. 
Drew adored the variety of the programme, and relished the challenge of every project. Gabriel White (her first boss at the Arts Council), and particularly the writer and critic David Sylvester, with whom she first worked in 1954, encouraged her sensitivity to the way works were installed, learning to look and value what they gave out, and to get them to give their best through acutely sensed placements. The projects Drew was responsible for became increasingly ambitious, notably the exhibitions of Picasso at the Tate in 1960 and 1967. The 1960 Picasso show proved a landmark: loans from Russia were negotiated for the first time; visitor numbers to the exhibition were unprecedented; the queen asked to come to see it. But it was only in 1967 that Drew met the artist himself, when she oversaw return of his sculptures to his house in Mougins. Offered the opportunity to select a drawing for herself, in a panic she lunged toward 'The Kiss'; Picasso immediately pronounced it 'bien choisi' and inscribed it to her. She willed it to the Tate. 
In 1968 the Arts Council moved to offices at 105 Piccadilly and commenced running of the new Hayward Gallery. Drew made her mark at the Hayward later that year through her organization of paintings and drawings from the collection of the Vincent van Gogh Foundation, Amsterdam. The Arts Council's exhibition-making activity in London was from then on concentrated largely at the Hayward -- the Tate and other London galleries slowly becoming more active in their own right. The Hayward had consciously to build a programme and a reputation. Drew rapidly consolidated her position as the Arts Council's consummate exhibition organizer. She became assistant exhibitions director in 1970, and director of exhibitions in 1975, but her influence was pervasive and virtually unrelated to job title. 
As the Hayward programme matured, every show had Drew's stamp on it, and the range of exhibitions was unrivalled. Other cultures were revealed in astonishing depth, as in 'The arts of Islam' (1976) and 'In the image of man: the Indian perception of the universe through 2000 years of painting and sculpture' (1982); contemporary British artists, among them Anthony Caro (1969) and Bridget Riley (1971), were given their first major exhibitions; thematic exhibitions such as 'Dada and surrealism reviewed' (1978) redefined modern art history; there were pioneering re-examinations of historical figures; and the work of artists or periods less well known in Britain was quietly championed. Curatorially reticent herself, and never keen to impose her own aesthetic, Drew had no qualms about the Arts Council's role as facilitator; she counted on subject experts, writers, critics, and artists, herself providing organizational skills, judgement, wit, vivacity, and benevolent leadership. Owing to her friendships, notably with Irene Bizot at the Reunion des Musees Nationaux, the Hayward hosted exhibitions of Millet (1976), Pissarro (1980), Renoir (1985), and Toulouse-Lautrec (1991). Having no art collection as trade collateral, the Hayward traded on Drew's brilliance, integrity, and allegiances. 
Drew's time as the Arts Council's director of art (1978-86), in succession to Robin Campbell, was perhaps less personally satisfying than her earlier career, but equally significant. She had a formidable portfolio, overseeing exhibitions at the Hayward and Serpentine galleries in London, exhibitions nationally, the Arts Council collection, subsidies to galleries regionally, photography, publications, and artists' films. Tim Hilton called her 'unquestionably the most powerful individual in the British art scene' ('The Guardian', 27 August 1992). She could be a shrewd operator. She was good at mustering her forces, and she normally won. But as art politics became more overt, she found the work increasingly tedious and missed working in the galleries. 
In 1986 Margaret Thatcher's abolition of the metropolitan authorities and the demise of the Greater London council resulted in the creation of the South Bank Centre. The Arts Council's areas of direct provision -- exhibitions in London and nationally, and the Arts Council collection -- were duly transferred. Drew, whose heart had always been in exhibitions, became director, Hayward Gallery and regional exhibitions, at the South Bank Centre. Although she managed to turn her hand again to exhibitions, most directly in a beautiful retrospective of drawings by Andre Masson organized with David Sylvester at the Hayward in 1987, it was a difficult period, with the Hayward's autonomy lessened and an emphasis on marketing and sponsorship which Drew found antipathetic. In 1992 she took early retirement. 
Drew's belief in art as a life-giving force was infectious. Virtually single-handedly she inducted a whole generation of art professionals, never making them feel as if they were being instructed. She gave people freedom to operate, to make mistakes, and could seemingly effortlessly manage the youngest of whippersnappers and the biggest of egos. A dab hand at building teams and intuiting moods and feelings, she was also an astute committee woman, though reluctant to chair them herself. She was also a sage adviser, one-to-one and as a member of the British Council fine art committee and the council of the Royal College of Art. 
Though little interested in her appearance, Drew had a wonderful ability to transform herself from the likes of some dowdy eastern European museum official to someone quite glamorous. She was not self-conscious about sellotaping her shoes when the strap on her red sandals broke moments before she was due to take the queen mother round an exhibition. Her background had attuned her to the niceties of behaviour, and instilled a sense of deference -- making her modest to a fault -- and of public service. She hated pomposity but was a great respecter of authority; she could be bitterly disappointed when those she held in high regard turned out to be men of straw. Although a product of her class, she lived life informally, and had a totally engaging way of taking human beings as they were. She was interested in politics, as a 'steadily inactive sort of lib/lab pinkie' (O'Ryan), and had an innate sense of justice. Although she travelled widely, she baulked at visiting apartheid South Africa despite family connections. (Her maternal grandmother, Marie, 'nee' Breytenbach, came originally from the Transvaal.) 
A deeply private person, Drew's professional and personal lives were nevertheless much entwined. She would trundle her bags of policy papers from office to home -- 57 St George's Square in Pimlico, the flat she rented in March 1953, eventually bought, and never left. Untouched by the modern world (the original cooker and dial phone served her to the end; there was radio but no television), it teemed with life and had something of the air of a Parisian garret, albeit infinitely brighter. At weekends she would escape to Wallingford, in Oxfordshire, where the house her mother had bought soon after her father's death became her home for close to thirty years. The garden would absorb her from breakfast to evening. Never prone to waste a thing, she moved the compost heap between London and Wallingford, and baskets of windfall apples would arrive in the office on Monday mornings. She was generous to a fault, whether bringing home-made soup to unwell friends or caring for her brother during his prolonged illness. Her love of France manifested itself in friendships, a proclivity to sport a beret, summers spent in Lacoste with her 'old man' and non-cohabiting partner, the painter Peter de Francia (1921-2012), and her ageing bright green Citroen 2CV, which saw her to Buckingham Palace to collect a CBE in 1985. 
On retirement Drew made a quiet resolution not to join anything that required raising money. She found giving it away a happier position to be in, and devoted herself to the Elephant Trust, of which she had been a founding trustee, and the Henry Moore Foundation, whose donations and publications committees she chaired. She was a vehement champion of good writing, and particularly mourned the loss of writers of the calibre of Andrew Forge and David Sylvester -- of whose estate she was executor following his death in 2001. The sale at Sothebys of works of art from Sylvester's collection provided her with a last and treasured opportunity to organize an exhibition. She was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer on Christmas eve 2002 and, after a short illness which she bore without self-pity, died on Easter Sunday, 20 April 2003, at Edenhall Marie Curie Hospice, in Camden, London. She was cremated at Golders Green crematorium in London on 30 April. She was, in the words of her friend Monika Kinley, 'Just about the only person in the art world everyone respected and loved' (private information). 


@@@@@


doc= 89885


Getty, Sir (John) Paul (1932-2003), philanthropist and book collector, was born on 7 September 1932, aboard ship off Genoa, the third son of John Paul Getty (1892-1976), oil tycoon, and his fourth wife, Ann, daughter of Sam Rork, the Hollywood producer of such stars as Clara Bow. He was baptized Eugene Paul but much later dropped the Eugene; he was always known as Paul. The Getty family, of Irish origin, came to riches through George Franklin Getty, a Minneapolis oil prospector and a fervent Methodist. He had little time for his son, John Paul (Paul's father), who had to make his own ruthless way to the top of the oil business, buying up piecemeal in the 1920s and 1930s Tidewater Oil, the foundation of his own company, Getty Oil. In the 1950s little known outside business circles except as a collector of works of art, he was revealed in glaring publicity as the richest man in the world -- a short-lived moment of glory that did not make life easy for the children who scarcely knew him. Young Paul, after his parents' brief marriage had failed, was brought up by his mother and his Getty grandmother in California and sent to school with the Jesuits at St Francis Xavier High School, a lucky circumstance that gave him the anchor of faith that held firm through the dark depressions that he suffered. He went on to San Francisco State University to study English and between wild adventures, for he was drawn to excess, built on the grounding in literature that the Jesuits had given him. Soon after he was drafted to Korea for a spell of military service, and an introduction to the pleasures of the orient. 
Getty had seen little of his father up to this time, but was now initiated into the family business, first as pump attendant on the forecourt, and within two years as the head of Getty Oil Italia with offices in Rome and a brief to exercise his natural talents for diplomacy in the Middle East. The company he directed was a loss-making arm of the parent company, but the wonders of Rome delighted him -- both the Rome of antiquity and the dolce vita circles in which he was immediately at home. In 1956 he married Gail Harris, daughter of Judge George Harris of San Francisco. They had two sons and two daughters, but the raptures of Roman life were too distracting for the marriage to survive and he found the oil business uncongenial and unfulfilling. 
A troubled romantic, Getty sought relief in drink and drugs, and solace in books and music and the films of the golden age of Hollywood. In London he met Talitha Pol, daughter of Willem Pol, a Dutchman who had survived incarceration with his wife (who had not) and his daughter in a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp and later married Poppet, daughter of Augustus John. Getty and Talitha Pol were married in 1966 and had one son. They bought Rossetti's house in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, and a palace in Marrakesh where they gathered a diverse group of friends from Mick Jagger to Gore Vidal, picnicking by mountain streams, supping with Moorish grandees, but equally amused by snake charmers and scallywags from the Djem al-Fna. Heroin took over and Talitha died of an overdose in Rome in 1971. A sorrowing Paul withdrew to Chelsea. 
Always bookish, Getty now began to accumulate a library, sharpening his tastes and knowledge through dialogue with dealers, chiefly Bryan Maggs of the eponymous firm. It was especially the book as object that sparked him, with the arts of the binder an enduring passion. He bought bravely and boldly, the death of his father in 1976 and the freeing of family trusts making him the rich man outsiders had wrongly imagined him to be. Nicolas Barker, in a tribute in 'The Bookman' in 2003, wrote that 'the collection is to be measured by comparison with the great collections of the past -- as great as any made in the last century'. It was rich in the finest copies of the most beautifully produced texts, the work of the greatest printers and binders, as well as a noble group of illuminated manuscripts, and books that spoke of history, like William Morris's copy of 'Das Kapital', bound by Cobden Sanderson, or the astonishing albums of drawings of the church treasures of Italy by John Talman, bound for Josiah Wedgwood. When he really wanted something he was fearless, paying $4 million for the Caxton Chaucer and $31/2 million for the Shakespeare first folio from Oriel College, Oxford. 
It was as much to house his books as himself that in 1984 Getty bought the estate of Wormsley, hidden in the Chilterns, where he built a library of knapped flint, its hammer-beamed roof decorated with the conjunction of the planets at the hour of his birth. There too he created a cricket pitch and hosted wonderful gatherings to watch teams he selected play against club, county, and international adversaries. Cricket, to which he became addicted during lonely days of television at Cheyne Walk, was a passion that brought him new friendships and great happiness. He was president of Surrey County Cricket Club in 1996 and in 1993 became the proprietor of Wisden. 
It is, however, as a philanthropist that Getty was most remarkable. His generosity both public and private was prodigious. He followed his own enthusiasms with gifts to the National Gallery ($50 million), the British Film Institute ($20 million), the Imperial War Museum ($1 million), to build the Mound stand at Lord's Cricket Ground ($2 million), to the SAS ($1 million), to the cathedrals of Hereford ($1 million), Ely ($1 million), and St Paul's ($5 million), the abbeys of Downside and Dorchester ($500,000), to St James's, Spanish Place ($500,000), the Bar Convent in York -- and to the Conservative Party ($5 million). Other beneficiaries of his generosity included the National Gallery of Scotland and the Victoria and Albert Museum, for Canova's 'Three Graces' ($1 million), the Historic Royal Palaces ($4.5 million), the National Trust, for Tyntesfield ($1 million), Denville Hall, for retired actors ($1 million), and the SS 'Great Britain' ($2 million). He supported his local churches, both Catholic and Anglican, and, through the J. Paul Getty Jnr General Charitable Trust, which he endowed with $25 million, many projects in Britain covered by its rubric of 'unpopular causes', helping the indigent, the addicted, the afflicted -- both small, self-help endeavours and courageous efforts on a larger scale to elevate the human spirit. Many individuals too had their troubles and anxieties eased by his discreet and timely intervention. His gifts to the country were marked by his appointment as an honorary KBE in 1986, and in 1998 he became a British citizen. In 1994 he married as his third wife his long-time companion Victoria Holdsworth, daughter of Commander Gerard Holdsworth, a hero of the Special Operations Executive. By his own remarkable efforts and with her strong support, he returned to a far fuller life: at Wormsley, in his rooms looking over St James's Park, in his box at Lord's, and on his yacht, 'Talitha G', this modest, witty, devout man entertained his friends and neighbours, and gathered his far-flung family about him. After years of declining health, he died in the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Westminster, of renal failure on 17 April 2003; he was buried in a wooded glade above the house at Wormsley. He was survived by his wife, Victoria, and the five children of his earlier marriages. He left an estate valued for probate purposes at just over $200 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 89886


Gladwin, Derek Oliver, Baron Gladwin of Clee (1930-2003), trade unionist, was born on 6 June 1930 at the County Maternity Home, Grimsby, the son of Albert Gladwin, marine fitter, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Oliver. At the time of his birth his parents were living at 10 Beeley Road, Grimsby. His father was a shop steward for the Amalgamated Engineering Union. He was educated at Carr Lane junior school, Grimsby, and Wintringham grammar school. He left at the age of sixteen to work first for British Railways in Grimsby, latterly at Grimsby fish docks. As a railwayman he was exempt from national service. 
In 1953 Gladwin went to Ruskin College, Oxford. As was his way, he 'persuaded' Ruskin that he should design his own programme of studies -- industrial relations and labour law. This brought him into early contact with Hugh Clegg of Nuffield College, who became an important influence. He maintained strong links with Ruskin after finishing his course, being elected a member of the governing council, and serving as chairman from 1979 to 1999. He was devoted to its interests and, in the 1960s and 1970s, persuaded successive Labour ministers of education to agree to its expansion and development. In 2000 he was made the college's first life president. 
On leaving Ruskin in 1955 Gladwin went to the London School of Economics and took the one-year diploma in personnel management. In 1956 he was appointed a district officer in the southern region of the National Union of General and Municipal Workers (NUGMW), and on 13 October in the same year, at the parish church in Clee, Grimsby, he married Ruth Ann Pinion, daughter of Herbert Pinion. They settled in Surrey and had one son. In 1963 Gladwin became an NUGMW national industrial officer for local government and health, during which time he played an important part in the successful 'dirty jobs' strike in local authority services. 
In 1970, by a comfortable margin, Gladwin was elected regional secretary for the southern region of the NUGMW, thus becoming one of the 'barons' of the union. Over the next twenty years in which he remained regional secretary he was noted for his tenacious defence of his members' interests. He never stood for the post of general secretary (supporting, in turn, the successful candidatures of David Basnett and John Edmonds), and from 1980 to 1982 served as chairman. However, Edmonds felt that the chair of the union should be a 'lay activist'. Gladwin took the view that this was 'silly' and never quite forgave Edmonds (private information). Edmonds none the less put Gladwin on the general council of the TUC on behalf of his union, and Gladwin used his membership to develop contacts with leading members of other unions. Following mergers, the NUGMW had meanwhile become the General and Municipal Workers' Union (GMWU) in 1976, and then became the General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union (GMBATU) in 1982 (and in 1989 GMB). 
From 1970 to 1990 Gladwin was part of his union's delegation to the Labour Party's annual conference, and hence was eligible for membership of its powerful conference arrangements committee. He became chairman in 1974, at a time when the committee was of great importance to the leadership of the party, and retained the position until 1990. Gladwin was at his best when dealing with rank-and-file delegates who wished to question its decisions. They found him sympathetic, fair, and ready to stand up for them against union leaders and others who treated them with scant respect. Yet he also tried to help the four Labour leaders whom he served (Harold Wilson, James Callaghan, Michael Foot, and Neil Kinnock). As a result he facilitated the changes in the Labour Party's constitution when conference decided that its system of government should be transformed -- although he was personally against most of these changes, fearing (rightly) that they would be used to concentrate power in the hands of the parliamentary leadership. 
Gladwin could never persuade Labour leaders to speak to time. They also often ignored his advice on how to get the best from the annual conference. He failed most spectacularly with the leader he thought he was closest to, Jim Callaghan. Gladwin could not believe that Callaghan was serious about his impractical and counter-productive 5 per cent pay norm, and he was particularly bitter when, after it collapsed, ministers tried to pretend that they had not been warned that it would not work and had somehow been 'let down' by the union leaders. During the Thatcherite era that followed the 'winter of discontent' of 1978-9, Gladwin had to watch many of his parliamentary friends desert the party to found, or join, the Social Democratic Party. For him this was the ultimate betrayal. He was not so much 'old Labour' as 'broad Labour'. That is to say, his ultimate loyalty was to the party's institutions and its longstanding aims. His attachment to individuals, even leaders, was in this sense contingent. 
Gladwin was on the boards of the Post Office (1972-94) and British Aerospace (1977-91) and a member of the council of the Industrial Society from 1968 to 1991. Among other public services he was chairman of the board of trustees of the British Diabetic Association from 1995 to 2001. He was also a visiting fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford, from 1978 to 1986. He was appointed OBE in 1977 and CBE in 1979, and was made a life peer as Baron Gladwin of Clee in 1994. On his elevation to the Lords he almost immediately became a whip. He took the work very seriously and, as a result, was asked to become deputy chief whip in 1997. After reflection, he decided that he preferred to 'work from behind' (personal knowledge). Part of the reason for this decision was that by then he had taken on so many good and interesting causes which he felt he could not give up, despite failing health. 
Remaining active in his retirement, Gladwin died on 10 April 2003 at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Downs Road, Sutton, of acute myeloid leukaemia. He was survived by his wife, Ruth, and their son. 


@@@@@


doc= 89887


Greenhill, Basil Jack (1920-2003), diplomatist, maritime historian, and museum director, was born on 26 February 1920 at 169 Moorland Road, Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, the only child of Basil Jack Greenhill, insurance salesman, and his wife, Edith, formerly Mitchell, 'nee' Holmes. He was educated at Bristol grammar school and the University of Bristol, where he was a T. H. Green scholar. In 1941 he joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, but with his eyesight precluding him from active service he was involved with the direction of air operations. In 1944-5 he was on the staff of the director of naval air radio. 
Demobilized with the rank of lieutenant, in 1946 Greenhill joined the Dominions Office. Marked out for rapid promotion, he served as private secretary to the parliamentary under-secretary of state and then to the permanent under-secretary in 1948, before being posted as first secretary at the high commission in Pakistan from 1950 to 1954, serving in Dacca, Peshawar, and Karachi. In the latter year he was part of the UK delegation to the general assembly of the United Nations in New York. After two years' secondment to the foreign service as first secretary in Tokyo, 1955-7, he was UK delegate to the Conference on the Law of the Sea at Geneva in 1958. Then followed postings as deputy high commissioner in East Pakistan (1958-9); assistant secretary at the Commonwealth Relations Office (1959-61); counsellor and head of chancery in Ottawa (1961-4); and finally head of the west African department in the Commonwealth Office (1965-6). 
On 29 July 1950 Greenhill married Gillian Stratton, eldest daughter of Captain Ralph Tyzacke Stratton, army officer. She died in East Pakistan in 1959, leaving him with a young son. On 2 June 1961 Greenhill married (May Elizabeth) Ann Giffard, artist, and daughter of Walter Ernest Giffard, farmer; they also had one son. 
Greenhill's boyhood love of the sea and of sailing ships had developed during his diplomatic career into a parallel occupation as maritime historian. His two-volume work, 'The Merchant Schooners' (1951 and 1957), was widely acclaimed, and among his other publications were an edition of W. J. Slade's 'Out of Appledore' (1959) and 'Sailing for a Living' (1962). When in 1966 the directorship of the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, became vacant, he applied, was duly appointed, and so resigned from the Commonwealth Office, being made CMG on his retirement. 
Greenhill arrived at the museum in 1967 with a new broom to bring it into the latter half of the twentieth century. Dusty showcases, containing dated and poorly labelled exhibits, were refurbished to become more appealing to the eyes of visitors. One of his proudest achievements was the creation of a polar gallery in the museum basement, where were displayed much clothing and equipment from nineteenth-century Arctic expeditions, including that of 1875-6 in which Rear-Admiral George A. Giffard, his wife's uncle, had taken part as a young lieutenant. (Among special lectures in the painted hall that Greenhill arranged was one on the British Arctic expedition of 1875-6.) The gallery's most famous exhibit for a number of years was Sir Ernest Shackleton's ship's boat, 'James Caird', later housed at Dulwich College. As a further example of Greenhill's eclectic interests and initiatives, in 1974 he invited from Norway Major Tryggve Gran, the last surviving officer of Captain Scott's last expedition, to give a lecture at the museum. Gran, then aged eighty-five, held a rapt audience for two hours. Greenhill then arranged for Gran's journal to be translated and edited for publication as 'The Norwegian with Scott' (1984). 
Greenhill ran a tight ship at the museum for sixteen years, and was a hard man to serve. He expected his senior staff to produce research books and papers, just as he did over the years -- his message was to publish or perish. Among his publications in this period were 'Westcountrymen in Prince Edward's Isle' (1967, with Ann Giffard), 'Boats and Boatmen of Pakistan' (1971), and 'The British Seafarer' (1980, with Michael Mason, also a BBC radio series). He was held in high respect by all his staff, but with little real affection. His stock internationally was such that he was elected first president of the International Congress of Maritime Museums (1975-81). He was also chairman of the National Museum Directors' Conference from 1980 to 1983, the year in which he retired. He had been made CB in 1981, but must be considered unlucky not to have been knighted on his retirement. Budgetary restrictions shortly afterwards forced his successor to dismantle the polar gallery, and Greenhill never entered the museum again. 
On his retirement Greenhill and his wife rented a small National Trust farmhouse at St Dominic, near Saltash, Cornwall, while retaining their house in London for a time. Both were accomplished maritime historians, and collaborated on a number of books. In 1980 Greenhill was awarded a PhD by the University of Bristol for further research. He continued to produce a stream of naval or maritime books until 1997, by which time he had published (either solely or jointly) more than forty books. In 1981 a new project claimed much of his time and driving force when, through the munificence of the British businessman Jack Hayward, the SS 'Great Britain' was brought back to her home port of Bristol to be conserved in dry dock in the Great Western Dockyard. She had been launched in 1843 as the first iron-hulled, ocean-going steamship to Brunel's design, but after being dismasted while sailing around Cape Horn in 1886 had lain stranded in Stanley harbour, Falkland Islands, where she was used for storage. From fragmentary evidence, Greenhill's expertise allowed him to deduce how the ship's masts must have been rigged. From 1982 to 1992 he was chairman of the SS 'Great Britain' project, and from 1992 vice-president. He was also chairman of the Centre for Maritime Historical Studies at the University of Exeter, 1991-8, and at one time or another held other prestigious appointments such as membership of the Ancient Monuments Board for England (1972-84). He was a tireless and talented lecturer, travelling widely to plug the campaign of the moment. During his long career several fellowships and honorary doctorates came his way. 
Greenhill died at his home, West Boetheric Farm House, St Dominic, on 8 April 2003, of cancer of the prostate. He was remembered as an austere person dedicated to his profession and to his writing, and a loyal friend to those he respected or admired. He was survived by his second wife and by the two sons of his two marriages. Following his death, his widow, Ann, organized a commemoration and celebration of his life, held aboard SS 'Great Britain' on 25 September 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 89893


Jones, Aubrey (1911-2003), politician and industrialist, was born on 20 November 1911 at 6 Plantation Terrace, Penydarren, Merthyr Tudful, Glamorgan, the son of Evan Jones, coalminer, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Aubrey, schoolteacher. His father, who began life as a coalface worker before becoming a pit deputy in charge of safety, was an ardent trade unionist in the colliery deputies' union, NACODS, but later contracted the miners' disease of pneumoconiosis, after which he took a labourer's job in the Dowlais steel works. 
Jones was educated at Cyfarthfa Castle secondary school in Merthyr and the London School of Economics, where he was tutored by Harold Laski, among others. He won first-class honours and the Gladstone memorial prize as well as the Gerstenberg postgraduate award. It appeared to be a golden key into the Labour movement -- but not for Jones. One theory is that in a perverse manner -- a notable Jones characteristic -- he may have been put off by the left-wing dominance at the London School of Economics in the mid-1930s, when it was almost an imperative to be with the left. Jones's choice was different -- he seized an opportunity to start work with the League of Nations in Geneva as a research assistant and then, after a brief spell in the atmosphere of international diplomacy, opted to move into journalism. He applied to 'The Times' for a job as a foreign correspondent, but received a predictable response: the editor told him first to acquire experience working on a provincial paper and then apply again. Jones accepted that advice and found a job as a reporter on the 'Western Mail' in Cardiff at $2 a week plus a bonus of five shillings for every leading article he wrote. In 1937 he finally joined 'The Times' in London as a sub-editor on the foreign desk, where one of his colleagues was Kim Philby -- whom Jones later described as 'agreeable, analytical, cool, objective and pleasant' ('The Guardian'). Subsequently he was posted to the paper's Paris bureau; after a brief spell in Rome he moved on to Berlin, where he remained a 'Times' correspondent until three days before the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939. 
With his experience in Nazi Germany and Mussolini's Italy, Jones joined the War Office military intelligence unit in 1939, going on to serve in that capacity with the Eighth Army in north Africa and Sicily. He remained with the army until 1946, and it was during the closing days of the war that his political attitude took a decisive shift towards the Conservative Party -- again a contrary move since servicemen of all ranks were then mostly voting Labour. While in Sicily he wrote a widely read pamphlet, 'Right and Left', which he followed with a full-length book, 'The Pendulum of Politics' (1946). During the election of 1945, by now with the rank of captain, he was given leave to contest South-East Essex as the tory candidate. Defeated though not discouraged, one year later while still in uniform he was again a candidate and came close to overturning a Labour majority in a by-election at Heywood and Radcliffe, losing by a mere 452 votes. After demobilization he rejoined 'The Times' but in 1949 moved to the British Iron and Steel Federation as assistant to its director, Sir Andrew Duncan, and played a leading role in the federation's campaign to stop steel nationalization. Meanwhile, on 7 September 1948 he had married Joan Marie Godfrey-Isaacs, daughter of Godfrey Phineas Godfrey-Isaacs, a company director, of Hanger Hill, west London. They had two sons. 
In the general election of 1950 Jones won the newly created seat of Birmingham Hall Green for the Conservatives with a majority of 3853. Much to his dismay this did not lead to speedy promotion when the tories returned to office in 1951. The Churchill government passed over Jones and confined him, restlessly, to the back benches from where he continued to work with the British Iron and Steel Federation as well as in parliament. In 1952 he was given a minor role as parliamentary private secretary to the minister of state for economic affairs, Sir Arthur Salter -- yet the restlessness continued, even to the point of him privately criticizing his government's policies, notably their lack of effective economic planning. Six months after Eden won the 1955 election Jones finally secured serious promotion, succeeding Geoffrey Lloyd as minister of fuel and power, albeit outside the cabinet. None the less Jones became responsible for three major state-run industries -- coal, electricity, and gas. He was sworn of the privy council the same year. His administrative ability was palpable and in 1957 when Harold Macmillan became prime minister Jones was made minister of supply -- in charge of defence contracting, including Britain's H-bomb testing programme, as well as the aircraft industry, though still outside the cabinet. He remained in that role until 1959. The final disappointment, which influenced the rest of his career, came after Macmillan won a large majority in the 1959 election: Macmillan abolished the Ministry of Supply and made Duncan Sandys his minister of aviation. Jones, disapproving strongly of the abolition of his ministry, and offered only a minor post, returned to the back benches. Increasingly he voiced criticism of his own government, especially over its policy on Europe. It was already clear that he was shifting towards a more liberal social and economic agenda and was out of tune with mainstream Conservative thinking. He was particularly out of sympathy with his government's policy on race relations and immigration and in November 1962 he rebelliously called for Macmillan's resignation. Yet even when that happened a year later, with Sir Alec Douglas-Home becoming prime minister, there was no ministerial job for him. 
In 1965 Jones accepted the Wilson government's invitation to become the first chairman of the National Board for Prices and Incomes. He resigned his seat to begin a new career which he later described as being his most fulfilling period in public affairs, though he was to find just as many frustrations in his new role as in parliament. Britain's economic situation was in continuous crisis, with the industrial relations scene tense and unpredictable. By then Jones was a convinced advocate of a rational wages policy as part of a planned economic strategy. But with the collapse of George Brown's national economic plan and devalution in 1967, Jones found himself trapped by circumstances beyond his influence or control. Though lacking powers of compulsion, the board found itself increasingly criticized by trade unions, and engaged in turf wars with the Monopolies Commission. On the eve of the 1970 election the Wilson government announced its intention of ending the latter by merging the Monopolies Commission with the Prices and Incomes Board, under Jones's command. However, the election was won by Heath's Conservatives, and Jones's organization was scrapped the following year. 
Jones retired to a range of industrial directorships (including Thomas Tilling Ltd and the Cornhill Insurance Co. Ltd), academic lecturing, writing several books (notably 'The New Inflation: the Politics of Prices and Incomes', 1973, 'Oil: the Missed Opportunity', 1981, and 'Britain's Economy: the Roots of Stagnation', 1985, the latter in part autobiographical), and lamenting the failure of successive governments to recognize the importance of a prices and incomes policy within a new economic strategy. He joined the Liberal Party in 1980 and in 1983 stood as the Alliance candidate against a tory minister, Norman Fowler, at Sutton Coldfield, where he was soundly defeated. He died on 10 April 2003 at Westhampnett Nursing Home, Chichester, of motor neurone disease. He was survived by his wife, Joan, and their two sons. 
Aubrey Jones was very much an odd one out -- in youth a loner, who despite his successful career remained a somewhat uneasy and detached character for the rest of his life. A meticulous, measured, and polished executant of power, he yet seemed uncomfortable with it, as if always affected by an inner conflict. From the coalfields of south Wales to the centre of Conservative political power was a remarkable journey, taken by very few. Yet in truth it was a journey too far for Jones, who only later in life discovered his metier, as a radical economic reformer. He was more comfortable as a technocrat than as a politician, and more suited to that role. 


@@@@@


doc= 89894


Jones, Elsie Elizabeth Duncan- (1908-2003), literary scholar, was born at 3 Walnut Road, Chelston, Devon, on 2 July 1908, the elder daughter of Henry Phare, stationer and later radio engineer, and his wife, Hilda Annie, 'nee' Bull. Her brilliance was recognized at Torquay Girls' Secondary School, and in 1926 a scholarship to Newnham College, Cambridge, provided a much needed supplement to her county and state awards. Her college mentor was Enid Welsford, and she was a favoured pupil of Ivor Richards, for whose experiment in criticism she wrote one of the 'protocols'. As president of Newnham's undergraduate literary society in June 1928 she secured a 'haughty' Virginia Woolf, a friend of the principal, Pernel Strachey, for a talk that planted the seeds of 'A Room of One's Own' ('The Independent', 24 April 2003). William Empson enlisted her to contribute to 'Experiment' and Terence White as a reviewer for 'Granta'. Meanwhile, from a Methodist background, she had offered herself for confirmation as an Anglican in the high church milieu of Little St Mary's. At a time when women were not yet full members of the university, her starred first in part one of the English tripos, followed by a distinction in part two, set a record until then unmatched by either sex. This was crowned when she became the first woman to win both the chancellor's medal for English verse (1929) and later the Seatonian prize for religious poetry (1935, 1938). A research studentship from the college allowed her to pursue an interest in French literature in Paris, where she paid a struggling Jean Rhys to type her dissertation on the English civil-war exiles. Her memoirs of the time in the 'Cambridge Review' (1982) and 'Cambridge Women' (1996) were written with the easy elegance that characterized all her writing. 
Having narrowly missed a Cambridge fellowship, in 1931 Elsie Phare became an assistant lecturer in English at the University College of Southampton, where she wrote a pastoral play, 'Fidelia's Ghost', and translated Moliere's 'Le misanthrope'. As E. E. Phare she made her critical debut with the earliest book-length study of 'The Poetry of Gerard Manley Hopkins' (1933), which, while reflecting the influence of Richards in its focus on meaning and imagery, did not shrink from defining its subject through comparison with other poets. Her marriage on 17 April 1933 to Austin Ernest Duncan-Jones (1908-1967), a Cambridge contemporary then teaching in the classics department, had by the regulations of the time already cost her the post. He was the son of Arthur Stuart Duncan-Jones, dean of Chichester; they had two sons, one of whom died young, and a daughter. At Birmingham University, where in 1936 her husband took up an appointment in philosophy (he was later professor of philosophy there, from 1951 until his death), she taught part-time until, on the outbreak of the Second World War, she obtained a lectureship. For the next forty years she helped, inspired, and charmed pupils and colleagues alike, retiring in 1976 with the rank of reader. Her scope was broad: Helen Gardner, a close friend from those days, attributed her own understanding of Eliot's 'Ash Wednesday' to an essay that she wrote in 1947, and hailed her perspicacity as her greatest debt in annotating Donne. 
From 1949 to 2001 a stream of discoveries and insights, published initially through the letter pages of the 'Times Literary Supplement' and in 'Notes and Queries', established Elsie Duncan-Jones as a leading authority on Andrew Marvell. For this she was admirably equipped by uncommonly attentive reading in all areas of seventeenth-century literature, both English and French, a formidable memory, and acute literary sensibilities. During a period of vastly increasing critical interest in Marvell's poems, her biographical and historical researches provided vital clues to context and date. Literary debts, traced from as far afield as classical authors or contemporary political prose, were identified and interpreted, and she had a determined eye for the literal element in the poems. Unmoved to theorize and disinclined by temperament to embark on large projects of her own, she nevertheless assisted the veteran French scholar Pierre Legouis in an English abridgement (1965) of his pioneering study 'Andre Marvell' (1929), and successfully collaborated in revising H. M. Margoliouth's Oxford text of the 'Poems and Letters' (1971), matching him almost note for note in the commentary. In the year of her retirement, her lively Warton lecture on English poetry, 'Marvell: a great master of words' (1975), drew on an equally unrivalled knowledge of the letters and polemical prose to define an underlying rhetoric of praise and blame. Back in Cambridge, where she lived in her retirement, she continued to promote understanding of Marvell's work by her own writings and, even more, through the advice that she gave to the many scholars who sought her out. 
Elsie Duncan-Jones was of middle height. A portrait photograph taken around the time of her marriage captures her prettiness -- the term did not displease -- and vivacity. While unfailingly kind, she was capable of sharpness when warranted, and sudden mischievous questions. Her curiosity was inexhaustible: news of fresh discoveries, however trivial or recondite, delighted her, and she could always be relied on to enlarge their significance. Her nineties, when a severe illness left her housebound and fretful at her diminished capacity for work, were cheered by the companionship of her former pupil Anthea Morrison. She died at her home, 16 Amhurst Court, Grange Road, Cambridge, on 7 April 2003, of bronchopneumonia, her funeral taking place on 15 April at Little St Mary's, with which she had kept up a close connection. She was survived by her son Richard, an ancient historian, and her daughter, Katherine, a Shakespeare scholar. 


@@@@@


doc= 89897


Kelley, Joanna Elizabeth (1910-2003), prison administrator, was born on 23 May 1910 in Murree, a hill station in India, the younger daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel William Beadon (1867-1916) of the 51st Sikhs and his wife, Joanna Elizabeth, 'nee' Ballard (1870-1958), a portrait painter, daughter of Lieutenant-General John Archibald Ballard and sister of Admiral George Alexander Ballard. Her paternal grandfather, Edward Musgrave Beadon, was also a general. Shortly before the outbreak of the First World War her mother returned to England with the children: her father was killed in action at Kut, in Mesopotamia, in 1916. Joanna Kelley grew up in Chelsea, London, and was educated at Hayes Court in Kent before going up to Girton College, Cambridge, in 1928 to read economics. She was awarded a lower second in part one of the tripos in 1930 and a third in part two in 1931. After moving to Paris she attended lectures at the Sorbonne and met Harper (Patrick) Kelley (1896/7-1962), an archaeologist from Illinois, head of the department of prehistory at the Musee de l'Ethnographie. They married on 6 November 1934. For the next five years she worked with her husband as a curator at the museum, becoming an expert in the classification of Stone Age implements. 
The Second World War broke out while Kelley was on holiday in England, and she worked as a youth club leader for the YWCA in the East End of London until the premises were destroyed by a bomb in 1942, when she moved to Bath as a welfare officer in the Admiralty. She had expected her husband, who had returned to America, to rejoin her after the war, and was deeply upset to learn that he was living with another woman and had no intention of returning. They were later divorced. By 1947 she was ready to leave the Admiralty, and with no clear idea of what she wanted to do next, took the advice of the Cambridge University appointments board and applied for a job with the prison service. She was appointed assistant governor of Holloway prison in London, the largest women's prison in the country. In 1952 she was appointed governor of Askham Grange open prison, opened in 1947 in a country house near York. There she developed a training course in domestic science to prepare the women in her charge to take up life outside again, and encouraged the prison staff to develop friendly relations with the prisoners: in Holloway inmates had not been allowed to speak to the staff unless spoken to. As she said in 1954, 'By far the majority of people here are not really criminal types at all. They are in prison because they were muddlers outside... We try to teach them how to cope' (Winn, 115). Her experience at Askham Grange convinced her that this approach was more likely to lead to the rehabilitation of a prisoner than punishing her by locking her up in a traditional prison. 
From 1959 to 1966 Kelley was governor of Holloway, a forbidding Victorian fortress built in 1852 with a facade reputedly inspired by that of Warwick Castle and a layout modelled on Pentonville prison, with corridors of locked cells radiating out from a central desk. Within this grim building she attempted to transform Holloway from a punitive institution into a therapeutic community, believing that most women who broke the law were suffering from personality or psychiatric disorders, and needed treatment not punishment. She introduced group therapy in 1960 and counselling in 1963, while the recidivist wing became a psychotherapeutic unit. 
In 1967 Kelley moved to the prison department of the Home Office as assistant director of prisons, in charge of women's prisons: 'I thought this was a wonderful opportunity... I shall spend my time getting Holloway changed and so I did' (Rock, 58). Having convinced her head of department, Kenneth Neale, that Holloway was 'an affront to civilisation', they set out their ideas in 'Prison Policy: Women and Girls' (1968). This was accepted by the home secretary, James Callaghan, who announced in December 1968 that Holloway would be pulled down and rebuilt as a secure hospital. A member of the Holloway redevelopment project group, she was described by Neale as 'the powerhouse of the whole thing' (ibid., 57), while a former colleague later remembered, 'She was a Mrs Thatcher. She got all the work done' (ibid.). The new Holloway was designed as a large hospital with a small secure unit, with the women living in small units grouped round a 'village green', in an attempt to provide a more normal environment, with the emphasis on community life and minimal security. The prison officers were to become more like social workers. Although at first she was in favour of renaming it Holloway Hospital, she later wrote that she regretted the use of the word 'hospital': 'we really had in mind a place of healing, not only of the body but also of the mind and attitudes and education and practice in relationships' (ibid., 93). Demolition of the old buildings began in 1970, while the prison remained operational, but by the time Kelley retired in 1974 attitudes towards women in prison were changing: the numbers were increasing, there was more violent crime, and there was the new problem of women terrorists, including the Palestinian hijacker Leila Khaled, members of the Angry Brigade, and IRA bombers, leading to questioning of the view that all that women lawbreakers needed was psychiatric treatment. In the mid-1970s the design and purpose of the new institution were changed, with less emphasis on treatment and more on the containment of violent and disturbed prisoners, and by the time it was completed in 1985, it was no longer able to function according to Kelley's vision. 
Kelley had always been a devout member of the Church of England, but in 1945 she found a deeper religious experience after meeting Brother Edward (Edward Bulstrode), a travelling preacher, at a retreat led by him. She later became involved in the work of the Village Evangelists, started by Brother Edward and Bishop Walter Carey in 1948 to spread the message of Christianity and prepare the way for the second coming. She was one of the many lay helpers who took part in missions to the parishes. As a prison governor she was sustained by her religious faith, though she later admitted that 'working in a place where there must be deep channels of evil, it is easy sometimes to be carried away completely by moods of bitterness and black depression' (Kelley, 'When the Gates Shut', 170). In 1965 she helped to found the Teilhard de Chardin Association, and in retirement she remained in London and joined the congregation of St Michael, Chester Square, and later that of St James-the-Less, Vauxhall Bridge Road, an evangelical and charismatic church. She was a member of the council of St George's House, Windsor, from 1971 to 1977, of the Redundant Churches Committee from 1974 to 1979, and of the Scott Holland Trust from 1978 to 1986. 

'When the Gates Shut' was published in 1967, followed by 'Who Casts the First Stone? A New Look at Crime and Punishment' (1978). She also wrote but did not publish a life of Brother Edward, 'The White Hyacinth' (1978), and collected material for a history of Holloway prison. She loved poetry, especially that of T. S. Eliot, and organized poetry readings in her house in Pimlico. She also travelled widely. She was appointed OBE in 1973. She died on 12 April 2003 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, following a stroke, and was cremated on 28 April at Hammersmith crematorium. She had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89900


Knight, Sir Arthur William (1917-2003), industrialist, was born on 29 March 1917 at 47 Park Road, Tottenham, London, the son of Arthur Frederick Knight, a steel hardener and later a railway porter, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Scott. He was educated at Tottenham county school until the age of sixteen, when he joined J. Sainsbury at Blackfriars as a clerk. While working there he took evening classes at the London School of Economics, graduating with a first-class degree in commerce. After spending a year in the LSE's department of business administration he joined Courtaulds in 1938 as a junior economist; the company was then one of the world's largest rayon manufacturers. 
Knight's economics training was put to good use during the Second World War. He worked for the Special Operations Executive, was posted to north Africa, and was later given responsibility for finance in the control commission for Austria. He rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1945 he married (Beatrice) Joan Osborne, 'nee' Oppenheim, and they later had three daughters and one son. She died in 1968, and on 1 July 1972 he married Sheila Elsie Whiteman, civil servant, and daughter of Bernard Whiteman, electrician. There were no children of this second marriage. 
Knight's wartime experience and his experience in the allied administration of Austria gave him an international outlook which was to prove valuable when he rejoined Courtaulds in 1946. He was assigned to the overseas investments department, dealing with the company's subsidiaries and joint ventures in North America, continental Europe, and Australia. He acquired useful knowledge about the world fibre market and Courtaulds' principal competitors. By the 1950s the company was facing serious problems. It had lost its valuable American subsidiary, American Viscose, sold in 1941 at the government's behest as part of the lend-lease agreement with the USA. It was also heavily committed to rayon at a time when demand was shifting to other synthetic fibres -- nylon, polyester, and acrylic. Courtaulds had a joint venture in nylon with Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), known as British Nylon Spinners, and it was developing an acrylic fibre of its own. But it was a long way behind the leaders in the synthetic fibre business, and there was no easy way of catching up. One response was to diversify into other industries. This effort was led by Frank Kearton, an ambitious former ICI chemical engineer who was emerging as the most forceful figure on the Courtaulds board. Knight assisted Kearton in the diversification programme, and was involved in several substantial acquisitions, principally in paints and packaging. He joined the board in 1958 and became finance director three years later. He introduced a more sophisticated approach to financial control, pioneering the use of discounted cash flow techniques for assessing new investments. 
As finance director Knight had an important supporting role in the events surrounding the attempted takeover of Courtaulds by ICI in 1961-2. This was an extraordinary event in British business history -- by far the biggest hostile takeover by then launched in the UK -- and a turning-point for Courtaulds itself. The ICI board, led by its chairman, Paul Chambers, argued that a merger would consolidate the UK's fibre industry in the hands of a single strong group, and eliminate the many sources of friction that had grown up between the two companies. Courtaulds was a partner with ICI in British Nylon Spinners, but also a competitor, and a large customer for ICI's intermediate chemicals. The board of Courtaulds was divided, but Kearton opposed the bid, and he was supported by Knight and several other directors. Their opposition was not to the industrial logic behind the bid, but to the price ICI was offering. But as the battle became more heated, antagonism between the two sides increased, and, even though ICI improved its offer, the Courtaulds board resolved to stay independent. When the offer was put to shareholders ICI won only 38 per cent of the votes. Knight subsequently negotiated an arrangement whereby ICI gave up this shareholding in return for Courtaulds' stake in BNS. 
While the defeat of ICI was widely seen as a triumph for Kearton and the new men at Courtaulds, it did nothing to solve the company's strategic problems. Even though the new acrylic fibre, Courtelle, was doing well, the company was still uncomfortably dependent on the slow-growing rayon market. To make matters worse, its principal customer was the Lancashire textile industry, which appeared to be in the throes of irreversible decline. This industry was suffering not only from obsolete equipment and poor management, but also from increasing imports of low-cost fabric from British overseas territories and Commonwealth countries -- principally Hong Kong, India, and Pakistan -- whose products were allowed into the UK free of duty. The challenge for Kearton, who became chairman of the company in 1964, was to find a way out of this dilemma. His solution was for Courtaulds to embark on a policy of vertical integration -- investing in all phases of the textile business, including spinning, weaving, knitting, and garment-making. Part of the rationale was to secure captive outlets for Courtaulds' fibres -- not just rayon, but also Courtelle, and the new ventures in nylon and polyester, where Courtaulds faced strong competition from established suppliers such as ICI and Du Pont. Knight, who was appointed a deputy chairman in 1970, worked closely with Kearton on this strategy (although their personal relations were often tense), and provided much of the intellectual rationale for it. His thinking was influenced by the example of the USA, where big textile companies such as Burlington Mills had prospered by investing in large, well-equipped mills to churn out standard fabric in very long runs. Knight believed that the same approach could work in the UK; an injection of capital, technology, and new management would allow the British textile industry to become the low-cost supplier to the rest of Europe. 
This strategy depended crucially on the willingness of the British government to provide some relief against import competition. Knight tried to convince the politicians that a period of protection would give the textile industry the necessary breathing-space in which to put its house in order. As he explained in a book published in 1974, 'Private Enterprise and Public Intervention: the Courtaulds Experience', he saw a parallel between the textile situation in the UK and the economic arguments often used to support 'infant' industries. A rebirth, he wrote, was as important as a new birth (Knight, 198). Some concessions were obtained, notably a decision by the Labour government in 1969 to impose a tariff on Commonwealth textile suppliers. But the extent of protection was less than Knight had hoped for. Meanwhile vertical integration proved more difficult to implement than he and Kearton had expected. It was a production-orientated approach which, by forcing the company's newly acquired textile mills to buy fibre from Courtaulds, took too little account of what the customer wanted. Moreover, the comparison with the USA turned out to be misleading; the European market was more diverse and more fragmented, offering less scope than the USA for high-volume production of standard yarns and fabrics. 
By the time Kearton retired from the chairmanship in 1975, to be succeeded by Knight, it was clear that the 'grand design' was failing. Knight, who was knighted that year, largely abandoned vertical integration, and allowed the mills to buy from competing fibre suppliers. Although he still believed in standardization and economies of scale as an appropriate strategy for the British textile industry, he took a more realistic view of what could be achieved through new investment. By replacing Kearton's one-man rule with a greater degree of delegation and collegiality, he brought some order into a group which, thanks to the hectic acquisition activity of the preceding decade, had become a complex collection of disparate activities. He also sought to rebuild relationships with the company's key customers, principally Marks and Spencer. When Knight retired in 1979 some of the excesses stemming from the Kearton era had been corrected, although there were still huge problems left for his successor to deal with. 
Knight was unusual among British industrialists in his intellectual approach to business; he had a strong commitment to management education, helping to set up the Manchester Business School in 1964 and serving on the school's council for several years. As he showed in his book, he also had a clear vision of how government and the private sector could work together to improve the UK's industrial performance. It was partly for that reason that he agreed, after retiring from Courtaulds, to take on the chairmanship of the National Enterprise Board (NEB), the industrial development agency that had been set up by the outgoing Labour government as the vehicle for extensive state intervention in industry. Knight presided over the disposal of several NEB shareholdings, but he was frustrated by the restrictions imposed on him by the Thatcher government. He had hoped to be able to reinvest the proceeds of NEB sales in new ventures, but this did not accord with the non-interventionist stance of the new government. He resigned from the NEB in 1980, after little more than a year in the post. 
Although Knight was in demand as a non-executive director after he had left Courtaulds (he served on the board of Dunlop Holdings from 1981 to 1984), he spent much of his time at his alma mater, the London School of Economics. He was a member of the LSE's court of governors from 1971 to 1994, and was made an honorary fellow in 1984. He had a particular interest in business history and industrial policy, but he also thought deeply, and read widely, about the future of the capitalist system. Always willing to talk frankly about his own business experience, he was a valuable source of ideas and intellectual stimulation for his LSE colleagues. In retirement he lived at Charlton End, near Chichester, Sussex. He died at the Nuffield Hospital, Broyle Road, Chichester, on 5 April 2003, of cancer, and was survived by his second wife, Sheila, and the four children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 89908


Nicholson, (Edward) Max (1904-2003), ornithologist and environmentalist, was born on 12 July 1904 at Kilternan, co. Dublin, Ireland, the elder son of Edward Prichard Nicholson (1875-1945), photographer, and his wife, Constance Caroline, 'nee' Oldmeadow (1875-1945), daughter of the chief clerk and chief superintendent of the Cheshire constabulary. At an early age he developed a passion for ornithology, a distrust of government, and a view that his generation had a duty to make things better because the slaughter of younger men in the First World War had left an incompetent old guard in charge of public affairs. These were to determine his life. 
Nicholson was educated as a scholar at Sedbergh School. However, when his father defaulted even on the reduced fees, he left at the age of seventeen. He lived with his family for a year in Germany, benefiting from being able to observe birds in a somewhat different environment and from being able to reflect on British society from an overseas perspective. In 1923 he took a hack job writing travel guides. His first published work had been a note in 'The Field' at the age of thirteen; his first newspaper article was published in 1921. He continued to write for newspapers, especially on birds, and by 1925 was well established. Submitting material to 'The Times' drew him to the attention of the editor, Geoffrey Dawson, who advised him to go to Oxford. A scholarship at Hertford College, supplemented by some small grants and his writing income (he was the Oxford correspondent of the 'Saturday Review'), allowed him to do so in 1926. 
At Oxford, Nicholson read modern history but, while this gave him a lifetime interest in current affairs, he spent more time learning ornithology. This he did from Bernard Tucker, a young don and a driving force in the infant Oxford Ornithological Society. Nicholson had published 'Birds in England' (1926) before going to Oxford and was soon drawn into the society's affairs. Having already discovered the value of systematic observations and of census work in ornithology, he organized teams to undertake such work in Oxford and, in 1927, the first national census of any British bird, the grey heron. (The census was repeated annually thereafter.) With the support of the ecologist Charles Elton, he set up the Oxford University Exploration Club, and took part in expeditions to Greenland and British Guiana. 
In 'Birds in England', Nicholson promoted the new ideas about ornithology that were developing and the need to bring them together, asserting that the old-fashioned collecting mania had to be channelled into something more useful. 'How Birds Live' (1927) presented 'the new ornithology' and 'The Art of Bird-Watching' (1931) was a practical guide to field observation. Their favourable reception, his experiences of Oxford, and the success of the heronries census led him to found the British Trust for Ornithology in 1933, in order to organize collaborative fieldwork by amateurs, serving as the trust's first honorary secretary and later as chairman (1947-9). In 1938 he and others founded the Edward Grey Institute in Oxford for professional studies linked to the British Trust for Ornithology, though the linkage later withered. 
After leaving Oxford with a second-class degree in modern history in 1929 Nicholson had become assistant editor of the 'Weekend Review'. This advocated planning and, when challenged by politicians to say what he would do were he in government, Nicholson produced 'A national plan for Britain' as a supplement to the 'Weekend Review' in February 1931. Within months the think-tank Political and Economic Planning (PEP) had been set up by a group of advanced thinkers and businessmen, including Nicholson, who served as its second secretary from 1933. Meanwhile, on 6 August 1932 he had married (Eleanor) Mary Lloyd Crawford (1908-1995), daughter of George Eustace Bigelow Crawford, barrister, of Shurdington House, Gloucestershire; they had two sons, Piers and Tom. 
Though apparently ignored by government, PEP established the thinking that allowed radical measures to be taken when the Second World War came. The Post War Aims Group was set up under its auspices, with Nicholson as an active member, aiming to avoid the mistakes that had been made after the First World War that were considered to have led to the second; its first report appeared the day after the declaration of war. Nicholson was quickly recruited to the Ministry of Information but he resigned after six weeks, dismayed by the incompetence of the civil service. He was, however, in 1942 persuaded to join the Ministry of Shipping, later the Ministry of War Transport, where he became head of the allocation of tonnage division (responsible for planning virtually all British seaborne freight). Here he displayed his talents for radical thought, for getting around procedural obstacles, for getting the right person into the right job, and for getting people to work together. He invented, as instruments of economic warfare, both the ship warrant scheme and the Middle East Supply Centre. He travelled widely, attending the summit meetings at Quebec, Yalta, Malta, Cairo, and Potsdam. Opportunities for bird-watching were not neglected: he once caused alarm on an Atlantic crossing by innocently revealing that he knew the ship's position -- from observing the birds. 
Nicholson played a major part in post-war reconstruction, as secretary of the office of the lord president of the council, and Herbert Morrison's most senior civil servant. Morrison and his team played a key role in prioritizing the wealth of legislation that was enacted, on town and country planning, agriculture and forestry, national parks, and nature conservation, Nicholson having a deep personal interest in all of these, especially the last. His main role in the office was to promote economic planning, though he later felt that the government had been mistaken to give this high priority in its manifesto, rather than letting it take its course. This work fell foul of political rivalries in the government, the determination of the Treasury to assert its traditional authority (combined with its suspicion of planning), and the reaction of some civil servants, especially in the Treasury, to an assertive man whose mind worked more quickly than theirs. Nevertheless the loss of the economic planning role to the Treasury freed up Nicholson's time to the extent that he was able, for example, to chair the committee that organized the Festival of Britain -- its success being in his mind largely the result of government letting others get on with the job. His organizational skills triumphed over the tight time-scale with which he was faced. 
After Morrison moved to the Foreign Office in 1951 Nicholson decided to leave the civil service. The Nature Conservancy, established by royal charter in 1949, was not flourishing and in 1952 Nicholson was persuaded to become its director-general, in succession to Cyril Diver. Nicholson's appointment heralded the glory years of the conservancy. Not only were nature reserves established but so was the conservancy's responsibility for promoting conservation issues more broadly, on a basis of sound science. Nicholson's passionate belief in basing policy on evidence and rational thinking flowered: he promoted fundamental research as well as that directly applied to managing particular sites; he established a network of research stations; he promoted ecological education, in particular an MSc course in ecology and conservation at University College, London; and he gathered a talented team and inspired them. He also encouraged the voluntary bodies, recognizing that the energies of their armies of skilled field naturalists could provide a wealth of scientific evidence far in excess of what the few professionals could achieve. He reached out to the wider public, funding the Council for Nature to run an intelligence unit for three years, until the media became used to the idea of running stories on the environment. He took up a challenge by the duke of Edinburgh to mount the 'Countryside in 1970' conferences (1963-70), the first at very short notice. They massively raised the profile of conservation in Britain. 
Although reluctant at first to divert British conservation energies into international activities, Nicholson found a Foreign Office lawyer to draw up a constitution for the International Union for the Protection (from 1956 Conservation) of Nature (IUCN) in 1948, and he remained a strong supporter throughout his time at the Nature Conservancy. As ever he promoted the importance of ecological science to the organization's activities and, as convener of the section on terrestrial conservation in the international biological programme, he sought to create a scientific database for the world's key conservation areas. Victor Stolan pointed out that if the IUCN was to be effective, it needed millions of pounds. In 1960-61 Nicholson discussed with Peter Scott, Guy Mountfort, and others the possibility of setting up a voluntary body to raise such funds, wrote a constitution for it, and got the duke of Edinburgh involved as British patron. So in September 1961 the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) was born. As was his habit, having set it up and got a good team to organize the new body, Nicholson largely dropped out. 
Nicholson was no mere administrator. Not only did he continue to write and speak on conservation issues but he participated in fieldwork, despite the limp that was a consequence of polio contracted on a survey of Baluchistan for the United Nations Development Programme in 1952. This included participation in Guy Mountfort's expeditions to the Coto Donana in 1957 and to Jordan in 1964, reports arising from which were influential in promoting nature conservation in both areas. 
Politically skilful, as head of the Nature Conservancy Nicholson fought off pressures from the Treasury, landowners, and some politicians that might otherwise have crushed the infant body. But in 1965 it was absorbed into the new Natural Environment Research Council; in 1973 it became the Nature Conservancy Council, a grant-aided body of the new Department of the Environment, but its research functions remained with the research council. By then Nicholson had left the Nature Conservancy, having retired in 1966. Another turning point was his marriage in 1965 to Marie Antoinette (Toni) Mauerhofer (1928-2002), his first marriage having been dissolved the previous year. With his second wife he had another son, David. 
Nicholson's retirement from the Nature Conservancy allowed him to pursue new projects. The chief of these was a trilogy of books. 'The System' (1967) was, as its subtitle said, about 'The misgovernment of modern Britain'. It criticized the civil service, especially the Treasury, for conservatism, inflexibility, and slowness to respond to need for change or action (or even to recognize it); for its public school ethos; for its denigration of professionalism and rational thinkers, and its technical incompetence; for its failure to adopt rational and experimental approaches or to learn lessons; and for its abandonment of planning. The book saw similar problems in the country at large. It made a case for abolishing the Treasury. Though it received much publicity and led to increased public awareness of deficiencies in the civil service, officials readily persuaded ministers not to attempt fundamental reform. 'The Environmental Revolution' (1970) was written to inform the growing band of concerned people about the need to address the impact of man on the environment. His view that conservation was essential, not a luxury, was widely accepted. Here again Nicholson felt that the established rulers were not intellectually equipped for the task in hand, but he also felt that there was a revolution in progress, with the technically competent taking over. Strangely, 'The Big Change' (1973), which argued for a big change in our management of the environment, was a 'flop' (his word), and was published only in the USA. 
Nicholson was always one to translate vision into action. Another retirement project was therefore to set up, in 1966, Land Use Consultants, to advise industry on how to reduce the environmental damage that might otherwise result from its activities, a new idea at the time. He remained as chairman until 1989. He also helped found the 'Ends Report', a journal for environmental managers in industry, and served as managing editor. Among other organizations he was involved in initiating were Earthwatch Europe and the International Institute for Environment and Development. Having been shown the Mallorcan wetlands site of s'Albufera while on a family holiday, he was a key driving force in its study and conservation as a national park. In 1977 he took responsibility for the environment on the committee organizing the queen's silver jubilee celebrations. Having experienced guided walks on nature reserves, he produced the idea of the silver jubilee walkway, to show people London's historic sites and to be a permanent marker of the celebration. 
Ornithology remained Nicholson's greatest passion. He had taken over the reins of the important journal of record, 'British Birds', on the death of its editor, Bernard Tucker, in 1951. He put together an editorial team of which he remained chairman until 1960, and a member until 1971. In the mid-1960s he led the initiative to produce 'The Birds of the Western Palearctic', the first volume of which appeared in 1977 and the ninth, and last, in 1994. Having written the habitats accounts for all but a few vagrant species, Nicholson was the only member of the editorial team to have seen the project through from start to finish. 
In 1996, with a small number of colleagues with experience in the environment and development movements, Nicholson founded the New Renaissance Group, of which he was the first chairman. Its aim was to be a stimulant to move humanity from its patently disastrous course in relation to the environment. As for many years, but still perhaps ahead of his time, Nicholson promoted the view that conservation and development had to go hand in hand, and that environmental, economic, and social considerations had to be pulled together. The New Renaissance Group produced a collection of essays under the title 'Where Next?' (2000), and organized a workshop that took forward the thinking of those essays to produce the statement 'Beyond sustainable development' (2001), in the drafting of which, at the age of ninety-six, Nicholson played a lively part. The secretary of the New Renaissance Group was Teresa Sexton, who had become Nicholson's secretary in 1945 and who worked with him until the end of his life. His success in organizing so many activities in his varied life was underpinned by his ability to inspire such commitment and loyalty in his colleagues. 
Described by Israel Sieff as 'the cleverest man I have ever met' (Sieff, 191) and by Bernard Donoughue and G. W. Jones as 'A man of mercurial intelligence, firing off ideas like a catherine-wheel' (Donoughue and Jones, 350), Nicholson was widely honoured. His work with Morrison resulted in his appointment as CB in 1948 and that with the WWF in appointment as CVO (1971) and Commander of the Order of the Golden Ark, of the Netherlands (1973). He was, however, dismissive of those honours that were bureaucratically routine, and twice turned down offers of a knighthood. He died at his home, 13 Upper Cheyne Row, Chelsea, London, on 26 April 2003, of old age. He was survived by his three sons, both wives having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 89912


Pugh, (Glanville) Vernon (1945-2003), barrister and rugby union administrator, was born in Amman Valley Hospital, Cwmaman, Carmarthenshire, on 5 July 1945, the eldest of the four children of David Glanville Pugh (1919-1988), coalminer, and his wife, Beatrice, 'nee' Lewis ('b'. 1924), of Glyn-moch, near Ammanford. He was educated at Glanamman primary school and Amman Valley grammar school, from where he won an Evan Morgan scholarship to the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. He graduated in 1966 with first-class honours in law and proceeded to Downing College, Cambridge, where he took the degree of LLM in 1968. On 3 April 1967 he married (Rosalyn) Dorinda Davies ('b'. 1947), of Gwauncaegurwen, Glamorgan, the daughter of James Glyn Davies, mining geologist. They had three daughters. In 1968-9 he lectured in property and commercial law at Leicester University, and was for the next four years a lecturer in town planning law at the University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology, Cardiff. In the meantime, in 1969 he became Hardwick scholar and member at Lincoln's Inn, and in 1970 a practising barrister with chambers in Cardiff and London specializing in environmental law and town planning, a role that involved him in major schemes like the redevelopment of Cardiff city centre and the regeneration of its docks and waterfront. In 1986 he was appointed a crown court recorder and queen's counsel. 
However, it was for the legal acumen and intellectual muscle Pugh brought to the transformation of rugby union from an amateur to a professional sport that he was chiefly notable; indeed, he passed up an invitation to become a high court judge because of his passion for rugby and his interest in its administration. He came from the edge of the west Wales coalfield where the game was an obsession and its working-class followers had never made a fetish of amateurism; despite a long tradition of unofficial payments to players, Pugh well knew that too many rugby players from the Welsh valleys had been forced by economic circumstances to abandon amateur rugby union for the more open financial rewards of the professional game played in the north of England. In 1995 his determination that the game should not be irrevocably bound by what he viewed as an outmoded ideology led him, as chairman of the amateurism committee of the International Rugby Board (IRB), to mastermind and, as chairman of the board itself from 1996, drive through the most revolutionary development in the game's history since the breakaway of the Northern Union, later the professional Rugby League, 100 years earlier. 
Pugh seemed to have risen without trace to domination of world rugby. A useful three-quarter and half-back, he played for a number of first- and second-class clubs including Amman United, Pontypridd, Leicester, St Peter's (Cardiff), and Cardiff High School Old Boys. Recognizing that the High School Old Boys would never get very far with such an unglamorous name, Pugh characteristically persuaded them to rebadge themselves as Cardiff Harlequins, and they proceeded under his effective coaching to go a lot further. His links with the Welsh Rugby Union (WRU) began in controversial circumstances when in 1989 he was invited to chair the union's independent inquiry into the Welsh participation in ostracized (because then apartheid) South Africa's rugby centenary celebrations. The Pugh report was damning of the players and administrators involved, and its author added an unsolicited recommendation advocating wholesale reform of the WRU, which he reckoned was inadequate to the task of running the game in a commercial era. The union sat on this for several years, and when it was eventually leaked to the press in 1993 there was uproar. A motion of no confidence was passed in the entire general committee, who resigned 'en masse', leaving the inert body of Welsh rugby to be revived by an infusion of new blood headed by Pugh, who was immediately elected WRU chairman, a position he held until 1997. 
In 1996 Pugh also became the first elected chairman of the IRB, a post he had already held in 1994-5 on the principle of Buggins's turn, a convention he promptly overthrew. Distressed by the diminishing authority of the IRB, Pugh forced it to recognize that the game it purported to administer was spinning out of its control. The amateur ethos of the game was under severe pressure, especially from the southern hemisphere nations, and if the threats from predatory media moguls like Kerry Packer and Rupert Murdoch to hijack it were not to materialize there had to be a revolution; it was too late for gradualism. At a historic meeting of the IRB in Paris in August 1995 Pugh overnight propelled the union game into the professional era. Under his subsequent chairmanship membership of the IRB doubled to over 100 countries, including China. He was the driving force behind admitting Italy to what then became the six nations championship in 2000, helped set up the Heineken cup for European clubs and provinces, and was a director and vice-chairman of the rugby world cup from 1996 to 2000. His tenure of the chairmanship of the IRB was not without its critics. He was seen as concentrating too much power in his own hands and having rushed through the transition to professionalism; although as a Welshman he recognized the needs of smaller countries for greater funding, the so-called 'dash for cash' disadvantaged smaller rugby nations like Argentina, Romania, the Pacific islands, and even the Celtic countries, thereby creating an imbalance in the game globally. Nevertheless, in March 2000 he was re-elected chairman of the IRB for a further four years, at the time the only Briton to be at the head of any major international sporting body. 
Pugh died from cancer at Holme Tower Hospice, Bridgeman Road, Penarth, near Cardiff, on 24 April 2003, and was buried at Thornhill cemetery on 2 May. He was survived by his wife and daughters. Short, bespectacled, and in later years somewhat portly, he may not have looked like a revolutionary, but he was one: a man of formidable intellect and persuasive charm, disarmingly polite to those who crossed him, he was the consummate sports politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 89921


Thomas, Graham Stuart (1909-2003), horticulturist, was born on 3 April 1909 at Bemerton, Hills Road, Cherry Hinton, Cambridgeshire, the son of William Richard Thomas, clerk to the university syndicate, and his wife, Lilian, 'nee' Hays. The family were enthusiastic amateur musicians and gardeners and Thomas later said that his passion for horticulture began when, at the age of six, he was improbably given a fuchsia as a present -- an indication that even then the family already owned a greenhouse. On one occasion, he spent a birthday present of half a crown on alpine plants he found at a stall in Cambridge market. After attending the local school, he began formal horticultural training in 1926 when he joined the staff of the Cambridge Botanic Garden. For three years there he learned the art and craft of gardening and gained the bedrock of professional practical grounding on which his further expertise and scholarship was built. Even more importantly, he was able to draw on the living collections at Cambridge to build up a knowledge of plants in all their diversity that would have been unavailable in a normal garden. Although not himself a member of the university and no scholar, he attended lectures in botany and so acquired an all-important blend of academic knowledge and practical skills. 
In 1930 Thomas entered commercial horticulture, taking his love of alpines to the famous Six Hills Nursery of the alpine expert Clarence Elliott in Stevenage, then moving the following year to became foreman at Hilling's wholesale nursery, near Chobham, Surrey. It was there that he met and fell under the influence of the ageing Gertrude Jekyll (she died in 1932) and cycled to her home at Munstead Wood, where he began to add knowledge of the art of gardening to that of botany and plantsmanship. Jekyll introduced Thomas to the value and beauty of the herbaceous perennial, and he thus embraced the second of the three great plant types with which he was to become particularly associated. The third plant group, old roses, came during the 1940s, by which time he had become a director of Hilling's and realized that many older varieties were being lost in the plethora of new hybrid tea and floribunda roses, which after the Second World War became an almost unstoppable tide. Thomas's attitude was advanced for its time in his interest in the collection of old varieties, an interest that later became a passion and contributed to the widespread concern for their conservation in the post-war years. It resulted in the formation of the National Council for the Conservation of Plants and Gardens. In 1956 Thomas became manager and then director of another famous and long-established nursery, Sunningdale Nurseries in Surrey, where, with his partner James Russell, he introduced a large number of old or rediscovered plants to the wider public, the vigorous pink-flowered hardy geranium 'Claridge Druce' among the best-known. He retired as a director in 1971. 
In the late 1940s Thomas began an association with the National Trust, initially at Lawrence Johnston's garden at Hidcote in Gloucestershire (arguably the most important English garden of the twentieth century), which passed to the trust in 1948 after his death. The association was at first informal but from 1955 Thomas was engaged formally as the trust's first gardens adviser, a position he held until 1974, although he continued to have an important guiding hand as a consultant for another twenty years until his death. The post of gardens adviser to the National Trust carried with it the responsibility and care for more gardens than any one person had probably ever had before and it was highly appropriate that Thomas should be its first incumbent, although he inevitably set a standard that was impossible for anyone else to follow. The brief but significant influence of Gertrude Jekyll on his life and thinking was manifest in the gardens he designed, added to, or remodelled for the National Trust, including Knightshayes, Shugborough, and Claremont. His crowning achievement, appropriately, was the rose garden he created in the old walled kitchen garden at Mottisfont Abbey in Hampshire, perhaps the finest rose garden in England. 
Fortunately for posterity Thomas not only found and rescued plants, he also wrote about them with a flowing and pleasing prose and many of his books were illustrated by his own fine watercolour paintings. His rose paintings are especially appealing for both their beauty and their botanical accuracy, and betray more than a little of the influence of Redoute. 'Perennial Garden Plants' (1976) and a trio of rose titles, 'The Old Shrub Roses' (1955), 'Shrub Roses of Today' (1962), and 'Climbing Roses Old and New' (1965), found their way onto the shelves of every contemporary horticulturist and gardener worthy of the name. Honours inevitably flowed to him. The Royal Horticultural Society recognized Thomas's work with its Veitch memorial medal in 1966, followed two years later by its highest accolade, the Victoria medal of honour. The Rose Society, rather belatedly, awarded the Dean Hole memorial medal in 1976, and the National Trust its founders' award in 1996. He was appointed OBE in 1975. Inevitably too, plants were named in his honour, none better known or more appropriate than David Austin's rich golden yellow New English shrub rose, 'Graham Thomas' (1983). 
Graham Stuart Thomas (he was almost never known simply as Graham Thomas) was a rather shy, retiring, and private man, a self-effacing individual who wore his learning lightly. Slim and dapper, with a pinched face, and with his spectacles characteristically borne on a beaky nose, he followed his parents' inclinations in his fondness for music and was an accomplished singer. He never married. His last years were clouded by the onset of Parkinson's disease. He died on 16 April 2003 at the Nuffield Hospital, Shores Road, Woking, Surrey, of bronchopneumonia and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 89941


Wettach, (Charles) Adrien (1880-1959), clown, was born at Reconvilier, in the Bernese Jura, Switzerland, on 10 January 1880, one of six children of Jean-Adolphe Wettach (1853-1921), watchmaker and cafe proprietor, and his wife, Cecile Fanny Pequegnat (1853-1941). After leaving school he was apprenticed as a watchmaker, but revealed comic and musical talents, and joined a travelling circus troupe. He took up with the Swiss national circus, where he encountered Marius Galante, who had been one half of the clown act Brick and Brock. When Galante's partner left for military service Wettach teamed up with him in 1903, adopting the name Grock in their partnership of Brick and Grock. 
After splitting up with Galante in 1907 Grock joined the Italian clown Antonet (Umberto Guillaume) and enjoyed triumphs in France, Germany, Belgium, Hungary, Denmark, and Spain, gaining lucrative deals with Schumann's circus in Berlin and in 1911 with the Medrano circus in Paris. By then regarded as the world's greatest clown, Grock reckoned 'the hardest nut was yet to crack, in the shape of an English audience. We had heard how spoiled and cold-blooded they all were. Colleagues had warned us. They had told us how Londoners sat in rows like a lot of polar bears behind a barrier of ice. ('Life's a Lark', 205)' Grock and Antonet adapted their show for the variety theatre and made their first British appearance at the Palace Theatre, London, in April 1912. Although not prominently billed, they were a success and their contract was extended to ten weeks. After that they were contracted to other major London variety theatres, including the Alhambra and Empire. Tours of Glasgow, Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds, Sheffield, and Birmingham (where he met Charlie Chaplin in 1912) followed, first with Antonet and subsequently, after they separated in September 1913, with a new partner, Geo Lole (Georges Laulhe), who worked with him until June 1914. Grock claimed consistent bad luck with his partners in Britain: one was a drunk, who had to be hustled off the stage at the Alhambra in Glasgow; another refused to shave off his moustache and in desperation Grock cut off one side of it while in their Manchester dressing room. 
In 1915 Oswald Stoll signed Grock to appear at the London Coliseum, which he regarded as the world's finest music hall, and where he went on to appear in five consecutive Christmas shows. In June 1918 he successfully took legal action against a fellow clown, Noni (Perezoff), for infringing his copyright in his music hall sketch, which involved producing a tiny violin from an enormous portmanteau, and attempts to play a piano from a seat placed out of reach of the instrument. His popularity was recognized at performances at the Coliseum for allied troops in July 1919, when he was 'the great hit of the afternoon' ('The Times', 21 July 1919). This was followed by a royal command performance before George V and Queen Mary, who both 'laughed heartily at Grock's antics' (ibid., 29 July 1919). The theatre critic A. B. Walkley struggled to analyse the inevitable 'convulsions of laughter' that Grock's act provoked in London audiences: 'Why does this queer combination of anthropoid appearance, unearthly noises, physical agility, and musical talent -- so flat in description -- make one laugh so immoderately in the actual presentation?' (ibid., 8 Oct 1919). 
From 1915 until 1924 Grock lived at 171 Shaftesbury Avenue, London. His first wife, Louise Marie Bullot (1875-1918), whom he had married in Copenhagen in 1914, died at this home in September 1918. He married as his second wife, at the St Giles register office, London, on 11 April 1923, Ines Maria Della Casa (1890-1974), a singer, who was the divorced wife of Stefano Della Casa and daughter of Giulio Ospiri. As well as being a talented musician he was a composer and arranger of music, entering into partnership with the music publisher Leon Silberman at 128 Charing Cross Road from 1916 until the partnership was dissolved in October 1919. Among the sixty Silberman and Grock compositions were 'If I were king' (1916), 'Once more give me your smile' (1916), 'Do it again' (1917), 'Angel of my heart' (1917), 'My Devon girl' (1918), 'On my way to Edinboro toon' and 'A-be my boy' (1918). 
Despite his admiration for the London Coliseum and its facilities Grock fell out with Stoll over his remuneration. This, together with a disputed income tax claim from the Inland Revenue for $4800, caused him to leave Britain in 1924. He never returned. His fame and popularity consolidated by his British appearances, he went on to conquer the entertainment world, playing the major venues of Europe and North and South America, where he performed before royalty and heads of state, and appeared in several films, earning the sobriquet 'der Konig der Clowns' ('the King of Clowns'). After the Second World War he formed the Circus Grock, which toured in Switzerland and Germany from 1951 until his retirement in October 1954, an event that attracted tributes to his technical brilliance ('The Times', 30 Oct 1954). He died at his home, Villa Bianca, Oneglia, Italy, on 14 July 1959 and his ashes were interred there. 


@@@@@


doc= 89943


Griffith, George (1811/12-1883), corn dealer and reformer of endowed schools, was born in Birmingham, Warwickshire, where his father lived in Edgbaston Street. Details of his education are obscure, but as a youth he was an avid reader and in early adulthood he attended and later taught at the Birmingham Mechanics' Institute. His lifelong radicalism was influenced by the Birmingham Political Union during the parliamentary reform crisis of 1830-32. In 1830 he became a clerk in the office of a corn merchant, and on 14 July 1833 he married Mary Rees Smith (1812/13-1894) of Bewdley, Worcestershire, with whom he had at least four sons and one daughter; two sons died in infancy. In 1837 he set up in business on his own account as a corn dealer in Bewdley, and for the next four decades he regularly attended the corn markets of the west midlands and beyond. 
Griffith's travels alerted him to the decay of endowed schools in provincial towns and when, in 1847, he moved his business to Kidderminster, Worcestershire, he became involved in the controversy over the new scheme approved by the court of chancery for reorganizing the charitable endowments of Kidderminster grammar school. Townspeople thought the scheme disadvantaged them, and Griffith took a prominent part in the agitation, circulating in 1848 a pamphlet showing how the new scheme deviated from the local charitable purposes for which the school had been founded. In 1850 he was elected to the town council as a school reformer and in the same year published an attack on Tractarianism, of which the vicar of Kidderminster and chairman of the school trustees, Thomas Legh Claughton, was an adherent. After the failure of a petition to the school's visitor, the bishop of Worcester (Henry Pepys), Griffith became the leading instigator of a chancery suit which sought to overturn the objectionable features of the new scheme, especially the permission which it gave to the headmaster to admit an unlimited number of boarders, the levying of fees for the teaching of subjects other than the classics, and the headmaster's policy of excluding sons of non-Anglicans. Apart from the latter issue, which related to the headmaster and not the new scheme, all the grounds for the suit were rejected by Sir George Turner, in an important judgment delivered on 8 November 1851. Following this defeat Griffith 'made a solemn vow, that I would never, during my life, cease to expose endowed school perversions, wherever I found them existing' (Griffith, 'Going to Markets', 2.437). 
Rather than incur further legal expenses, Griffith sought to arouse public opinion in support of the restoration of endowed schools to their original purposes, and delivered lectures in Worcester, Bromsgrove, Bewdley, Stourbridge, Manchester, and London. He backed up his public speaking with a major work of antiquarian compilation and investigation, 'The Free Schools of Worcestershire and their Fulfilment' (1852), dedicated to Robert Whiston, the contemporary reformer of Rochester Cathedral school. This was prefaced by a proposal for an act of parliament to deprive the court of chancery of its supervisory role, to make school trustees elective, to create county boards to oversee the trustees, to adapt endowed schools to the needs of their neighbourhoods, and to confine their benefits to those classes for whom they had been intended. These prescriptions anticipated many of the ideas for reforming endowed schools which gained currency a decade later. 
Effective at stirring up local interests, Griffith had less success in transferring his cause to the national stage, not least because of the competing demands of running a business. He briefly engaged the support of MPs such as Francis Mowatt and William Ewart, but proposals in 1853 to found a Birmingham-based league, on the model of the Anti-Corn Law League, to bring in legislation came to nothing. He continued to promote the cause by lecturing, addressing letters to local newspapers, a heavy-handed didactic novel, 'The Life and Adventures of George Wilson, a Foundation Scholar' (1854), and further volumes on the free schools of Staffordshire (1860) and Birmingham (1861). In 1860 he challenged the revisionist contention of the headmaster of Shrewsbury School and eminent Latin scholar Benjamin Hall Kennedy that 'libera schola' (free school) meant free from ecclesiastical jurisdiction rather than, as Griffith maintained, free from payment. 
The common theme of Griffith's publications was to expose, as he put it, the conspiracy on the part of the upper classes to deprive the middle and working classes of their birthright. He sought to show that the schools had been chiefly founded for the benefit of the latter, resident in the locality of the schools, but as a result of the admission of outsiders as boarders, the curricular emphasis on the classics, and the defective supervision of the charities by unelected trustees, the benefits of the charities had fallen into the hands of sons of the 'opulent classes'. He calculated that if the funds of endowed schools were properly applied, they would amount to $6 a year for every child in the United Kingdom between the ages of eight and fourteen, therefore making the fees levied on middle-class parents -- by whom he meant tradesmen, clerks, and small farmers -- unnecessary. Having moved to Wolverhampton in 1861, he involved himself in local controversies there, and in Bridgnorth, Tamworth, and Etwall (Repton School), over the alleged misapplication of local educational endowments, and also travelled to Ireland in 1869 to examine the state of endowed schools. He elaborated his ideas in a paper to the Social Science Association congress in York in 1864, but by then a more influential movement, concerned with raising standards in secondary schools, had been set in train to reform educational endowments, and Griffith was effectively displaced. His attempts to gain an appointment as an assistant commissioner on the schools' inquiry commission, chaired by Lord Taunton, were unsuccessful, the positions mainly going to university men. He subsequently attacked the schemes of the endowed schools commissioners, which ended gratuitous education and vested school government in co-optive trustees. 
Griffith's failures reinforced his sense of being an outsider, as a small businessman, in his relations with the professional classes and the aristocracy, and fuelled his radical hostility to the 'upper ten thousand' and the extravagant national expenditure which he believed underpinned them. A streak of anti-clericalism also coloured his outlook, though he was a member of the Church of England. He attributed his reverses to collusion among the well connected, and concluded that no improvement in government could be achieved until a different class of men entered parliament. He put himself forward as a parliamentary candidate for Kidderminster in 1868, but withdrew before polling took place. Through his involvement in the corn trade he identified himself with the interests of small tenant farmers, and called for the repeal of the malt tax and the game laws. His memoirs, 'Going to Markets and Grammar Schools' (2 vols., 1870), recording his experiences as a corn dealer during the years of transition from protection to free trade, are frustratingly sparse in their account of his family life. But they reproduce the details of his campaigns, municipal activities, and minor literary productions in inordinate detail. Their 'quiet egoism' amused one reviewer, who nevertheless acknowledged Griffith's standing as 'a representative of the civic Hampden in the unceasing pursuit of abuses' ('Morning Post', 7 Feb 1871; quoted in Griffith, 'Reminiscences and Records', 95). The volumes also revealed the ambiguities in his radicalism, for they reproduced correspondence in which it emerged that in 1846 he had sought the admission of one of his sons, as a boarder, to Kidderminster grammar school, in furtherance of his ambition to educate his sons for the church; the rejection of his application by the headmaster, on the ground that he was a tradesman in the town, suggested that a personal motive helped to spark his original campaign. 
A prolific versifier, Griffith took pride in his literary activities carried out in moments of leisure. Local events such as the opening of the two Worcester corn exchanges and the unveiling of the statue to the prince consort in Wolverhampton were subjects of his verse. The rebuilt castle of Quatford inspired a volume of couplets, 'The English Village' (1847), dedicated to John Smalman, the architect, while the battle of Worcester suggested a poetic drama on Charles II, of which in 1869 he sent a copy of the third edition to Queen Victoria, with a request (not granted) that he receive in return a signed copy of her highland journal. 
Settling at Severn Cottage, Bewdley, in 1870, Griffith was a member of the corporation and defended charitable doles to the poor. He stood for the Bewdley parliamentary seat at the general election of 1874 as an independent Liberal against an official Liberal and a Conservative and, 'ignoring all the persuasions of his best friends' ('Kidderminster Shuttle', 10 Feb 1883), persisted in going to the polls, where he received only one vote. He produced a further volume of memoirs and miscellaneous writings (1880), but latterly was in straitened circumstances and 'his mind, at one time very vigorous, became clouded' ('Worcester Daily Times', 9 Feb 1883). He died at the County Lunatic Asylum, Powick, Worcestershire, on 3 February 1883, having suffered for over two years from cerebral atrophy, and was buried at Ribbesford on 9 February. His wife survived him. 
Griffith's later eccentricities and mental decline diminished his contemporary reputation, but he can now be seen as a remarkable advocate of local rights in provincial England (Roach, 288). Many historic schools and endowments in the region came under the reforming scrutiny of this 'West Midlands busybody' (Mason, 19), whose activity has been acknowledged as 'the only coherent attempt to create a middle-class lobby' in the Victorian debate about middle-class education (Allsobrook, 155). 


@@@@@


doc= 89944


Barbara Mary Franks (1907-1987) was the eldest child and only daughter of Herbert George Tanner (1882-1974), of Llanfoist, Clifton Down, Bristol, businessman and magistrate, and Agatha Mary Gales (1877-1957), daughter of a Liberal electoral agent and peace activist. Barbara had been weaned on good organization and good causes. The Tanners were teetotallers, vegetarians, non-smokers, pacifists, nonconformists, and Liberals. Her mother was a Quaker by upbringing; her father became one by conviction after the war. Barbara herself had been to Sidcot, the co-educational Quaker school at Winscombe, Somerset, where her grandparents had been (and where Franks's parents settled in retirement). In youth as in maturity she had both sense and sensibility. She also had a keen social conscience, and an impulsion to act. Her commitment to public service antedated that of her husband; in this respect, as perhaps in others, it was he who learned from her. Already in the 1930s she was serving on the committee of the Eye Hospital in Oxford, and organizing the Plantation Club for poor girls in the Gorbals, Glasgow. She also acted from time to time as research assistant to Sir George Clark, the historian. During the Second World War she worked first for the press research department of the Foreign Office, and then for the Women's Voluntary Service. After the war family movements enforced a break in such activities, but no sooner were they re-established in Oxford in the 1950s than she began an intensive involvement in the social provision of the city. Signally, she was a magistrate for twenty-two years, by common consent an outstanding chairman of the city bench, compassionate, expeditious, and fair. She also served as a member of the board of governors of Aylesbury and Oxford prisons, Huntercombe borstal, Campsfield detention centre, and a local probation hostel; chairman of the local Citizens' Advice Bureau and of Age Concern; a trustee of Oxfam; an independent member of two wages councils; and chairman of the management committee of the Nuffield Orthopaedic Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 89945


Measom, Sir George Samuel (1818-1901), publisher and philanthropist, was born in Blackheath, Kent, on 3 December 1818, and baptized in St Alfege, Greenwich, on 12 July 1819, perhaps the eldest of the five children of Daniel Measom ('b'. 'c'.1790), carver and gilder, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Coventry. He was educated at a preparatory school in Blackheath, but the early stages of his career are obscure. On 27 January 1842, when he married Sarah (1820-1865), daughter of John Hillman, fishmonger, Measom described himself as a tailor. Later in that decade he advertised his services as an engraver, an art in which he evidently had some skill, which may have been developed in an apprenticeship. In 1849 he published a pictorial work of his own devising, 'The Bible: its Elevating Influence on Man', in an album of six wood engravings depicting a drunkard rescued from his addiction by exhortation, his systematic study of the scriptures, the benefits brought to his family by a wholesome life and attendance at church, his ministrations to a former companion in sin, and finally his edifying death. 
About 1850 Measom acquired a new interest as a railway topographer which absorbed much of his energy over the next twenty years. It was furthered by his artistic skill and his sense of the power of advertising, both of which appeared again in 'The Crystal Palace Alphabet: a Guide for Good Children' (1855), and 'Light from the East: Tales Moral and Instructive of Oriental Origin and Character' (1856). By then Measom was describing himself as the author of the 'Official Railway Guides', the first of which had appeared in 1852 as 'The Illustrated Guide to the Great Western Railway'. From the first Measom's guides were addressed to the traveller, and insisted on the practicalities of travel by rail. Passengers were advised to inquire about the services available, to consider their best route, to note where they had to change trains if the service was not direct, and to prepare themselves for their journey by equipping themselves with necessities. It evidently occurred to Measom that the standing of the guide could be improved by invoking the authority of the railway company. The guide to the Great Western was followed in 1853 by 'The Official Illustrated Guide to the South-Eastern Railway and all its Branches', and every succeeding volume was distinguished as 'official', with the company's arms on the cover and a list of the directors and officers as well as a description of its principal undertakings. By 1867, when official illustrated guides to the Irish Midland, Great Western, and Dublin and Drogheda railways appeared, the whole network was covered. Journeys to Paris and the Ile de France by the Northern Railway of France were described in a supplement to the guide to the South-Eastern Railway in 1859. The guide to the Great Eastern in 1865 included a map showing connections to Naples, Vienna, and Danzig, and accounts of Antwerp and the principal towns of the Netherlands. 
The sightseeing excursions proposed for a stay of six days in Paris imply a more self-assured and enterprising readership than the earlier advice on finding the railway station and buying a ticket, but the guides themselves, always sustained by their practical nature, changed as their reputation grew. From the beginning the traveller could be expected to look out of the train windows and draw some pleasure from the passing spectacle. The guides therefore described places of interest on the route, as well as at the final destination. Antiquities were well documented, and in an age before photographs could be simply reproduced Measom's skill as an engraver stood him in good stead. Commercial information was another matter. Local directories had to be collected and were not of an assured quality. There were few provincial libraries, and chambers of commerce were still inchoate. Measom, who was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, spoke of having travelled over the entire system, and he evidently made useful contacts wherever he went -- with manufacturers of soap, chemicals, and carriages, and in Birmingham over the whole range of the city's products, including pen-nibs. In other places he singled out correspondents whose own interests were served by stocking and selling the guides, and who could inform him about the local market. The finished product attests only baldly to an endless series of inquiries, visits, and negotiations. 
The guides came to an end with the 1880s, though they were revised and reissued. Measom continued to publish engravings in his later years, but having achieved a comfortable ease and competence he devoted himself to philanthropic works. He became chairman and for some time treasurer of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and was a promoter of the charity later known as the Battersea Dogs' Home. He was also active in supporting the hospital, later the Royal Marsden, and argued strongly for the use of the title Cancer Hospital at a time, long enduring, when such bluntness was superstitiously shunned. Following the death of his first wife, in 1867 he married Charlotte (died 1911), daughter of George Simpson. There were no children of either marriage. He was knighted for his public services in 1891 and became a justice of the peace for Middlesex. He continued to be active to the end of his life, and under recreations in 'Who's Who' remarked simply and convincingly 'Never had time'. In many respects he was a perfect model of his time. He died at his home, St Margaret's Lodge, Isleworth, Middlesex, on 1 March 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 89948


Jones, Lewis (1837-1904), settler in Patagonia and writer, was born in Pool Lane, Caernarfon, on 30 January 1837, the first of six children (only three of whom survived) of Stephen Jones, tanner, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Morgan. As a youth he was employed as an apprentice printer on the 'Carnarvon and Denbigh Herald'. His interest in literature and his talent for languages and reciting led him to be the driving force of the Literary Society of Caernarfon, which met in the cellar of the Engedi Chapel. At the end of 1856 the society discussed emigration to Patagonia, an idea that had originated earlier that year at meetings of the Welsh Colonial Society (Cymdeithas Drefedigol Gymreig) in Camptonville, California. Many Welsh residents of the United States were disappointed that the first generation born on American soil often turned their backs on the Welsh language and traditions, as a consequence of being scattered across the country among other ethnic groups. They saw a need to channel Welsh migration to a place where they would be free from external influences, and Patagonia -- a remote, inhospitable, and barely populated region -- became one of the favoured destinations. 
In 1857 Jones bought a printing press with his colleague on the 'Herald', the printer and Calvinistic Methodist minister Evan Jones (1836-1915), and moved to Holyhead, Anglesey, where in partnership they started publishing 'Y Punch Cymraeg', a Welsh-language version of the popular magazine 'Punch'. In Holyhead he met Ellen Griffiths (1840-1930), daughter of Owen and Mary Griffiths, whom he married shortly afterwards on 29 August 1859 in St Cybi's Church, Holyhead. They had three children: Llewelyn, who died at an early age; Myfanwy Rufudd, who married Llwyd ap Iwan, son of the Reverend Michael D. Jones; and Eluned Morgan (1870-1938), who would become one of the greatest literary talents of Welsh Patagonia. 
By 1861 the young couple had moved to Liverpool, where Lewis Jones started his own printing business and resumed contact with Hugh Hughes Cadfan Gwynedd (1824-1888), a former member of the Literary Society of Caernarfon. Jones's interest in the emigration venture was rekindled and a 'colonizing society' was founded to channel enthusiasm for the project. In order to rally support for the movement Jones published in 1862 Hughes's 'Llawlyfr y wladychfa Gymreig' ('Handbook of the Welsh colony') as well as the newspaper 'Y Ddraig Goch'. Contacts were made with S. R. Phibbs, the Argentinian vice-consul in Liverpool, and at the end of 1862 Jones sailed to Buenos Aires, where he was joined at the beginning of 1863 by Captain Love Jones-Parry (1832-1891) in order to discuss with the Argentinian government the possibility of establishing a Welsh settlement in Patagonia. After a short visit to the Rio Negro and Chubut valleys both wrote reports about the adequacy of the land for settlement. During this first visit to Argentina, Lewis Jones's first child died in Wales, and his printing office was closed down. Upon learning the news he became depressed and wrote in his diary that he could not wait to leave the country. He nevertheless returned in March 1865 with his wife and Edwin Cynryg Roberts, a fellow member of the Colonizing Society, in order to make the necessary arrangements before the arrival of the first pioneers, who set sail from Liverpool in May, arriving in Patagonia on 28 July 1865. 
Lewis Jones's contributions to the establishment of 'y Wladfa' ('the colony'), the Welsh settlement in the Chubut province of Patagonia, were vital for its development and survival through difficult periods, especially during the early years. By November 1865 some of the colonists were discontented at the unfavourable location of the settlement, and blamed Jones, who was advised to leave. He moved to Buenos Aires, where he found a job in the offices of the 'Buenos Aires Standard', a newspaper founded in 1861 by the Irish brothers Edward and Michael Mulhall to cater for the English-speaking community in Argentina. Despite being away from the Chubut settlement Jones never lost interest in its fate, and when the majority of the colonists expressed a wish to be moved to another province in the republic in 1867 Jones secured material help from the Argentinian government and persuaded Abraham Matthews -- leader of the party in favour of leaving -- and the rest of the settlers to give the colony a further opportunity to succeed. Jones then moved back to Chubut and worked tirelessly to make the Patagonian venture a success through his skills as a spokesperson, his contacts with the wealthy and powerful British community in Buenos Aires, and his role as an agent liaising between Buenos Aires and the Chubut settlement, which led him to travel forty times to the capital city between 1865 and 1885. 
From the early days of the settlement Jones was actively involved in its political life as a member of several governing bodies and institutions. He was the first elected president of the council of the twelve, a self-governing body created by the first settlers. In 1879 he was also appointed administrator of the colony for six months and in 1885 he was elected justice of the peace under the new 'Law of the Territories', which granted the colony the right to elect its own authorities. Tensions, however, arose between the local Welsh settlers, who had been left to govern themselves for almost ten years, and the officials appointed by the government in Buenos Aires to bring the Chubut settlement under effective administrative control of the central state. In 1882 Lewis Jones and Richard Jones Berwyn were taken to gaol in Buenos Aires by the administrator, Juan Finoquetto, after Jones refused to hand in some statistics about the colony on the grounds that such information had to be requested of the local council (a Welsh-elected body). In prison they shared a cell and an amiable conversation with Manuel Quintana, who had been imprisoned for his political activities and who would later become president of Argentina. On the following morning the Welshmen were released after the bail was paid by Michael Duggan, a member of the British merchant community in Buenos Aires. 
Between 1868 and 1882 Lewis Jones took part in at least twelve expeditions to explore the territories of Chubut and Santa Cruz, looking for other places to establish new settlements or find new communication routes with the rest of the country. In 1884 he played a key role with Thomas Davies and the engineer E. J. Williams Mostyn in obtaining permission and funding to build a railway linking the New Bay and the Chubut settlement, a plan that had been conceived during the exploratory trip of 1863. The town that developed at the southern end of the railway line was named Trelew (Lewis town) in recognition of Jones's role in the settlement. He also made contributions to the settlement in the field of publishing. He brought a printing press to the Chubut settlement to publish 'Ein Breiniad' (1878-83), the first printed newspaper in Patagonia. In 1891 he started editing and publishing 'Y Dravod', the oldest surviving newspaper in Patagonia. In 1898 he published in Wales 'Cymru newydd', his personal account of the Patagonian venture. 
In 1899 tragedy struck 'y wladfa' as the Chubut River burst its banks and ravaged in a matter of hours what the pioneers had achieved in thirty-four years of constant toil. Lewis Jones was broken-hearted and retired from public life thereafter. He died in his home in Plas Hedd, Chubut Valley, on 24 November 1904. His remains rest among those of other prominent figures in the history of the Welsh settlement of Patagonia in the cemetery of Moriah Chapel, Trelew. Special permission was granted for the remains of Lewis Jones's wife to be buried alongside him on her death in 1930, since the cemetery was no longer in use. 


@@@@@


doc= 89951


Anne Hathaway (1555/6-1623) (though the record in the bishop of Worcester's register mistakenly refers to the bride as Anne Whateley of Temple Grafton) and on the following day a bond was issued binding Fulke Sandells and John Richardson for the sum of $40 as surety for the marriage, a necessary step since William was at eighteen still a minor and needed his father's consent to the match. Sandells and Richardson had both in 1581 been named in the will of Richard Hathaway, Anne's father, a yeoman farmer of Shottery, a village just outside Stratford; the will left Anne 10 marks, to be paid when she married. 


@@@@@


doc= 89956


Baines, Sir George Grenfell- (1908-2003), architect and town planner, was born George Grenfell Baines on 30 April 1908 at 11 Cecilia Street, Preston, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Ernest Charles Baines (1882-1950), railway clerk, and his wife, Sarah Elizabeth, 'nee' Grenfell (1885-1979), from a family of Methodist lay preachers. He was educated at Roebuck Street council school but left at fourteen to become a junior clerk to the Preston and district rating surveyor. His drawing ability was quickly recognized, and his boss suggested that he become an architect. However, it was three years before he secured a draftsman's position in the Lancashire county architect's department and began studying architecture at the Harris Institute, Preston. 
In 1930 Baines joined the firm of Bradshaw Gass and Hope in Bolton, specialists in winning competitions for town halls and commercial buildings. Unusually, the practice employed its own engineers and quantity surveyors but, already experienced in the importance of involving all the professions at an early stage in a building's design, Baines regretted that they were seen as subservient to the architects. He enrolled at the Manchester College of Technology, and when his teachers declared they had no more to teach him, he secured a scholarship to Manchester University. There he was introduced to modern architecture, admiring the multi-disciplinary Bauhaus school, Le Corbusier, and the group-working methods adopted by the young Tecton practice in London. 
For his RIBA diploma Baines persuaded the university to accept a competition project for a new parliament building in Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. When he came third, with a prize of $250, he was able to set up his own practice. His first office was his parents' living room, before he found accommodation with George Henry Broadbent, pooling skills and sharing a secretary. Baines designed bungalows for local builders and a hotel conversion, and with the build-up to war he was approached in 1938 by English Electric to convert premises in Preston, Sheffield, and elsewhere into armament factories. During the Second World War he remained a civilian, being in a reserved occupation. He designed runways, hangars, aircraft factories, and armaments factories for English Electric and other companies, and his practice expanded rapidly. Baines and Broadbent were joined by another architect, Harry Walters, and in 1941 they formed the Grenfell Baines Group with the architects John Ashworth and Tom Mellor. The first quantity surveyor partner was recruited in 1942, followed in 1949 by a structural engineer. In accordance with Baines's socialist beliefs, all the partners and staff took a share of the profits on a points system, as Baines explained in a lecture to the RIBA in 1944. Baines completed his town planning qualifications at Manchester in 1944, and became consultant to the new towns of Newton Aycliffe (1948) and Peterlee, where he succeeded Berthold Lubetkin in 1951. By then Baines had a family, having on 28 March 1939 married Dorothy Hodson ('b'. 1916), shop assistant, and daughter of William Stuart Hodson, engineer; they had two daughters. 
The Grenfell Baines Group dissolved into five practices in 1950, Grenfell Baines (as by now he was known) forming a partnership with Thomas Hargreaves, a friend from student days. This practice also expanded rapidly, opening offices in Blackpool, Manchester, Derby, and London by 1959. Grenfell Baines and Hargreaves built extensively in the north-west, but were best known for the power and production pavilion at the Festival of Britain in 1951, developed from an idea by the disabled architect H. J. Reifenberg. Grenfell Baines's first marriage was dissolved in 1952 and on 24 April 1954 he married Milena Ruth Fleischmann ('b'. 1929), a Czech refugee, daughter of Rudolf Fleischmann, merchant; they had a son and a daughter. 
In April 1961 Grenfell Baines formed the Building Design Partnership (BDP), the first of many multi-disciplinary practices founded in the 1960s. The practice was highly successful at winning commissions for both public sector projects (such as hospitals) and industrial work. By the time of Baines's retirement in 1974 BDP had fourteen architect partners, six quantity surveyors, and eight mechanical, two electrical, and eight structural engineers, with 723 staff and seven offices. When in 1984 as non-executive chairman he visited all the offices, he encouraged still stronger communications between them and between disciplines. He was also interested in architectural education. In 1966 he suggested to the RIBA that BDP and a school of architecture should together open an office where students could get real practical experience. He revived the idea when in 1972 he was asked to suggest a new professor of architecture at Sheffield. Grenfell Baines was persuaded to take the job himself, and founded a new practice with young architects and students. After a promising start it foundered in the recession of 1979-80 and was taken over by BDP. 
Grenfell Baines was appointed OBE in 1960 and knighted in 1978; after this time he used the form Grenfell-Baines, but without complete consistency. The Salisbury competition may have been the high point of his career as a designer. Thereafter he put his exceptional talents for management and organization to the fore, and transformed the way large commercial practices operated. But he retained a deep concern for humanity and the way buildings were used, and for egalitarianism and profit sharing within his practices. For relaxation he loved dance music and fast cars, and in 1953 he competed in the RAC rally. In old age he remained trim and dapper, and attributed his longevity to his belief in holistic healthy eating and complementary medicine. He died on 9 May 2003 at his home, 60 West Cliff, Preston, of a chest infection. He was survived by his second wife, Milena, and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89960


Blackwell, Sir Basil Davenport (1922-2003), engineer and industrialist, was born on 8 February 1922 at 72 Hollyshaw Lane, Whitkirk, Yorkshire, the son of Alfred Blackwell, engineering company manager, and his wife, Hilda Kathleen Sophia, 'nee' Bretherick (later Lloyd). He was educated at Leeds grammar school and St John's College, Cambridge, where he studied for the mathematical tripos. He graduated as a wrangler in 1942, and won the Hughes prize. Not content with these academic achievements, and determined on a career in engineering, he later pursued his studies at London University and was awarded a first-class honours degree in engineering in 1948. On 4 September that year he married Betty Meggs, aged twenty-four, daughter of Cecil John Meggs, an engineer captain in the Royal Navy. They had one daughter. 
After graduating from Cambridge Blackwell had joined the directorate of scientific research at the Admiralty to engage in research on anti-submarine warfare, including depth charges and torpedoes. In 1945 he went to Rolls-Royce in Yorkshire and started work on jet engines (while pursuing his engineering studies). In 1949 he went to Bristol Aircraft to work on aero-engines including Proteus, Orpheus, and Olympus 200. He became assistant chief engineer in 1957 and deputy chief engineer of the aero-engine division two years later, when Bristol Engines was formed. His abilities were recognized in the early 1960s and he was appointed commercial manager in the aero-engine division and in 1965 became managing director of the small engine division, which later became part of Rolls-Royce Ltd. 
Blackwell's career with Westland Aircraft started in 1970, first in the capacity of commercial director, followed by a meteoric rise to managing director of Westland Helicopters (1972) and then chief executive of the Westland Group (1974). He persuaded Lord Aldington to become chairman of the Westland Group in 1977. Aldington, a barrister and former government minister, had held a long string of directorships and was well respected in the business world. He and Blackwell forged a strong partnership in planning Westland's strategic future. When Aldington stepped down in 1985 Blackwell took over as chairman for a short while. He was also chairman of the British Hovercraft Corporation (1979-85), which was part of the Westland Group, and chairman of Normalair Garrett Ltd (1979-85), also within the Westland Group but partly owned by American interests. 
From his early days at Westland Blackwell was convinced that the company needed strong alliances with foreign enterprises, to build on the already existing collaboration with the American Sikorsky helicopters. Westland had secured an agreement as early as 1946 to build Sikorsky designs under licence and in 1948 the Sikorsky S-51 Dragonfly was produced, followed by other models, including the WS-55 Whirlwind (1952), the W3-58 Wessex (1957), and the successful SH-30 Sea King (1967). Blackwell was keen to nurture this alliance and ensured that design and technical know-how flowed across the Atlantic in both directions. He also pursued alliances in Europe, notably with the French Aerospatiale to produce several aircraft, such as the Puma, the Gazelle, and the Lynx, and with Agusta of Italy to establish a joint venture (which later, in 2000, became Agusta Westland) to produce the versatile EH101 helicopter, aimed at both the military and civilian markets for combat and non-combat uses, such as civilian search and rescue, VIP personnel transport, and law enforcement. 
These alliances with Sikorsky, Aerospatiale, and Agusta were designed to provide the enormous financial resources needed for innovation, development, and design of new products, and to spread the costs among the major companies in the helicopter industry. But the ensuing financial strain became too much for Westland and by the early 1980s it became evident that the company could not sustain the burden on its own. A takeover by a major aircraft or engineering company seemed inevitable, but no 'white knight' came forward to the rescue, until Bristow Rotorcraft announced its intention to bid for Westland Aircraft in 1985. At first Blackwell had reservations about such a linkup, but then (in the absence of better prospects) recommended the bid to the shareholders, only to be rebuffed by Bristow's sudden withdrawal from the bid. This was the last straw for Blackwell, who resigned as chairman, to be succeeded by Sir John Cuckney. The tribulations at Westland and its uncertain future led the following year to the unfolding of what became known as the Westland affair, a row at cabinet level that culminated in the resignation of two cabinet ministers, namely the defence secretary Michael Heseltine, who preferred Westland to become part of a European consortium, and Sir Leon Brittan, the trade and industry secretary, who championed a possible bid by the American Sikorsky, also the preferred option of the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher. 
During his fifteen years at Westland Blackwell was showered with honours and tributes. He was a council member of the British Institute of Management, the Confederation of British Industry, the National Defence Industries Council, the Council of British Aerospace Companies (of which he was president 1979-80), the Engineering Employers Federation, and the Association Europeenne des Constructeurs de Materiel Aerospatial (of which he was president 1984-5). He was knighted in 1983. His contribution to the technical and commercial success of Westland's products was widely acknowledged, but in the end the mounting political and financial pressures prevented him from finding a means to secure a long-term future for Westland. 
After his resignation Blackwell devoted time to various charities and causes, most notable being his tireless work for the University of Bath, where he collaborated closely with the vice-chancellor to restructure the long-term planning and decision-making processes of the university, of which he became an honorary fellow. His experience in the aircraft industry led him to investigate the financial implications of research and development of numerous products, such as camcorders, cars, computers, electrical white goods, pharmaceuticals, and many others. He published many papers and articles in scientific and professional journals. He coined the related concepts of 'critical mass' and 'characteristic unit price' to emphasize the minimum sales volume needed to sustain the viability of any given product in the face of ever pressing competition. He expounded his ideas in a book, which he wrote jointly with Samuel Eilon, 'The Global Challenge of Innovation' (1991), highlighting the mounting financial resources needed for research and development in industry. 
Blackwell was a keen gardener. He designed his own garden at his house in Sherborne, Dorset, and also the garden of the country house owned by Westland, where many visitors from all over the world had an opportunity to appreciate his outstanding talent. He had an innovative and vibrant mind that was greatly admired by all who knew him. He died at his home, High Newland, 1 Newland Garden, Sherborne, on 18 May 2003, and was survived by his wife, Betty, and their daughter, Susan. 


@@@@@


doc= 89964


Bywaters, Eric George Lapthorne (1910-2003), rheumatologist, was born on 1 June 1910 at 11 Kingly Street, Westminster, the son of George Ernest Bywaters (1878-1966), director of a building company, and his wife, Ethel Mary, 'nee' Penney (1879-1942). His early education was at Southsea preparatory school. He then won a scholarship to the Sutton Valence School in Kent, where his biology teacher interested him in collecting and making detailed drawings of rotifers, the microscopic free-swimming transparent animals with eyes, stomach, and genitalia that live in puddles and streams. This interest in biology steered him to a career in medicine. He qualified from the Middlesex Hospital medical school in 1933 with a gold medal and honours in pathology. He was then appointed as assistant pathologist to Lionel Whitby. On 10 August 1935 he married Betty Mereryd Euan-Thomas (1909-1998), physiotherapist, and daughter of William Edward Euan-Thomas, tea merchant. They had three daughters. 
While researching on cartilage with Charles Dodds at the Courtauld Institute of Biochemistry at the Middlesex Hospital, Bywaters came to the notice of Walter Bauer, a pioneer of rheumatology in the USA, who invited him in 1937 to Harvard and the Massachusetts General Hospital. There he studied patients with 'Lupus erythematosus', his wife, Betty, doing the follow-ups. In 1939, when the Second World War was imminent, they returned to London, but Bywaters was rejected for military service because of a kidney problem. He took over the rheumatism clinic at the British Postgraduate Medical School in Hammersmith Hospital, setting up a study of the life history and clinical outcome in 200 patients with rheumatoid arthritis. When the bombing of London started, he studied casualties whose limbs had been trapped by falling masonry and who after rescue developed fatal kidney failure, a sequence that became known as 'crush syndrome'. In 1944 this work moved to Newcastle at the Medical Research Council shock research unit. The cause of crush syndrome, he found, was the release into the bloodstream from damaged muscle of the muscle protein, myoglobin. This blocked the tiny ducts in the kidneys so that urine and waste products could not be filtered from the blood. Bywaters used animal models to show that alkaline fluids by mouth or intravenously, if given in time, could keep the patient alive until the kidneys could heal. He was the first to introduce the Kolff artificial kidney to the UK for those with established kidney damage. 
Before the war rheumatology was not a recognized speciality of medicine. Indeed many teaching hospital physicians regarded arthritis patients as 'bed-blockers' who could neither be cured nor discharged from hospital. Such patients were referred to the physical medicine departments of hospitals, to spa hospitals, or in London to outpatient clinics established by the Red Cross. Some consultants who believed in the theory of focal sepsis as the cause of rheumatic conditions injected patients with vaccines made from their own resident bacteria, a treatment that persisted long after its value was debunked. It fell to Bywaters and a few of his contemporaries to change these attitudes and practices. 
In 1947 Bywaters had taken on the additional responsibility of director of the special unit for juvenile rheumatism at Taplow, near Maidenhead. The unit, housed in a small general hospital (formerly a military hospital) built on part of the Cliveden estate, comprised three thirty-bed wards, offices, and research laboratories. There was meticulous follow-up of the patients organized through outreach clinics at Slough, Isleworth, Reading, Hammersmith, and the National Heart Hospital. When the seemingly miraculous effects of cortisone on arthritis in adults were described by Philip Hench and Edward Kendall in 1948, the special unit took part in a combined US-UK study of the effects of the hormone in rheumatic fever children. Though the immediate and dramatic effects of cortisone on their painful inflamed joints were confirmed, after five years it was proven, disappointingly, that cortisone did not protect the heart from rheumatic heart disease. Nevertheless the introduction of powerful antibiotics and the general increase in post-war public hygiene were able to prevent and cure the streptococcal infections that triggered rheumatic fever, so that by 1960 new admissions for rheumatic fever were a rarity. The clientele of the special unit changed from rheumatic fever to juvenile forms of chronic arthritis, previously known as Still's disease. 
Bywaters's forte was in his expertise in pathology and in his visual approach to the rheumatic diseases. He explored these from the clinical to the ultramicroscopic level, often enlisting new methods of imaging to make a research point or a more telling teaching slide. He left to others in his team the molecular intimacies of auto-immunity, which most rheumatologists came to accept as the most likely cause of the inflammatory rheumatic diseases. He used his skill in pathology to clear up ambiguities of diagnosis, firmly differentiating rheumatic fever from rheumatoid arthritis at tissue level. He was consulted by others for his expertise in the morbid anatomy and tissue pathology of the rheumatic diseases. He was also a pioneer in the study of bone diseases, introducing an early method of quantifying osteoporosis and showing how other bone conditions could affect joints. At Hammersmith he continued his survey of 200 patients with rheumatoid arthritis seen early in their disease and followed them for twenty years, a study that yielded a wealth of material and became the basis for numerous studies of the natural history of the disease and the causes of death. He received the prestigious Gairdner award in 1968. 
Bywaters's most noteworthy achievement was his pioneering work on juvenile chronic arthritis. With his colleagues but particularly with Barbara Ansell he transformed the management of these children. Whereas at one time they would be put to bed for long periods, their muscles wasting, their limbs stiffening in the position they were nursed in bed, it was Bywaters's policy to use pain control with drugs and hydrotherapy and if necessary surgery in order to maintain or regain movement. Much of the work was of a 'salvage' nature in neglected children. His surgeon colleagues were the first to develop custom-made artificial hips for children. Other prosthetic joints followed. Inflammation of the eyes caused by the disease could lead to cataracts and blindness: ophthalmologists at Taplow found ways to counter this. Dentists had to devise ways of getting stiffened jaws to open and anaesthetists ways of administering anaesthetics to children with stiff necks. The body of expertise built up at Taplow spread out to the country as a whole. Based on the work at Taplow, paediatric rheumatology became a recognized speciality of its own. 
Bywaters was also notable for 'seeding' rheumatologists and rheumatology expertise throughout the world. Postgraduate students came to Hammersmith and Taplow in large numbers not only from the United Kingdom but from the Commonwealth and Europe. Some became professors in their own universities, spreading knowledge wider. Bywaters counted 349 trainees over his period of service and he was later able to visit many of them in their own countries and universities. He was also proud of his contribution in bringing the medical perception of rheumatology firmly into the orbit of general medicine. His work was honoured in many countries, and after his retirement he was particularly glad to receive the European League against Rheumatism's award for lifetime achievement. 
Bywaters was an avid medical historian, amassing a lifetime's collection of books and artefacts related in particular to the history of rheumatic diseases, much of which he donated to the libraries of the Wellcome Institute and the Royal College of Physicians. He started painting in watercolours during the First World War when he was evacuated to Southsea. Oil painting was begun later and he became a skilled portrait artist. He went into caricature as a medical student when he was editor of the hospital magazine (tolerated, usually, by his teachers), and regularly caricatured himself and family in annual Christmas cards. He was also a keen gardener and a member of the Royal Horticultural Society. He was particularly proud of his rare union jack dahlia, which had been acquired as a tuber from Eleanor Singer, to whose house in Suffolk his wife and family had been evacuated towards the end of the Second World War. In his Beaconsfield garden there also stood a 'Platanus orientalis' that he grew from a seed from the original plane tree under which Hippocrates is said to have taught. After his wife Betty died in 1998 he found the garden a great consolation. His final weeks were spent in a nursing home, Chalfont Lodge, in Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire. He died there on 2 April 2003 of bronchopneumonia and cerebrovascular disease, and was survived by his three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 89966


Collins, (Lewis) John (1905-1982), Church of England clergyman and social reformer, was born on 23 March 1905 at Hawkhurst, Kent, the youngest of the four children (two daughters and two sons) of Arthur Collins, master builder, and his wife, Hannah Priscilla Edwards. He was brought up in a conservative, churchgoing home and at the age of six he felt called to the church's ordained ministry. This was reinforced during his time at Cranbrook School, and also at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he went as a scholar. He obtained a third class in part one of the mathematical tripos (1925), and a second in part one (1927) and a first in part two (1928) of the theological tripos. He was ordained in Canterbury Cathedral in 1928 and became curate of Whitstable (1928-9). 
Within a year, however, he was invited to return to Cambridge as chaplain of his old college, where he remained until 1931. During this time he became interested in the work of Albert Loisy, a French Roman Catholic scholar who had been excommunicated because of his liberal interpretation of the 'Bible'. The two men became friends and Collins began to question various elements in his own faith, as well as his conservative approach to politics and the ordering of society. In 1931 he became an assistant lecturer in theology at King's College, London, and minor canon of St Paul's, but three years later returned to Cambridge as vice-principal of Westcott House (1934-7). Soon after his appointment in 1938 as dean of Oriel College, Oxford, he joined the Labour Party, having noted the effects of the 1930s economic depression on the working class. On 21 October 1939, at St Peter's, Stutton, Suffolk, he married Diana Clavering Elliot ['see below'], a gifted and dynamic woman who shared fully in every aspect of his work and was appointed DBE in 1999. They had four sons. 
In 1940 Collins left Oxford in order to become a chaplain in the Royal Air Force. For most of the war he was at a training station in Wiltshire, where he conceived the idea of forming a fellowship of Christian airmen and airwomen who would meet regularly to study their faith and its practical implications. This experiment aroused considerable interest, though his choice of socialist speakers and his frequent challenges to authority brought him into serious conflict with his senior officers. 
When the war ended Collins resumed his post at Oxford and in December 1946 convened a meeting in Oxford town hall which was addressed by several prominent speakers, all of whom urged a large audience to take their religious convictions into the social and political life of the nation. As a result of this meeting Christian Action came into being, and in 1948 the prime minister, Clement Attlee, appointed Collins to a canonry at St Paul's so that he might devote more time to the new movement and provide it with a London headquarters. 
Before long Collins had become a national figure and for the next three decades was one of the world's leading Christian protagonists of action in the causes of justice, freedom, and peace. Christian Action itself never had a very large membership but it provided an organization to support his own highly controversial personal work and its influence was quite out of proportion to its size. In home affairs it gave strong support to a successful campaign for the abolition of capital punishment and undertook pioneering work among the homeless and persons displaced by war. But the emphasis was soon to change. In 1956, after Collins had visited South Africa, over $20,000 was raised on behalf of some 156 opponents of apartheid who had been arrested and imprisoned in Johannesburg. This was intended to pay for their legal defence and to provide support for their families. Two years later a separate organization known as the International Defence and Aid Fund was set up, with Collins as president and director, and this soon became an important instrument of British, and later international, opposition to apartheid. His work in this field was recognized in 1978 by the award of the gold medal of the United Nations Special Committee Against Apartheid. 
The explosion of the first nuclear bomb at Hiroshima in 1945 disturbed Collins greatly and during the early part of 1958 he was one of the sponsors of the national Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND), with the philosopher Bertrand Russell as its president and Collins as its chairman. The main public manifestation of the campaign's activities was a series of Easter marches to and from the nuclear research establishment at Aldermaston. The numbers taking part ranged from 7,000 to 20,000. Soon, however, there were serious disagreements. A breakaway committee of 100 was formed in 1960 to organize civil disobedience. This caused dissension, indiscipline, and violence in CND and Collins resigned from the chairmanship. 
Collins continued to serve as a canon of St Paul's, where he held, successively, the offices of chancellor (from 1948), precentor (from 1953), and treasurer (from 1970). The cathedral pulpit was used by him to promote Christian Action causes and, although he did not himself attract large congregations, his controversial sermons received wide publicity. Collins would have been a disturbing member of any cathedral chapter, but he had a great affection for St Paul's and never lost his vision of this national cathedral as a centre of culture and of Christian faith and witness. It was therefore a great blow to him when, on the retirement of W. R. Matthews from the deanery in 1967, he was not chosen as his successor. He remained at St Paul's until his seventy-sixth birthday and after a brief retirement died in a London hospital on 31 December 1982. At the end of his life the British churches were more deeply aware than ever before of their social and political responsibilities, and the man who symbolized this change and helped to bring it about was John Collins of St Paul's. There is a memorial stone to him in the crypt of the cathedral he served for a total of thirty-six years. 
Collins's wife, Dame Diana Clavering Collins (1917-2003), campaigner and writer, was born on 13 August 1917 at Stutton Hall, Stutton, near Capel St Mary, Suffolk, the daughter of Jan Frederick Lettsom Elliot, a landowner and businessman then serving as a captain in the 4th Suffolk regiment, and his wife, Florence Elizabeth Vere, 'nee' Fison. She was educated at Bedgebury Park School and attended a finishing school in Paris before being presented at court in the presence of King Edward VIII (whom she remembered as looking sad as well as bored). At Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, she read English and won a lacrosse blue, but left without taking a degree. Following her marriage she was closely involved in all the campaigns her husband was associated with. She initially ran the office of Christian Action, in 1957 chaired and spoke at the meeting in Trafalgar Square which led to the formation of CND, and wrote much of the early campaign literature as well as organizing the office of the International Defence and Aid Fund. At one point she travelled incognito to South Africa to meet with leaders of the anti-apartheid movement. Following her husband's death she wrote 'Time and the Priestleys' (1994), a memoir of J. B. Priestley and his wife, Jacquetta Hawkes (she had given the address at Priestley's memorial service in Westminster Abbey), and 'Partners in Protest' (1992), an account of her own marriage. She was also active in the Movement for the Ordination of Women. When she was appointed DBE in 1999, in recognition of her work for the anti-apartheid movement, she commented that this was because at her age she was no longer regarded as any threat. She died on 23 May 2003 at Colchester General Hospital, near her home in Nayland, Suffolk. She was survived by three of her four sons, Andrew, Peter, and Mark, another son, Richard, having died in a road accident. 
Trevor Beeson', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 89968


D'Abo, Jennifer Mary Victoria (1945-2003), businesswoman, was born on 14 August 1945 at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, London, the elder of the two daughters of Michael William Vernon Maude, later Hammond-Maude (died 1995), diplomat and land agent, of 11 North Terrace, Kensington, London, and his wife, (Jacqueline) Rosamond Mary, 'nee' Patrick (died 1963). The family moved around as her father pursued his career in Brussels and Egypt, and after her mother became an invalid she was largely brought up by her grandmother and her nanny. She attended nine schools, before leaving Hatherop Castle, Gloucestershire, in 1961, with five GCE passes at O-level. After a finishing school in Paris, on 14 December 1965 she married an officer in the Life Guards, Captain David Gwynn Morgan-Jones ('b'. 1937), son of Gwynn Morgan-Jones, a lieutenant-colonel in the Life Guards. They had one daughter, Sophy. With few educational qualifications, a typical situation for an upper-class young woman at the time, she took a job working as a secretary for Peter Egbert Cadbury (1918-2006), son of Sir Egbert Cadbury, chocolate manufacturer. Peter Cadbury was chairman and managing director of the Keith Prowse theatrical ticket agency, and executive chairman of Westward Television Ltd. She divorced her husband in 1970 in order to marry Cadbury, which she did on 15 April the same year; they had one son, Joel, who became a London restaurateur and club owner. Deciding that she had more financial expertise than her husband, a skill learned from her grandmother, she took over the running of his investment portfolio, greatly increased its value, and sold all the shares shortly before the crash of 1974, but to her annoyance she was barred from membership of the London stock exchange because she was a woman. This marriage also ended in divorce, and on 30 January 1976 she married Robin Gerard d'Abo ('b'. 1939/40), a stockbroker, and son of Robert Erlaud Nicholi d'Abo, also a stockbroker. There were no children of this marriage, which ended in divorce in 1987. 
D'Abo made her first venture into the business world in 1976 when she took over the franchise of a Wavy Line grocer's shop in Alton, Hampshire. After this proved a success, in 1977 she bought a rundown department store in Basingstoke with the help of a bank loan of $1/2 million: naming it Burlington's Furniture Company, she modelled it on the Peter Jones store in Chelsea and sold it for a $1 million profit to the Perrings furniture group in 1980. Her next business venture was the Jean Sorelle perfume and toiletry manufacturer in Peterborough, which she bought in 1980 when the toymaker Dunbee-Combex-Marx, which controlled it, went into receivership: she sold the business in 1983. 
D'Abo's most successful venture, and the one that brought her to the attention of the public, was the acquisition of the Rymans chain of office stationery shops, which she bought in 1981 from Ralph Halpern, chairman of the Burton Group. Rymans, founded in 1893 and part of the Burton Group since 1960, had become unprofitable by the end of the 1970s, and was losing nearly $2 million a year. Jennifer d'Abo raised $2 million in the City with which to buy the chain and after two more years of losses turned it into a flourishing concern, with profits of over $1/2 million in 1985. Her ranges of bright red, green, and yellow files, waste paper baskets, and filing cabinets transformed drab office buildings, and she was responsible for the introduction of brightly coloured self-adhesive post-it notes, which she had discovered (available at that time only in white) at the Frankfurt trade fair. She remained chairman of Ryman Ltd until it was sold to the Pentos bookshop chain for over $20 million in 1987. 
In 1986 d'Abo became the first woman to launch a takeover bid for a public company when through Stormgard, an investment company she had joined in 1985, she successfully bid for Selincourt, the fashion and textiles group, which included the Jacqmar and Frank Usher labels. Although some of her backers withdrew their support, leaving her to find $23 million in a very short time, her bid succeeded. Nevertheless, after disagreements with her fellow directors over future strategy she abandoned her plans to turn Selincourt into a major supplier of clothing to the high street chain stores and resigned in 1987 to become a consultant to the clothing supplier John Crowther. With the help of the management team she had built up at Rymans, in 1988 she bought Roffey Brothers Ltd, a turf dressing manufacturer in Bournemouth, followed by T. Parker, a distributor of supplies to golf courses; and in 1990 the fashionable Mayfair florist Moyses Stevens. She remained chairman of the Moyses Stevens Group and Moyses Stevens Investments until 1999. 
D'Abo claimed never to have taken on a profitable business: she preferred to turn around a failing company, and, impressed by her successes, City bankers and financial institutions were prepared to back her ventures. As her reputation as a successful businesswoman spread, she was asked to join the boards of other companies and bodies, including the London Docklands Development Corporation from 1985 to 1988, the Channel 4 television company from 1986 to 1987, and the industrial development board for Northern Ireland from 1992 to 1994. She was appointed a trustee of the Natural History Museum in 1988, and served on the council of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (later Cancer Research UK) from 1994. 
Tall, stylish, and striking in appearance, famous for her heart-shaped glasses, and with her upper-class background and manner, Jennifer d'Abo led a hectic and cosmopolitan business life. A well-known London hostess, she enjoyed entertaining, and in 1999 published 'Jennifer d'Abo at Home: Recipes for Stylish People in a Hurry', which won an award at the World Cookbook Fair in Versailles. A few months before her death she moved to Aguts, in the Tarn region of southern France, where she died of cancer on 30 April 2003, and where she was buried. She was survived by her daughter, Sophy Morgan-Jones, and her son, Joel Cadbury. In her memory her family and friends founded the d'Abo memorial scholarship to enable a woman to study for the degree of master of business administration at a business school in the United Kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 89971


Denis, Michaela (1914-2003), writer and wildlife film-maker, is thought to have been born in London on 28 August 1914. According to her own account she was an only child, as her father, whom she described as an archaeologist from Yorkshire, was killed in one of the early battles of the First World War, and she was brought up in west London by her White Russian mother and grandmother. She was artistically gifted and set out on a career in fashion; this was very much in keeping with her energetic and dauntless character, which she always attributed to being an only child, doted on by her mother and grandmother. She won a scholarship to a fashion school in London and subsequently trained as a dress designer in Paris, where she lived until the outbreak of the the Second World War. She returned to London and joined the Women's Voluntary Service, adapting the uniform to her own stylish design. 
In 1945 Michaela Holdsworth met an American admiral at a party in a Park Lane hotel; he proposed to her over a lavish bouquet of red roses the next day. She recognized that she was not attracted to him and had grave misgivings as he was a widower with young children, but -- always the pragmatist -- she badly wanted to get away from bombed-out London to America. She accepted his proposal and sailed for New York, but week by week delayed leaving for California to join him. Eventually she told him that she could not marry him as she could never love him. Some weeks later she met the Belgian film-maker Armand Denis (1897-1971) at a New York party. It was a 'coup de foudre' and they soon started an affair. Armand was waiting for his divorce from Leila Roosevelt (of the American political family) to be finalized, and had four children. His and Leila's marriage had been stormy, and his friends were adamant that he would not get married again; but by the time his film unit left for an assignment in South America Michaela was on the trip. They were married by special licence in Potosi in the high Andes in 1948; the ring was from a Christmas cracker and the start of their honeymoon was spent in gaol after a misunderstanding at a border post. 
Michaela Denis's extraordinarily successful film and television career was launched as she gradually emerged from behind the camera as Armand's assistant to become a presenter herself. Her striking blonde looks, confidence, and good humour, together with Armand's heavily accented and slightly lugubrious English, made them an unforgettable partnership from their first radio broadcast on the BBC's 'In Town Tonight' in 1955 (to promote their feature 'Filming Wild Animals'). Their first BBC TV series, 'Filming in Africa' (1955), was followed by 'On Safari' (1957-9 and 1961-5), which initially ran in fifteen-minute slots but was so popular with viewers that the time slot was extended to half an hour. The combination of Armand's stunning black and white filming, the locations, proximity to wild animals, and the personalities of the Denises was unique, as was Michaela's fearlessness. There were comedic moments too: Michaela's tendency to apply lipstick or comb her hair before confronting an animal earned her much mimicry. Subsequent TV series included 'Safari to Asia' (1959-61), a series for ATV, 'Armand and Michaela Denis' (1955-8), several full-length feature films including 'Below the Sahara' (1954), and the books Michaela based on their experiences: 'Leopard in my Lap' (1957) and 'Ride a Rhino' (1959). 
The Denises spent much of the 1950s filming in Africa -- Armand was technical adviser and Michaela acted as Deborah Kerr's stand-in during the filming of 'King Solomon's Mines' in 1950 -- and they spoke passable Swahili and could get by in a few other local languages. By 1958 their dream house built above the Mbagathi river in Langata, on the outskirts of Nairobi, was completed. From then until her death Michaela regarded Kenya as her home although the Denises lived for short periods in New York, Florida, Antwerp, and London, either renting a house in Curzon Street or staying at Claridge's. Her marriage to Armand was an extremely happy one. When he developed Parkinson's disease she nursed him until his death in 1971, setting great store by alternative healing, for which she believed she had an aptitude -- indeed, she founded a free Saturday-morning clinic at her home that was open to anybody, including a local witchdoctor's son. A strong believer in extra-terrestrial beings, she would describe in minute detail a sighting she and Armand had of a blue spaceship moving over the Masai reserve, and she had a fascination with crop circles in Britain. 
In August 1975 Michaela Denis married in Nairobi, secondly, and as his third wife, Sir William O'Brien Lindsay (1909-1975), a British-born barrister who had retired as chief justice of Sudan in 1955 and founded a law practice in Nairobi. He died in his sleep beside her in October that year. She claimed it was because he had made himself so angry thinking about his previous wife. After his death she stayed on in Kenya, proving herself an able businesswoman, particularly in property development. She had homes in Nairobi and on the coast, and inherited a small house in Ealing, London, where she would escape the African heat in the summer. It was in Ealing that she began work on her autobiography, which remained unfinished. She had a fund of stories and anecdotes, particularly about other white Africans, many of whom frequented the Muthaiga Club (made famous in the book and film 'White Mischief'), of which she was a member. She was a close friend of Louis Leakey; disliked Karen Blixen, whom she considered wildly promiscuous; and disapproved of the way Joy Adamson (author of 'Born Free', and Michaela's rival) treated her servants, having once intervened when Adamson was beating her kitchen boy. 
Despite her outdoor life filming before the availability of proper sunscreen, Michaela Denis had beautiful, pale, undamaged skin until the end of her life, albeit having been in a bad car crash in the late 1940s when her face had to be rebuilt by Sir Archibald McIndoe. She was completely untroubled by this. Indeed, because her nose would ache before a rainstorm, she would sometimes use it to good effect during filming, most memorably when she got advance warning of rain at a rain dance in Rwanda starring a female witchdoctor who had predicted rain and was about to be killed when nothing had happened. A vegetarian, Michaela Denis had a lifelong, genuine passion for animals. In 1963 she damaged a picture of a bull wounded in a bullfight that was hanging on the railings in Piccadilly and exclaimed 'I bonkered it, I bonkered it' ('Daily Telegraph'). She represented east Africa at the World Federation for the Protection of Animals in Geneva. She was on the committee of the Kenya Society for the Protection and Care of Animals, and was vice-chairman of the Kenya branch of the Men of Trees, a silvicultural conservation movement. She led a full life right up until her death in Nairobi, Kenya, on 4 May 2003. She had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89974


Ford, Trevor (1923-2003), footballer, was born on 1 October 1923 at 65 Llangyfelach Street, Swansea, the second son and second of the four children of Trevor Ford, van driver and later under-manager of the Tower Cinema, Swansea, and his wife, Daisy, 'nee' Young. He grew up in Townhill, Swansea, the largest council estate in Wales, attending Powys Avenue and Townhill senior schools. His father encouraged his enthusiasm for football, giving him a new ball and boots on every birthday and forcing him to use his weaker left foot by making him practise with a plimsoll, no protection against heavy leather balls, on his right. At the age of ten and a half he was the youngest player to have been chosen for Swansea schools, and he retained his place for four years. He was deprived of a Wales schools football cap by a broken ankle, but he was capped as a cricketer. 
After leaving school Ford worked at Mannesman steel works, Landore, before joining Swansea Town's ground staff in 1942. Conscripted in 1943, he served as a physical training instructor in the Royal Artillery. Propitiously, his army unit converted him from full-back to centre-forward, in which position he played as a guest for Clapton Orient. On 29 July 1944 he married Doris Irene Simmons, the 22-year-old daughter of William Edward Simmons, storekeeper. The marriage was short-lived and ended in divorce. 
Ford rejoined Swansea Town after the war, and was spectacularly successful in the transitional 1945-6 season, his forty-one goals leading the scorers in league south, which was formed from teams who played in the top two peacetime divisions. He also played for Wales against Northern Ireland. Ford was the archetypal British centre-forward, proudly proclaiming football 'a man's game', and always ready to shoulder-charge a goalkeeper or enter physical conflict with a centre-half, although at 5 feet 10 inches and just over 12 stone he generally conceded height and weight. A player of 'pent-up energy, a dynamo waiting to be activated' (Stead, 63), he was fast, ferocious, and fearless, with a powerful shot. Idolized by his own club's fans, he was a villain to those of opponents. The England centre-half Billy Wright declared him 'amongst the cleanest and most sporting men I have ever played against' (ibid., 65) but the goalkeeper Gilbert Merrick accused him of deliberately mistreating keepers -- a claim retracted after Ford took him to court. Ford initiated a remarkable generation of Swansea-born attacking talent. He, Ivor Allchurch, John Charles, and Cliff Jones, all born between 1923 and 1935, were among the 100 players elected 'football league legends' in 1999. He retains a prominent place in Swansea lore in spite of playing only sixteen peacetime second division games. 
An assertive, confident man in an age when most of his professional colleagues were deferential, Ford was never afraid to challenge a manager's judgement or claim what he felt was his due. He left Swansea for first division Aston Villa in January 1947, following a disagreement over preparations for a cup tie. The leading scorer in all three seasons with Villa, in October 1950 he left for Sunderland, for a then record fee of $30,000. An offer of a motor trade job worth $1000 per year plus a house was decisive in his choice of Sunderland, then known as the 'Bank of England club' for its expensive transfer dealings, over Chelsea. On 29 June 1948 he had married (Anne) Louise Morgan, the 22-year-old daughter of David John Morgan, former publican of the Red Cow Hotel, Plas-marl, Swansea. They had two sons, David and Martyn. 
Ford's home debut against Sheffield Wednesday was rumbustious even by his standards. He scored a hat-trick, broke the opposing centre-half's jaw, charged the Wednesday goalkeeper into the net, and broke a goalpost. His stay at Sunderland produced sixty-seven goals in 108 league games, and a cup replay winner scored with a broken ankle. He is, however, remembered for falling out so badly with the England inside-forward Len Shackleton that it became impossible to play them in the same team -- Ford accused Shackleton of deliberately placing passes just out of his reach, while the inside-forward dismissed him as 'merely a goal-minded dasher' (Stead, 65) -- and also for his revelations about illegal payments. Ford, who regarded himself as a businessman, was consistently critical of the $15 per week maximum wage and $10 limit on signing-on fees. In 1950 he was fined $100 for allegedly seeking an illegal payment in negotiations with Chelsea, a loss rapidly made up by a newspaper fee. In newspaper articles in 1956 and in his memoirs, 'I Lead the Attack' (1957), he wrote of widespread abuses: 'I have met almost every known type of football fiddle. I have been involved in quite a few myself... driven to it by the miserly attitude of the authorities in their assessment of fair payment for services rendered' ('I Lead the Attack', 13). Refusing to name names, he was briefly banned from the game, and his Welsh international career, which had produced twenty-three goals (then a record, but later equalled by Ivor Allchurch and beaten by Ian Rush) in thirty-eight matches, was ended by the row. Nevertheless, his allegations prompted inquiries into illegal payments that, while they damaged Sunderland, who had several players banned and lost first division status after sixty-eight years in 1958, undoubtedly contributed momentum to the Professional Footballers' Association campaign against the maximum wage, which succeeded in 1961. 
On winning reinstatement in March 1957, Ford left Cardiff City -- which he had joined in November 1953 for another $30,000 fee -- for the Dutch club PSV Eindhoven. He spent three years in the Netherlands before returning to Britain for brief spells with Newport County and Romford. His final peacetime football league tally was 175 goals in 349 games. After retirement he enjoyed, suitably for one of his name, a successful career in the motor trade, taking pride in his ability to educate both his sons privately and in his grandson's schooling at Eton. He returned to Swansea, where his final years were blighted, like those of many footballers of that era, by Alzheimer's disease. He died at the Singleton Hospital, Swansea, from pneumonia on 29 May 2003. He was survived by his wife, Louise, and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 89975


Fraser, Sir Ian James (1923-2003), merchant banker, was born on 7 August 1923 at Moniack Castle, Kirkhill, Inverness-shire, the second of four sons and fourth of the six children of Alastair Thomas Joseph Fraser (1877-1949), mining engineer and fourth son of Simon Fraser, thirteenth Lord Lovat, and his wife, Lady Sibyl, 'nee' Grimston (1887-1968), fifth daughter of James Walter Grimston, third earl of Verulam. Simon Joseph Fraser, fourteenth Lord Lovat, was his uncle. He was educated at Ampleforth College and Magdalen College, Oxford, where he read classics for a year and obtained a third in classical moderations in 1942. After leaving Oxford that year he served for the remainder of the Second World War as a lieutenant in the Scots Guards, advancing arduously through Italy. He was captured -- and escaped -- and was several times wounded; in 1945 he was awarded the Military Cross for leading an attack on a German gun position. He considered himself fortunate to have survived the war, unlike many classmates and friends, and attributed his career success partly to the decimation of his age cohort. 
Fraser returned to Oxford on demobilization but was restless and decided that he wanted to earn a living. In 1946 he joined Reuters, the news agency, and worked first in Paris and then Berlin. At the border check-point between the British and Soviet zones he had his first encounter with Captain Robert Maxwell. Fraser uncovered Maxwell's smuggling activities (for which Maxwell used his position in the occupying forces and a false press pass) but the expose was suppressed by the authorities. As Reuters' chief correspondent in Bonn from 1951 Fraser witnessed the rebuilding of the shattered German economy and made friends among Germany's new governing class. 
Fraser's familiarity with post-war Germany and its leaders and his linguistic abilities -- he spoke flawless German and excellent French and Italian -- were his passport to a new career in the City. In 1956 he was hired as personal assistant to Siegmund Warburg, the emigre founder of the merchant bank Warburgs. Another new turn was his marriage on 25 October 1958 to (Evelyn Elizabeth) Anne Grant (died 1984), the 20-year-old daughter of Alistair Edward George Grant, army officer. They had two sons and two daughters. The same year Warburgs rocked the British establishment by organizing a takeover bid for British Aluminium -- an episode that introduced the hostile takeover bid to the City and announced the arrival of Warburgs as a force to be reckoned with. 
Warburgs' second major innovation was the Eurobond -- long-term securities issued in London but denominated in dollars or other 'offshore' (non-sterling) currencies. The issue that launched the Eurobond market was a loan for Autostrade Italiane, the Italian motorway operator, in July 1963. Fraser was a leading member of the team that spent months blazing a path through the tangle of official and market regulations and tax problems. Once launched, the Eurobond market boomed, rapidly becoming the biggest and most dynamic dimension of the international capital market and a vital factor in the City's post-war revival. Fraser played a key role in keeping Warburgs at the forefront of the Eurobond business; in 1966 he made fifty-eight overseas trips in pursuit of new business and he brought the first Japanese borrowers to the market. But he was also active on the corporate advisory side of Warburgs' business, conducting a series of acquisitions on behalf of the buccaneering Roland (Tiny) Rowland of Lonhro as well as other clients. 
At the invitation of the governor of the Bank of England, Leslie O'Brien, in 1969 Fraser became director-general of the newly beefed-up Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, whose purpose was to police takeovers. The panel's first major test was to adjudicate in an acrimonious merger dispute between Leasco and Pergamon Press, which was controlled by Robert Maxwell. Fraser's ruling in Leasco's favour led to threats from Maxwell and an extraordinary display of bombast and histrionics at the appeal hearing -- but Fraser prevailed. The episode established the authority of the Takeover Panel and boosted the prestige of City self-regulation, helping it to survive until the mid-1980s. 
On leaving the Takeover Panel in 1972 Fraser joined Lazard Brothers, a venerable merchant bank, of which he was deputy chairman from 1974 and chairman from 1980. Under his leadership the firm developed greater discipline and dynamism, and closer co-operation with the Lazard houses in New York and Paris. While other merchant banks diversified their activities in the 1980s during the City's 'big bang', Lazards stuck to corporate advisory work, prospering in this role and, unlike most of its peers, retained its independence. 
For two decades, from the mid-1960s to the mid-1980s, Fraser was a leading figure in the City and beyond. Other appointments included the chairmanship of Rolls-Royce from 1971 to 1980, and a host of directorships including Vickers, TSB, Pearson, BOC, Chloride, and EMI. The key to his career success was his formidable analytical intelligence and a very quick mind. He had no tolerance for stupidity, phoniness, or dishonesty, leading some to perceive him as arrogant, but friends recalled his sense of fun and a deep streak of kindness. He retired in 1985 and was knighted in 1986 (having been appointed CBE in 1972). Following the death of his first wife in 1984, on 25 June 1993 he married Fiona Margaret Martin ('b'. 1936), the daughter of Henry Montagu Douglas-Home, army officer, and former wife of Gregory Martin. His retirement was marred by ill health, and by membership of a Lloyd's underwriting syndicate that sustained crippling losses; he was chairman of the Lloyd's Syndicate 90 (1982) Names Association from 1990 to 1996. He died at Musgrove Park Hospital, Taunton, Somerset, near his home, South Haddon Farm, Skilgate, Taunton, on 8 May 2003, of heart and renal failure. He was survived by his wife, Fiona, and the four children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 89978


Gunton, Colin Ewart (1941-2003), theologian and United Reformed minister, was born on 19 January 1941 at 32 Lexden Road, Colchester, Essex, the eldest of three sons of Herbert Ewart Gunton (1907-2000), local government officer, and his wife, Mabel Priscilla, 'nee' Bradley ('b'. 1916). At the time of his birth his parents lived at 102 Maldon Road, Colchester. The family moved in 1946 to Nottingham, where Gunton was educated at Nottingham high school. In 1960 he won a classics scholarship to Hertford College, Oxford, where he graduated with a second-class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1964. On 8 August the same year he married Jennifer Mary (Jenny) Osgathorpe, a 24-year-old schoolteacher who lived in Nottingham, where they were members of the same church; she was the daughter of Albert William Osgathorpe, an insurance claims assessor. They had two daughters, Sarah and Carolyn, and two sons, Christopher and Jonathan. 
From Hertford College Gunton moved to Mansfield College, Oxford, to study theology; he graduated with a congratulatory first in 1966, and obtained his MA in 1967, and his DPhil in 1973. His doctoral thesis, on the relationship between the process philosopher Charles Hartshorne and the Reformed theologian Karl Barth, was supervised first by Robert Jenson, then by John Marsh, and finally by John Macquarrie. His formative influences in theology also included George Caird, and Reformed figures such as John Calvin, P. T. Forsyth, T. F. Torrance, and Karl Barth. Throughout his career, Gunton similarly pursued his theology in an unremittingly Christocentric and Trinitarian way, always seeing the discipline as a task of the church. He was deeply committed to systematic theology as a constructive and exegetical discipline, and to working out his theology in dialogue with, but not in subservience to, modern patterns of thought. 
In 1969 Gunton was appointed lecturer in the philosophy of religion at King's College, London, becoming lecturer in systematic theology in 1980, senior lecturer in 1983, and professor of Christian doctrine in 1984. In subsequent years he was both dean of the faculty of theology and religious studies (1988-90) and head of the department of theology and religious studies (1993-6). His election as a fellow of King's College in 2003 proceeded posthumously. He was made a DD by the University of London in 1993, and an honorary DD by the University of Aberdeen in 1999. At the time of his death he had also been granted leave to supplicate for the degree of DD by the University of Oxford. During his time at King's College, the department developed from being a training house for Anglican ordinands to being a non-denominational, theologically and internationally diverse centre for theological enquiry. 
Gunton's doctoral thesis was published as 'Becoming and Being' in 1978, and a series of further theological monographs, journal articles, and edited volumes followed. Among his most important works were 'Yesterday and Today' (1983), 'The Actuality of Atonement' (1989), 'The Promise of Trinitarian Theology' (1991), and 'Theology through the Theologians' (1996). He was invited to give the Bampton lectures at the University of Oxford in 1992 which led to the acclaimed 'The One, the Three and the Many' (1993), and the Warfield lectures at Princeton Theological Seminary in 1993, from which came 'A Brief Theology of Revelation' (1995). One of his last published works, 'The Christian Faith: an Introduction to Christian Doctrine' (2001), was to have prepared the way for his projected multi-volume work on Christian dogmatics. 
Professionally, Gunton was involved in the Society for the Study of Theology (SST) throughout his career, serving as its secretary (1977-87) and president (1993-4). For many years, he was one of a small group -- along with Daniel W. Hardy and others -- who led the development of the SST, by organizing its meetings, shaping its agendas, and overseeing its growth. In 1999 he co-founded with John Webster the 'International Journal of Systematic Theology', on whose editorial team he served until his death, and he also served as editor of the 'King's Theological Review'. 
Gunton was the second minister ordained into the newly formed United Reformed church in 1972. From 1975 until his death he served as associate minister of Brentwood United Reformed Church, Essex, having moved to Brentwood with his wife in 1972. Between 1985 and 1991 he was convenor of the doctrine and worship committee of the United Reformed church. In 2001 a volume of his sermons was published as 'Theology through Preaching: Sermons for Brentwood', with a second volume also planned. For Gunton the church was no merely academic object of study: it was primarily the place for the living out of his Christian conviction and commitment. 
Gunton was a man of profound faith who embodied a real zest for life and a constant sense of cheerfulness. An inspirational and impassioned teacher and preacher, his joy and interest in theology were infectious and deeply appreciated by students, colleagues, and parishioners alike. He was also a devoted family man and a loyal friend, who relaxed in the pursuit of gardening, walking, and choral singing. His legacy lay not only in his accomplished academic work, but in the many who were touched by his enthusiasm and his witness. It was a great shock both to his family and his colleagues when Gunton was pronounced dead on arrival at Oldchurch Hospital, Romford, on 6 May 2003, having suffered a gastro-intestinal haemorrhage and a bleeding gastric ulcer. He was survived by his wife, Jenny, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89979


Gwynne, (Alban) Patrick (1913-2003), architect, was born on 24 March 1913 at Portsdown House, Portchester, Hampshire, the eldest of two children and the only son of Commander Alban Lewis Gwynne (1880-1942), a naval officer based at the Portsmouth submarine school, and his wife, Ruby Muriel, 'nee' Bond (1888/9-1942), the daughter of a cavalry officer who grew up in India. The family soon moved to Esher, Surrey, where they rented and then bought Homewood, a large Victorian house sited by the Portsmouth Road with 8 acres of land behind it. Here Gwynne's sister, Noreen Gwyneth (known as Babs), was born in 1915. 
Gwynne spent a happy childhood and was educated at Sandroyd preparatory school (from 1921) and Harrow School, which he entered in 1927. Neither academic nor sporty, he took art as an extra subject to get out of cricket. He became skilled in sketching and measured drawing, and discovered the modern movement, whose work was then beginning to be covered by the 'Architectural Review', for which he took out a subscription. Harrow ran sketching classes to the countryside, including one to Amersham, where he encountered Amyas Connell's pioneering modernist house High and Over (1928-9). That 'sold me' (Bingham, interview) and convinced him that he should become an architect. He had initially agreed with his father's wish that he should train as a chartered accountant, but his father accepted his vocation and gained him a pupillage. From 1930 Gwynne served articles with John Coleridge, a former assistant of Sir Edwin Lutyens, whose architecture Gwynne later described as 'traditional but very decent' (ibid.). He divided his free time between designing houses and furniture, motoring, and being part of his sister's debutante dance circuit. A keen motorist, Gwynne received a Wolseley Hornet as a twenty-first birthday present and drove through France, Belgium, Germany, Austria, and Switzerland with an old school friend in 1934, visiting the modernist houses of Stuttgart's Weissenhof estate (1927), overseen by Mies van der Rohe, and Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye (1929), near Paris. 
Having completed his pupillage Gwynne sought work with a modern practice -- placing an advert in the 'Architects' Journal' without success. He was then introduced to Swedish friends of the Canadian architect Wells Coates, who held a party so that the two could meet. Coates initially offered Gwynne a job on a two-week trial basis, and this became two years, during which time he assisted in the detailing of Coates's Lawn Road flats, Hampstead, and Embassy Court flats, Hove. Here he also worked with Denys Lasdun and (George) Edric Neel (1914-1952). Working independently he designed a house -- Shipwrights (1937) in Benfleet, Essex -- in which most of the accommodation was set on the first floor. 
Gwynne's father's family were members of the Welsh landed gentry from whom he had inherited an estate in the seaside town of Aberaeron. This Commander Gwynne sold in 1936, and from the subsequent investments he put $10,000 towards a new house at Esher, situated away from the increasingly noisy Portsmouth Road. Not wanting to leave their garden, Alban Gwynne and his wife agreed to Patrick's suggestion that he design a modern house set at the rear of the site. Gwynne talked to his parents daily about their requirements for the new residence, later explaining how 'they completely accepted the basic idea behind the house and its modern manner' (Bingham, interview). 
Construction of The Homewood began in October 1937 and was complete seven months later. The result was an accomplished and striking work of modernism, raised on 'pilotis' or stilts, and constructed from reinforced concrete. Though clearly influenced by the Villa Savoye, and one of the most confident statements of Le Corbusier's ideal in British domestic architecture, The Homewood also retains an English flavour, shaped by Coates, as well as -- in its large, single living space and use of rich materials -- by van der Rohe's Tugendhat House, Brno. Gwynne's Homewood was prominently featured in the 'Architectural Review' (Sept 1939), but the family enjoyed only 'one good year' there. In 1940 Patrick joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, and was sent in the following year to Canada, where he designed airstrips at Assiniboia, Saskatchewan, and Goodridge, Ontario. Both of his parents died in 1942 and Gwynne and his sister returned to The Homewood alone. Babs married soon afterwards, while Patrick, rejecting work in public housing, set up his own architectural practice in the ground-floor wing of the house. 
Gwynne's first post-war success came in 1950, when he was placed second (out of sixty-seven entries) in a competition for a restaurant for the Festival of Britain. It led to a commission for the Crescent Restaurant in the Festival Gardens, Battersea, for which he designed a regency-style tent, painted in different colours to last a second year, and managed by Forte Holdings. Gwynne went on to design further restaurants, including that at the Serpentine in London's Hyde Park for Charles Forte in 1963-4. He was inspired by the sight of people walking with umbrellas in the park to create a design around a series of concrete hexagons supported on mushroom columns; the glazing was set back behind the columns, breaking down the building's bulk and giving an indeterminacy to its definition of indoors and outdoors. It was demolished in 1990 but a small version survives as the Serpentine restaurant, also in Hyde Park, and it led to a similar structure being adopted as the foyer of the York Theatre Royal (1967) after its director, Donald Bodley, had lunched in the park. The foyer includes top lighting to ensure that even by day it is possible to see inside the building from outside, while for evening performances it is totally illuminated. A further commission for Forte was Burtonwood service station (1974), two octagons with sweeping copper spires on the M62 motorway near Warrington. In 1954 Gwynne also designed London's first Japanese restaurant, finished using black lacquer, as well as numerous shops, none of which has survived. 
Following the success of The Homewood, Gwynne came to specialize in private house design, mainly for a close network centred on his friends, the builder Leslie Bilsby, whom he had met through Wells Coates, and the quantity surveyor Kenneth Monk, with whom he worked on all his domestic designs. Gwynne's first house was the rebuilding of Bilsby's Victorian home in Blackheath, south London, in 1949. From the late 1950s his houses adopted strongly geometric shapes, usually with the garden frontage wider than that to the street, and the principal rooms gathered around a central top-lit stair. This was first seen at The Firs, Hampstead (1958), and two houses in Beechwood Close, all for German emigres who admired his mixture of modernism, dignified materials, and ability to incorporate the latest appliances. Many features included in these houses also appeared at The Homewood, including fitted furniture, simulated Japanese grass paper for the walls, and murals by Stefan Knapp and Peter Thompson. Gwynne's second house in Blackheath Park for Bilsby (1968-9), described as 'a design which sets out to shock' (Pevsner, 276), comprises pentagonal rooms lined in black plastic with sliding red lacquer doors that could be thrown open for drinks parties. Such houses epitomized 1960s executive living at its most stylish and futuristic. Smaller versions appeared in a speculation of four houses for Monk at Coombe, Kingston upon Thames, and a seaside house for him at Angmering, Sussex (1970), where the food servery and drinks cabinet were given equal standing. A last house for Bilsby (1979) was a cluster of octagonal rooms, each with its own cone-shaped roof. Gwynne also had many friends in the worlds of music and theatre, for whom he built or converted houses, including the pianist Sir Clifford Curzon and the actors Laurence Harvey and Jack Hawkins. His largest house was Witley Park, at Brook, near Godalming, Surrey (1961-3). Built for the department store owner Gerald Bentall, the design was of underlying hexagonal forms incorporated into an overall boomerang-shaped plan. 
Gwynne had a strong independent streak and was willing to walk away from commissions if clients would not accept his advice. He took a fastidious and logical approach to the design process -- acknowledging a meticulous nature inherited from his mother -- and he could be self-critical and ruthless if he decided something was not right. In 1993-4 he bequeathed The Homewood to the National Trust, though he continued to live and work there for the remainder of his life, advising on its restoration and refurnishing, maintaining his mischievous humour, and searching for perfection in design to the end. Patrick Gwynne died, unmarried, on 3 May 2003 of heart failure, at his home of more than sixty years; he was cremated and his ashes were scattered in the garden. Opened to the public by the National Trust in 2005, The Homewood is notable -- along with Erno Goldfinger's 2 Willow Road, Hampstead -- as one of the few inter-war modern houses with fittings and grounds intact. 


@@@@@


doc= 89981


Herbert, Jocelyn (1917-2003), theatre and film designer, was born at 12 Hammersmith Terrace, Hammersmith, London, on 22 February 1917, the second of three daughters and second of the four children of Alan Patrick Herbert (1890-1971), author and politician, and his wife, Gwendolen Harriet, daughter of Harry Quilter, art critic. Although he was called to the bar, Herbert's father never practised as a barrister but instead made his name as a writer of wit, joining 'Punch' in 1924. He had equal success in the theatre, frequently bringing home the cast of his plays to rehearse. Between 1935 and 1950 he was an independent MP for Oxford University; he was knighted in 1945. Herbert's mother had no formal profession, but was an accomplished painter and pianist, and the family attracted a distinguished circle of friends, Robert Graves, Victor Pasmore, Joyce Grenfell, and Naomi Mitchison among them. 
Herbert was a shy child. After stints at boarding school and at St Paul's Girls' School, London, she was sent at the age of fifteen to Paris to learn French and the piano, and went every day to paint at the studio of Andre Lhote. Crucially she saw the Compagnie des Quinze at the Theatre du Vieux-Columbier, a company founded by Jacques Copeau and at this time led by his nephew Michel Saint-Denis. It was 'a revelation... the sort of theatre, serious theatre, of a kind one had never seen before' (BL NSA, C465/13). 
After studying drawing at Leon Underwood's school in London, Herbert went to Vienna for nine months, where, as well as learning German and attending the opera, she became alert to the rising political tensions of the 1930s. In England she enrolled at the Slade School of Fine Art to study theatre decor under Vladimir Polunin. Although she acknowledged Polunin's skills as a teacher, his limited vision of theatre frustrated her and, hearing that Michel Saint-Denis was intending to establish a school in London, she asked to be admitted. On joining the London Theatre Studio (LTS) in 1936, she began to absorb an approach to theatre that would underpin her future. Like his uncle, Saint-Denis sought to clear the stage of unnecessary clutter and, as Herbert recalled, 'was looking for a design that had poetry in it but wasn't naturalistic' (interview, BL NSA). More than this, his 'attitude to the theatre was a way of life, a search for perfection in which everyone's talents contributed' ('Jocelyn Herbert: a Theatre Workbook', 15). Students, whether aspiring actors, designers, or technicians, learned to understand one another's skills. Alongside Saint-Denis, Herbert's teachers included George Alexander Cassady Devine (1910-1966) and the design trio known as Motley, Elizabeth Montgomery and Sophia and Margaret ('Percy') Harris. 
On 11 November 1937 Herbert married the lawyer and art patron Anthony Baruh Lousada (1907-1994), son of Julian George Lousada, solicitor, and her years at the LTS were curtailed when she became pregnant with the first of their four children (three daughters and one son). Setting aside her career while she brought up her family, it was not until 1956, when she was almost forty, that she embarked on her professional life, joining Devine's English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre as a scene painter. The skills and convictions that had taken root at the LTS found their ideal environment amid the extraordinary chemistry of the writers' theatre that Devine was nurturing. On the Court's tiny, beautifully proportioned stage, Herbert worked with directors and writers, relatively inexperienced themselves, to create the first productions of plays that were to define post-war British theatre. Her first major design was for the British premiere of Ionesco's 'The Chairs' in 1957. Not finding a solution using any of the director Tony Richardson's ideas ('I hadn't yet learned that I didn't have to do exactly what a director asked for'; 'Jocelyn Herbert: a Theatre Workbook', 21), she returned again and again to the text -- the approach she followed all her life -- and was relieved when Richardson responded to the sketch she best liked, 'a place which had no architectural reality' (ibid.). The creation of a haunting and specific environment using the minimum of elements was one of Herbert's greatest strengths. 
The late 1950s saw Herbert's initial collaborations with three people with whom she went on to form deep friendships and vital working relationships: Samuel Beckett, John Dexter, and Lindsay Anderson. For Beckett she designed the first English-language production of 'Endgame' (1958), the world premieres of 'Krapp's Last Tape' (1958) and 'Footfalls' (1976), and the first English productions of 'Happy Days' (1962) and 'Not I' (1973), all for the Court, and 'Play' (1964) for the National Theatre at the Old Vic. Between 1959 and 1960 she worked with Dexter on the first productions of Arnold Wesker's 'Trilogy'. Their ground-breaking production of Wesker's 'The Kitchen' (1959) saw the lighting rig and the Court's bare back wall left exposed to the audience, a visually shocking revelation at the time. Dexter's genius for staging met its ideal partner in Herbert and their collaborations were to take them to the Paris Opera and the Metropolitan Opera House in New York, as well as into the West End, to the Haymarket Theatre, Leicester, and to India. Once Lindsay Anderson had got over his alarm at the way Herbert kept removing elements from the set she had put on stage during rehearsals for their first production (the world premiere of John Arden's 'Serjeant Musgrave's Dance', in 1959), she became his preferred designer. They worked most fluently alongside David Storey, creating the first productions of five of Storey's plays, spanning 'Home' (1970) and 'Early Days' (1980). Although she was never as happy working for the cinema, Herbert's film credits included 'If...' (1968), 'O Lucky Man!' (1973), and 'The Whales of August' (1987) for Anderson. 
Herbert's deepest relationship was with George Devine, and by the end of the 1950s they were living together at Rossetti Studios in Chelsea. (Herbert was divorced from Lousada in 1960; he subsequently married Patricia McBride, and was knighted in 1975.) Financed largely by their work on Tony Richardson's film 'Tom Jones' (Herbert was costume designer and colour consultant, Devine played Squire Allworthy), they rescued and rebuilt a dilapidated cottage, Andrew's Farm, in Long Sutton, Hampshire. In 1965 Herbert designed the premiere of John Osborne's 'A Patriot for Me', and it was while he was corseted in an evening dress for the drag ball scene that Devine collapsed and suffered a stroke. He died in 1966 and thereafter Andrew's Farm became a vital place of sanctuary for Herbert. But if Herbert was without Devine's physical presence, his spirit and his values never left her. Her role on the council of the English Stage Company and her work on the annual George Devine award ensured the continuation of his influence. 
Herbert's extraordinary ability was to remain fresh in her approach while not compromising the ideals which had formed her. The most rejuvenating collaboration of the latter part of her career was with the poet Tony Harrison, with whom she worked on his translation of 'The Oresteia', directed by Peter Hall for the National Theatre in 1981, first for the Olivier auditorium and, in 1982, at Epidaurus. (Herbert had been a member of the building committee for the National's new home on the South Bank, and had firm views on how the Olivier should be used.) Inspired by a profound understanding of Greek drama, Harrison and Herbert developed a creative relationship in which the written and visual form of the plays they evolved informed one another, and in many ways Harrison's demands -- whether for lions, tigers, and a bear for an amphitheatre in Austria, or an epic month-long journey across Europe in a truck dragging a mighty golden statue for his Channel 4 film 'Prometheus' (1998) -- provided exactly the challenge that Herbert needed. 
Herbert's influence as a designer was immense, and her humanity and strength made her as pivotal a figure for a great many people in their daily lives as in the theatre. She was tall, with a natural beauty that seemed to increase as she aged. She was working with Tony Harrison on 6 May 2003, the day she died at Andrew's Farm, of heart disease. Her ashes were scattered at Andrew's Farm. She was survived by her four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89982


Hiller, Dame Wendy Margaret (1912-2003), actress, was born at Heathwaite, Bramhall Lane, Hazel Grove-cum-Bramhall, Cheshire, on 15 August 1912, the only daughter among the four children of Frank Watkin Hiller, a manager at a cotton mill, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth (Marie), 'nee' Stone. She was sent away to school, to Winceby House in Bexhill, Sussex, her father having decided that she stood no chance of marrying unless she lost her Lancashire accent. 
Hiller had longed to be an actress from childhood and at eighteen joined the Manchester Repertory Theatre as a student. She was happy just to be there, whether it meant making the tea, sweeping the stage, understudying, or playing small parts. She made her debut as the maid in George Pleydell Bancroft's 'The Ware Case' in September 1930, and in 1931 became an assistant stage manager. After four years' service she was sacked and left the company. But when the theatre produced 'Love on the Dole', adapted from Walter Greenwood's novel by Ronald Gow (1897-1993), the leading role of Sally Hardcastle needed an actress with an authentic Lancastrian accent, and they remembered the girl they had just fired. Hiller was recalled and after a long northern tour 'Love on the Dole' reached the Garrick Theatre, London, in 1935, and the Shubert Theater, New York, in 1936. James Agate thought her 'magnificent... the play moved me terribly and must move anybody who still has about him that old-fashioned thing -- a heart' ('The Guardian', 16 May 2003). It made Hiller's reputation, and brought her to the attention of George Bernard Shaw, who invited her to the Malvern festival in 1936, in a season celebrating his eightieth birthday. With only six rehearsals for each show, she played Eliza Doolittle in 'Pygmalion', and the title role in 'Saint Joan'. 'I thought Shaw asked all young actresses to do those parts', said Hiller, 'It never occurred to me he thought I was something special' ('Evening Standard', 25 June 1992). 
After the success of 'Love on the Dole' both Ronald Gow and Hiller excited the interest of the film studios, and in 1937 she made her film debut in 'Lancashire Luck', a 'quota quickie' written by Gow, whom she married on 25 February that year. He was the son of Anthony Hepburn Murray Gow, a bank manager. He had trained as a chemist and for some years was a teacher at his old school, Altrincham grammar. Writing occupied his spare time and during the 1910s and 1920s he made several short educational films. His first success as a playwright came in 1933 with 'Gallows Glorious', a play about the American slavery abolitionist John Brown. Theirs was a famously happy marriage. They had two children, Anthony and Ann, and lived for many years in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire. Hiller (who continued to appear under her maiden name after her marriage) was fiercely private, and was determined that her career would interfere as little as possible with their domestic life. 
Hiller was primarily a stage actress, making relatively few films during a fifty-year career, but she left an indelible impression in many of them, starting with the enormous success of her second feature film. Shaw adored her, and had been delighted with her performances at Malvern. He insisted that she play Eliza in the film version of 'Pygmalion' (1938), predicting she would be 'the film sensation of the next five years' (Holroyd, 390). Leslie Howard was Henry Higgins, the film was directed expertly by Anthony Asquith, and Hiller was nominated for an Oscar. A projected film of 'Saint Joan' fell through, but Hiller's success as Eliza and her desire to play Barbara Undershaft led to Shaw himself investing $20,000 in the film of 'Major Barbara' (1941). The director was the inexperienced and temperamental expatriate Hungarian Gabriel Pascal, who had produced 'Pygmalion'. 'Major Barbara' was filmed at the height of the blitz, and between air raids the film was shot by the then untried David Lean, and by Harold French, who rehearsed the actors. Cuts demanded by the distributors left the film with much of the play's religious irreverence and social criticism weakened. 'I saw the finished film once only -- I wept with disappointment', wrote Hiller (ibid., 437). Her only other film in the 1940s was Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's charming Scottish love story, 'I Know Where I'm Going!' (1945), in which she gave a radiant performance as the headstrong heroine who discovers that love is more important than money. 
Hiller returned to the theatre in 1943, touring wartime factories as Viola in 'Twelfth Night', and to the West End in 1944 as Sister Joanna in John Gielgud's revival of 'Cradle Song' by Gregorio Martinez Sierra. Gielgud later described her as 'modest to a fault, punctual, reliable, deeply professional [and] loyal' ('The Independent', 9 Aug 1992). She then played Princess Charlotte to Robert Morley's Prince Regent in Norman Ginsbury's 'The First Gentleman' at the New Theatre in 1945; and at the Bristol Old Vic in 1946 she was Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice' and Pegeen Mike in 'The Playboy of the Western World'. She had a huge success in her husband's adaptation of Thomas Hardy's 'Tess of the d'Urbervilles' (1946), which transferred to London, although their later collaboration on H. G. Wells's 'Ann Veronica' (1949) was less successful. She had returned to New York in 1947 as Catherine Sloper in 'The Heiress' (Ruth and Augustus Goetz's adaptation of Henry James's 'Washington Square'), appearing alongside Basil Rathbone, and succeeded Peggy Ashcroft in the role in London in 1950. She then accepted a supporting role in Norman Hunter's self-consciously Chekhovian 'Waters of the Moon' (1951) for the opportunity of working with Edith Evans and Sybil Thorndike. 
Hiller was never aligned to any of the major classical theatre companies, and perhaps the idiosyncrasies of her vocal delivery, sometimes over-emphatic and disjointed, prevented her from scaling the heights in Shakespeare. Her Shakespearian performances were rare, but she joined the Old Vic Company for the 1955-6 season, playing Portia in 'Julius Caesar', Mistress Page, a vapid piano-playing Helen of Troy in Tyrone Guthrie's Edwardian 'Troilus and Cressida', an outstanding Emilia to the alternating Othello and Iago of Richard Burton and John Neville, and a moving Hermione in 'The Winter's Tale'. 
On Broadway in 1957 Hiller was nominated for a Tony award for her Josie Hogan in Eugene O'Neill's 'A Moon for the Misbegotten', and in London the following year she succeeded Celia Johnson as Isobel Cherry in Robert Bolt's West End debut, 'Flowering Cherry', repeating the role in New York in 1959. In the early 1960s she appeared in two more adaptations from Henry James, as Miss Tina in 'The Aspern Papers' (1962) in New York and as Susan Shepherd in 'The Wings of the Dove' (1963) in London. 
Hiller had returned to the screen as Mrs Almayer, the drab, resigned wife of Robert Morley's Almayer, in 'Outcast of the Islands' (1952), directed by Carol Reed, and she won an Oscar for best supporting actress as Miss Cooper, the lonely hotel manager, in the film of Terence Rattigan's 'Separate Tables' (1958). She was especially memorable as Mrs Morel in 'Sons and Lovers' (1960), and heartbreaking as Alice More in 'A Man for All Seasons' (1966), gaining another Oscar nomination. Later films tended to be as part of all-star ensembles, but she shone as Mrs Micawber to Ralph Richardson's Micawber in 'David Copperfield' (1969) and as the imperious Princess Dragomiroff in Agatha Christie's 'Murder on the Orient Express' (1974). 
Hiller had made her television debut in 1939, as Grace Darling, but thereafter made few appearances until the 1960s, when she appeared in an episode of 'Z Cars' and read the stories of Alison Uttley on 'Jackanory'. During the 1970s she played Miss Moffat in 'The Corn is Green', Aase in 'Peer Gynt', the puritanical Mme Putet in 'Clochemerle', and the Duchess of York in 'Richard II'. In 1986 she scored a huge success as Lady Slane in 'All Passion Spent', from the novel by Vita Sackville-West, for which she gained a BAFTA award nomination and the best actress award from the Broadcasting Press Guild. 
Hiller's later theatre successes included three appearances in Ibsen: as Irene in 'When We Dead Awaken' (1968) for the 69 Theatre Company in Manchester, directed by Michael Elliott, as Mrs Alving in 'Ghosts' (1972) at the Arts Theatre, Cambridge, and a powerful performance as Gunhild, the icy and miserable wife of Ralph Richardson's John Gabriel Borkman, in Peter Hall's National Theatre revival of the play of the same name at the Old Vic in 1975 and in the Lyttelton in 1976. In the West End she was both splendidly ramrod and fragile as Queen Mary in 'Crown Matrimonial' (1972), Royce Ryton's recreation of the abdication crisis; and as Mrs Whyte, Sybil Thorndike's old role, she expressed much with a disapproving sniff and a click of a knitting needle in a revival of 'Waters of the Moon' with Ingrid Bergman at Chichester in 1977. During the 1980s she played a formidable Lady Bracknell (1982, 1987, and on television), the Old Lady in a revival of 'The Aspern Papers' (1984) with Vanessa Redgrave and Christopher Reeve, and the American lady from the deep south in Alfred Uhry's 'Driving Miss Daisy' (1988). She said: 'Luckily, West End audiences seem to rather like very old people. They think, 'My God, we saw her acting in the war and there she is still doing it,' and mentally they give you a sort of prize for sheer survival, as long as you turn up every night and remember most of the lines. Not that it ever gets any easier to do. ('The Times', 8 June 1988)' Hiller was 'the least self- or career-obsessed of great actresses' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema'), preferring to spend time with her family, gardening, or playing golf to enjoying the trappings of stardom. Her great quality as an actress was a spiritual radiance, an emotional integrity and sincerity, whether as a cockney flower girl or an English queen. She was unconventionally beautiful, 'with those marvellous cheekbones and slanting eyes', wrote Mollie Panter-Downes, 'that give her the strong look of a Holbein woman' ('New Yorker'). She had a unique voice, at once crisp and quavering. Appointed OBE in 1971 and DBE in 1975, she died of bronchopneumonia at her home, 9 Stratton Road, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, on 14 May 2003, and was buried at St Mary's parish church, Radnage, Buckinghamshire. She was survived by her two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89983


Hurst, John Gilbert (1927-2003), archaeologist, was born on 15 August 1927 at the Brunswick Nursing Home, Cambridge, the only son of Charles Chamberlain Hurst (1870-1947), a plant geneticist (who had served as a major with the Royal Engineers during the First World War) and his wife and cousin, Rona, 'nee' Hurst, a botanist. At the time of his birth his parents lived at Annesley House, Union Road, Cambridge. From them he acquired a lifelong interest in plants and gardening, and a practice of scientific record-keeping. He was educated in Horsham (Sussex), at Harrow School, and at Trinity College, Cambridge. He had first read about the archaeology of the Middle East as a schoolboy, and before going up to Cambridge his period of national service took him to that region. His Cambridge archaeology degree course (in 1948-51) was focused principally on prehistory, without much emphasis on practical skills. Enterprising students, Hurst among them, excavated on their own initiative, and especially on sites of the medieval period, which were not then academically fashionable. At Cambridge he met (Dorothy) Gillian Duckett (1931-1971), daughter of John Arthur Duckett, civil servant, and they married on 26 April 1955. She excavated sites and assisted in the early development of the Society for Medieval Archaeology. They had two daughters. 
From 1952 to 1987 Hurst worked in the inspectorate of ancient monuments, first as part of the Ministry of Works, but latterly within English Heritage. He became inspector (medieval rescue excavations) in 1964, principal inspector (rescue excavations) in 1973, and assistant chief inspector in 1980. In the inspectorate he exercised great influence over the development of medieval archaeology, by selecting the most important sites for excavation, and by recruiting talented excavators who could recognize and recover the evidence, such as the often flimsy traces of timber buildings. His constant round of visits enabled him to observe different sites over the whole country, and to acquire an encyclopaedic knowledge (recorded on index cards) of medieval and post-medieval pottery. Alongside his official duties he pursued a parallel career as a researcher into pottery, and he also directed excavations at Northolt manor house near London (1950-70), and at Wharram Percy in Yorkshire. The programme of research at Wharram, a medieval village, which began in 1952, was part of the work of the Deserted Medieval Village Research Group. Under the leadership of Hurst (who served as secretary from 1952 to 1986) and the historian Maurice Beresford this organization pursued the goal of listing every deserted village in England. 
Much of Hurst's research was carried out as part of some collective enquiry. While many of his papers in learned journals (often studies of pottery) were written solely by him, lengthier works appeared under joint authorship. In the field of village research the two best-known were produced in conjunction with Maurice Beresford, his collaborator for half a century: 'Deserted Medieval Villages: Studies' (1971), and 'Wharram Percy: Deserted Medieval Village' (1990). In pottery studies, 'Medieval Pottery from Excavations' (1974) was edited jointly with Vera Evison and Henry Hodges, and 'Pottery Produced and Traded in North-West Europe, 1350-1650' (1986) with David Neal and H. J. E. van Beuningen. 
Hurst gave numerous lectures for university adult education departments. His long-running series of seminars at Goldsmiths College in London provided a unique training in medieval archaeology and especially medieval pottery. His style of teaching was rather formal, but he had important things to say, and his enthusiasm and learning ensured that students valued the experience. Although his work as an inspector, his research, excavations, and teaching imposed heavy demands on him, he made the time to be active in many societies. He played a key role in organizing the Society for Medieval Archaeology (founded in 1957) and the Society for Post-Medieval Archaeology (in 1967), and later served as president of both societies. He promoted archaeology within the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He had many contacts in continental Europe, and went on tours to meet colleagues with similar interests. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1958, and of the British Academy in 1987. The Society of Antiquaries, which he served as vice-president in 1969-73, awarded him its society medal in the year that he died. The University of York made him an honorary DPhil in 1995. He was presented on retirement with two collections of essays, one on rural settlements (shared with Maurice Beresford), and the other on pottery studies. 
Although he was a private and quiet man, and at meetings or conferences often made few (but always pertinent) comments, Hurst's work was carried out in co-operation with others, and he played an important role in a number of academic movements of the second half of the twentieth century. With his help, medieval and post-medieval archaeology were accepted as integral, even indispensable parts of a discipline which before 1950 had been dominated by classicists and prehistorians. His influence brought to the forefront of medieval archaeology the material culture of the peasant and the potter, the ordinary people of the time rather than the inhabitants of the castles and monasteries. He saw himself as a scientist, and applied to medieval sites the methods used to investigate prehistory. He realized, partly through contact with Danish scholars, that the open area method of excavation enabled medieval sites to be better understood, and within a short time this was accepted universally. He applied systematic and rigorous analysis to pottery studies, and early in his career he identified the main types of pre-conquest pottery in eastern England, which enabled sites of all kinds to be dated. His approach was cautious and measured, and he was reluctant to arrive at a conclusion until he was sure of his ground. Like a true scientist, if an old hypothesis was not supported by the evidence, he abandoned it and put forward a new one. In the fifty years of the Wharram research project -- which was a test bed for ideas about medieval settlement in general -- the interpretation changed more than once, and Hurst would recall ruefully the outmoded thinking of the past. He set in motion fruitful debates about peasant houses, the origins and evolution of villages, and the landscape of settlement. 
After retirement from English Heritage Hurst moved to Great Casterton in Lincolnshire, and was still very active in research when in March 2003 he was attacked in the street. He died from head injuries at Peterborough District Hospital after six weeks in intensive care, on 29 April 2003. A cremation service was held in Leicester on 30 May 2003. He was survived by his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 89986


Redgrave, Sir Michael Scudamore (1908-1985), actor, was born on 20 March 1908 in theatrical lodgings at St Michael's Hill, Bristol, the only child of George Elsworthy (Roy) Redgrave (1873-1922), actor, a specialist in melodrama, and his second wife, Margaret (Daisy) Scudamore (1884-1958), actress, daughter of Fortunatus Augustin Scudamore, dramatist. Sixteen months after his birth his mother took him for a short time to Australia where his father was acting. Three years later his parents were divorced. In 1922 his mother, who looked after him, married J. P. Anderson, who had formerly been employed by the Ceylon and Eastern Agency in Ceylon. They had a daughter, Peggy, a half-sister to Michael. 
Michael Redgrave went to Clifton College, Bristol, where he became a competent schoolboy player in male and female parts. His Macbeth, at seventeen, made his mother, who had been opposed to this, think twice about him becoming a professional actor. In 1927 he went to Magdalene College, Cambridge, to study medieval and modern languages, and English. He undertook much undergraduate acting and wrote for and edited university magazines before graduating in 1931. He then went to Cranleigh School, Surrey, as modern languages master. Here, in effect, he was an actor-manager, doing six productions and playing, among other parts, Samson Agonistes, Hamlet, and Lear; moreover he was given work in the semi-professional Guildford repertory company, which was glad to have a recruit so accomplished and personable: he was 6 feet 3 inches tall and strikingly handsome. Confidently he resigned from Cranleigh and got an audition from Lilian Baylis of the Old Vic, who offered him a contract at $3 a week. Before accepting, he had an interview with William Armstrong, the director of Liverpool Playhouse, who persuaded him to go there; between 1934 and 1936 he had a wide variety of parts in the most sympathetic circumstances. 
More important to him, Redgrave fell in love with Rachel Kempson ['see below'] when they acted together in John Van Druten's 'The Flowers of the Forest'. They were married in the chapel of the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth (Rachel Kempson's father was its headmaster) on 18 July 1935 and for another year remained at Liverpool. It was then that Tyrone Guthrie, who was becoming one of the principal directors of his time, invited them for a season at the Old Vic where in September 1936 they opened as Ferdinand of Navarre and the Princess of France in 'Love's Labour's Lost'. In 1936-7 Redgrave was Horner in 'The Country Wife' (with the American actress Ruth Gordon) and, to his delight, Orlando in 'As You Like It' to the Rosalind of Edith Evans, then forty-eight but, with her unerring sense of comedy, ready for the adventure. At once they were attracted to each other, an association they sustained during the Old Vic run and a transference for three months to what was then the New Theatre. Before then Redgrave had another rich experience, Laertes to Laurence Olivier's vigorous Hamlet. A daughter, Vanessa, was born to Redgrave and Rachel in January 1937. They later had a son, Corin Redgrave (1939-2010), and another daughter, Lynn Redgrave (1943-2010). All three became well-known actors. His son later wrote a book about his father, in which he revealed that despite his marriage, Redgrave had a number of homosexual relationships in his later life. Corin Redgrave commented that 'My father was bisexual. He wanted to write about it but never managed to' (C. Redgrave, 4). 
Even after so brief a time in London, it was clear that Redgrave would be an important player; recognizing this, John Gielgud gave him several parts (including Tusenbach in 'Three Sisters') in a season at the Queen's Theatre (1937-8). Work came easily. When he played, surprisingly, Sir Andrew Aguecheek during a production of 'Twelfth Night' in the West End in 1938, the drama critic James Agate called him 'a giddy, witty maypole'. At the Westminster Theatre in 1939 he was the first Harry Monchensey in T. S. Eliot's 'The Family Reunion', and he had also, inevitably but reluctantly, gone into films: Alfred Hitchcock cast him in 'The Lady Vanishes' (1939). With the outbreak of war he had to abandon an Old Vic opportunity; instead, during 1940, he acted and sang Macheath in 'The Beggar's Opera' at the Haymarket Theatre; later, at a small Kensington theatre and in the West End, he appeared most sensitively as the idealistic recluse of Robert Ardrey's 'Thunder Rock'. 
Redgrave's call-up papers reached him in June 1941 as he was in the middle of making a film and he found himself, as an ordinary seaman, training in devastated Plymouth. Discharged after a year for medical reasons, he returned to the stage in a sequence of plays, some as successful as Turgenev's 'A Month in the Country' (he was Rakitin in 1943) and an American melodrama, 'Uncle Harry' (1944), in which he acted with exciting nervous power. Curiously in 1947 he appeared to be out of key in an elaborate production of 'Macbeth'. Another good spell was coming: first, the relentless tragedy of Strindberg's 'The Father' (1948-9), then a long season with the Old Vic Company at the New Theatre (its final period before going back to Waterloo Road). Redgrave ended with Hamlet (1950), a performance which lacked only the final quality of excitement: as a disciple of Konstantin Stanislavsky he was apt to concentrate upon a close dissection of the text. From that he went to Stratford upon Avon for a pair of remarkable performances, an intellectually searching Richard II (1951) in which he did not disguise the man's sexual ambiguity, and a Hotspur, grandly direct, with a precise Northumbrian accent. That summer he also played Prospero and the 'Henry V' Chorus. In 1952, at the St James's, he was admirable in 'Winter Journey', Clifford Odets's American drama, though at the time there were awkward differences of opinion with a fellow actor. A good company man, Redgrave never hesitated to speak his mind. Meanwhile he gave an excellent performance as the schoolmaster in the film 'The Browning Version' (1951). 
During another Stratford year (1953) Redgrave had to perform the unnerving trinity of Shylock, Lear, and the Antony of 'Antony and Cleopatra'. As the triumvir at sunset he reached his Shakespearian height -- Peggy Ashcroft was Cleopatra -- and the play had a London season at the Princes. Films, such as 'The Dam Busters' (1954), continued to occupy much of his time. He returned in 1958 to Stratford -- his last appearance there -- and again, at fifty, acted as Hamlet, a performance mature and deeply considered. Appointed CBE in 1952, he was knighted in 1959. His final major work in the theatre was at the Chichester festival of 1962 (as Uncle Vanya) and at the opening of the National Theatre in 1963, in the Old Vic, when he was an authoritative Claudius to the Hamlet of Peter O'Toole. The next year (1964) he was Solness in Ibsen's 'The Master Builder'. 
At the opening of the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford, in May 1965, Redgrave returned to 'A Month in the Country', which also had a West End showing. He had become a prodigiously popular film star in such productions as 'Kipps' (1941) in which he played the title part, 'The Way to the Stars' (1945), 'The Importance of being Earnest' (1952), and 'The Quiet American' (1957); one of his last roles was General Wilson in 'Oh! What a Lovely War' in 1969. Illness was developing: he had Parkinson's disease and he kept to readings, on various international tours, during the ebb of his career. His last appearance was in Simon Gray's 'Close of Play' (National, 1979), a practically silent part during which he sat in a wheelchair for most of the play. Sir Michael Redgrave died on 21 March 1985 in a nursing home at Denham, Buckinghamshire. He was cremated at Mortlake crematorium, London, on 26 March, and a memorial service was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, London (the actors' church) on 18 July. 
Redgrave's publications include 'The Actor's Ways and Means' (1953) and 'Mask or Face' (1958), and a version of 'The Aspern Papers' by Henry James, in which he acted, as 'H. J.', at the Queen's in 1959. He published in 1983 an autobiography, 'In my Mind's Eye'. 
Redgrave's wife, Rachel Kempson (1910-2003), actress, was born on 28 May 1910 at 10 Mount Boone, Dartmouth, Devon, the daughter of Eric William Edward Kempson, headmaster of the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth, and his wife, Beatrice Hamilton, 'nee' Ashwell. She was educated at a private day school in Kew; St Agnes Convent in East Grinstead, Sussex; Colchester county high school, Essex; Oaklea, Buckhurst Hill, Essex; and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, London (entering the same year as Joan Littlewood and Ida Lupino). Her first stage appearance was as Hero in 'Much Ado About Nothing' at Stratford upon Avon in 1933. She made her first London appearance later the same year, as Bianca in 'The Lady from Alfaqueque' at the Westminster Theatre. In 1936 she appeared with the Old Vic Company, and the following year joined John Gielgud's season at the Queen's Theatre. She acted little while her children were young, though she appeared with her husband in the Ealing film 'The Captive Heart' (1946) and in the 1953 season at Stratford. In 1956 she was a founder member of the English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre under George Devine; she scored a notable success in the latter's production of Chekhov's 'The Seagull' in 1964. She continued to appear regularly in the West End in the 1960s and 1970s, including in Alan Bennett's 'The Old Country' at the Queen's Theatre in 1977, alongside Alec Guinness. She also appeared in films, including 'Georgy Girl' (1966) and (with her daughter Vanessa and her son Corin) 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' (1968). She continued to make occasional appearances in theatre, film, television, and radio roles in the 1980s and 1990s; her last film was 'Deja Vu' (1998), in which she played the mother of Vanessa. She also performed a series of poetry readings with her son Corin. Her fierce loyalty to her husband (despite his homosexual affairs) extended to her children, and her acting colleagues. Her autobiography, 'A Family and Its Fortunes', was published in 1986. She died in Millbrook, New York, on 23 May 2003, while visiting her granddaughter Natasha Richardson, and was survived by her three children. 
J. C. Trewin', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 89989


Most, Mickie (1938-2003), singer and record producer, was born on 20 June 1938 at Louise Margaret Hospital, Aldershot, Hampshire, the son of Harold Victor Hayes, a sergeant (later regimental sergeant-major) in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Doris Kathleen, 'nee' Bower. He was an under-achieving student and left school at the age of fifteen to become an apprentice in a metal works. After an accident at work left him with a foot injury (a toe was amputated) he became interested in entering the burgeoning pop industry of the mid-1950s. As a teenager in Harrow, Middlesex, he befriended Terry Dene (real name Terence Williams) at the onset of the British skiffle craze (1956-8). Both found work as extras at Pinewood Studios in 1956. The following year, while Dene became one of the UK's early rock and roll stars, Hayes worked at the famed 2I's coffee bar in Soho. 
In 1958 Hayes and his friend Alex Murray formed the Most Brothers, and he adopted the name Mickie Most, which he retained thereafter. They recorded unsuccessfully for Decca, and toured with the young Cliff Richard. Indeed the Most Brothers backing group included the future Shadows Hank Marvin and Bruce Welch on guitars, and the bassist Jet Harris. Mickie Most abandoned the light harmony rock and roll of the Most Brothers when he met Christina Frisco in 1958, marrying her a year later. Christina was South African by birth, and for the next three years Most performed in South Africa, forming the group Mickie Most and the Playboys. By exploiting the non-availability of American recorded music in South Africa he covered American rock and roll hits such as Chuck Berry's 'Johnny B. Goode'. He was a great success there, achieving eleven consecutive number one hit singles, and becoming a household name -- at least in white society. 
Most returned to England in 1962, attempting to break into the expanding R&B and beat scenes. Despite his South African success he toured on the package tour circuit with little success (he was only an opening act on the UK tour of Little Richard, Bo Diddley, and the Everly Brothers in 1963), and his South African recording of 'Mister Porter' only reached number 43 in the UK charts, in July 1963. He had, however, picked up a great deal of knowledge in South Africa about the art of rapid record production (records were cheaply and swiftly produced for the local South African market), and after accepting his shortcomings as a performer he turned to independent record production. 
The Animals recorded Most's first acknowledged production, 'Baby Let Me Take You Home', in 1964. It was later variously reported that Most had spotted the Animals performing in either a Newcastle or a London nightclub, inviting them to a recording session on the strength of that one performance. Whatever the truth of the matter, 'Baby Let Me Take You Home' and the follow-up, 'House of the Rising Sun', were brilliant studio re-workings of songs featured on Bob Dylan's first LP. 'Baby Let Me Take You Home' was only a small British hit (reaching number 21), but its successor topped the charts internationally. 
This was the start of an impressive run of success. Soon all Britain's major labels beat a path to Most's door. He had hits for Decca with the Nashville Teens ('Tobacco Road'); Brunswick with Brenda Lee ('Is It True'); Columbia with Herman's Hermits (including 'Silhouettes'), the Animals ('Don't Let Me be Misunderstood', and others), and Lulu ('The Boat that I Row'); and Pye with Donovan (including 'Sunshine Superman'). The careers of Lulu and Donovan were both flagging when Most took over producing their records, and he furnished them with significant hits. By 1966 Most was a rare breed indeed, owning his own recording studios in London. However, Alan Price, the key figure in the Animals, did not like what he saw as Most's dictatorial approach in the studio and left the Animals; this in turn led to accusations that Most was a manipulator and a Svengali. There was some evidence for this: from 1966 onwards Most certainly played a major role in shaping the career of Donovan -- taking him from something of a Dylan clone to an international singer-songwriter of great renown. Donovan later commented that 'He'd sift through my material until he'd say: 'right, I'll have that one and that one for singles'. He knew right away' ('The Times'). 
Most's productions were regularly performed by top London session musicians, including Big Jim Sullivan and Jimmy Page on guitars, John Paul Jones on bass and arrangements, and Nicky Hopkins on piano. Most also recorded the original Jeff Beck Group and put Beck into the top ten with 'Hi-Ho Silver Lining' in 1967. He produced another two hit singles for Beck, 'Tallyman' and 'Love is Blue', and the influential LPs, 'Truth' and 'Beck-Ola'. Furthermore, he teamed the Beck group with Donovan for the hit single 'Goo Goo Barabajagal', and signed new artists like the underrated singer-guitarist Terry Reid. It was, however, no coincidence that by 1967 Most was being criticized for treating one of Britain's finest rock guitarists -- Jeff Beck -- as a 'pop star'. Indeed, Most came to signify for the growing 'underground' a line that should not be crossed in the search for popular music recognition, and Beck later disowned his hits produced by Most. Most's forthrightness and his opposition to over-production also led to his turning down lucrative production work for the Rolling Stones and the Who, groups who were known to spend inordinate hours in the studio, but were also leading players in the new album-oriented rock market. 
By 1967, as rock music was turning to a heavier and more improvisational studio sound, Most's formulaic, singles-oriented approach appeared to be an anachronism. After the commercial and critical failure of the Yardbirds' 'Little Games' album he decided to steer clear of rock groups, perhaps thinking that they did not quite share his vision. The Yardbirds had objected to practically everything Most had put before them as a producer. His policy of aiming to cut down every song to within three minutes and his (by now dated) idea that albums were only a postscript to success in the singles chart certainly angered this musically adventurous group. This somewhat myopic approach also led to splits with both Donovan and Terry Reid in 1969. 
Despite these setbacks Most set up his own production office at 155 Oxford Street, London, which he shared with his business partner, Peter Grant. It was through Most's association with the Yardbirds that Grant was eventually persuaded to manage this by now disintegrating group. In 1968 Most and Grant jointly set up RAK Management, but Grant's involvement with the Yardbirds (who rapidly evolved into Led Zeppelin) meant that Most had full control by late 1969. RAK Records and RAK Music Publishing were also launched in 1969. Most also continued freelancing and in 1970 produced Mary Hopkin's Eurovision song contest entry, 'Knock Knock Who's There?' (and its follow-up 'Temma Harbour'), for the Beatles' Apple label. 
With RAK Records Most's success began with the folk-singer Julie Felix's cover of Paul Simon's 'El Condor Pasa'. Julie Felix was the first artist signed to the label in 1969. For a while Most appeared to be willing to embrace the underground, with signings such as Felix and Alexis Korner's CCS. However, his pop consciousness was never far from the surface and by 1971 RAK was regarded by the music press as a UK 'bubblegum' label. As part of his successful strategy Most decided to work closely with people who were initially his rivals in this new teen pop market. The songwriters Nicky Chinn and Mike Chapman, the force behind Sweet, joined RAK Publishing to create number one hit singles and international successes for Suzi Quatro in 1973 with 'Can the Can' and 'Devil Gate Drive'. Most had approached Quatro while on a production assignment in Chicago in 1970, after seeing her on stage at a Detroit dance hall with the band Cradle (which included Quatro's sisters Arlene, Patti, and Nancy). 
Most had by now tapped into the new generation of early and pre-teen record buyers, who were uninterested in self-indulgent albums by ageing 1960s rock bands. RAK records were noted for their well-produced sound and commercial appeal. Unlike early Motown, however, RAK did not have a 'sound' as such (Mud did not sound like Hot Chocolate, and Suzi Quatro had a bass sound more reminiscent of T. Rex). But the appeal of RAK lay in its no-nonsense approach to production. RAK releases were never overburdened with noise and thus remained remarkably fresh. By 1973 Most achieved an all-time high ratio of hits with fourteen of eighteen RAK releases finding UK chart success. By the mid-1970s Suzi Quatro was at the forefront of a small roster of highly successful pop artists signed to RAK Records, including Hot Chocolate, Smokie, and Mud. In addition there were such other artists as Arrows, who enjoyed limited success at the time but, having also signed with RAK Publishing, were to receive long-term publishing benefits. Most was also lucky: the multiracial Hot Chocolate and Smokie were a cut above the average pop acts, and RAK boasted a long string of hit singles with these artists. Hot Chocolate, for example, enjoyed at least one British hit single every year from 1970 until 1984, twelve actually reaching the top ten. 
Most was a studio man at heart but was also highly visible as a television personality on the popular 1970s ITV talent show 'New Faces'. He and Tony Hatch were considered hard (at times acerbic) but fair in their assessment of aspiring artists, and Most's endearing good looks and affable personality made him appear a knowledgeable statesman of pop rather than a Svengali. He went on to produce the ITV rock show 'Revolver' in the late 1970s, persuading the singer Kate Bush to appear as the first guest on the pilot episode. He used subsequent episodes of the programme to promote punk rock. 
As a producer Most dabbled with punk a little (producing the Vibrators and Chris Spedding), but the legacy of punk and post-punk popular music unsettled RAK. Their artists were less successful as the 1980s dawned and Most did not adjust well to the dominant tastes of the 1980s. Despite the successes of the ever-popular Hot Chocolate and a string of hit records by Kim Wilde between 1981 and 1983 he became something of an anachronism in the new romantic and digital era of the mid-1980s. Most's motto, 'Find good songs, go in the studio, make good records and then go home' (Clarke), appeared at odds with the DIY aesthetic of late-1980s dance music. Perhaps as a consequence of this marked shift in song styles, production values, and recording techniques Most sold his RAK catalogue to EMI in 1983. Following this his production days were all but over. There were a handful of later productions; these included work with the pop group Johnny Hates Jazz in 1987 ('Shattered Dreams', 'I Don't Want to be a Hero', and 'Turn Back the Clock'), but only by virtue of his son Calvin being the group's drummer. In 1988 Most briefly revived RAK for the group Perfect Stranger, but no hit ensued. In later years he concentrated his business activities on the copyrights still held by RAK. These publishing rights were not part of the sale to EMI in 1983 and Most was able to administer these rights to his continued advantage until his final illness. 
The 'Sunday Times' 'rich list' in 2003 estimated Most's wealth to be in the region of $50 million, and many obituarists highlighted his financial success. Nevertheless Most's legacy deserved greater recognition. He was one of a small number of young independent producers of the 1960s who, having cut their teeth on the rock and roll of the 1950s, learned 'on the hoof' and forever dislocated the hitherto vertically integrated British music industry. While labels such as Decca and EMI were monoliths unable to move at speed, mavericks like Most found their niche by responding rapidly to an ever changing popular culture and turning out, in the process, three-minute songs immediately recognizable by the youth of the nation. Additionally Most's studio accomplishments lasted far longer than many of his perhaps more illustrious 'rock' contemporaries, and he certainly retained a knack for identifying what constituted a hit single, as Kim Wilde's 1981 hit 'Kids in America' testified. Indeed, in a long career Most produced thirty-seven records which reached number one in the singles charts in either Britain or the USA. He was one of only a few post-war popular music studio professionals who were able to transform recorded sound: his place in the popular music canon is thus assured. 
Most was diagnosed with mesothelioma, a form of lung cancer associated with exposure to asbestos, in 2000, and he died on 30 May 2003 at his north London home, Montebello, 19 Totteridge Common, Barnet. At the time of his death there was speculation that the cancer from which he suffered might have developed as a consequence of the many hours he spent in the unhealthy environment of the recording studio. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium and was survived by his wife, Christina, and their three children, Calvin, Nathalie, and Crystalle. 


@@@@@


doc= 89996


Powell, Sir (Arnold Joseph) Philip (1921-2003), architect, was born at 35 Shakespeare Road, Bedford, on 15 March 1921, the younger son and one of three children of the Revd (later Canon) Arnold Cecil Powell (1882-1963), headmaster of Bedford Modern School, and his first wife, Mary Winnifred, 'nee' Walker (died 1954). He was educated at Epsom College, where his father had become headmaster and where he excelled at languages. His father sent him abroad to improve his French and German after he won an exhibition to read modern languages at Cambridge. But Powell's passion was for architecture, the architecture of the modern movement in particular, and he seized the opportunity to visit recent building projects in France, Germany, and the Netherlands. On his return to Britain he joined the MARS (Modern Architectural Research) Group. Inspired by the example of his brother, Michael (1916-1971), whom he hero-worshipped, he abandoned Cambridge and entered the Architectural Association (AA) school of architecture in London in 1939. 
It was at the AA that Powell first met the American-born John Hidalgo (Jacko) Moya. During the Second World War both Powell (a pacifist by conviction) and Moya were judged unfit for war service and became friends when Moya (who had entered the AA in the previous year but whose tutors felt he was making poor progress with his studies) was relegated to the first-year unit to which Powell had been allocated. The two men shared a house, first in Hadley Wood, where the AA was evacuated during the war years, and then at 16 the Little Boltons, which for a time was home to a number of young architects, including (the unrelated) Geoffry Powell, later a partner in the practice of Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon. The house was to be Philip Powell's home for the rest of his life. He married Philippa Jane Eccles (died 2006), a 24-year-old teacher of dancing, and daughter of Lieutenant Colonel Charles Eccles, army officer, on 17 January 1953. They had a son, Ben, and a daughter, Dido. 
The practice of Powell and Moya, in which Michael Powell was initially a member before quitting in 1950 to join the London county council architect's department, was founded in 1946 after Philip Powell (who had worked briefly in the office of Frederick Gibberd) and Jacko Moya, both barely qualified, won the competition for a very large housing scheme to be developed by Westminster City Council on a 33 acre site in Pimlico. Churchill Gardens, strongly influenced by Dutch housing projects of the 1930s and by the Stuttgart Weissenhofsiedlung, included nearly 1800 dwellings for around 6500 residents and was built in phases between 1947 and 1962. The development reflected Powell's 'mistrust of conscious struggling after originality... of the monumental approach' (P. Powell, 116). Combining medium-rise slabs of flats with low-rise terraces -- inspired, perhaps, by J. J. P. Oud's housing at the Kiefhoek in Rotterdam -- the housing was set in an informal green landscape, a concession to English tradition perhaps, and faced in brick and render rather than exposed concrete. John Summerson complained that 'this sort of thing is not London at all' (K. Powell, 28), but Churchill Gardens wore well, physically and socially, in contrast to many other public housing schemes of the post-war years in which strong architectural form was to the fore and the needs of residents a secondary consideration. 
In 1950 Powell and Moya won another prestigious competition, that for a 'vertical feature' on the festival of Britain's South Bank site. Both partners had prepared designs, but Moya's, designed with the brilliant engineer Felix Samuely, was the one submitted. The Skylon is remembered as the outstanding landmark of the 1951 festival. It was destroyed after the festival closed, though there were later moves to reconstruct it. The structure was seen, Powell recalled, as a symbol of hope when 'everything except hope was strictly rationed' (K. Powell, 28). 
Housing formed a large part of Powell and Moya's workload during the late 1940s and early 1950s. Two houses in Mount Lane, Chichester, were built for Powell's parents (his father had become a canon of the cathedral) and for his sister, Joan Hogg, who had married a naval officer. A striking house at Toy's Hill, Kent, was completed for two spinster sisters in 1955, but by this time the practice was becoming too busy to take on small jobs of this sort. The local authority housing in Lamble Street, Gospel Oak (1951-4), again combined slabs of apartments and low-rise houses and was notable for its response to the existing urban fabric. Like other young practices of the period, Powell and Moya prospered at a time when there was an urgent need for new housing, schools, and hospitals: for more than half a century the partnership worked almost exclusively for the public sector. Mayfield School, Putney, completed in 1956, was one of the first of the new comprehensives and was described by the critic Ian Nairn as 'one of the best modern buildings in Britain' (I. Nairn, 'Modern Buildings in London', 1964, 59). The commission for Princess Margaret Hospital, Swindon, came to the firm in 1951, though the hospital was not completed until 1960. Wexham Park Hospital in Slough (1966) was notable for its low-rise layout, around a series of courts, the antithesis of many of the super-hospitals of the period. Hospitals thereafter became a mainstay of the practice, dominating its later years to a degree that Powell personally came to regret. The Festival Theatre in Chichester, inspired by the ideas of Tyrone Guthrie, opened in 1962, the first architecturally important post-war theatre in Britain. Laurence Olivier was its first director and later tried, without success, to interest Powell in the National Theatre project, which went to Denys Lasdun. 
Powell and Moya's reputation for 'gentlemanly' modern design, as Reyner Banham described their approach (R. Banham, 'Nice, modern and British!', 'New Society', 18 July 1974, 160), marrying modernism to a feeling for context and history, was underscored by a series of commissions for additions to Oxford and Cambridge colleges. The first of these projects, occupying a confined backyard site, was completed in 1961 for Brasenose College, Oxford, and was one of the first modernist buildings commissioned by an Oxford college. Residential buildings for Christ Church and Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and St John's and Queens' colleges in Cambridge followed. Blue boar quad at Christ Church straddles an ancient wall, retained at the insistence of the architects -- Oxford planners would have welcomed the chance to demolish it and widen the adjacent road. The Cripps building at St John's College, Cambridge, was the largest (200 rooms) and most costly of the Oxbridge schemes, faced in travertine and fitted out to a high quality. The picture gallery dropped into the dean's garden at Christ Church (1968) was a favourite project of Powell's ('I like buildings you can't see', he joked; 'The Independent'), and one in which he was personally much involved. At Wolfson College, Oxford, Powell and Moya, who had failed to secure work from one of the new universities, built a mini-campus for graduate students, with generous funding from Sir Isaac Wolfson. 
Powell and Moya worked together on all projects, Powell tolerating his partner's mercurial character and periods of absence from the office, and combining the role of a lead designer with that of its business strategist. Despite its success, Powell and Moya was never a large practice, though it attracted younger talents including James Gowan, Richard Burton, Paul Koralek, and Richard MacCormac. During the 1970s and 1980s younger partners were brought in, Moya retiring in 1990 and Powell a year later, though acting as a consultant to the practice until 1994. The last project that he oversaw was a series of additions to Great Ormond Street Hospital -- which involved physically moving the gem-like Victorian chapel. 
Powell and Moya was regarded for more than a decade as perhaps the key British architectural practice; its 'pragmatic modernism' (Powell's own description; K. Powell, 30) fell from favour to some degree as younger practices, such as those of Norman Foster and Richard Rogers, came to the fore from the mid-1970s onwards. In fact the newly fashionable high-tech manner was prefigured to some degree by the British pavilion designed by Powell and Moya for the 1970 Expo in Osaka, a pioneering example of a masted structure, and the practice's workload of hospitals and university buildings (in Bristol and London) remained extensive into the 1980s. Though the decade saw a development boom, neither of the founding partners was interested in pursuing commercial work, particularly speculative office schemes, and the Miesian office block located on top of the Museum of London, itself a major project of the 1970s, was not a building of which Powell was proud. There was evidence of some loss of direction in projects of the 1980s, such as the housing scheme in Endell Street, Covent Garden, and the National Westminster Bank on Shaftesbury Avenue. The practice's role in the power station at Heysham, completed in 1986, was merely to provide architectural clothing for a massive piece of engineering. Competition entries for major projects such as the Stuttgart Staatsgalerie (won by James Stirling) and the BBC Radio Centre (which went to Foster) were, disappointingly, unplaced. The Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre, occupying a prominent site opposite Westminster Abbey, was commissioned in 1975 but not completed until 1986, when Margaret Thatcher was prime minister. Thatcher disliked the building and said so at a Royal Academy dinner, when she was seated next to Powell, a lifelong socialist who remembered the encounter as 'hair-raising' ('Daily Telegraph'). Although unapologetically modern in style, the building escaped the attentions of the prince of Wales, whose architectural campaigns were then at their height, and is a polite, though far from insipid, addition to a historic context. From 1987 onwards a number of Powell and Moya buildings were statutorily listed, an outcome that pleased Powell, as did renewed interest in the practice's work on the part of critics, historians, and younger architects. In 2000 Churchill Gardens was selected from over 1000 award-winning projects for the Civic Trust's fortieth anniversary award. 
Powell and Moya won the RIBA royal gold medal for architecture in 1974, the first occasion on which the medal had been awarded to a practice rather than an individual. Powell was appointed OBE in 1957, knighted in 1975, and appointed a Companion of Honour in 1984. He became a member of the Royal Fine Art Commission in 1969, serving on it actively for twenty-five years. Elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1972 and an academician in 1977, he served ten years (1975-85) as the academy's treasurer. He was a trustee of Sir John Soane's Museum from 1978 to 2001, typically taking an active interest in the campaign to restore Soane's unique home and museum. 
After his retirement from active practice, Powell sat on the juries for a number of major architectural competitions, including those for the Inland Revenue headquarters in Nottingham, the Tate Modern, and the Cardiff Bay opera house (he was dismayed by the subsequent abandonment of the winning scheme by Zaha Hadid), and served for a time as an adviser to the Heritage Lottery Fund. Small in stature -- and nicknamed Titch in his youth -- Powell was a modest and reticent man, scrupulously polite, not instinctively a lover of the social occasions which his wife, a natural extrovert, relished, but always a generous and attentive host. He lectured rarely and wrote little: 'I mistrust architects writing about architecture because I find it so difficult myself', he told an audience at the RIBA in 1966, finding the writings of his heroes, Corbusier and Wright, 'turgid' and 'bombastic' (P. Powell, 116). His genuine interest in encouraging young architects and warm manner in personal encounters made him a popular figure in the profession and earned him the trust and respect of clients. His pastimes, apart from his family, included travel and music, though his commitment to architecture left him little free time. He died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, on 5 May 2003, of heart failure, and was survived by his wife, Philippa, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 89997


Redding, (David) Noel (1945-2003), musician, was born on 25 December 1945 at the Royal Victoria Hospital, Folkestone, Kent, the son of Horace Albert Redding (1906-1970), a tutor at the Midland Bank training school and former flight lieutenant in the RAF, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Berggren (1914-2003). At the time of his birth registration his family lived in Hythe, Kent. He had a brother, Anthony ('b'. 1942), and a sister, Vicki ('b'. 1948). He took up guitar at the age of fourteen and turned professional at seventeen. He played in several bands without success, culminating in the Loving Kind, who released three singles on the Piccadilly label in 1966. Ready to leave the music business, in September 1966 his luck changed when an advertisement in 'Melody Maker' drew him to an audition where he found himself asked to play bass for a new group that would feature an American guitarist, Jimi Hendrix. It was a much-needed opportunity, though Redding had never played bass before. A second rehearsal in Soho bonded Redding and Hendrix with the drummer Mitch Mitchell. By mid-October the Jimi Hendrix Experience were playing concerts, and by December their cover of 'Hey Joe' was a hit, giving them television exposure. 
'Hey Joe' was followed into the charts by 'Purple Haze', whose stridently dissonant two-bar introduction memorably pitted Redding's bass octave E against an octave B[flat] on guitar, and then by 'The Wind Cries Mary', as well as a debut LP, 'Are You Experienced'. Redding also played on the second album, 'Axis: Bold As Love' (1967) and on some of 'Electric Ladyland' (1968), but not on 'Voodoo Chile' and 'All Along the Watchtower'. Much to his frustration, the Jimi Hendrix Experience released only two songs by Redding, 'She's So Fine' and 'Little Miss Strange'. Other songs of his were worked on but none was released until the issue of 'The Experience Sessions' on CD in 2004. The limitations of Redding's guitaristic bass-playing suited the Experience, as he kept things simple, put chords in his parts which filled out the trio's live sound, and functioned as anchor for both Hendrix's and Mitchell's freewheeling playing. But on extended blues like 'Hear My Train a-Coming' his task as bassist could be monotonous. 
Redding grew increasingly frustrated with his role in the Jimi Hendrix Experience, irritated by protracted recording sessions, hangers-on in the studio, and Hendrix's desire to use guest musicians. When Chas Chandler walked out during the recording of 'Electric Ladyland' in 1968 he advised Redding to do likewise. Redding later believed that he made himself unpopular by asking too many questions about the band's earnings. Constant touring, drugs, and the stress of fame led to tensions within the band, and increased disillusionment. Redding stayed put, but in late 1968 formed his own group, Fat Mattress, with whom he played lead guitar, and persuaded Hendrix and his management to allow the band to support the Experience on tour. Hendrix took to referring to them as 'Thin Pillow'. Redding recorded two albums with Fat Mattress before the group split up in 1970. 
Redding played his last gig with the Jimi Hendrix Experience in June 1969 in Denver, when Hendrix announced from the stage that the band was splitting. Redding flew home to London and told the music press that he had resigned. In 1970 Hendrix toyed with reforming the Experience but decided he could not work with Redding again; Redding was not told this until he had flown to the USA for the reunion. 
Redding subsequently guested on many records including 'Lord Sutch and Heavy Friends' (1970). A solo album, 'Nervous Breakdown', was financed by Redding but not released, which, along with the end of his marriage to Susanne M. Fonsby (whom he had married on 6 November 1969), was the start of financial and alcohol problems. Some stability was found with a second partner, Carol Appleby, and a home at Dunowen House in Clonakilty, co. Cork, Ireland, with four acres of gardens and sea views. He continued to play with groups including Road and the Noel Redding Band. On Friday nights he invariably played in De Barra's pub in Clonakilty. Financial difficulties forced the sale of the Fender Jazz bass he had played while performing with Hendrix, and in 1974 he signed away income from future Hendrix releases for a one-off payment of $100,000. In February 2003 he instigated fresh legal proceedings against the Experience Hendrix company for more than $3 million in lost earnings. It was estimated that by that time the royalties from the issue of Jimi Hendrix Experience recordings had earned more than $300 million. 
In the 1990s Redding was offered Irish citizenship in recognition of his contribution to Irish music and the arts. In 1992 the Jimi Hendrix Experience was inducted into the Cleveland rock and roll hall of fame; Redding described this and playing the Monterey pop festival in June 1967 as the highlights of his life. With Carol Appleby he wrote 'Are You Experienced: the Inside Story of the Jimi Hendrix Experience' (1990), drawing on his diaries. Carol was killed in a car-crash two days after it was finished. He later formed an enduring partnership with Deborah McNaughton, a Canadian artist. In 2002 Carl Fischer Music Ltd published 'The Noel Redding Bass Guitar Method'. He died suddenly at home (Dunowen House, Clonakilty) from haemorrhage secondary to cirrhosis of the liver on 11 May 2003. After a funeral at St James's Church, Ardfield, on 18 May, he was cremated, and his ashes scattered in the garden of Dunowen House. He was survived by his partner Deborah and a son from his marriage, Nicolas Noel Redding ('b'. 1970). 


@@@@@


doc= 89998


Richardson, Sir Michael John de Rougemont (1925-2003), financier, was born on 9 April 1925 at 13 Pitt Street, Kensington, London, the eldest of three sons of Arthur Wray Richardson, a City insurance broker, and his wife, Audrey, 'nee' de Rougemont. Educated at Harrow School before being evacuated to Kent School, Connecticut, during the Second World War, he joined the Irish Guards in 1943. Seriously wounded at Nijmegen, he served in Palestine before leaving the army as a captain in 1949. After a few weeks at Cambridge he left to join the Drayton Group, run by the controversial financier Harley Drayton, where he worked in the investment trust business. On 16 July 1949 he married Octavia Joyce (Paddy) Mayhew (died 1999), a 23-year-old games mistress and daughter of Arthur Joyce Mayhew, mining engineer. They had a son and two daughters. 
Richardson joined Panmure Gordon & Co. as a junior partner in 1952, and remained there for almost twenty years, until 1971, when he joined Cazenove & Co. Disappointed not to get the top job there in 1981, he accepted an invitation to join N. M. Rothschild & Sons Ltd as managing director. From 1990 to 1994 he was vice-chairman of Rothschilds and chairman of Smith New Court plc, the securities trading house in which Rothschilds had a stake. In 1995 he became vice-chairman of JO Hambro Magan, remaining with its successor, Hawkpoint Partners, from 1996 to 1999. Although he was the ultimate insider, his career was defined by dealmaking for those outside the charmed circle, identifying a new breed of entrepreneurs challenging the financial establishment -- James Hanson, Gordon White, and John King, all ultimately ennobled, but notoriously also Asil Nadir, who fled beyond the reach of extradition after the collapse of his Polly Peck business, and Robert Maxwell, who plundered Mirror Group Newspapers. 
Richardson began to make his reputation in the 1950s with a series of successful transactions. He was involved on the winning side of one of the earliest contested takeovers, of British Aluminium, in 1958, a bid publicly resisted 'in the national interest' by many blue-chip institutions. He became a key financier for many high-profile takeover battles as the City turned more aggressive. He was a close adviser of James Hanson as the latter built up an empire acquiring underperforming companies. When, later, he rescued Hanson's floundering 1985 rights issue, Hanson took down a prized racehorse painting from behind his desk and sent it round to Richardson. Later still, he would covertly buy shares for Hanson for the unsuccessful assault on ICI, then the UK's largest manufacturing company. 
Richardson's association with Robert Maxwell began in 1964 when he acted on Maxwell's behalf in the flotation of Pergamon Press. Later he bought shares in Pergamon to inflate the price when Maxwell tried to buy the 'News of the World', and stayed close even when a government report found Maxwell not to be relied on 'to exercise proper stewardship of a publicly-quoted company' (T. Bower, 'Maxwell the Outsider', 1988, 222). He made a glowing speech at Maxwell's sixty-fifth birthday party, was involved in the controversial flotation of the Mirror Group in 1991 when its finances were already seriously compromised, and was the man Maxwell's sons phoned for advice when their father went missing at sea later that year. After Maxwell's misdeeds began to come to light Richardson famously remarked 'Bob was squeaky clean to me' ('The Independent', 16 May 2003). 
Richardson was an early supporter and became a personal friend of Margaret Thatcher, another outsider, encountered when their sons played cricket together at Harrow. Eyebrows were raised when he became the only City adviser to the small Treasury group which laid plans for privatization under her government, and then earned millions in fees for Rothschilds as the major beneficiary of the programme he had helped construct. Dubbed a 'privateer of privatisation' ('The Guardian', 20 May 2003), he even devised an audacious plan to sell Powergen -- half the nationalized electricity industry -- to his old friend Hanson. The plan failed after a leak, but the price rose. Richardson however met his match in Nigel Lawson, over the sale of the government's residual stake in BP in 1987. When the stockmarket crashed between pricing and closing, Richardson backed the underwriters' calls for the flotation to be pulled. Lawson refused, settling instead for a buy-back offer at a lower price (at a cost of many millions to the underwriting banks). 
Richardson was knighted under the Conservative government in 1990; his brand of suave ruthlessness was ideally suited to the times. Known for his charm and remembering the names even of minor players, he used his regular table at the River Room at the Savoy to spread his web. In his pomp he was ubiquitous. When one grateful client murmured appreciation of a typically sage but brief appearance, an assistant was heard to wonder aloud, 'But does he have any idea which bid this is?' (private information). 
Richardson's career paralleled the post-war progression of the City of London from gentlemen's club to eager partner in the controversial practices of transatlantic dealmaking. He became the most consummate City fixer of the 1980s and 1990s, and the Conservative government's principal adviser on privatization. He was memorably described by Nigel Lawson as 'at first sight too suave and smooth to be true... his unfailing charm, courtesy and good manners disarmed all who came into contact with him... he owed his success to manipulating people rather than money' (Lawson, 758). Others saw a more sinister side, and insouciance about his clients finally betrayed him when in 2001 he was banned from doing business in the City 'in any capacity' after writing letters confirming credit for a client twice declared bankrupt. Bemused by the new climate of regulation, he called it 'a very harsh view of a small error' ('The Independent'). 
Richardson was a keen small boat sailor and huntsman (serving as joint master of the Crawley and Horsham hunt; he lived at Butterstocks, Shipley, near Horsham). He was also a prominent freemason but claimed that he 'never combined Masonry with business in any way' ('The Observer', 5 Feb 1995). His last years were spent under the shadow both of his ban from the City and of oesophageal cancer. He died at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Westminster, on 12 May 2003, of pneumonia, and was survived by his three children, his wife, Paddy, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 89999


Roberts, John Morris (1928-2003), historian, was born on 14 April 1928 at 35 Longfellow Avenue, Bath, the only child of Edward Henry Roberts, ironmonger, and his wife, Dorothy Julia, 'nee' Hallett. Educated at Taunton School, he went to Keble College, Oxford, with a scholarship. He graduated in 1948 with a first in modern history followed by national service in the intelligence corps. In 1951 he was elected to a prize fellowship at Magdalen College, Oxford. His career as an academic historian began with a doctoral thesis (1953) on the Cisalpine republic in northern Italy under the tutelage of the French directory and then Napoleon. In 1953 he was elected to a tutorial fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, but deferred this for a year which he spent at Princeton and Yale. On 10 September 1960, at Milton Abbas, he married (Mariabella) Rosalind Gardiner, daughter of Henry Rolf Gardiner, a farmer. This marriage was dissolved in 1964 and in Oxford on 29 August the same year he married Judith Cecilia Mary Armitage, schoolteacher, and daughter of James Armitage, a clerk in holy orders. They had one son and two daughters. 
Roberts was a college tutor (1954-79) at a time when the tutorial system in Oxford was at its apogee as a form of individualized education delivered to a characteristic mix of exceptionally brilliant and much less able students. He exemplified the system at its best: attentive, kind, and stimulating to all but the idle, who were imperiously dismissed. He forced his pupils to think for themselves by asking unnerving questions, by subverting apparent self-evidence, and by producing information or parallels new to the student. His success lay in his understanding of individual students and his ability to adjust his teaching and provocative questions to their individual potential. Fluent in several western European languages, he had also acquired familiarity with American history at Yale. These were uncommon attributes among Oxford historians at the time. He was thus brought to teach a very broad range of history, underpinning what later became his personal historical style. He read a lot of history in European languages other than English. As a result his thinking and teaching focused on large questions. 
Roberts believed strongly in the importance of primary research and this was evidenced by his editorship (with Richard Cobb and subsequently John Hardman) of the two-volume 'French Revolution Documents' (1966) -- a remarkably shrewd and extensive selection of primary sources for study by undergraduates. He published two monographs, 'The Mythology of Secret Societies' (1972) and 'The Paris Commune from the Right' (1974), which demonstrated his characteristic concern with viewing things from an unexpected angle. His attention to formal scholarship was also visible in his meticulous and competent editorship of the 'English Historical Review' between 1967 and 1977. However, it is evident that he was always more at ease on a broader canvas. His capacity for crystal-clear and incisive generalization based on mastery of the main lines of the history of different countries and the points of convergence between them was first demonstrated in his 'Europe 1880-1945' (1967). Such a textbook was in many ways the extension of his talents as a college tutor and in his hands the increasingly panoptical approach was to become very illuminating, as he explored it in books such as his 'History of the World' (1976). 
This desire to seize the broad sweep of history and to explain it to an audience of non-initiates -- to educate them about history and its importance in the understanding of their contemporary present -- found its most successful expression in Roberts's television series of 1985, 'The Triumph of the West'. Few historians have excelled in this difficult medium. Roberts excelled because he had a strong theme (the spread of the innovations fostered by a self-transforming Western culture) presented without prejudice or triumphalism, and in the same spirit of thought-provoking interest that pervaded his tutorial style. He did not bow to editorial judgements based only on televisual concerns (at the cost, indeed, of some robust encounters behind the scenes) and as a result never looked ridiculous or superficial. The programme attracted two million viewers, was repeated in 1988, and was seen in a substantial number of other countries. The success was justified because he did indeed articulate a way of looking at history and the world that was quite new and enlightening to his audience. 
By the time of 'The Triumph of the West', Roberts's talents as an organizer and a man of sound judgement had brought him the opportunity of another career. Indeed in Oxford he had increasingly taken on roles of either administration or collective academic effort. He had been acting warden of Merton in 1969-70 and again in 1977-9. He was senior proctor in 1967-8 at a time when student troubles affected many universities but left Oxford untouched for the time being, which many attributed in part to his stewardship of this office with its particular function of supervision of the administrative bodies of the university and of student affairs. As for the work of historians, as well as editing the 'English Historical Review', he became general editor of Purnell's 'History of the Twentieth Century', of the 'New Oxford History of England', and of the 'Oxford History of Europe'. 
In 1979 Roberts accepted the position of vice-chancellor of the University of Southampton. His tenure (1979-85) coincided with a new and more abrasive government policy towards universities. In his words, universities then still believed 'that they could prosper without national planning (let alone collective action) or the consideration of anything other than piecemeal expansion in terms of more of the same' ('Recollections', 100). There was little sense that money might not continue to be supplied as before. In many ways Southampton was typical of the dilemmas facing universities. It had grown markedly in recent years so that the strong sense of institutional solidarity among its members no longer matched the reality of an institution now too big for business to be conducted by people who all knew each other. It faced sudden demands for serious financial cuts without the academic culture necessary to accept easily differentiation between colleagues and departments. Roberts brought energy and decisiveness to the resolution of these difficulties. His early proposals, which reflected his view of the comparative strengths and weaknesses of the university, provoked considerable opposition (especially over staff reductions) and the suspicions about him generated by this in some parts of the institution never really died away during the rest of his time there. Certainly he drove change from the top. None the less he did set out to persuade colleagues of the need for change and convinced a great many. He pioneered at Southampton innovations which later became standard practice in all British universities. He emphasized diversification and growth of earnings; inaugurated fund-raising; gave impetus to an alumni organization; invested in public relations; worked hard with the local community; instituted internal reviews of departments, restructured departments, bid for government funding for new centres, and favoured new degree courses; invested in new buildings and actively sought out high-quality academics for new chairs; and initiated a science park. He was a modernizer who left Southampton much stronger than he found it. 
In 1985 Roberts returned to Oxford as warden of Merton College, where he stayed until retirement in 1994. He later wrote that it was a decision 'too much swayed by powerful feelings' ('Recollections', 109), and it certainly reflected the strong emotional bond he felt. He set himself with energy to modernize the college. He oversaw an ambitious programme of refurbishment and new building. He initiated a large appeal which innovated in Oxford at that time by its emphasis on building the alumni association and on the permanence of the engagement of the college with its alumni. Given the classic individualism of a college community, it was Roberts who provided not only the impetus for all these initiatives but also did most of the hard work. He travelled tirelessly on the college's behalf while stimulating a strong culture of intellectual endeavour in it. At the same time, he was convinced that the future of Oxford depended on making a large place for postgraduate students. He pursued this direction in the college by expanding the number of graduate students and by providing proper facilities for them. He pursued it too with the university, chairing an inquiry into provision for postgraduates which in 1987 resulted in a powerful report. None the less, it is hard not to think that, after Southampton, Merton was too limited a stage for Roberts. The projects he pursued there were essentially extensions of his work at Southampton but on a smaller scale. He found Merton and Oxford coming to terms with the new pressures on universities in the same way that he had seen in Southampton and with the same divisions and doubts, but the complexity of the Oxford structure made impossible a clear decision-making role such as he had become used to. 
Among other activities Roberts was a trustee of the Rhodes Trust (1988-94) and of the National Portrait Gallery (1984-98); a member of the board of the British Council (1991-8); and a governor of the BBC (1988-93). He was made a CBE in 1996. To all his different activities he brought a considerable breadth of vision, facilitated by a strong and quick intelligence. He had directness of mind and purpose together with decisive and sound judgement of people. He was capable of great personal warmth and loyalty in friendship as well as frosty dismissiveness of those he saw as fools. All his endeavours were pursued with boundless energy, although at times of frustration in matters substantial or ephemeral this could translate into what appeared to be brusqueness. After retirement Roberts lived in Somerset, where he had long kept a base. He died at his home, Timwood Farm, Roadwater, near Watchet, on 30 May 2003 after a protracted struggle with myeloma. He was buried in the cemetery of nearby Leighland church. He was survived by his wife, Judith, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 90001


Ryder, Sydney Franklin Thomas, Baron Ryder of Eaton Hastings (1916-2003), journalist and industrialist, was born on 16 September 1916 at 20 Balfour Road, Ealing, London, the son of John Ryder and his wife, Amelia Sarah, 'nee' Graimes. At the time of his birth his father was serving as a driver in the Royal Field Artillery; he had formerly been a carman, and was later a town clerk. Ryder won a scholarship to Ealing county school, but left at the age of sixteen without qualifications. Fascinated by the stock market, he embarked on a career as a financial journalist. His first job was as assistant to the city editor of the 'Morning Post', and he later joined the 'Stock Exchange Gazette', where he remained until the outbreak of the Second World War. In 1939 Ryder was assigned to a Territorial Army anti-aircraft unit. He devoted himself to the study of gunnery, later joining the trials wing of the school of anti-aircraft artillery, where he worked on the development of rockets. He also wrote the official training manual for the Bofors gun. Ryder went back to the 'Stock Exchange Gazette' after the war, but soon switched to the 'Financial Times', where he started the first column of investment advice. In 1950 he returned to the 'Gazette' as editor. On 18 March the same year he married Eileen Winifred Dodds, the nineteen-year-old daughter of William Dodds, accountant. They had one daughter, Jill ('b'. 1950), and one son, Michael ('b'. 1953). 
Ryder's main interest was in the business rather than the editorial side of newspapers -- he once remarked that financial journalism was an excellent preparation for management -- and the opportunity for making the switch came in 1960, when the International Publishing Corporation (IPC), owner of the 'Daily Mirror' and other publications, took over Kelly Iliffe Holdings, the publishing group which owned the 'Stock Exchange Gazette'. Ryder offered to buy some of the Kelly Iliffe magazines, and although the offer was rejected his ideas for developing the business impressed Cecil King, then head of IPC. Ryder was made managing director of Kelly Iliffe and formed a close partnership with King. Three years later he was promoted to the much bigger job of running Albert E. Reed (later Reed Paper Group), an old-established paper-maker which had been supplying the 'Daily Mirror' with newsprint since the 1920s and in which IPC had a minority stake. 
Reed at the time faced serious problems, stemming in large part from the creation of the European Free Trade Association in 1960. This arrangement -- a rather weak riposte by the UK and other European countries to the creation of the six-nation Common Market in 1958 -- had exposed the British paper industry for the first time to unrestricted competition from low-cost Scandinavian mills. Ryder set about reshaping the company with enormous energy and determination. His strategy was to convert Reed's paper machines to grades which were less vulnerable to Scandinavian competition, to acquire pulp and paper assets outside Britain, and to diversify into other industries. The growing popularity of takeovers during the 1960s suited Ryder's expansionist ambitions. He was a 'hands-on' manager, and became famous for his eighteen-hour working days. A bundle of nervous energy, he was once described as a cross between Emil Zatopek and Samuel Smiles (Foster and Bull). Ryder believed that the British paper industry as a whole needed rationalization and it was largely at his prompting that the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation -- an agency created by the Labour government to promote mergers in fragmented industries -- undertook a study of the sector in 1968. Ryder's hope was that the corporation would endorse the idea of combining Reed with the other giant of the industry, Bowater. But this plan did not find favour with the corporation, and the two companies went their separate ways. 
Under Ryder's leadership Reed reduced its dependence on imported pulp, invested in grades based on waste paper (including the country's first plant for 'de-inking' old newspapers), and expanded the company's business in packaging materials, building products, and paper merchanting. Reed's transformation from a paper-making group into an industrial conglomerate was taken even further when Ryder merged it with its principal shareholder, IPC, to form Reed International. Ryder can be criticized for expanding Reed too fast and on too large a scale, especially in South Africa and Canada, and by the time he retired in 1974 the company's finances were under some strain. Yet Ryder's stewardship could not be regarded as a failure. Building on the management accounting systems installed by his predecessor, he decentralized the group and pushed more responsibility down to the mill managers. He was a modernizing figure who greatly improved the quality of management at all levels, and he inspired considerable respect among many of those who worked for him. Although not all his diversifications were successful he rescued a moribund company, and the group of businesses which he assembled through mergers and acquisitions contained some valuable assets -- notably publishing -- on which his successors were able to build. 
These achievements made Ryder a public figure -- he was knighted in 1972 -- and it was not entirely surprising that, when he retired from Reed, he should have been asked by the Labour government to be an industrial adviser, and then, in 1975, to take command of the new industrial development agency, the National Enterprise Board (NEB). He was made a life peer as Baron Ryder of Eaton Hastings in the same year. The NEB was to some extent a successor to the IRC, but it had more sweeping powers. Its intended role -- reflecting a leftward shift in Labour's thinking about industrial policy -- was not just to merge companies, but also, where necessary, to take them over and improve their performance. Harold Wilson, the prime minister, and Tony Benn, his industry minister, saw Ryder as a professional manager with experience and skills which could play a vital role in the government's industrial strategy. Ryder, for his part, had no strong political opinions, but shared Wilson's view that British industry needed a thorough shake-up and that government could and should play an active part in that process. He saw the NEB in technocratic rather than political terms, somewhat akin to Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, which was widely (though wrongly) credited with orchestrating that country's remarkable industrial success. The NEB, Ryder said at the time of his appointment, would not interfere in the day-to-day management of the companies in which it held shares, but would act like the board of a multinational company, 'analysing and checking and occasionally altering' (Ensor). 
Ryder saw himself as engaged in a patriotic crusade to streamline and professionalize British industry. But the environment in which he now found himself was intensely political and, as far as the business community was concerned, extremely hostile. The NEB, with its potentially aggressive mission, was regarded with much more suspicion than the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation, which had operated mostly through co-operation and persuasion. To make matters worse, the NEB's portfolio was dominated by a few 'lame ducks', which had been taken over by the government because of deep-seated managerial and financial problems. The biggest of these was British Leyland Motor Corporation. British Leyland, which brought together virtually all the British-owned car and truck manufacturers, had been formed by a government-induced merger in 1968, in the hope that it would match the economies of scale enjoyed by rivals such as General Motors and Ford. But the proponents of the merger had failed to appreciate the difficulty of integrating British Leyland's many constituent businesses, and after an erratic performance in its first few years the company almost went bankrupt in the summer of 1974. A new Labour government had taken office earlier in the year, and for Harold Wilson and his colleagues, who had presided over the creation of British Leyland in 1968, the collapse of the company was unthinkable. They provided emergency loans to keep the company afloat, while at the same time setting up a committee, chaired by Ryder, to examine the company's future. 
The Ryder report, 'British Leyland: the Next Decade', published in 1975, concluded that, subject to changes in internal organization and a substantial increase in investment (to be funded largely by the government), British Leyland could become a profitable, world-leading automotive business. Although some commentators warned that the sales projections on which the report was founded were unrealistic, Ryder's recommendations were accepted by the government as the basis for a massive injection of public funds -- some $1400 million in total. British Leyland became a ward of the state, with Ryder and the NEB charged with ensuring that the promised improvements in productivity were achieved. But the company's internal weaknesses, both in the field of labour relations and in the quality of its products, had been vastly underestimated, and the new management team installed by the NEB could make little impression on them. Despite an ambitious attempt to introduce a measure of worker participation, the company was dogged by strikes and other forms of disruption, mostly initiated by shop stewards without the approval of their trade unions. Some poorly designed new models contributed to a continuing decline in market share and profitability. It was not until the appointment of Sir Michael Edwardes as chairman of British Leyland (after Ryder's departure from the NEB) that the situation began to improve. 
Ryder spent less than two years at the NEB -- he resigned in August 1977 -- and it was not a happy period. The assumptions contained in his British Leyland report were clearly invalid, and his attempts to influence management decisions from his seat at the NEB probably compounded the company's problems. Ryder was also subjected to personal attacks, including a bizarre accusation by the 'Daily Mail' that he had connived in bribery and corruption. A former employee had provided the newspaper with a letter, allegedly written by Ryder to the managing director of the company, in which he had agreed to the use of bribes to win customers. The letter was shown to be a forgery, and Ryder won substantial damages from the 'Daily Mail'. Whether a businessman with different skills and greater political sensitivity could have made a success of the NEB is doubtful. Its ability to act as a catalyst for industrial change, as Ryder had hoped, was limited by the legacy of weak companies with which it was saddled from the start. Some Labour Party advisers had likened the NEB to Italy's IRI, a state holding company which later became notorious for the size of its losses. Fortunately the NEB was never allowed to grow as large as IRI, but the comparison reflected the confused thinking which lay behind the NEB's creation. By the end of the 1970s there was growing scepticism about the efficacy of state intervention in industry, and the demise of the NEB under the Thatcher government was not much regretted. 
Ryder's name became indelibly associated with his report on British Leyland, and the failure of his prescription for the company severely damaged his reputation. In his earlier role at Reed, however, he made a significant and positive impact on the British business scene. He was part of a new generation of modernizing managers, alongside such men as Frank Kearton at Courtaulds and Arnold Weinstock at the General Electric Company, who came to the fore during the 1960s and 1970s. At a time when the management of many large British companies was flabby and conservative, they set an example of professionalism, energy, and dedication which was badly needed. After his resignation from the NEB Ryder played no further role in public life. He lived in retirement in Yorkshire until his death, of myelofibrosis, at Cottingley Hall Nursing Home, Bradford Road, Bingley, Yorkshire, on 12 May 2003. He was survived by his son and daughter, his wife, Eileen, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 90003


Sandford, (Christopher) Jeremy (1930-2003), writer, was born in London on 5 December 1930, the only son (there were two daughters) of Christopher Sandford (1902-1983), typographer and publisher, and his wife, Lettice Mackintosh, 'nee' Rate (1902-1993), wood engraver and illustrator. His father owned and ran the Golden Cockerel Press from 1933 to 1959, publishing fine books illustrated with wood engravings, many of them by Lettice Sandford; in later life she also became an authority on corn dollies. 
Sandford was brought up in the beautiful surroundings of Eye Manor, near Leominster, Herefordshire. He was educated at Eton College and New College, Oxford, where he read English and was regarded as one of the most flamboyant undergraduates of his generation. He graduated with a second-class degree in 1954. He was already fond of music at school and played the clarinet in an RAF band during his national service. This inspired an early radio play, 'Dreaming Bandsmen' (1956). On 14 February 1957, at St Patrick's Church, Westminster, he married the twenty-year-old Nell Mary Dunn, writer, and daughter of Philip Dunn, a millionaire Canadian industrialist. The wedding reception was held at the Ritz Hotel but the couple then moved across the Thames to live in the largely working-class district of Battersea, where Nell Dunn took a job in a sweet factory while writing her novels 'Up the Junction' (1963) and 'Poor Cow' (1967). They had three sons, Roc, Reuben, and Jem. 
Sandford himself became famous after the showing in 1966 of the television play 'Cathy Come Home', which highlighted the plight of the homeless in Britain. The original inspiration was the story of a Battersea neighbour. The play, written by Sandford and directed by Ken Loach, won prizes around the world and was a factor in the growth of Shelter, the campaign for the homeless. It was described almost forty years later as 'surely the most talked-about television play ever' ('The Guardian', 15 May 2003). Sandford's next television play, 'Edna the Inebriate Woman' (1971), based on a woman he had met while carrying out research in a Salvation Army hostel in east London, did not arouse the same public sympathy for alcoholics that his earlier play had for the homeless, although it won several awards. There was to have been a third play on Gypsies to form a trilogy but it was never completed. 
Sandford was intrigued by Romany Gypsies as well as 'New (Age) Travellers' -- house-dwellers who left home and took to the road to live in the style of traditional Gypsies. His paternal grandmother, Mary, the widow of the ninth Baron Carbery before marrying Arthur Wellesley Sandford, had travelled on the road and been a member of the Gypsy Lore Society. In her old age Sandford's father brought her and her caravan to Herefordshire. Later Sandford edited her diary as 'Mary Carbery's West Cork Journals' (1998). 
Sandford attended the first World Romany Congress, held near London in 1971. He then became involved with the Gypsy Council and for a short time was editor of its magazine, 'Romano Drom'. He felt obliged to resign this unpaid position after he was criticized for giving space in its pages to a rival organization, the Romany Guild. He continued his involvement with the community, however, carrying out a series of interviews with a number of Gypsies and Travellers, the result being the book 'Gypsies' (1973), republished in 1999 as 'Rokkering to the Gorjios' ('Talking to the non-Gypsies'). Sandford's other publications at this time included the books 'Prostitutes' (1975) and 'In Search of the Magic Mushroom' (1972), as well as articles for both tabloids and broadsheets. He continued to write for radio, again taking up the cause of outsiders in society. A Nigerian who was found drowned in a river in Leeds in unexplained circumstances was the subject of the radio play 'Smiling David' (1975). 
Sandford's marriage to Nell Dunn ended in 1986 and on 27 September the same year he married Philippa Sophia Finnis, a 31-year-old singer, and daughter of John Frank Finnis, antique dealer. They moved from London to Hatfield Court, a large Jacobean house near Leominster where the extensive grounds provided a regular stopping place for New Age Travellers in their caravans and buses. The interior was as sparsely furnished as had been his Battersea home. His association with the Gypsy Council was resurrected after the election of a new committee. He worked with its chairman, the poet Charles Smith, on a CD/video of songs, 'Spirit of the Gypsies' (1999), and edited a book of Travellers' songs, 'Songs from the Roadside: 100 Years of Gypsy Music' (1995). 
Sandford never lost his interest in music and as well as the clarinet he could also play the tin whistle, but he mainly performed on the accordion. He led a band accompanying so-called circle or sacred dance and played at gatherings of the Rainbow family and other alternative groups. One of the campers was later to write in the book of condolences opened at Hatfield Court after Sandford's death: 'we danced to your wonderful playing and had the joy of your company around the fire' ('Remembering Jeremy Sandford'). In 2002 he suffered a stroke but continued to work on his autobiography and -- together with Philippa -- a film about schizophrenia. By then he and Philippa had separated, though they remained in close contact, as did Sandford and Nell Dunn. He died in his sleep at Hatfield Court on 12 May 2003 of heart failure and was buried at Eye church on 19 May. He was survived by his three sons. He was remembered by his friends as a man of great charm with a wide variety of interests. For the general public his legacy was 'Cathy Come Home', and his efforts to publicize the problems of the less fortunate members of society. 


@@@@@


doc= 90014


Wensley, Frederick Porter (1865-1949), police officer, was born at The Pigmarket, Taunton, Somerset, on 28 March 1865, the son of George Wensley, journeyman shoemaker, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Porter. By 1881 the family had moved to London where, aged sixteen, he worked as a telegraph messenger. He joined the Metropolitan Police as a constable on 16 January 1888. After a brief, rudimentary training, he was posted to the L (Lambeth) division and then in 1891 to the H (Whitechapel) division. While a constable in Whitechapel he married, on 3 August 1893, Laura Elizabeth (1869-1943), daughter of William Martin, fruiterer; they had a daughter and two sons. Baulked initially by the local detective inspector, who refused to recommend him, Wensley was not admitted to the CID as a detective constable until October 1895. When the normal rule was for those promoted to be transferred to another division, Wensley stayed at Whitechapel not only on promotion to detective sergeant but also to detective inspector and detective chief inspector. In a career materially helped (following a chance meeting at Leman Street police station) by the patronage of Melville Macnaghten, an Etonian parachuted into the force at senior level in 1888 who became assistant commissioner (crime), Wensley acquired an encyclopaedic knowledge of criminal life in one of the most impoverished, cosmopolitan, and violent areas of London. 
An intelligent and determined officer whose underworld nickname was the Weasel, Wensley became increasingly noticed not only at Scotland Yard but also among the legal profession and the press in London. His career coincided with the rise for the first time of a mass circulation popular press for which crime stories were a staple of its inherent sensationalism, and murder cases with the threat of the death penalty the acme of fascination. His working life also saw the consolidation of the crime novel genre, for which his career offered a real-life epitome noticed even in the USA on his retirement. Dramatic early cases included a roof-top fight with and arrest of a man (Seaman) subsequently convicted of a double murder, the arrest and conviction of two brothers (Reuben) for the robbery and murder of a sailor, and later the pursuit of the Houndsditch murderers to the conclusion of the Sidney Street siege in January 1911. 
Apart perhaps from the last case, Wensley first came prominently to national attention in 1911 in the case of Stinie Morrison, accused of the murder on Clapham Common of Leon Beron. Formally Wensley was not in charge of the case, for which his colleague Detective Inspector Alfred Ward at W (Wandsworth) division was responsible. Wensley became associated with the investigation when it was realized that the victim's normal habitat was Whitechapel, and was known to Wensley. It was Wensley who guessed who the particularly tall, good-looking suspect might be. Employing informants to track down the suspect -- Morrison -- and keeping observation on an address, Wensley arrested the man initially for failing to report a change of address after the recent completion of a sentence of penal servitude. This course was taken because there was then insufficient evidence to arrest Morrison for murder, yet he was known to carry arms. According to Wensley and other officers, Morrison, in an oral exchange initiated by him after his arrest, incriminated himself by assuming, without being told, that he was a murder suspect. Although there was other evidence pointing to Morrison's guilt and the jury did not take long to convict, doubts were cast on whether Morrison had not in fact been told he was a murder suspect. The police evidence was attacked, especially by a sensational late witness for the defence, a policeman who claimed his colleagues had lied. An inquiry into the police evidence by George Cave, a king's counsel and member of parliament, discredited the policeman and exonerated his colleagues. On the other hand, the feeling that the prosecution had not uncovered the whole story (the perpetrator had almost certainly acted with an accomplice), and that an error by the defence counsel that permitted Morrison's unsavoury criminal history to be disclosed might have influenced the jury, contributed to a court of criminal appeal's unenthusiastic dismissal of the appeal against conviction and sentence. In the face of doubts about Morrison's guilt or the extent of it, the home secretary, Winston Churchill, commuted Morrison's sentence to life imprisonment. An extraordinarily refractory prisoner, Morrison died in prison in 1921. 
None of this impeded Wensley's rise in the service. According to his biographers, the Old Bailey prosecutor Richard Muir 'looked upon Wensley as one of the greatest detectives of all time' (Felstead, 306). Travers Humphreys, first a prosecutor and later a judge at the Old Bailey, had a similarly high opinion. Promoted detective chief inspector in 1912, Wensley was moved in 1916 to what was still a small CID headquarters at Scotland Yard. It was as a result of his proposals that force-wide detective supervision was increased by the creation from 1919 of four area detective superintendents supervising detectives throughout the four districts into which the Metropolitan Police was divided above divisional level. Along with Francis Carlin, Albert Hawkins, and Arthur Neil, Wensley was among the initial appointees to the 'big four', and was responsible for the whole of the East End and beyond. He was also associated with the establishment of the 'flying squad', a group of officers with special vehicles and a remit to pursue crime across divisional boundaries in response to the greater mobility and sophistication of criminals. In 1924 his pre-eminence was marked by his appointment (the first detective from the ranks since the 1880s) as a chief constable, the rank still then mostly reserved for men of superior social status appointed from outside the Metropolitan (or indeed any other) police service. 
Despite his undoubted professional success Wensley has not been above criticism. His own memoirs fail directly to mention his appearance before the royal commission on the Metropolitan Police of 1908. There the petty crook Arthur Harding alleged that Wensley had sought to bring false charges against him. Wensley was cleared by the commission but his initial prevarication during examination about how well he knew Harding did not gain him credit. Harding's much later allegations that Wensley was in the pay of gamblers were never substantiated, nor were John Syme's similar insinuations made in the course of his relentless campaigns to overturn his own dismissal from the force. Against these points there is the fact that it was to Wensley that management turned in 1929 to root out racketeering in the Public Carriage Office. Assistant Commissioner Elliot had had his suspicions of the office confirmed when, during a visit, a licence applicant mistaking Elliot's role had sought to press a florin into his hand. Wensley mounted an operation that cleaned up the enterprise with cauterizing speed. He was also associated with the investigations that finally brought the corrupt Sergeant George Goddard to book earlier the same year in circumstances that suggested the existence of a much wider network of systematic corruption, in relation to which senior management had shown culpable complacency, and that too little had been done to challenge the unacceptable side of police 'esprit de corps'. 
Some criticism has fastened on Wensley's conduct of the Thompson and Bywaters case in 1922, partly perhaps because of a modern abhorrence of the death penalty. Edith Thompson's husband was stabbed to death by her much younger lover, Frederick Bywaters, when the husband and wife were walking home from a night out at the theatre. Wensley arranged for Edith (not knowing that Bywaters had been arrested) to see Bywaters as if by chance at the police station to which she had been taken. Taken by surprise, her exclamation on realizing that her lover had been arrested for the murder was alleged to show her complicity in the crime. With Bywaters she was convicted of murder and hanged in circumstances that have remained controversial because of the use of her exclaimed remarks against her and the prosecution's deployment of her passionate letters to Bywaters. To her supporters she was in effect hanged for adultery rather than murder, where her complicity was not satisfactorily established. In his autobiography, written when the case remained controversial, Wensley described the murder at some length, stressing its premeditated character, the relative youth of the victim, his wife's failure to assist him, and her later prevarications and lies. 
Concentrating retrospectively on possible blemishes almost certainly does Wensley an injustice. He had to work within the standards of his times. In that context Wensley deserves every credit for epitomizing the growing professionalization of the police service in general and of the CID in particular. His generation had little forensic scientific support and no reliable system of identification (among other things to prove previous convictions) until Henry devised a practicable fingerprint technology in the early 1900s. Investigation was a painstaking procedure that required alertness, resourcefulness, experience, and intelligence. The Gerard case of 1917, where the investigation started from a headless and limbless female torso dumped over some Bloomsbury railings with a laundry mark on underclothes as the sole clue, is a classic of its kind. In a few days Wensley's pertinacity had found a target and, as the result of a clever interrogation, trapped the perpetrator and his accomplice. 
Wensley retired in 1929 and wrote his memoirs, which were published in 1931. He died at his home, Lucholm, 76 Powys Lane, Palmers Green, London, on 4 December 1949, and was buried in Southgate cemetery. His sons died in the First World War: Frederic Martin was killed in action in 1916 and Harold William died from influenza four days after the armistice of 1918. His daughter survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 90027


Bloom, Solomon (1921-2003), restaurateur, was born on 1 January 1921 at 58 Brick Lane, Spitalfields, London, the son of Morris Bloom (died 1951), and his wife, Becky, 'nee' Krisman. His father had arrived in London from Lithuania eleven years earlier. A latecomer who managed to enter the country despite the impact of the 1905 'Aliens Act' (which had staunched the flow of east European Jews to Britain), Morris Bloom was a master sausage maker who had learned to pickle meat in Lithuania before emigrating. In London he established himself in the food trade and a year before Sidney was born he opened a shop in Brick Lane, in the heart of the Jewish East End, from which he sold salt beef. He flourished in a modest way, providing kosher food to a Jewish clientele. He opened a snack bar attached to the salt beef business and, on premises close by in Wentworth Street, he later established a meat products factory. 
Sidney Bloom was educated at Raine's Grammar School but did not continue there beyond the age of sixteen; at that point he entered the family business. His work for the firm was interrupted by the Second World War, for the duration of which he worked in a munitions factory. On 21 June 1942 he married Evelyn Radzan (died 1990). The daughter of Adolph Radzan, a watchmaker and jeweller, she was eighteen years old at the time of their marriage, and worked as a shorthand typist in the Ministry of Food. It was a good match in more ways than one. Evelyn in time became the public face of her husband's restaurant, meeting, greeting, reassuring, and schmoozing the customers as need arose, while Sidney supervised the kitchen. There were two children of the marriage, a daughter and a son. 
In 1952 Bloom opened the establishment that soon styled itself 'the most famous kosher restaurant in Great Britain'. The family owned vacant premises on Whitechapel High Street and Bloom moved the restaurant there. His father had died a year before, and the new restaurant was named in his honour M. Bloom (Kosher) & Son Ltd. It provided east European Jewish food -- gefilte fish, chicken soup with lockshen, salt beef, and potato latkes -- and tea and coffee without milk, as the rules of 'kashrut', which demanded the separation of milk and meat, required. The East End still housed a sizeable Jewish population in the early 1950s, though the community was ageing and in numerical decline as growing numbers moved to the suburbs of north-west and east London. However, by day the resident Jewish population was swollen by others whose businesses and workplaces remained in the district -- city traders, stallholders, shopkeepers, and manufacturers in the rag trade -- and they provided a ready clientele for the restaurant. In addition Blooms, as it was known, drew some glitzier diners, Cliff Richard, the singer, and Princess Margaret among them. Like most British Jews in post-war Britain, Bloom had no difficulty in mixing ardent Zionism with conventional patriotism. When Golda Meir, the prime minister of Israel, visited his establishment, the entire restaurant stood up in her honour. A decade later, during the 1977 silver jubilee celebrations, a banner outside announced 'Mazeltov to Her Majesty'. 
A great deal of the manufacturing in the Jewish East End worked on the basis of subcontracting. Bloom adopted this practice and applied it to his restaurant, where the waiters worked as independent contractors. They purchased the food themselves as it was brought from the kitchen and thus acted as independent traders. They were understandably eager that customers should order and eat without ceremony, and not linger once they had done so, and this may help to account for their brusque manners and want of charm, which became infamous, and part of Blooms' attraction. One customer, who pointed out that he had been served boiled potatoes when he had ordered mashed, found his waiter pulping the vegetables with a fork and telling him, 'you want mashed potatoes, you've got mashed potatoes' ('The Times', 23 June 2003). 
In 1965 Blooms opened a branch in Golders Green, north-west London, as it adapted to the migration of Jews from the East End to the suburbs. Bloom retired in 1985 but the business remained a family affair conducted by his children, whom he had in vain tried to persuade to become 'a lawyer or accountant' ('The Times', 19 June 2003), and his grandchildren. The East End restaurant closed in 1996, but the Golders Green branch continued to do good business. 
A shy, modest man, with a keen sense of humour, Bloom had little time for outside interests, though he loved football and horse racing. He continued to visit the Golders Green restaurant (and more particularly its kitchens) until shortly before his death, on 1 June 2003, at the Wellington Hospital, 27 Circus Road, St John's Wood, London, of heart failure. He was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 90029


Bromley, (Lionel) Peter John Stuart (1929-2003), horse-racing commentator, was born on 30 April 1929 at 29 Derwent Road, West Derby, Liverpool, the son of Leonard Bromley, dental surgeon, and his wife, Kathleen Muriel, 'nee' Gibbs, who were then living at 51 Rocky Lane, Liverpool. He first developed an interest in horses after the family moved to the Cotswolds. There he taught himself to ride and in 1945 was introduced to jump racing at Cheltenham; it remained his favourite racecourse. Educated at Cheltenham College, he later attended the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, at which he discovered another lifelong passion, shooting. His skill with the rifle won him the Bisley cup in 1951 and also enabled him to train with the British modern pentathlon squad for the 1952 Olympic games. He narrowly missed final selection. 
From 1948 to 1953 Bromley served as a cavalry officer with the 14/20 King's hussars and, when stationed at Fleet in Hampshire, he schooled horses for the local racehorse trainer Frank Pullen, competing in several point-to-points. On resigning his commission he became assistant to Pullen but a serious riding accident resulted in a fractured skull, a year-long convalescence, and the end of his aspirations as a jockey. He moved to Kent, and applied for a job with the British Racecourse Amplifying and Recording Company to become one of the first racecourse commentators. It is alleged that his first commentary, at Plumpton, contained the line, 'Atom Bomb has fallen!' ('The Guardian', 5 June 2003). On 21 August 1954 he married Mary Josephine Hobson, the 23-year-old daughter of Alec Hobson, secretary of the Royal Horticultural Society of England. They had one daughter, Mary Clare. 
During the next few years, Bromley honed his race reading skills at courses in south-east England and worked as a freelance for Independent Television and the BBC, which he joined full-time in 1959 as its first accredited sports correspondent. This ground-breaking appointment was overshadowed, however, by the death of his wife in a car accident that year, leaving him to bring up his young daughter. He married, on 8 May 1962, Joanna MacRobert Massie, a 23-year-old secretary, and daughter of Duncan MacRobert Massie, company director. They had two daughters, Liz Anne and Jane. 
Bromley was the BBC racing correspondent for more than four decades. He had initially been offered a position alongside Peter O'Sullevan and Clive Graham as part of the television racing team, contributing to such weekly programmes as 'Sportsview' and 'Grandstand', but he soon decided to concentrate on radio. His first commentary for BBC Radio was the Newmarket stakes in May 1959, his last the Epsom Derby in 2001. He worked for the Light Programme, Radio 2, and Radio 5 Live, undertaking commentaries in France, Ireland, Hong Kong, America, and South Africa, as well as calling the principal races each year in Britain. He was also responsible for the introduction of the daily racing bulletin on Radio 2 in 1964. His passion for the sport soon took him beyond the commentary box. As an owner his first and most successful purchase was Treasury Bond, unbeaten as a two-year-old in 1975. He later wrote 'The Price of Success' (1982), the authorized biography of his trainer, Ryan Price, and 'My Most Memorable Races' (1988). 
Bromley became the radio voice of BBC racing, bringing the spirit and excitement of the racecourse into the homes of his listeners and creating, in his own words, 'a whole library of word pictures of great races' (Bromley, 'Memorable Races', 141). His preparation was meticulous. Before the advent of colour television and newsprint he painstakingly compiled his own charts of the jockeys' silks for easier identification, and after major races he would present these colourful records to winning owners, trainers, or jockeys. In his time as racing correspondent he witnessed an increase in racing coverage from fifty races a year in the 1950s to over 200 in the 1980s, and fought to maintain the presence of the sport on national radio as its general appeal waned. He still called around 150 races a year when he retired in 2001, having described over 10,000 during his career. His reputation was such that he had persuaded his employers to let him stay on until he reached the landmark of 200 classic race commentaries, a feat he finally achieved at the age of seventy-two. 
Bromley's retirement was tragically short. Having spent much of his life in Berkshire, he moved to Essex to be nearer his daughters and grandchildren. There he continued to train gun dogs and to take an interest in field sports but within a year of his final commentary he was diagnosed with cancer of the pancreas. He died at the Oaks Hospital, Oaks Place, Mile End Road, Colchester, on 3 June 2003. He was survived by his second wife, Joanna, and his three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 90031


Butterworth, John Blackstock, Baron Butterworth (1918-2003), university administrator, was born on 13 March 1918 at Lyndhurst, Station Road, Sutton-in-Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, the son of John William Butterworth (died 1939), railway goods clerk, and later a manager for the London and North Eastern Railway, and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Blackstock, schoolteacher. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Mansfield, and then at Queen's College, Oxford, to which he had won an open scholarship. He graduated with a first-class degree in jurisprudence in 1938. He then went to the chambers of Geoffrey Cross. On the outbreak of the Second World War he joined the Royal Artillery. After gunnery training he spent most of the war based on the island of Hoy in the Orkneys, protecting the naval base at Scapa Flow. On demobilization in 1946 he returned to the chambers of Geoffrey Cross, but moved back the same year to Oxford as fellow and tutor in law at New College; he was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1947. On 30 April 1948 he married Doris Crawford Elder, the 22-year-old daughter of George W. Elder, businessman, of Skegby, Nottinghamshire. They had two daughters, Anna ('b'. 1951) and Laura ('b'. 1959), and a son, John ('b'. 1952). 
As a fellow of New College from 1946 to 1963 Butterworth was a superb tutor, whose students achieved excellent results. He published relatively little, but attained a reputation as an authority on administrative law. He played a full part in college and university life. He was dean (1952-6), bursar (1956-63), and sub-warden (1957-8) of New College, and as bursar oversaw a successful appeal that raised some $250,000 for the college. He served on the university's hebdomadal council from 1953 to 1963, taking a particular interest in the university's financial affairs, on which he became chief spokesman. 
In 1963 Butterworth became founding vice-chancellor of the University of Warwick, one of a number of new universities created in the early 1960s. (He had also been offered the vice-chancellorship of the new University of Lancaster.) At the time of his appointment the university consisted of no more than a greenfield site at Gibbet Hill on the outskirts of Coventry (the name Warwick had been chosen in order to attract support from the county notables of Warwickshire), but with the aid of modern industrial building techniques it was able to admit graduate students from 1964, and undergraduates from the following year. Perhaps the most striking aspect of Butterworth's vision for the new university was his insistence that teaching should go hand in hand with leading-edge research (an idea which would later become commonplace, but which at the time was unusual), thus establishing from the outset Warwick's vocation as a centre of academic excellence. Though in many other respects a forceful and 'hands-on' vice-chancellor, he devolved considerable responsibility to his founding professors, enabling them to develop their departments and curricula with minimal interference beyond the necessary budgetary constraints. It was widely acknowledged that he was an excellent judge of academic talent, and many of his appointments went on to become internationally renowned experts in their own fields. 
The original bid for the new university had come from a consortium of Coventry industrialists, trade unionists, and city councillors, keen to address the economic decline of the city and region, and another striking (and prescient) aspect of Butterworth's vice-chancellorship was his emphasis on forging links with industry and the local community. When the University Grants Committee (UGC) baulked at the creation of an engineering department (on the grounds that engineering was already well catered for at other universities) he orchestrated a protest from local industrialists which eventually overcame the UGC's objections. When it refused funding for a business school, with the help of Lord Rootes (chairman of the local promotion committee) he raised the funds privately. The university's close association with local industry led to an embarrassing episode in 1970 when students who had occupied the university registry in pursuit of their demands for a student union building discovered correspondence that they claimed implicated Butterworth and local firms (notably Rootes) in political vetting and surveillance of students and lecturers. Despite a court injunction the 'Birmingham Post' published a selection of the correspondence, E. P. Thompson (a Marxist historian then teaching at the university) edited a scathing attack on the university for its alleged subservience to local industry ('Warwick University Limited', 1970), and the staff passed a motion of no confidence in the vice-chancellor. Butterworth kept his cool, the furore eventually died down, and the university continued on the path on which Butterworth had set it. Among the most notable achievements of his latter years as vice-chancellor were the creation in the early 1980s of the Warwick Manufacturing Group under Kumar Bhattacharyya (which by the time of Butterworth's death had an annual turnover of over $100 million), and of the Warwick Science Park (Butterworth again finding himself attacked by student radicals after inviting the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, to open it in 1984). The achievement of which he was proudest, however, was the building of the Warwick Arts Centre, an innovatory complex at the heart of the campus, housing theatres, a concert hall, a cinema, and an art gallery, all open to the public, and built entirely with private funding. The centre's 1500-seat concert hall was named the Butterworth Hall in honour of his role in its creation in 1987, two years after his retirement as vice-chancellor. By the time of his retirement Warwick was without doubt the most successful of the new universities, with more than 1000 graduate and 4600 undergraduate students, an annual income of $36.1 million (only 59 per cent of which came from the UGC), and a research base which surpassed that of most of the older universities. 
Throughout his time at Warwick Butterworth was active in public and educational bodies, most notably as a managing trustee of the Nuffield Foundation (1964-85), chairman of the Inter-University Council for Higher Education Overseas (1968-77), and a board member of the British Council (1981-95). He was a member of the royal commission on the working of the Tribunals of Inquiry Act (1921) in 1966, and in 1971-3 chaired a government inquiry into the work of probation officers and social workers. From 1964 to 1999 he was a governor of the Royal Shakespeare Trust. He was also a magistrate in Oxford and then Coventry. He was appointed CBE in 1982 and on retirement from Warwick in 1985 was made a life peer, as Baron Butterworth, of Warwick. Unusually for a former vice-chancellor he chose a party affiliation, as a Conservative. He spoke relatively rarely in the chamber, but he was an active member of the select committees on science and technology and on the European Communities. He also chaired the Foundation for Science and Technology (1990-97). 
A forceful, ebullient man, with a booming voice and a keen sense of humour, Butterworth was known in Oxford and Warwick as Jolly Jack. He was supported throughout his career by his wife, Doris, to whom he was devoted. He remained active to the end, despite the onset of lung cancer. He died of heart failure on 19 June 2003 at the General Hospital, Cheltenham, having lived latterly at Barton, near Guiting Power, Gloucestershire. He was survived by his wife and their three children. A memorial service was held at Lincoln's Inn chapel on 24 November 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 90033


Caplat, Moran Victor Hingston (1916-2003), actor and opera administrator, was born on 1 October 1916 at Tantallon, Alma Road, Herne Bay, Kent, the only child of (Armand Charles Victor) Roger Caplat, later known as Roger Victor Caplat, or Roger Armand Charles Caplat, architect, and his wife, Norah Bessie, 'nee' Hingston. His father, who was French, came to Herne Bay at the age of eighteen to learn English, staying on to become a draughtsman in an architect's office and then a qualified architect. In 1915 he married a local girl, Norah Hingston. 
Caplat was educated at St George's, Herne Bay, a dame school, and from the age of twelve at Herne Bay College. He became stage-struck after seeing 'Twelfth Night' by the Ben Greet Players in the Canterbury chapter house garden, and in 1933 he applied successfully to become a student at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) in London. His passing-out play, George Bernard Shaw's 'Androcles and the Lion', in which he played the Lion, was supervised by the author. On leaving RADA he was engaged by the Margate repertory. From there he played at the Croydon repertory, then toured with Matheson Lang in a play by Marguerite Steen, 'Matador', and in 1938 took part in Stephen Spender's first play, 'The Trial of a Judge', at the Unity Theatre, London. He also worked for the BBC and acted in two films, both in 1938: 'The Challenge', an account of Edward Whymper's ascent of the Matterhorn, and 'A Royal Divorce', a melodrama about Napoleon and Josephine. His final engagement as an actor was with the Sevenoaks repertory company. 
Caplat's youthful passion was sailing. He had owned a boat since the age of ten and his summer holidays were spent exploring the countless bays and inlets of the Thames estuary in his dinghy 'Oakey'. Later he crewed in a larger yacht, 'Phryna', which raced to Fastnet and the Baltic. In the summer of 1939 'Phryna' raced to La Rochelle and was returning home on 3 September when the Second World War broke out. Caplat had joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Supplementary Reserve (for yachtsmen with a basic knowledge of navigation) the year before, and he was called up on 13 October. After only five days' training at HMS 'King Alfred' in Hove, Caplat was posted to Thurso, where he joined the 'Northern Isles', a converted deep-sea trawler on the northern patrol, as navigating officer. Going on leave in June 1940, he was diverted to Sheerness, where he joined a paddle steamer which chugged across the channel to Dunkirk to rescue several hundred British soldiers, bringing them safely back to Ramsgate. Caplat was then sent to Halifax, Nova Scotia, to collect one of the destroyers offered to the Royal Navy by the American government, and sail her back to Britain. HMS 'Bradford' was old and decrepit, and after only a few trips on convoy duty in the north Atlantic she was decommissioned. 
Caplat volunteered for submarines, and after training he joined HMS 'Tempest', a new submarine which sailed to Malta with aviation spirit in her buoyancy tanks. Taking part in an operation off Taranto, 'Tempest' was sunk by an Italian frigate, which picked up the surviving members of the crew. Caplat was taken to a transit camp near Bari, then to a camp in Tuscany, and finally south again to Certosa di Padula, an old Carthusian monastery, where he produced several plays, including 'Twelfth Night'. In March 1943 he was repatriated, via Turkey, Egypt, and Algiers. He was married to Diana Murray Downton, to whom he had become engaged before sailing to the Mediterranean, on 29 May. She was the 19-year-old daughter of Arthur Murray Downton, road surveyor, of Offham, Kent. Caplat was appointed to another submarine, HMS 'Tradewind', after his marriage, but it soon became apparent that he was not fit for service at sea, and he moved to a shore establishment. In autumn 1944 he took a staff course at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. The war in Europe was entering its final phase, and Caplat was put in charge of the return of all naval prisoners of war. 
Awaiting demobilization in September 1945, Caplat was asked to audition for a job as assistant manager of Glyndebourne, the opera house near Lewes in Sussex founded by John Christie and his wife, the singer Audrey Mildmay. He saw Rudolf Bing, the general manager, in London, and then met the Christies at the Savoy Hotel. When he was offered the job he accepted. He was able to get his demobilization advanced and on 1 October 1945, his twenty-ninth birthday, he joined, in his own words, 'the good ship Glyndebourne'. Glyndebourne, originally opened in 1934, had been closed during the war. Now plans were in hand to reopen the opera house. Bing was also planning the Edinburgh International Festival, and when he became director of the festival in 1947, Caplat became manager of Glyndebourne. Two operas, Mozart's 'Le nozze di Figaro' and Verdi's 'Macbeth', both from the pre-war repertory, were performed at the first Edinburgh Festival, and two more in 1948 and in 1949, after which Bing left Britain to become director of the Metropolitan Opera, New York. Caplat became general manager of Glyndebourne, and moved in 1953 with his wife and family to a large house in Barcombe a few miles away. 
Though Caplat knew nothing of opera when he arrived at Glyndebourne, his theatrical experience turned out to be invaluable while the administrative skills he had learned in the navy were equally useful. He rapidly settled into the opera house routine when Glyndebourne gave a short season (fourteen performances of two operas) in Sussex in 1950, as well as two operas in Edinburgh. By 1960 this had risen to seventy performances of six operas at Glyndebourne. Caplat's job entailed a great deal of travelling round Europe in order to hear singers. At first these trips were made with Audrey Mildmay. After her death in 1953 he travelled either with Jani Strasser, head of music staff, or alone. He was also responsible for arranging tours made by the company abroad. In 1954 Glyndebourne took Rossini's 'La Cenerentola' to Berlin; and in 1958 the company performed Verdi's 'Falstaff' and Rossini's 'Le Comte Ory' in Paris. 'Falstaff', designed by Osbert Lancaster, whom Caplat had introduced to Glyndebourne in 1953 to design Stravinsky's 'The Rake's Progress', was a particular triumph. 
Glyndebourne visited Scandinavia in 1967, opening in the eighteenth-century theatre at Drottningholm, outside Stockholm, with 'Don Giovanni' and Cimarosa's 'Matrimonio segreto'. The tour continued to Oslo, Goteborg, and Copenhagen. Two years later Glyndebourne took Cavalli's 'Ormindo' to the Cuvilliestheater in Munich. John Christie retired as chairman in 1959 (he died in 1962) and was succeeded by his 25-year-old son George. Caplat guided the young man for a while, but George proved a proficient pupil and soon became his own master. Music directors and directors of production also changed: the pre-war team of Fritz Busch and Carl Ebert was followed by Vittorio Gui and Gunther Rennert, then by John Pritchard and John Cox, and then by Bernard Haitink and Peter Hall. Caplat, who was appointed CBE in 1968, provided the continuity that allowed Glyndebourne to develop and grow, without losing its essential style. Caplat never sat through a complete opera, but he was fascinated by the rehearsal process and attended every rehearsal that his other duties permitted. Once a production was launched, he lost interest. 
Spring and summer were the busiest seasons of the year at Glyndebourne, but Caplat found time for sailing as skipper of 'Griffin', the Ocean Racing Club's yacht. He was suitably nautical in appearance, being described by one obituarist as beginning 'to look like the sea dog on the front of a packet of Players' Medium Navy Cut cigarettes' ('The Times', 26 June 2003). He retired on 1 October 1981, his sixty-fifth birthday. His memoirs, 'Dinghies to Divas, or, Comedy on the Bridge', were published in 1985. With his wife he moved from their house in Barcombe to a cottage in Newick. He died on 19 June 2003 at the Kent and Sussex Hospital, Tunbridge Wells, following a stroke. He was survived by his wife, Diana, two daughters, and a son, one son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 90034


Cattaneo, Ambrogio Antonio (1927-2003), animator, was born on 15 February 1927 at 53 Hamilton Road, West Norwood, London, the son of Dante Cattaneo, a chef at the Savoy Hotel, originally from Gravedona, near Como, Italy, then living at 41 Burton Street, Euston Road, London, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Salusolia. In 1935 Cattaneo was taken to Italy by his father, and spent the next three years with an aunt in Caccivio, near Lake Como. Back in England in 1938, he and his family lived in Soho before moving out to Surbiton in Surrey. By the time he left school he had become interested in painting and worked painting backdrops for the window displays at Bentalls department store in Kingston, Surrey, while studying fine art in the evenings and weekends at Kingston College of Art. He began his career as a commercial artist by taking on commissions for advertising designs. On 15 January 1950 he married Lesley Margaret (Rita) Barnes (1924-1995), a fashion buyer at Bentalls, and daughter of Charles Bertram Barnes, musician. They had one son and two daughters, one of whom died in infancy and the other at the age of twenty-one. 
In 1957 Cattaneo was recruited as a trainee film animator by the screen advertising contractor Pearl and Dean, where he started out designing backgrounds for the films before becoming interested in animation. His future partner, Ron Wyatt, was also working for Pearl and Dean, and they met again in 1962 when Cattaneo joined the Richard Williams animation studio, where he was art director for several cinema commercials commissioned by Pearl and Dean, including one for Nescafe instant coffee. Cattaneo and Wyatt left Richard Williams in 1965 to work freelance together, forming Wyatt Cattaneo Productions in 1965 after the success of their first commercial for Geers Gross. The latter had been commissioned by Spillers to produce an animated advertisement to promote its new lump-free flour: Cattaneo and Wyatt took the bowler-hatted flour graders and created a series of scenes in which Fred and his fellow flour graders jumped into bags of flour and sifted the lumps to a voiceover spoken by John Le Mesurier. Within four months Spillers Homepride flour had overtaken McDougalls to become the brand leader. Commercial television had been introduced into Britain in 1955, but for the first decade the press remained the most important advertising medium, and television commercials were little more than moving newspaper advertisements. But the success of the Homepride campaign alerted the advertising agencies to the potential of animation in advertising. Over the next twenty-five years Cattaneo animated such memorable characters as the Dunlop groundhog, the Typhoo gnu (winner of a golden lion at the 1976 Festival International du Film Publicitaire), the Country Life buttermen, the Tetley tea folk, and the KP Crisps monks. Advertising became part of television entertainment, and because the thirty-second animated commercials could stand repeated showings and were watched by millions of viewers the characters became household names, along with the products they advertised. Wyatt Cattaneo made fifty-four Homepride and fifty Tetleys films in all. Based for most of its existence above a gentlemen's outfitters at 22 Charing Cross Road, the studio limited itself to about thirty commercials a year. Although his main talent lay in animating the characters, Cattaneo was involved at every stage of each project, often helping the advertising agency to create the script. Wyatt Cattaneo became the leading producer of animated television commercials in Britain, but over half of its work was for agencies abroad. 
Cattaneo directed two 'art films' for the cinema, 'Fairy Story' (1968) and 'I Love You' (1969). He was also a book illustrator, illustrating Lewis Carroll's 'The Walrus and the Carpenter' in 1974 and 'The Lobster Quadrille' in 1977, in Warne's 'Stuff and Nonsense Books' series. After retiring in 1990 he ran painting classes in his house, 7 Richmond Bridge Mansions, Willoughby Road, Twickenham. Although he suffered from periodic bouts of depression throughout his life, he created a friendly and happy atmosphere around himself, and had many friends. He died of cerebrovascular disease on 3 May 2003 at West Middlesex Hospital, Isleworth, London, and was buried at Richmond cemetery, Surrey. He was survived by his son, Peter Cattaneo, a film director, best known for 'The Full Monty' (1997). 


@@@@@


doc= 90035


Conder, (Hugh) Neville (1922-2003), architect, was born at 60 Foxley Lane, Purley, Croydon, Surrey, on 30 April 1922, the younger son and third child of John Reynolds Conder, advertising agent, and his wife, Edna Frances, 'nee' Benson, whose father, Samuel Herbert Benson, founded Britain's first large advertising agency. He was a diffident child, and unhappy at his school, Charterhouse, although when he accidentally discovered copies of the 'Architectural Review' in the library he was entranced and this led him to enrol at the Bartlett School of Architecture, which was based in Cambridge during the Second World War. He later recalled that he was nearly seduced by Albert Richardson's conservative classicism, but after one year he left for service with the RAF. While awaiting call-up he worked on a farm in Devon, where an accident with a gun almost caused the loss of his left arm and made military service impossible. While recuperating he was inspired by modern architecture and resumed his studies at the Architectural Association, forming part of a brilliant wartime generation at the exiled school under Sir Frederick Gibberd that included Philip Powell, (John) Hidalgo Moya, and Geoffry Powell. His skill in drawing and his interest in landscape had been stimulated by finding the books of his ancestor, William Gilpin, in the family library. He realized that if architecture were to achieve true functionalism it needed to respond flexibly and modestly to the site and programme. 
Conder's career began in the straitened conditions after the war, with exhibition designs and drawings for publication, including those for 'Bombed Churches as War Memorials' (1945). On 25 July 1946 he married a 24-year-old fellow architecture student, Jean MacArthur, daughter of Donald Hector Colin MacArthur, of the Royal Army Medical Corps. They had one son and one daughter. After his marriage Conder continued designing and writing. He wrote a short 'Introduction to Modern Architecture' (1949) for the publishers Art and Technics, which was the beginning of his contact with Hugh Casson, the editor of the series. When Casson's partner Christopher Nicholson was killed in a gliding accident in 1948, Conder completed some of the work in hand and, working with Patience Clifford, he contributed to the South Bank exhibition for the Festival of Britain of 1951. In 1953 Casson was appointed professor of environmental design at the Royal College of Art, and while continuing in practice and specializing in interiors, tended to delegate most of his architectural design work. The two men shared the same office space, but the practice of Casson, Conder & Partners was only formalized in 1956. The collaboration was fruitful, with Casson's understanding of planning strategies and client relationships complementing and overlapping Conder's design skills. Casson was a public figure, and outsiders assumed that he was at least part-author of the projects, when in fact Conder's share of the work at all levels was much greater, in conjunction with the associates Ronald Green, Michael Cain, and Timothy Rendle. Green wrote that Conder 'maintained a keen guardianship over the character and nature of the practice while steering it into mainstream architecture' ('Architects' Journal', 26 June 2003). 
In 1952 Casson and Conder were selected as master planners for a new arts faculty for Cambridge University (the Sidgwick site), their proposal for an accretive and asymmetrical scheme having acknowledged what Conder called 'the paradox that it was unlikely [all] to be built' so that 'it was less noticeable if a bit was missing' ('The Independent'). The scale of the three-sided 'raised faculty' building was determined by comparison with the historic courts of Cambridge colleges, and views were opened through and across the site. The elevations in stone and brick were carefully considered in terms of weathering. In 1984 Conder returned to build the new classics department and museum. At Birmingham University in 1958 he planned the future of a large site, including the Vale, with a new lake in the manner of an eighteenth-century landscape park, and the staff house, with its fine staircase. His George VI Memorial Hostel in Holland Park, on the site of the bombed Holland House, was originally painted in two shades of khaki to disguise its presence. In 1961 he planned and partly built the Children's Village at Sedlescombe, Sussex, for the Pestalozzi Children's Village Trust (the only such village built in Britain by the war orphans' charity), and he later became involved in the life of the organization. 
Conder later claimed that he had introduced rough concrete, as favoured by the 'New Brutalists' in the Festival of Britain, and tried to build the Lady Mitchell Hall (the lecture theatre at the front of the Cambridge arts faculty site) in ribbed bush-hammered concrete before it became a fashionable architectural treatment. Two well-known buildings of 1965 used a ribbed surface, the National Westminster Bank in King Street, Manchester, and the elephant and rhino house at London Zoo, the latter being an instance where the mercurial Casson was more or less forced by his partner to produce the design. Among the major projects of later years were the Derby civic centre (1971-6) and the Wyvern Theatre, Swindon (1975). In 1972 he planned the Pulteney weir at Bath, a sensitive site in the centre of the historic city, where he created a beautiful elliptical shape, although the full scheme was not completed. Meanwhile, his first marriage having ended in divorce in 1967, on 5 February 1970 he married Susan Ruth Heller, a 24-year-old teacher (later plantswoman and counsellor), and daughter of Philip Heller, building contractor. With his second wife he had a further son and daughter. 
Conder's design for the Ismaili Centre in South Kensington (1977-83) filled an awkward triangular site near his office and home, and showed a deep understanding of and sensitivity to the requirements of the brief and the neighbourhood, learning how to modify western assumptions in architecture and reinterpret them in Islamic terms while avoiding the effect of 'a Sheraton in Kuwait' ('Architects' Journal', 30 November 1983). The granite cladding was made 'in a light and card like manner' and the windows of the first floor social hall faceted and chamfered to conceal the people inside. For his client, the Aga Khan, he also built racing stables in Ireland. 
Conder was a member of the council of the Royal Institute of British Architects, and its vice-president in 1976. He was appointed CBE in 1986. In retirement he lived at 49 Thurloe Square, South Kensington, but spent much time in Sussex, painting the landscape in a romantic and intuitive manner. He died at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, on 20 June 2003, following a heart attack, and was survived by his wife, Susan, and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 90036


Cross, Sir Kenneth Brian Boyd (1911-2003), air force officer, was born on 4 October 1911 at The Rest, East Cosham, Fareham, Hampshire, the son of Pembroke Henry Cokayne Cross, an estate agent and surveyor, and his wife, Jeannie, 'nee' Boyd. He had three sisters and a younger brother, Ian. He was educated at Hilsea College, Portsmouth (1918-27), and Kingswood School, Bath (1927-8), where he played rugby for the first fifteen. He then worked at a Ford depot in Portsmouth until he was eighteen and could apply for a short service commission in the RAF. He was accepted and reported to the RAF depot at Uxbridge in April 1930 for a preliminary course, before being posted to 3 flying training school at Grantham, Lincolnshire. There he learned to fly on the Avro Trainer and Armstrong Whitworth Siskin. He played rugby for the station and gained his 'wings' in April 1931, then was posted to 25 (fighter) squadron, which flew Siskins and subsequently Hawker Furies at Hawkinge, near Folkestone. He served with this squadron until November 1934, taking part in the 1933 and 1934 Hendon air displays. 
From December 1934 Cross was at the Central Flying School at Wittering, near Stamford in Lincolnshire, training as an instructor. He also played rugby for Harlequins. When qualified he was posted in April 1935 to 5 flying training school at Sealand, near Chester, joining the Bulldog flight. He captained the station's rugby team in the 1935/6 season and was selected to play for the RAF. He was awarded a permanent commission in 1936 and by then had acquired his nickname, Bing, after Bing Crosby -- for, parallel with his reputation as fighter pilot and rugby player, he enjoyed a reputation as a man-about-town (with several girlfriends) and as a crooner at dances. In October 1938 he was promoted to squadron leader, then posted to 12 group headquarters, on the staff of Air Vice-Marshal Trafford Leigh-Mallory. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Cross was given command of a Hurricane squadron, no. 46, based at Digby but operating from North Coates, taking over at the end of October 1939. In April 1940 he was sent to Norway by the assistant chief of the air staff (Air Vice-Marshal Sholto Douglas) to investigate the possibility of Hurricanes operating from Andalsnes, to support a Gladiator squadron (no. 263) mauled by the Luftwaffe. Although this mission was abortive it was his own squadron, no. 46, which was sent to Norway in May 1940 -- with tragic consequences. Its Hurricanes, having been flown up to Abbotsinch, were hoisted aboard powered barges and taken down the Clyde to Greenock where the aircraft carrier HMS 'Glorious' was anchored. They were then lifted by crane onto the flight deck. After some delays and a realization that there was tension between the captain, Captain Guy D'Oyly-Hughes, and his commander flying, Commander John Hughes, the Hurricanes made their first ever take-off from an aircraft carrier and landed at Skanland -- moving from there to Bardufoss, which was a more suitable landing-ground. The squadron had several operational successes against the Luftwaffe, but on 24 May the British government decided to evacuate north Norway, and on 8 June the Hurricanes successfully landed on HMS 'Glorious' -- as did the Gladiators of 263 squadron. With no forward reconnaissance the carrier and her two destroyer escorts were intercepted and sunk by the German battleships 'Scharnhorst' and 'Gneisenau'. There were only seven survivors -- one of them Squadron Leader Cross. He described this horrifying episode in his autobiography, 'Straight and Level' (1993). On 11 June they were picked up (one survivor dying later of gangrene) by a Norwegian fishing-vessel and taken to the Faroes, eventually reaching Rosyth on 18 June aboard HMS 'Veteran'. 
In September 1940 Cross was awarded the DFC; then, only partly recovered from his ordeal -- 'still encased in carpet slippers' -- he was posted to 12 group air staff (operations and training), where he had 'a clear if remote view' of the closing stages of the battle of Britain. When fit enough he resumed flying duties and requested a more active role, being posted to the Middle East -- to 252 wing at Alexandria, as wing commander. To get there he was instructed to sail by the aircraft carrier HMS 'Furious' in convoy to west Africa, in charge of a consignment of forty Hurricanes which were to be delivered to Cairo. In January 1941 he led the first of the Hurricanes off the carrier to fly the short distance to Takoradi on the Gold Coast; then he flew in convoy (with a Blenheim leading) to Heliopolis, Cairo. He then took up his appointment in command of 252 (air defence) wing, and in July was promoted group captain. He made it clear, however, that he wished to be closer to western desert operations; and after the Eighth Army and western desert air force were formed in September 1941 he was posted to the latter as group training officer. He was involved in planning for operation Crusader, scheduled for 18 November. In September he was given command of 258 wing, and during the swirling battles which followed the failure of Crusader his skilful handling of his fighter squadrons and personal bravery earned him the immediate award of a DSO, the citation saying that he had displayed 'inspiring leadership' -- and that 'in spite of his ground control duties' he had consistently participated in air operations and his 'indomitable courage' had contributed to the fighting skill of the force he commanded. 
At the beginning of April 1942 Cross left the western desert to take up his former command, as air officer commanding 252 wing at Alexandria. After the battle of El Alamein and the Afrika Korps's retreat he was promoted to air commodore and given command of 212 group at Benghazi -- a short-lived appointment; for from February 1943 he was made air officer commanding 242 group -- the equivalent of the western desert air force with the British First Army. Its task after the capture of Tunis in May 1943 was to protect the First and Eighth armies in the invasion of Sicily. This was successfully accomplished by the middle of August, and on 2-3 September the Eighth Army invaded Italy, whose forces surrendered on the 8th. At the end of September Cross was awarded an American decoration, the Legion of Merit, with the degree of commander. Like other battle-experienced Middle East leaders, he was then posted back to the UK -- to the allied expeditionary air force, from February 1944, to train RAF and USAAF squadrons in a ground-attack role in preparation for operation Overlord. 
On 30 March 1944 the second great personal tragedy of Cross's life occurred, when his brother, Ian (a Wellington pilot with 103 squadron, who had been shot down when attacking 'Scharnhorst' and 'Gneisenau' in their 'Channel dash', and subsequently made a prisoner of war), was one of fifty prisoners of war shot on Hitler's orders after the successful tunnel escape from Stalag Luft 3. More happily, on 15 January 1945, after a whirlwind courtship, Cross married Brenda Megan Powell, a WAAF officer, and daughter of Frank James Bickley Powell, RAF officer -- a marriage which was to last for fifty-seven years. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Cross was selected for the first post-war course at the Imperial Defence College, and in January 1947 was posted to the British forces of occupation in Germany, holding this appointment during the Berlin airlift, for which he was senior planner. After this tour he was appointed to command Horsham St Faith, a fighter station in 2 group, from July 1949; then in August-September he took a flying refresher course at RAF Finningley, being subsequently appointed sector commander, eastern sector, from 1950 as an air commodore, until posted to the Air Ministry as director of operations -- a title later changed to director of operations (air defence). From February 1956 (as an air vice-marshal) he took up the first of two appointments at Bomber Command, though he had no experience of bombing operations. The air officer commanding-in-chief, Air Chief Marshal Sir Harry Broadhurst, also had a fighter background: the idea was to energize the command, with its four-jet bombers, into a quick-reaction role as the spearhead of Britain's nuclear deterrent forces. 
After three years as air officer commanding-in-chief 3 group Cross was appointed air officer commanding-in-chief Bomber Command, in May 1959. In that year's birthday honours he was appointed KCB; he had been made CBE in 1945 and CB in 1954. He brought the V-bombers and Thor missiles to their highest ever state of readiness during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, and established a good professional and personal relationship with the USAF strategic air command. In September 1963 he relinquished his Bomber Command appointment, and in December of that year took up his last one, as air officer commanding-in-chief Transport Command. In that less stressful environment his reputation as a tough commander -- not only in the bomber world but also in some of the Second World War's crucial campaigns -- made an indelible impression. 
Cross retired from the RAF in January 1967 and was active in the British Red Cross, serving as director first of the Suffolk and then of the London branch. On 4 September 1991 he suffered his third great personal tragedy, when his wife Brenda was murdered on the premises of the antiques business she ran with a partner. His autobiography, 'Straight and Level' (written in conjunction with Vincent Orange), reflected his personal character -- honest, courageous, and unpretentious. He died on 18 June 2003 at Gorseway House, a retirement home in Hayling Island, Hampshire, following a stroke. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 90039


Fairclough, Sir John Whitaker (1930-2003), computer engineer and public servant, was born at South View, Carlton Road, Carlton Miniott, near Thirsk, Yorkshire, on 23 August 1930, the son of Harold Whitaker Fairclough, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Elsinora, 'nee' Chappell. He was educated at Thirsk grammar school and Manchester University, from where he graduated BSc in electrical engineering. After a spell of national service as an RAF radar technician, in 1954 he joined Ferranti, the Manchester-based electronics company. On 4 September that year, he married Margaret Ann Harvey, a 26-year-old clerk, and daughter of Herbert Eldon Harvey, inspector of metal products. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Fairclough joined Ferranti at a pioneering phase in computing technology, when the company was attempting to market the first commercial computers in the UK -- indeed in the world. One of the first production-line Ferranti computers was the Pegasus, on which Fairclough worked designing memory modules. In 1955 he was sent to New York to help Ferranti market these machines in America. The Pegasus became a well-regarded workhorse among the British computing fraternity (still at that time only a handful of people), but it was not a commercial success and Ferranti sold only about forty machines. British efforts to establish an internationally competitive computer industry foundered after the 1950s, when American companies -- with their large domestic customer base and their lavish government support -- captured the emerging computer market both in the USA and overseas. Chief among these American companies was IBM, which became the computer industry leader. 
In 1957 Fairclough saw better prospects in the USA and accepted a post at IBM's Poughkeepsie laboratory in upstate New York. The following year he transferred to IBM's UK subsidiary as director of development at the company's newly established Hursley laboratory near Winchester. There he set up and managed the development of a small computer, codenamed SCAMP (scientific computer and modulator processor). Fairclough's work led to an important innovation: the development of the control store, a specialized memory which contains the micro-instructions that are essential to execute all the programs on a computer. Control stores became fundamental to the development of IBM's landmark System/360 series of computers -- a range of compatible machines, adaptable to a wide variety of uses -- that allowed IBM to leapfrog its competitors and set the industry standard in the mainframe business. The design work of Fairclough and his team was crucial in the development of the first of this series, the model 40, which was shipped in 1965. 
In 1968 Fairclough was appointed assistant general manager and director of data processing at IBM UK and was given responsibility for sales. However, he did not find this work congenial. Two years later he transferred to IBM's Raleigh development laboratory in the USA as director -- a unique position within the American computer industry for an Englishman. He helped pioneer 'distributed' computing, which enabled office workers to communicate through networks. In 1974 he returned to Hursley as managing director, with his position as a visionary computer technologist well established. In 1983, as director of manufacturing and development and chairman of IBM UK Laboratories Ltd, he was given charge not only of IBM UK's research and development, but also its manufacturing facilities (and some 6500 workers) at Havant and Greenock. 
In 1986 Fairclough's career changed direction. He was seconded from IBM to the Cabinet Office as chief scientific adviser to the government of Margaret Thatcher. It was unusual for an executive from industry to occupy this post, but it reflected the prime minister's view that an entrepreneurial input was needed to reinvigorate Britain's research efforts, especially where state funding was involved. Fairclough's job was to advise on how to maximize the return from government spending on science and technology. He agreed with the government's view that there had been a failure to capitalize on British excellence, and he looked with dismay on the way in which, as he perceived it, universities could often garner support regardless of the usefulness of their work. One tangible result of his ideas was the creation in 1987 of the Advisory Council on Science and Technology, which reported to him in his capacity as cabinet adviser. 
By 1988 Fairclough had set out the broad principles that were to underlie his policy on public expenditure on research and development (R&D). Essentially he believed that funding should be directed to work that was furthest from the development of a marketable product or process. Thus so-called 'near-market' R&D was to be left to industry, with government expenditure confined to areas where the market could not be relied upon to produce maximum benefits to the economy as a whole. In other words, the government should withdraw from commissioning and funding research from which industry gained direct benefit. This decision led to the termination of most government support for civil near-market and single-company R&D, with an exception made for the aerospace industry. In 1989 Fairclough also restated the customer-contractor principle, with the aim of encouraging development of an internal market in which public sector research providers would compete for public funds for R&D. This increasing emphasis on value for money in the use of resources by government departments for research was, unsurprisingly, not universally applauded -- especially by those who found their funding cut or withdrawn. But Fairclough did encourage 'interdisciplinary research centres' on university campuses as a focus for academic and business resources. 
In 1990 Fairclough relinquished his appointment as chief scientific adviser and was knighted. In that year he joined the bankers N. M. Rothschild as chairman of their venture capital arm, Rothschild Ventures Ltd. He was involved in several business start-ups and was also a non-executive director of Psion, Oxford Instruments, and Lucas Industries, among others. He was involved with Prince Charles's Innovation Initiative and the British Computer Society, and accepted several honorary degrees. Between 1991 and 1996 he was chairman of the Engineering Council and launched an initiative that aimed to unite Britain's diverse and numerous engineering institutions under one umbrella body. This was unsuccessful: the only result was a senate, which had little authority or support. 
Fairclough's first wife died in 1996; on 1 May 2000, he married Karen Jefferson, formerly known as Karen Burrington, a 56-year-old personal assistant, and daughter of James Oswald Morgan, commercial clerk. In 2002 the government again turned to Fairclough to investigate research -- this time in the construction industry. His report restated some familiar Fairclough themes: a commitment to government support for research, but an emphasis on the need for industry to take greater responsibility for defining and funding research and wholly to fund shorter-term knowledge transfer. Again the report was controversial, and many industrialists expressed some dissatisfaction with its findings. Fairclough died on 5 June 2003 at his home, 3 Clockhouse Close, Wimbledon, from a brain tumour. He was survived by his second wife, Karen, and the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 90041


Hirst, Paul Quentin (1946-2003), social and political theorist, was born on 20 May 1946 at the maternity home, Holberton, Devon, the son of Henry (Harry) Hirst, a fitter in the motor trade and later a manager at the royal dockyard, Plymouth, and his non-practising Jewish wife, Joyce Evelyn, 'nee' Schaffer. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 6 Chapel Way, Lower Compton, Plymouth. His father subsequently rose through the ranks to become an officer in the RAF, so much of his childhood was spent on the move in Germany in military schools and in different schools in England. His last school was the grammar school in Plymouth, where his parents resettled. If his early education was disrupted, it drove him to read widely on his own. When his family suggested he enter the motor trade -- an uncle owned garages -- he was prompted to find a place to study sociology at Leicester University. He must have known what he was doing because for a time Leicester was the best place in the country for theory-driven, critical sociology, led by the Russian-born, Belgian-educated Ilya Neustadt, and the German refugee, Norbert Elias. Elsewhere British sociology was in the main parochial and empirical, often hardly distinguishable from social administration. His teachers, including the young lecturer Sami Zubaida, a Marxist Middle East specialist, believed that sociology had a mission to change the world. Hirst was a leading activist in the student politics of that time. After taking a first-class degree, he went to Sussex University in 1968 to study for an MA under Tom Bottomore, a Marxist of moderate persuasion, less hostile to relevant empirical investigation. 
In 1969 Hirst was appointed a lecturer in sociology at Birkbeck College, London, through the persuasion of Sami Zubaida, who had moved there the year before. They both loved the company of the mature evening students who attended the college, but were less than happy to be attached for subsidiary teaching, as if a kind of violent yeast, to the psychology department, doggedly empirical and behavioural. Hirst was a brilliant and demotic teacher, speaking the language of most of the students. He had a tic of ending every assertion, almost every sentence, with either an interrogative or a demonstrative, 'Right?!'. Already a small group had gathered around him, half disciples and half combative colleagues, associated at first with a new journal, 'Theoretical Practice', to study the work of Althusser and Michel Foucault. In 1973 Bernard Crick was invited to take up a new, free-floating chair of politics at Birkbeck, but was readily persuaded to rescue Hirst and Zubaida from what the then master called 'their Babylonian captivity', to form a small postgraduate department of politics and sociology. Agreeing a curriculum could have been an ideological battle. But Hirst's tolerance and good humour were remarkable. A live-and-let-live concordat was readily achieved. The students got both critical Marxism and bourgeois civic republicanism. External examiners found this difficult but the two polarities stretched the students. They had to be both serious and empathetic. 
Hirst's 'Pre-Capitalist Modes of Production' was published in 1975 and 'Marx's Capital and Capitalism Today' followed in 1978, both jointly authored out of the Althusserian study group which was contesting the idea of historical materialism as the core of Marxist intellectual practice rather than high theory. This was a 'succes de scandale' among the intellectual Marxisante left, leading to fierce polemics with leading writers of the 'New Left Review', whom he regarded, as Ben Pimlott said, 'as a clique of Trotskyite public schoolboys' ('The Guardian', 20 June 2003). To discuss the ideas of Althusserian theory Hirst had a private seminar as well as the curricular one on Marx, Durkheim, and Weber. One of his most remarkable collaborations followed his meeting in 1976 with Penelope Ann Franklin (Penny) Woolley ('b'. 1939), sociologist. (She was the daughter of Alexander John Woolley, schoolteacher; they married on 16 February 1980, and had one son, Jamie.) To interest psychology students in anything but measurement he had devised a highly innovative course on the relation of the social to the biological. Penny at Hatfield Polytechnic had found a similar solution to the same problem. So together they wrote 'Social Relations and Human Attributes' in 1982. Traces of Althusser and Foucault remained, especially in rejecting Mill's and Popper's 'methodological individualism' as a starting point. But by the end of the 1970s it became clear that much of the study of Althusser had turned from agreement with the stance of high theory rejecting history, or rather being the only way of interpreting history, into a more balanced view of theory and practice: theory must interpret the world but the world is a construct of empirical scientific knowledge. 
When in 1985 Hirst was appointed to a chair of social theory at Birkbeck he gave his inaugural lecture on democracy. His colleagues waited for some new intellectual formulation but there followed a sturdy, commonsense reimagining of the liberal theory and practice of representative government. He had reinvented the wheel, reasoning away as if to proclaim a new discovery -- but for himself it was. Colleagues joked that he had turned from Karl Marx into Sidney Webb almost overnight. He became a familiar figure at Fabian Society meetings and active in Charter 88, as vice-chair and then chair (1998-2003). He rediscovered and updated the pluralism of J. N. Figgis, Harold Laski, and G. D. H. Cole, notably in 'Associative Democracy: New Forms of Economic and Social Governance' (1994). He dedicated it to his son Jamie, deliberately to mark faith in progress and a better future. Many saw it that way, both Marxists coming down to earth and also social democrats looking for a successor to Tony Crosland's 'The Future of Socialism' of 1956. His last position is best found in 'After Thatcher' (1989), calling for a 'third way' between a purely pragmatic politics on the left and those who still refused any compromise with a centrist social democratic state. But the shallowness of the Blairite 'third way' soon earned his contempt, both politically and intellectually. 
In all Hirst was main author of eighteen books and hundreds of articles, reviews, and lectures on a remarkable range of subjects in a remarkable range of journals. They all had one thing in common. In 'The future of political studies' (published in 'European Political Science' in 2003) he wrote, 'To be engaged and try to be objective is tough, but it is the only serious stance.' That was true of both his Marxist and his social-democratic writings. He was a man who never stopped thinking afresh and tackling new problems, a great teacher, and to students and colleagues a friendly, humorous man of Falstaffian girth, with an appetite for good food and wine. He died at Middlesex Hospital, Westminster, on 16 June 2003, following a stroke and brain haemorrhage. His donor card was honoured that same day to save the life of another. He was survived by his wife, Penny, and son, Jamie. 


@@@@@


doc= 90043


Jackson, Thomas (1925-2003), trade unionist, was born on 9 April 1925 at 7 Dow Street, Hunslet, Leeds, the only son of George Frederick Jackson, a one-shop master baker, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Hargreaves. His father died when he was four. In October 1939, aged fourteen, he left Jack Lane elementary school to become an office boy in an engineering company and, within weeks, a Post Office messenger and member of the Union of Post Office Workers (UPW) Leeds no. 1 branch. In 1943, by then a postman, he joined the Royal Navy as a wireless operator. Seeing the poverty in the Far East confirmed his belief that only socialism could give people a better future. After returning to Leeds and his postman's job in 1946 he had a brief flirtation with the Communist Party before deciding that his ideals would be better served through his union and the Labour Party. He studied economics as an extramural evening class student at Leeds University, and on 29 November 1947 married Norma Burrow, a Leeds GPO telephonist he had met at a local dance. She was the daughter of Arthur Shaw Burrow, brickworks manager. They had one daughter, Kim ('b'. 1949). 
Jackson's thirty-six years of unbroken office-holding service to the UPW started in 1946 on the Leeds no. 1 branch committee, on which he served until elected to the UPW national executive in 1955. He was the union's national chairman in 1962-3 and became a full-time UPW official in 1964. In 1967 he was voted UPW general secretary on the first ballot with a majority over all other candidates. He held that post for over fifteen years, becoming the UPW's longest-serving general secretary since the union's founder, William Bowen. 
During his leadership of the UPW Jackson was alternately described as a militant when battling to increase the postman's basic weekly wage, and as a moderate when advocating working with the government to control wages and prices inflation. With his handlebar moustache -- grown to make him look older than his twenty-one years when he first stood for union office -- he was unquestionably the most instantly recognizable trade union leader of his generation. Almost uniquely he was able to combine a populist flair with passionate conviction, illustrated by putting the union's Humber Hawk car in a raffle because he did not drive, and being the only union leader to take resolute action during a Trades Union Congress (TUC) protest week in 1977 against apartheid, by cutting all telephone and postal links between the UK and South Africa. 
Jackson was first elected to the influential general council of the TUC in 1967. He looked to his fellow union leaders for financial and not merely moral support, when in 1971 the UPW (which had no strike fund) called the first ever postal workers' national strike, claiming a 15 per cent pay increase to produce at least $3 a week more for postmen. It based its claim on settlements in other industries and the 13.2 per cent rise in the general wages index. The Post Office management offered the UPW 7 per cent, then 8 per cent, asking the union to put the difference to arbitration. The UPW rejected this, but the reluctance of its telephonist members to join the strike undoubtedly weakened its ability to force a better offer. During the course of the forty-seven-day strike (then the longest national stoppage since the general strike in 1926) the union sold its investments, used up reserves of $500,000, and borrowed some $750,000 to give those not entitled to state benefits a hardship payment. Other unions made loans, but gave little direct financial support, and took no other supporting action. To cries of 'Hey, hey Tommy J, what about our $3 pay', Jackson faced his striking members at a Hyde Park meeting in London, urging them to return to work without a firm promise of a better deal. The dispute was referred to a committee of inquiry chaired by a retired civil servant, Sir Henry Hardman, who awarded a 9 per cent increase. The settlement gave Edward Heath's Conservative government its biggest single victory over trade union militancy. 
Having lost this pay battle, Jackson became more convinced that the way forward for trade unions was not through a free-for-all wages scramble, but through agreement with a future Labour government on an incomes policy that would protect the lowest paid, control prices and dividends, protect the pound, and help keep that government in power. With the election of a Labour government in 1974, albeit with a majority of three, Jackson's influence on economic policy rose with his battle scars and seniority. It was therefore ironic that it was his casting vote at a fateful special meeting of the TUC general council on 14 November 1978 which finally ended the joint union-government agreement to curb wage increases and inflation, which had begun in 1976. The TUC and ministers had drawn up an agreement headed 'collective bargaining, costs and prices' which was endorsed by the powerful TUC economic committee on the morning of the general council meeting, having received cabinet approval the previous day. When it came to the vote the union leaders split 14-14, Jackson (who was in the chair) declared the motion not carried, and so the unions returned to free collective bargaining. Some ministers thought that Jackson could have saved the day by using his vote in favour of the joint statement. Jackson, however, argued that a policy statement as important as this adopted on his casting vote would carry no political conviction at home or with the financial markets abroad. In any case, his union's long-standing practice in similar situations was to rule the motion 'not carried'. The rift paved the way for the 'winter of discontent' with its wave of strikes, which led inexorably to Margaret Thatcher's election victory in 1979. In his presidential address opening the 1979 Trades Union Congress, a disappointed and embittered Jackson reminded delegates that 'It is of no value simply to be in favour of a Labour Government in power if we do not have the will to sustain, influence and share the responsibilities of such a government' ('Report of 11th Annual Trades Union Congress', 1979, 409). 
In a period when trade unions and industry made daily headlines, Jackson was able to speak intelligently and eloquently in conveying ideas and policies to a wider audience -- a trait which, combined with his affable personality, saw him in constant media demand. This in turn placed him high on the establishment's list when seeking trade union representation on outside bodies. He was a governor of the BBC (1968-73); a council member of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (1974-85); a government-appointed director of BP (1975-83); a member of the Press Council (1973-6); a member of the Annan committee on the future of broadcasting (1974-7); a member of the court and council of Sussex University (1974-8); and a member of the Commission for Racial Equality (1977-8). 
At the end of 1979, Jackson lost the sight of an eye. He decided to take early retirement in 1982, having correctly forecast that the division of the Post Office into two separate corporations -- posts and telecommunications -- would lead to privatization of the latter and withdrawal of the Royal Mail's monopoly of postal delivery. Also in 1982 his first marriage was dissolved, and on 26 August he married the 35-year-old Kathleen Maria (Kate) Tognarelli, schoolteacher, and daughter of Alfred Francis Tognarelli, confectioner. They moved to Ilkley, in Yorkshire, had a daughter, Sarah ('b'. 1983), and set up a small antiquarian bookselling business specializing in cookery and children's books. Jackson was himself a skilled cook, once remarking that there was 'nothing like a sharp kitchen knife and a pile of fresh vegetables for working off a bit of spleen' ('Daily Telegraph'). Having refused honours from Harold Wilson, and the offer of a peerage in James Callaghan's resignation list, Jackson virtually turned his back on national public life, although he did serve as a member of the Broadcasting Complaints Commission (1982-7) and took on local appointments, including as chairman of the Ilkley Literature Festival (1984-7); council member of Bradford University (1987-90); and a member of Yorkshire Water Authority (1983-9) and non-executive director of Yorkshire Water plc (1989-94). In his last years he suffered from cancer of the prostate. He died at Troutbeck Nursing Home, Crossbeck Road, Ilkley, on 6 June 2003 following a stroke, and was survived by the wives and daughters of his marriages. 


@@@@@


doc= 90045


Legum, Colin (1919-2003), journalist, was born in the Mont aux Sources Hotel in Kestell, Orange Free State, South Africa, on 3 January 1919, the fourth of five children of Lithuanian Jewish immigrant parents. His father, Louis Legum, kept the hotel. He was educated at Retief High School in Kestell with the local Afrikaner children. He grew up in a house without books or newspapers, but was befriended by a neighbour who belonged to a mail-order book club and at school quickly became a voracious reader. As soon as he matriculated -- that year he was ranked seventh in South Africa -- he went off to Johannesburg. At fifteen he found a job as an office boy on the (Johannesburg) 'Sunday Express', and at nineteen was its political correspondent. 
From early days Legum was a man of firm views and convictions, a socialist but strongly anti-communist, and a staunch Zionist and defender of Israel. He became deeply concerned about the plight of the black population of his country and quickly entered politics, being elected a member for the (white) Labour Party on Johannesburg city council in 1942. He served as general secretary of the Labour Party, edited its journal 'Forward', and became chairman of the special housing committee, which fiercely opposed those running the shanty towns. A year after Daniel Malan's Nationalist Party ousted Jan Smuts's United Party government in 1948 and launched apartheid Legum moved to London, at first joining a research team at the Tavistock Institute of Human Relations. This brought him into contact with David Astor, editor of 'The Observer'. It was said that one day he turned up unannounced at the office to see Astor, did not apply for a job, but simply said he would be covering Africa for the paper. It was the unorthodox beginning of a legendary Fleet Street career -- thirty years as the newspaper's diplomatic and Commonwealth correspondent. Although the Commonwealth beat was much wider than Africa, the spotlight fell increasingly on that continent. Kwame Nkrumah took Ghana to independence in 1957 and thereafter the pace of decolonization quickened almost by the month. The Commonwealth became embroiled in the events that flowed from Ian Smith's unilateral declaration of independence in 1965, the subsequent war in Rhodesia, and then the long struggle in South Africa to end apartheid. 
Legum had married Eugenie Maud Leon in South Africa in 1941, and they had one son, David. She died in 1953 and on 27 July 1960 he married, in London, the South African economist Margaret Jean Roberts ['see below']. They had three daughters. In 1964 Legum and his second wife published 'South Africa: Crisis for the West', an influential book arguing for sanctions to bring down apartheid. 
In these years of fundamental changes in Africa that were now being extensively covered in the British press, Legum was one of the most distinguished of a generation of journalists, some of whom became personally committed to the emergence of a new Africa. Among these were Basil Davidson, Anthony Sampson, Clyde Sanger, Bill Kirkman, Tom Stacey, Cyril Dunn, Michael Holman, Brigid Bloom, Patrick Keatley, Roy Lewis, and John Dickie. Legum became close to many African leaders such as Nkrumah, Jomo Kenyatta, Julius Nyerere, Kenneth Kaunda, Milton Obote, and Oliver Tambo. David Astor, influenced by Legum and the campaigner Michael Scott, took an increasingly close interest in events in Africa and 'The Observer' acquired a growing reputation for its coverage. Scott was director of the Africa Bureau and Legum was a key voice on its committee. 
Deceptively, Legum never gave the outward appearance of huge energy, whether at his typewriter with a cigar between his lips, calmly chatting to African presidents or prime ministers, or waiting invariably until the end of a press conference to come in with the most pertinent of all the questions. He was always helpful to young journalists, although his style was serious and sometimes brusque. In committee he usually got his way, displaying a great command of facts and detail, though with little sense of humour and usually pronouncing on African affairs as if he was the ultimate authority. 
Legum's literary output was prodigious. He was involved as author, co-author, or contributor of twenty books -- most notably 'Congo Disaster' (1960), 'Pan-Africanism: a Brief History' (1962), 'Africa: a Handbook of the Continent' (1962), 'Western Crisis over Southern Africa' (1979), and 'Mwalimu: the Influence of Nyerere' (1995). His last book, 'Africa since Independence' (1999), was based on lectures delivered at Indiana University, in which he looked back at what he categorized as Africa's 'romantic period' (1939-70), its 'period of disillusionment' (1970-85), its 'period of realism' (which he dated enigmatically 1988-?), and then forward to a possible 'period of renaissance'. However, his most remarkable achievement was to found in 1968 and edit twenty-three volumes of the 'Africa Contemporary Record', persuading many leading Africanists to write for it -- altogether a huge task. He also edited the 'Middle East Survey' and from 1982 'Third World Report'. In 1981, by then associate editor, he had left 'The Observer' when the paper was taken over by the controversial head of Lonrho, Roland (Tiny) Rowland -- a change that he felt would undermine the paper's integrity. 
Legum and his wife had been banned from South Africa in 1962, but with the ending of apartheid in 1990 were able to return. In 1996 they settled there, at Kalk Bay, near Cape Town. Legum was delighted to be given honorary degrees by Rhodes University and the University of South Africa. In 2002 he founded a development trust to provide scholarships at Retief School. He continued to work as a journalist, author, and visiting lecturer until his death from cancer in Cape Town on 8 June 2003. 
Legum's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 90046


Marshall, Geoffrey (1929-2003), political scientist, was born on 22 April 1929 at 132 Chatsworth Road, Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the son of Leonard William Marshall, engineer's fitter, and his wife, Kitty (or Kate), 'nee' Turner. Soon after his birth the family moved to Blackpool, where his mother kept a boarding-house. Educated at the Arnold School, Blackpool, Marshall shone both academically and on the football field. He was offered a place at Balliol College, Oxford, but chose to go in 1947 to Manchester University to study government and economics. In 1948 W. J. M. Mackenzie arrived as professor of government at Manchester and was an early influence on the young Marshall. In February 1950 Marshall attended Harold Laski's final series of lectures, delivered in Manchester, and edited them for publication, after Laski's death, as 'Reflections on the Constitution' in 1951. The experience probably triggered his interest in constitutional issues. After graduation he remained at Manchester to complete an MA thesis on the political thought of David Hume. 
In 1951 Marshall was appointed assistant lecturer in politics at Glasgow University, where he completed his doctorate, later published as 'Political Sovereignty and the Commonwealth' (1957). This dealt with the constitutional controversy in South Africa, following the decision by the government of South Africa to abolish the entrenched sections of the constitution. In what became a familiar Marshall trait he dismissed grand theories of sovereignty. At Glasgow he forged a good relationship with Graeme Moodie and the two later wrote 'Some Problems of the Constitution' (1959), portions of which grew out of informal conversations the two men had had when colleagues. The book exposed the ambiguities and misunderstandings about constitutional matters and punctured myths, including the idea that ministerial responsibility was an effective device for holding governments to account. 
In 1954 Marshall moved to Nuffield College, Oxford, as a junior research fellow. Having decided that he would not impress the interviewing panel, he had over-indulged in the college hospitality beforehand. To his surprise he was offered the post. At Nuffield he became interested in jurisprudence, began reading for the bar, and met and soon married (on 10 August 1957) Patricia Anne Christine Woodcock, daughter of Edward Cecil Woodcock, engineer's designer. A graduate of St Anne's College, Oxford, she was Kenneth Robinson's research assistant at Nuffield. There were two sons of the marriage. From 1957 until his retirement forty-two years later, Marshall's career was spent at Queen's College, Oxford, as a fellow and tutor in politics, and as provost between 1993 and 1999. He was loyal to Queen's, turning down approaches for chairs from a number of leading universities and for Oxford's Gladstone chair of government and public administration, in succession to S. E. Finer. The chair carried with it a fellowship of All Souls College and it was typical of Marshall's dry humour and refusal to take himself too seriously that he noted that All Souls lacked both a car park and a squash court -- two essentials in his life. 
Marshall was also involved in the life of the city and the university. He served as a university councillor on Oxford city council in 1967-74 and was its last university sheriff, in 1971-2. A member of the board of delegates to the university press, he was also active in the Political Studies Association and the Study of Parliament Group, becoming president of the latter in 1975. Although the queen's private secretary sometimes consulted him on constitutional matters, he was not one for taking public stands on issues of the day. 
Between 1957 and 1981 Marshall was assistant editor of the journal 'Public Law', to which he contributed numerous reviews and articles on a wide range of subjects, including maladministration, police cars, official secrets, parliament, the rule of law, statutory interpretation, and precedent. His frequent reviews for the 'Times Literary Supplement' were eagerly read for their gentle but effective puncturing of jargon or highfalutin theories. Tough-minded but gentle in manner, modest and humorous, he also wrote witty pieces for the 'Oxford Magazine'. 
It was almost a cliche to say that Marshall bridged the gap between the study of public law and politics. At the start of his career the two were closely interrelated. But as politics threw off legal formal approaches he ploughed something of a lonely furrow. It was often noted that his reputation was at least as high among public lawyers as among political scientists. His 'Police and Government' (1965) was a study of the constitutional status of the constable and the rival claims made on the constable by local government and the Home Office. As in 'Some Problems', Marshall questioned the existing procedures for accountability and called for more effective checks on the executive and the creation of more opportunities for citizens to press for the redress of grievances. There followed 'Constitutional Theory' (1971) and 'Constitutional Conventions: the Rules and Forms of Political Accountability' (1984). These books confirmed Marshall's reputation as perhaps the leading British scholar on constitutional issues. 
Marshall's concern to explore the ideas that lay behind institutions explains the greater debt he owed to jurisprudence and legal theory than to the social sciences. It also explains perhaps his interest in rigorous analysis of the meaning and history of concepts and theories. The clarity of his prose and the precision of his terms reflected his tidy mind. He argued that much of the talk among politicians and commentators of parliamentary accountability was a fiction. The conventions of ministerial and collective responsibility had been developed before the rise of the two-party system and interventionist government. These developments, in his view, had weakened the independence of parliament vis-a-vis the executive and thereby the citizens' ability to hold ministers to account. He also regretted how the British reliance on 'political' rather than 'legal' protection for citizens against abuses of power had encouraged the courts to be passive on administrative matters. He called for the development of administrative law, greater judicial review, and the creation of the office of a parliamentary ombudsman. 
On his retirement in 1999 Marshall's colleagues presented him with a volume of essays: 'The Law, Politics and the Constitution', edited by David Butler, Vernon Bogdanor, and Robert Summers. Marshall was short, wiry, and extremely fit, playing squash until a late age. During his final years he remained unassuming and approachable and much enjoyed the provostship at Queen's. Suffering from acute leukaemia, he died on 24 June 2003 at his home, 33 The Villas, Rutherway, Oxford, following a stroke. He was survived by his wife, Patricia, and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 90051


Parkes, Terence (1927-2003), cartoonist, was born on 19 November 1927 at 134 Heathfield Road, Handsworth, Birmingham, the only child of Walter Thomas Parkes, a welder in a motor-car factory, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Hirons. At the time of the registration of his birth his parents lived at 2 Anglesey Street, Lozells, Birmingham. He was educated at Handsworth grammar school, Birmingham, and in September 1939 he and his classmates were evacuated to Stroud in Gloucestershire, returning to Birmingham soon after the fall of France. He started drawing cartoons while still at school and began to study fine art at the Birmingham College of Arts and Crafts but his training was interrupted by national service as a gunner in the Royal Artillery (1946-8), stationed in Wales, co. Durham, and Portsmouth. After completing his art course he went on to qualify as an art teacher for the newly formed secondary modern schools. At about this time his first published cartoons appeared in the 'Birmingham Sunday Mercury' and 'Birmingham Gazette'. On 26 July 1952 he married (Jean) Pauline Woodward, daughter of Ernest Edward Woodward, technical supervisor. They had a son and a daughter. 
Parkes began work as an art teacher at Lincoln Road secondary modern school, Peterborough, Northamptonshire, in 1951, and it was there that he acquired his pseudonym, Larry, a nickname given to him by his pupils in honour of Larry Parks, star of 'The Jolson Story' (1946), which was screened in the city in 1954. The same year he returned to Birmingham and worked as a progress-chaser in the Lucas Turbines factory (1954-6) while continuing to produce cartoons in his spare time. His first drawings were accepted by 'Punch' and 'Lilliput' in 1954, and in the autumn of 1956 he was briefly a staff cartoonist on the 'Daily Express' before turning full-time freelance in 1957. He moved to Solihull in 1959 and soon began working for numerous newspapers and magazines including (eventually) the 'Birmingham Evening Mail' (sports cartoons), 'Soldier', 'Punch', the 'Daily Sketch', the 'Daily Express', 'Private Eye', 'The Oldie', 'The Guardian', 'Opera Now', 'The Observer', the 'Daily Telegraph' and the 'Sunday Telegraph'. He also drew advertising cartoons for Double Diamond beer, HMSO, and the Inland Revenue, among others, produced cartoons and commentary for Granada TV's 'Afternoon Edition' (1963-4), supplied visual jokes for the TV comedian Marty Feldman, drew cartoons for the title credits of the comedy films 'Carry On Up the Khyber' (1968) and 'Carry On Camping' (1972), and was a scenery painter at Joan Littlewood's Theatre Royal, London (1973-4). He also produced greetings cards, calendars, plates, and bathroom tiles, and illustrated many books, including James Herriot's 'Vets Might Fly' (1976), George Mikes's 'How to be Poor' (1983), Stephen Pile's 'The Return of Heroic Failures' (1988), and the 'Private Eye' 'Colemanballs' series (1982-96). 
Larry's first big cartoon success came in the late 1950s with his captionless 'Punch' series 'Man in Apron', about a balding middle-aged, middle-class husband attempting to cook and do housework. The series (which had been suggested to him by Russell Brockbank, the art editor of 'Punch') caught on quickly and led to a dozen books from 'Man in Apron' (1959) to 'Man on Holiday' (1973). Larry later said that the character was based on his father: 'Indefatigable he was -- though, like me, he always had a good head of hair. The reason I drew him bald was to distinguish him from the women -- my cartoon faces always look the same, male or female' ('Larry on Larry', 9). Larry's jokes about fine art were also very popular -- the first collection of these was 'Larry's Art Collection' (1977), followed by 'Larry on Art' (1978) -- and in 1992 he began experimenting with three-dimensional clay cartoons on art themes. Other collections of his drawings included 'The Larry Omnibus' (1967), 'Best of Larry' (1983), and 'Larry at War' (1995). A light-hearted autobiographical book, 'Larry on Larry', appeared in 1994. 
Larry won many awards for his cartoons, was elected an honorary fellow of Birmingham Polytechnic in 1991, and had his work exhibited at the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, and in many commercial galleries in Britain and overseas. Some of his drawings were also included in the major exhibition, 'Drawn and quartered: the world of the British newspaper cartoon, 1720-1970' at the National Portrait Gallery in 1970. Examples of his work are held in such public collections as the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum Department of Prints and Drawings, Essex University, the British Cartoon Archive at the University of Kent, and the Cartoon Museum, London. 
A great fan of the humour of Jacques Tati, Laurel and Hardy, the Marx Brothers, W. C. Fields, Will Hay, and Sid Field, Larry also admired the art of Daumier, Lautrec, and Van Gogh. His favourite cartoonist was Leslie Starke. Though Larry's drawing technique was entirely his own (it was Russell Brockbank who encouraged him to keep his loose, sketchy line by publishing drawings he had originally submitted as roughs), he later admitted that his 'big-nose style' was influenced by the work of the French cartoonist Jean-Maurice Bosc. He worked very quickly, using an old-fashioned Rolinx dip pen and Pelikan or Rotring black ink (sometimes also coloured inks or watercolour) on ordinary typing paper. He rarely used words in his cartoons and was once described by the former 'Punch' editor Alan Coren as 'the only great silent comedian still in business' (foreword, 'The Best of Larry', 1983). 
Larry was 5 feet 10 inches tall and was normally clean-shaven with a full head of grey (formerly black) hair. He died after a short illness in Warwick Hospital on 25 June 2003, and was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 90053


Redgrove, Peter William (1932-2003), poet and novelist, was born on 2 January 1932 at 9 Lanherne, Kingston Hill, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, the elder son of Gordon James (Jim) Redgrove (1905-1989), an advertising copywriter, and his wife, Nancy Lena, 'nee' Cestrilli-Bell (1903-1980). His brother, David, born in 1937, was to die in a tragic accident in 1957. The family circumstances were those of the comfortable and conventional middle class, and Redgrove went to kindergarten in Norbiton, where an ambivalent attitude towards Jesus and religion took root. He discovered an early interest in dinosaurs and the microscopic world, seeing himself as 'a small Faust' ('A poet in teaching', 171). Insects and visions of microscopic life were to provide an important theme in his work. From 1945 to 1949 he attended Taunton School, Somerset, where he became a school prefect, played squash, joined the natural history society, and developed what was to be a lifelong interest in photography. His experience of national service was less conformist, and he was diagnosed with incipient schizophrenia and subjected to insulin shock treatment, an experience which soon surfaced in his poetry. 
In 1951 Redgrove went to Queens' College, Cambridge, on an open scholarship to read natural sciences, but by his own account he found the syllabus mechanical and felt himself to be a 'barbarian scientist' on the wrong side of the culture gap: he began to read and write poetry, met poets (including Ted Hughes), attended the open lectures of F. R. Leavis, and attempted unsuccessfully to change to English. In 1953 he co-founded (with Rodney Banister) the magazine 'delta', in the second issue of which appeared 'Lazarus and the Sea', a powerful poem about his shock treatment, prefiguring in subject matter the work of Sylvia Plath. He shortly handed over the editorship of 'delta' to Philip Hobsbaum. Redgrove also attended the supportive but critically intense London meetings of The Group, which had been founded in Cambridge in 1952, and of which Hobsbaum was the leading member. The poet Peter Porter later recalled Redgrove's memorable appearances at the afternoon drinking clubs in the London of this period. On 10 July 1954 Redgrove married the sculptor Barbara Mary Sherlock, one of whose drawings, 'The Good Listener', had appeared in 'delta 2'. She was two years older than him, the daughter of John Edward Sherlock, businessman. The marriage produced two sons and one daughter. 
Redgrove left Cambridge in 1954 without a degree, and struggled to make a living by writing medical advertising copy. His first volume of poetry, 'The Collector' (1960), was followed by 'The Nature of Cold Weather' (1961), 'At the White Monument' (1963), and 'The Force' (1966). In 1961 he became visiting poet at Buffalo University on a Fulbright award, and in 1962-5 Gregory fellow in poetry at Leeds, a post which gave him time for his own work. In 1966 he moved to Cornwall as resident author at the Falmouth School of Art, which was to remain his base until 1983, and where he became renowned as an eccentric and innovative mentor, and a key figure in the move to establish creative writers in academic institutions. 
In Falmouth Redgrove studied dream analysis with the retired Jungian psychotherapist John Layard. The greater permissiveness of the 1960s affected Redgrove's marriage: he claimed to have married, according to middle class 'tribal values', the first woman to whom he made love, and sexual mores were now rapidly changing ('Hudson Review', 379). In 1969 he met the novelist Penelope Diane Shuttle ('b'. 1947), daughter of Jack Frederick Shuttle, office administrator -- an encounter which had a profound influence on his life and work. He and his first wife separated and were divorced in 1969, and in 1970 Shuttle settled with him in Falmouth. They had one daughter, and were married three years later on 16 September 1980. 
From 1970 onwards Redgrove and Shuttle embarked on an exceptionally productive and intense literary and personal collaboration, exploring sexuality and the stuff of dreams. In an exchange and merging of roles he began to write fiction, and she to write poetry. His earlier collections described the strain of combining the writing of poetry with an office life as breadwinner and family man: his poetry and prose now began to flourish with uninhibited, erotic, and oceanic vigour. 'Dr Faust's Sea-Spiral Spirit' (1972) contained one of his most celebrated poems, 'The Idea of Entropy at Maenporth Beach', dedicated to his magus Layard and paying tribute to 'The Idea of Order at Key West' by Wallace Stevens: its central image is of a white-bodied woman immersing herself gloriously in the richness of black mud. This collection was followed by 'In the Country of the Skin' (1973), a poetic novel adapted in the same year as a radio play; and then by an uninterrupted surge of volumes of poetry, prose poems, fiction, radio plays, and works on psychology and socio-sexuality, many of them celebrating the numinous seascapes and landscapes of Cornwall, in which much of his work was deeply rooted. 
Redgrove and Shuttle appeared as co-authors on the title pages of several volumes, including 'The Hermaphrodite Album' (1973), 'The Terrors of Dr Treviles' (1974), and 'The Glass Cottage: a Nautical Romance' (1976). The last was a novel inspired in part by an Atlantic crossing to the USA and by Redgrove's term as O'Connor professor of literature at Colgate University, New York, in 1974-5. This was his last teaching post abroad, and not a particularly happy one, though he and Shuttle both wrote copiously while they were there. In 1978 they published jointly 'The Wise Wound: Menstruation and Everywoman', a pioneering work investigating the mythologies and realities of female menstrual experience, thus breaking a taboo which even Jung had observed; it was also remarkable for its bold examination of popular culture and horror films. 
The works that appeared under Redgrove's sole name were also informed and affected by Shuttle's critiques and inspiration: both poets acknowledged that some of their writing was so deeply fused that it was impossible to disentangle authorship. Redgrove's output was prodigious, and although some of his volumes interweaved overlapping material, the originality of his inspiration was unmistakable, and drew comparisons with the work of William Blake. His productivity daunted some readers, colleagues, and critics, but his genius was widely recognized, and he received various awards, including the Guardian fiction prize (1973), the Prix Italia (1982), the Cholmondeley award (1985), and the queen's gold medal for poetry (1996). He became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1982. 
Redgrove's many poetry collections included 'The Weddings at Nether Powers' (1979), 'The Apple-Broadcast' (1981), 'The Man Named East' (1985), 'In the Hall of the Saurians' (1987), and 'My Father's Trapdoors' (1994): all were marked by vitality of language, visionary insights, scenes of domestic transfiguration, striking imagery drawn from the natural (and unnatural) sciences, and a kind of good-humoured, life-affirming wit and joyfulness. Later volumes contained memorable evocations of the trickster figure of his father. His poetic spirit, often contrasted with the more violent tone of Ted Hughes (who championed Redgrove's work) was largely benign. He was not a formalist, and his verse swept and flowed effortlessly, overwhelming metrical orthodoxy, but the verbal texture of his work withstands close scrutiny. His poems have been widely anthologized, but their true impact relies on a cumulative power. His reading was vast and eclectic, and his work was rich in allusion. 'The Black Goddess and the Sixth Sense' (1987) was an encyclopaedic prose study described by Shuttle as 'a man's menstrual vision' ('We Two', 125), which addressed hidden or suppressed knowledge of the senses: it revealed him as acutely weather-sensitive, with a heightened awareness of barometric pressure, magnetism, and other unseen forces. It also pursued earlier explorations of gender, archetype, and repressive patriarchy. 
Redgrove was a man of great physical presence and strength, with a full and magnificent speaking voice, which had won him a verse-speaking award at Cambridge, and which he continued to employ to great effect: he read his poems with a musical and ceremonial precision, giving weight to every syllable. He practised yoga and judo (achieving the British Judo Association first kyu, or brown belt) and was famed in his youth for being able to tear a London telephone directory apart with his bare hands. He enjoyed wine and beer, and wrote evocatively about the pleasures of drinking: one small volume ('The Mudlark Poems and Grand Buveur', 1986) was largely devoted to this topic. Towards the end of his life, when suffering from late-onset diabetes and Parkinson's disease, he regretted the dietary restrictions his ill health imposed upon him. One of his best-loved late poems ('Elderhouse', 'From the Virgil Caverns', 2002) poignantly celebrated a simple glass of tap water in a Falmouth cafe. 
In 2001 Redgrove was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Sheffield, where his principal archives are housed. He died on 16 June 2003, at the Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro, of a combination of causes, chiefly renal failure due to a diabetic infection. He was cremated in Truro on 23 June 2003, and his ashes were scattered on Maenporth beach on 19 September 2004. He was survived by his wife, Penelope, and a son and two daughters, one son from his first marriage having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 90054


Rees, Leighton Thomas (1940-2003), darts player, was born on 17 January 1940 at the Lady Aberdare Maternity Home, Mountain Ash, near Pontypridd, Glamorgan, the only son of Ivor Thomas Rees, lorry driver, and his wife, Olwen, 'nee' Holt. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 10 Other Street, Ynys-y-bwl, near Pontypridd. He was educated at Trerobert junior school and the Mill Street secondary modern school, Pontypridd. It was during his period at Mill Street that he threw his first darts at the local United Services Club. In 1979 he admitted, 'I was only an average pupil and cannot remember being gripped by the urge for learning' (Lanning, 2). When he left Mill Street at the age of fifteen one of his teachers declared he would be 'good only for reading the sports pages of the 'South Wales Echo'', his mind having been more on rugby football than anything else ('Daily Telegraph'). 
Rees immediately began work at a local factory, Simmonds Aerocessories, which specialized in manufacturing nuts and bolts, eventually moving into the dispatch office where he remained for twenty-one years. It was during his lunch hours that he became interested in darts. A factory team was established, based at the Colliers Arms at Porth, and played in the Pontypridd district darts league. Rees was a team member for two years before signing for the United Services Club, Ynys-y-bwl, on whose books he remained for his entire career in darts. 
Rees's ambition was always to win the prestigious 'News of the World' individual darts championship. Although he reached the grand finals in London on no less than three occasions (1970, 1974, and 1976), his dream was never realized. Rees later said, 'It is every player's dream of success and, as it turned out, my impossible dream' (Lanning, 58). Nevertheless by 1974 he had been capped for both the Wales and Great Britain national teams and was receiving numerous invitations to appear at events and play exhibitions around the country. This placed him in a dilemma. As he told his biographer, Dave Lanning, 'I loved my job, my workmates, the uncomplicated routine of my life. A simple home life, Mum's cooking, friendly employers, a boisterous, if beery, social existence. It all offered an odd sort of security, protection. You could call it humdrum. But I was perfectly happy and who needs fame, fortune and flashiness if you're happy and healthy enough not to have a hangover after a night out with your mates? (ibid., 7)' It was during the late 1970s that the ubiquitous pub game of darts was elevated to a global sport by the combination of the drive and organizational skills of the British Darts Organisation and the involvement of television, with its innovative split-screen technology. Almost overnight amateur darts players were transformed into highly paid professionals. Eventually, convinced by his manager, Eddie Norman, and his Welsh darts colleague and friend Alan Evans, Rees turned professional in 1976 and became one of the darts players who helped usher in a new era for the sport. 
Rees's first major international success came at the Wembley conference centre, London, in December 1977, when he led the Welsh national team to victory in the inaugural World Darts Federation world cup and won the individual title at the same event. But the high point of his darts career came on 10 February 1978 when he became the first ever world professional darts champion in the Embassy world professional darts championship organized by the British Darts Organisation and held at the Heart of the Midlands Club, Nottingham. He beat England's John Lowe by eleven legs to seven in the final and collected the winner's cheque for $3000. Later, in honour of their world champion, Rees's local council named a street after him, Leighton Rees Close. 
Although winning the world professional darts championship was the pinnacle of his career Rees continued to be a leading contender in all major darts competitions for which he entered. In his international career he represented Wales on no less than seventy-seven occasions and, even as his health began to decline in the 1990s, he remained a highly popular player on the lucrative exhibition circuit until illness forced him into retirement. 
On 16 August 1980 Rees married, in Las Vegas, Debra (Debbie) Ryle, nee Pearl (1952-2007), a Californian who was herself a keen darts player. From her first marriage Debbie had a son, Ryan, whom Rees always considered as his own. About the same time Rees moved from Ynys-y-bwl to Trallwn, also near Pontypridd. In 2002, in what was to be his last major interview, he spoke to his old friend and adversary John Lowe about his career in darts. Rees told Lowe that he would not change anything but then added, 'If only I had a crystal ball at the time, I would have looked after my health and money differently' (Lowe and Chaplin, 296). He eventually succumbed to a long-term heart condition and died on 8 June 2003 at the Royal Glamorgan Hospital, Llantrisant. He was cremated at Glyn-taf crematorium. He was survived by his wife and her son. 


@@@@@


doc= 90061


Sugden, Sir Arthur (1918-2003), businessman, was born on 12 September 1918 at 73 Casson Street, Gorton, Manchester, the second child in the family of four sons and one daughter of Arthur Sugden (died 'c'.1938), a timekeeper at the wagon works of the London and North Western Railway, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Wardle, a secretary at a cotton firm. Unable to take up a scholarship at Manchester grammar school because of his mother's illness, he remained at Thomas Street elementary school until he was fourteen, when he took and passed the entrance examination for the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS). He started work in 1933 as a junior accounts clerk, while studying accountancy at a day continuation school and at night school. He later qualified as a certified accountant and a chartered secretary. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Sugden joined the Royal Artillery as a private soldier, but was selected for officer training, and ended the war with the rank of major, having worked on mathematical gunnery. On 28 June 1941 he married Elsie Collins (died 1945), a 24-year-old machinist and daughter of Robert Collins, rubber worker; they had one son. Following her death Sugden married, on 28 October 1946, Agnes Warrender, a 26-year-old widow, and daughter of Francis Grayston, engineer. There was one son from this marriage. 
Returning to the accountancy department of the CWS in 1946 as an accountancy assistant, Sugden became manager of the sales and accounts department in 1950, and in 1954 moved into factory management as general manager of the CWS margarine works and lard refinery. After ten successful years at the margarine works, during which the factory became the most profitable in the CWS, in 1964 Sugden was promoted to become general manager of the newly created edible oils and fats group of five factories involved in the manufacture and processing of butter, margarine, lard, and other edible oils and fats. 
The CWS had grown out of the North of England Co-operative Society, founded in 1865 to buy goods in bulk and supply the local retail co-operative societies, and had since built its own factories and developed services such as banking and insurance. Owned by the retail societies, which dominated the board of directors, the CWS was a leading member of the Co-operative Union. By the mid-1960s the CWS and the retail societies were in difficulties, facing competition from the large multiples, and, after widespread consultation, radical changes were made in an effort to ensure the survival of the co-operative movement. A new management structure was approved, and in 1967 the society appointed its first chief executive officer, heading three divisions, each under a deputy chief executive officer. Sugden was appointed deputy chief executive officer in charge of the food division, by far the largest. The society launched Operation Facelift at the end of 1968, in an attempt to improve the public image of the Co-op and create a national brand. The Co-op brand name and symbol were introduced, the CWS helped local societies to transform their shops and financed the building of supermarkets, and a large-scale advertising campaign was launched with the slogan 'It's all at the Co-op, now'. After further reorganization, in 1971 Sugden was appointed sole deputy chief executive officer, and as such played an important part in bringing about the merger of the Scottish CWS and the CWS in 1973, following the collapse of the Scottish CWS Bank. 
In 1974 Sugden became chief executive officer of the CWS, based at its headquarters in Manchester. He carried on with the programme of modernization and rationalization: inefficient CWS factories were closed down and new ones built; small local societies were encouraged to amalgamate into larger regional societies; regional distribution centres, to supply food to the local co-op shops, were developed, and the CWS bought goods for the local co-ops from suppliers other than CWS factories if it could get better value. A new advertising campaign was launched in 1976 with the theme 'Your caring sharing Co-op', reaffirming the principles of the co-operative movement. By the end of the decade, despite the fierce retail price war with the big chains such as Tesco, which hit the profits of many of the smaller shops, the Co-op had managed to maintain its market share, especially in food. Sugden had played a large part in this, even though he was careful to keep a low profile. When he took over in 1974 he said, 'I will dominate the CWS management... But it really will be best if no-one actually thinks I am doing so' ('The Times', 5 July 2003), but at the same time he assured members that the CWS was not seeking to control the Co-op movement. He appreciated that the Co-op was owned by its 11 million members and existed for the sake of its members, but he was never able to solve the problem of the relationship between the CWS and the retail societies. The small societies resisted change for fear of losing their independence, and despite the aim of reducing the number of societies to fifty or fewer, there were still over two hundred at the end of the 1970s. They also resented the CWS's domination of national planning, and feared that the CWS was becoming indistinguishable from any other big business, even though in his presidential address to the Annual Co-operative Congress in 1978 Sugden stressed the need to act together as one movement 'without destroying those characteristic features which distinguish the consumers' co-operative movement from all other forms of economic activity' ('Report of the Annual Co-operative Congress', 1978, 16). 
Sugden was also appointed chairman of the Co-op Bank in 1974. The Co-op Bank had developed out of the CWS Bank. The latter had until recently existed mainly for the benefit of the co-operative movement, but in 1971 it had become a separate legal entity, though still owned by the CWS, and it was admitted as a member of the bankers' clearing house in 1974. The first British bank to offer free banking, it was also the only bank to pay interest on current account balances, and because many branches were opened in Co-op shops, it was able to open for longer hours than other banks. It expanded rapidly in the 1970s as a major consumers' bank, attracting large numbers who had never had a bank account before. In 1977 Sugden was invited to serve on the Wilson committee to review the functioning of financial institutions. A member of the working party to consider the setting up of a co-operative development agency, he was appointed a member of its board when it was established in 1978. He was also involved in the international co-operative movement as a board member of Euro-Coop and Inter-Coop: he served as president of Inter-Coop from 1979 to 1980, and he was a member of the central council of the International Co-operative Alliance. 
Sugden was knighted in 1978. He took early retirement in 1980 after his wife was attacked and kidnapped from their home, and held to ransom, before managing to escape from the boot of the kidnapper's car. Quiet and courteous, Sugden was a tough and persistent negotiator. A strong believer in the ideals of the co-operative movement, he was determined to modernize the CWS in order that it and the movement would survive. He died on 7 June 2003 at Hope Green Residential Home for the Elderly, London Road, Adlington, Cheshire, of pneumonia and cerebrovascular disease, and was buried at Handforth, Cheshire, on 13 June. He was survived by his wife, Agnes, and one son, Keith, his other son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 90063


Thatcher, Sir Denis, first baronet (1915-2003), businessman and prime ministerial consort, was born on 10 May 1915 at 26 Southbrook Road, Lee, Lewisham, London, the elder child of Thomas Herbert (Jack) Thatcher, businessman, and his wife, (Lilian) Kathleen, 'nee' Bird. From the age of eight he boarded at a preparatory school in Bognor, then at Mill Hill, a leading nonconformist public school. He joined the family paint and preservatives business at eighteen, volunteering for the army shortly after the Munich crisis of September 1938 because he was convinced that war would shortly come. His character was partly shaped by army discipline and camaraderie. Although to his regret he saw no real fighting, he was mentioned twice in dispatches and left the forces in 1946 with the rank of major and a military MBE. He returned to run the family business, his father having died, aged fifty-seven, in 1943. A brief, childless wartime marriage on 28 March 1942 to Margaret (Margot) Kempson, daughter of Leonard Kempson, businessman, ended in divorce in 1948. In February 1949 he met Margaret Hilda Roberts ('b'. 1925), daughter of Alfred Roberts, grocer, at a dinner in Dartford where she was the newly selected Conservative parliamentary candidate. They married on 13 December 1951. 
Denis Thatcher brought his new wife many gifts. His income funded her training as a barrister and a home in fashionable Chelsea. He was a cheerfully hedonistic, irreverent, and good-natured man, with a talent for friendship, qualities that banished the rigours of Margaret's Grantham upbringing (if not the habit of hard work and self-control to which they gave rise). Twins -- Mark and Carol -- were born in August 1953, Margaret entering parliament six years later as Conservative MP for Finchley. Through the early years of his wife's political career Denis Thatcher worked long days running his firm (which employed 200 by 1957). He suffered a mild breakdown in 1964, took a short break, alone, in South Africa (which he later acknowledged 'shook Margaret'), and decided to sell the business to Castrol. He received $10,000 of the $530,000 purchase price and a seat on the parent board, maintaining a senior position when Castrol was taken over by Burmah Oil in 1969. A large house at Lamberhurst in Kent was bought in 1965. Kent was his true home, greatly preferred to London, where business and Margaret's career forced him to spend so much time. When Margaret ran for the Conservative leadership in February 1975 Denis frankly told her she had no chance of winning, but he would back her all the way. He retired at sixty, months after she became leader, freeing him to play a full supporting role in her career. The premiership followed four years later. 
Early in life Denis Thatcher had taken to heart a favourite saying of his father's: 'it is better to keep your mouth shut and be thought a fool than open it and remove all doubt'. As he felt his way into the role of male prime ministerial consort -- unprecedented in Britain and a novelty anywhere -- he consistently followed that advice, refusing interviews and making only occasional speeches, anodyne and brief. He deeply regretted a single lapse, when in December 1979 at a dinner of the London Society of Rugby Football Union Referees (of which he was treasurer, having refereed at a club level for many years) he made remarks criticizing the sporting boycott of South Africa. He felt the consequent controversy was at his wife's expense. 
Paradoxically a policy of silence worked well for him partly because other people started speaking for him. After May 1979 the satirical magazine 'Private Eye' began publishing 'Dear Bill', a regular spoof letter to a golfing chum, gifting him the comic persona of a gin-soaked buffoon, married to a workaholic dominatrix who happened to run the country. Denis saw the advantages of playing along with 'Dear Bill' (he had little choice), and grew into the part. Did he have a drink problem, he was once asked? 'Yes, Madam, I can never get enough.' What did he do with his time at number 10? 'Well, when I'm not pissed, I play a lot of golf.' 
More than anything else Denis Thatcher saw his role in Downing Street as helping his wife survive the stress of the premiership. He worked hard to relax her and sustain her self-confidence (which was not as unshakeable as most assumed). She would not have functioned politically at such a high level, and for as long as she did, without him. Perhaps no British prime minister has depended more heavily on a spouse. He made probably his most significant attempt to influence her career when he urged her to leave office around the time of her tenth anniversary as prime minister, shrewdly judging that otherwise she would go at a time not of her choosing. He was the first in her immediate circle to realize that the end had come when Geoffrey Howe resigned in November 1990. 
Denis Thatcher was made a baronet in 1991 (the first created since 1964), and his wife a life peer, as Baroness Thatcher, in 1992. In the years following, the continued intrusions of security and staff in the Thatchers' lives sometimes irritated him, but he remained remarkable for his self-effacing amiability and humour. Few who knew him had anything but warm regard. He died of pancreatic cancer at the Lister Hospital, Westminster, on 26 June 2003. He was survived by his wife, who died on 8 April 2013, and their two children, and succeeded as baronet by his son, Mark. 


