@@@@@


doc= 90066


Williams, Sir Bernard Arthur Owen (1929-2003), philosopher, was born on 21 September 1929 at 19 Valkyrie Road, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, the only child of Owen Pasley Denny Williams (1901-1975), architect and chief maintenance surveyor for the Ministry of Works, and his wife, Hilda Amy, 'nee' Day (1897-1991), a personal assistant. At the time of his birth his parents lived at Chequers, Elmsleigh Drive, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex. 
Williams was educated at Chigwell School, a minor public school in Essex, and entered Balliol College, Oxford, in 1947 to read 'literae humaniores' (classics and philosophy). He graduated four years later with a congratulatory first. It was obvious from the very beginning of his time in Oxford that he was an outstanding intellect: he soon had a glowing reputation, not only among his tutors but also among his peers, whom he regularly helped with their work by conducting impromptu seminars. The two tutors he admired most, the distinguished classical scholars Eduard Fraenkel and Eric Dodds, both encouraged him to become a classical scholar himself, and he later paid a touching tribute to their influence on his work in the preface to his book 'Shame and Necessity' (1993). But by the time he graduated it was the philosophical component of his course that had become his passion. Indeed he later recounted that when he was preparing for his final examinations he neglected the Roman history component to such an extent that he needed part of the time for that particular examination to learn more and arrived twenty-nine minutes late, the latest he could arrive without being deemed to have withdrawn from the examination altogether. His precociousness was subsequently something of an encumbrance. It was often said of him in his later career that he had been the cleverest undergraduate in Oxford and still was. In other respects, of course, his early brilliance was a boon. Immediately after graduating he was elected to a highly prestigious prize fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford. 
Williams spent the first two years of his All Souls fellowship, from 1951 to 1953, in the RAF, after his call-up to national service. During this time he devised various reaction tests for pilots. For a year he also flew Spitfires in Canada. He thoroughly enjoyed the experience. He especially valued the salutary and (for him) unusual experience of wanting to do something well and finding that there were other people who were able to do it far better. The friendship and respect of these people mattered a great deal to him. He claimed much later that this had been the happiest year of his life. 
When he returned to All Souls Williams's early reputation remained undiminished. He attracted the admiration of many major figures in Oxford philosophy, including Isaiah Berlin and Stuart Hampshire (both of whom became lifelong friends), A. J. Ayer, and Gilbert Ryle. Ryle was one of the first people to comment, as many others had occasion to, that Williams understood better what you were going to say than you understood it yourself, seeing all the possible objections and counter-objections before you had finished saying it. 
In many ways these were exciting but daunting times for philosophers in Oxford. Ayer's iconoclastic attack on metaphysics in the 1930s, the new linguistic philosophy of Ryle and J. L. Austin, and the revolutionary work that Ludwig Wittgenstein had recently been producing in Cambridge, of which reports and circulated copies had already reached Oxford, all contributed to the prevailing view that, through the careful analysis of language, not only could most of the great answers to the great questions of philosophy be discounted, but so too could the very legitimacy of the questions. Philosophy appeared to be coming to an end, an end brought about by philosophy itself. For a while, at least until his own counter-revolution, Williams found this heady and liberating; and he never surrendered the mistrust of philosophical system-building that it instilled in him. 
Williams obtained his first teaching post in 1954, as a fellow of New College, Oxford. Shortly afterwards, on 2 July 1955, at the Roman Catholic church of St James, Spanish Place, London, he married Shirley Vivien Teresa Brittain Catlin, ('b'. 1930), daughter of Sir George Edward Gordon Catlin, political scientist, and his wife, the writer Vera Brittain. They had first met as undergraduates, and had met again during his time in the RAF, when he had been on leave in New York and she had been studying at Columbia University. When they became engaged she was a journalist, but later (as Shirley Williams) she went into politics and became a Labour cabinet minister. Williams shared her political interests and enthusiastically supported her in her early political career. He continued to devote time to the service of politics after the break-up of their marriage. Like her, he was originally a member of the Labour Party and later defected to the Social Democratic Party (which she helped to establish). Unlike her -- as Baroness Williams of Crosby she went on to become the leader of the Liberal Democrats in the House of Lords -- he eventually rejoined the Labour Party, which had by then become a very different animal. 
In 1959, after a year's visiting lectureship at the new University College of Ghana, Williams obtained a lectureship at University College, London. He was strongly encouraged to move there by Ayer, who had been professor there for some while. London life was busy and stimulating for the Williamses, whose daughter Rebecca was born in 1961. London was also, by now, a more congenial intellectual environment for Williams. The Oxford philosophy that had initially attracted him so much had begun to pall in his eyes. Its emphasis on linguistic analysis now seemed to him not liberating but constraining, and what he had once found adroit in it he now found shallow. By deliberately separating itself off from the sciences, including the social sciences, and in particular history, it also seemed to him to lose touch with the real human concerns that animate philosophical enquiry in the first place. Williams was keen to re-establish contact with these concerns. His first articles, written around this time, were on traditional philosophical issues such as the nature of the self, as well as on matters of political concern such as democracy and equality. 
After a visiting professorship at Princeton University in 1963, and after Shirley's election as Labour MP for Hitchin in 1964, Williams obtained his first professorship, in 1964, at Bedford College, London. He was still only thirty-four. Three years later, still remarkably young, he moved to the Knightbridge professorship of philosophy at Cambridge University, and to a fellowship at King's College, Cambridge. 
Williams's tenure of the Knightbridge professorship presented him with various new opportunities to pursue academic ideals that were dear to him. He played a significant role in the decision of King's to be among the first all-male colleges in Cambridge to admit women in the early 1970s, for example. But his major concern during this period was the philosophy faculty: how it should be run, who should be appointed to it, and what should be on the syllabus. He devoted a good deal of time and energy to all of these -- and indeed to lecturing, tutoring, and taking part in philosophical discussions. He enjoyed this enormously, as did those who benefited. 
This was an active period for Williams in all sorts of other ways. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1971, and he held visiting positions at universities in Australia and America. From 1968 to 1986 he served as an energetic member of the board of Sadler's Wells Opera (renamed English National Opera in 1974), and for a period he was chairman of the opera committee. Music in general and opera in particular were lifelong passions for him. He published many essays on opera in programme notes, handbooks, and the national press. He was also a familiar voice on the radio during the intervals of opera performances. The long interview he gave in 1999 for Michael Berkeley in the series 'Private Passions' on BBC Radio 3 provided a striking example of his ability to communicate his love and knowledge of music. 
In 1974 Williams's marriage to Shirley was dissolved. Their lives had for a long time been following separate paths. Williams had also fallen in love with Patricia Law Skinner ('b'. 1942), then married to the Cambridge historian Quentin Skinner. She was the daughter of Frederick Charles Dwyer, orthopaedic surgeon. They met when Williams became a syndic of Cambridge University Press, where she was the senior commissioning editor in history and the social sciences. She later became the European editor for Harvard University Press and the publisher for the National Gallery in London. They lived together in Cambridge from 1971 and married on 16 August 1974. The following year saw the birth of their first son, Jacob. The marriage was a very happy one. 
When Williams was appointed to the Knightbridge professorship, he had written relatively little. He had no books to his name (save for 'British Analytical Philosophy', 1966, which he co-edited with Alan Montefiore). But he had already established himself as a brilliant and promising young philosopher, and it was while he was Knightbridge professor that his promise was first substantially realized. During this period his first four major publications appeared, in fairly quick succession. The first of these, published in 1972, was 'Morality'. This was a beautifully concise introduction to moral philosophy, containing what could be seen in retrospect as a compendium, albeit a very broad-brush one, of all of Williams's main ideas in this area. It showed his growing impatience with the Oxford-inspired submersion in second-order linguistic debates about such issues as whether telling someone 'It was reprehensible of you to do that' involved making a genuine assertion. 'Most moral philosophy at most times has been... boring', Williams wrote in his preface, but 'contemporary moral philosophy has found an original way of being boring, which is by not discussing moral issues at all' (p. 9). Towards the end of the book he turned his attention to the idea of authentic self-expression, quoting a phrase from D. H. Lawrence: 'Find your deepest impulse, and follow that' (p. 93). This became a guiding concern of his entire philosophical career. 
In 1973 Williams brought out his first collection of essays, 'Problems of the Self'. This included his seminal essays on personal identity, in which he attacked traditional conceptions of the 'soul'. That same year he published 'Utilitarianism: For and Against', with J. J. C. Smart. In the first part of this book Smart defended utilitarianism; in the second part Williams attacked it. This was part of a lifelong crusade to overturn what he saw as a deeply pernicious influence in modern moral thought. With great sensitivity and force, he exposed utilitarianism's failure not only to acknowledge values other than happiness but to make sense of happiness itself. 

'Descartes', on the great seventeenth-century philosopher and scientist Rene Descartes, was published in 1978. This book demonstrated Williams's deep respect for science, which he argued was capable of achieving what he called an 'absolute conception of reality'. But it also gave early hints of his equally deep hostility to scientism, the application of scientific method in philosophy itself. 
Williams played a significant role in public life, spanning thirty-five years and including service on several commissions. All of these commissions involved the critical and complex balance between, on the one hand, liberal ideals of equality, fairness, freedom, and toleration and, on the other hand, the various legal, political, and economic realities of public policy making. It was in 1965, during his time in London, that Williams had been appointed to his first public commission, the public schools commission, on which he served until 1970. Two more commissions followed in the 1970s: from 1976 to 1978 he was a member of the royal commission on gambling, and from 1977 to 1979 he chaired the committee on obscenity and film censorship, set up by Harold Wilson's government. The latter reported in 1979, and Williams wrote most of the report himself -- having first succeeded in reconciling the views of the twelve very disparate members of the committee, in light of the evidence and opinions of many different pressure groups and individuals. The committee took as its guiding principle that no conduct should be prohibited unless it could be shown to cause harm, though restrictions could be imposed on conduct which might cause offence to reasonable people. It notably rejected as misconceived the 'public good defence' under the 'Obscene Publications Act', whereby a work can be acquitted if it has serious merit of, say, an aesthetic or scientific kind; and it unanimously concluded that there were no grounds for suppressing pornography beyond the protection of children. The report did not endear Williams to Margaret Thatcher, whose government effectively shelved it. But many of its specific recommendations were welcomed and implemented by the police, lawyers, and local authorities in Britain, as well as being discussed by politicians and arts organizations elsewhere. 
In 1979 Williams was elected provost of King's College, Cambridge. The college flourished under him. It retained its progressive reputation, admitting many more undergraduates from the state sector than was the norm among Cambridge colleges. In 1983 it took the lead among colleges in abolishing entrance awards which, because they rewarded achievement rather than potential, deterred applications from less successful schools. The college also retained its reputation for academic distinction. It had an unusually large number of research fellowships. This was at a time when the government gave little sign of valuing research, but Williams was determined that the college should keep the torch burning. He engaged the fellowship as a whole in choosing the subjects for these research fellowships, and he was himself very active in making appointments to them. 
This was another happy and fulfilling period for Williams and his family. He and Patricia brought style, culture, and a real love of scholarship to King's, and 1980 saw the birth of their second son, Jonathan. During this period Williams also received a number of distinctions: honorary doctorates from Dublin and Aberdeen universities in 1981 and 1987 respectively; foreign honorary membership of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1983; and honorary fellowships of Balliol College, Oxford, and Bedford College, London, in 1984 and 1987 respectively. From 1984 to 1987 he was first a syndic and later the chairman of the Fitzwilliam Museum, another outlet for his great interest in the arts. From 1985 to 1986 he made a number of short academic visits to various places in Latin America, and in 1986 he was visiting professor at the University of California in Berkeley. In 1988 he wrote and presented the television series 'What is Truth?' on Channel 4. 
When Williams became provost he resigned his professorship. Combining research with his new administrative role, rather than with the teaching that he had been doing for so long, proved conducive to his own writing; in particular it enabled him to write somewhat more freely. He renewed his interest in the classics, deepened his appreciation of philosophers on whom he had hitherto spent little time -- especially Nietzsche -- and expanded the historical and literary range of his work. During his time as provost, as well as co-editing 'Utilitarianism and Beyond' with the economist Amartya Sen in 1982, he had two more major publications. 
The first was 'Moral Luck', Williams's second collection of essays, which also came out in 1982. The title essay in particular showed that his opposition to utilitarianism was matched by an opposition to its apparent polar opposite, Kantianism, according to which doing one's duty counts for more than being happy. Both utilitarianism and Kantianism presuppose a way of thinking about ethics whereby ethics is ultimately concerned with what is purely voluntary and 'moral luck' is an oxymoron. Williams challenged this way of thinking. 
In 1985 Williams published 'Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy'. This was probably his greatest work and certainly the 'locus classicus' for his ideas in moral philosophy. In this book he dubbed the way of thinking presupposed by both utilitarianism and Kantianism (as indeed by many other dominant 'isms' in moral philosophy) 'morality, the peculiar institution', and continued his attack on it. He also rejected its principal classical rival, Aristotelianism, arguing that an Aristotelian ethic of well-being rested on a teleology that could no longer be taken seriously. Furthermore, he rejected the possibility of any other theoretical foundations for ethics. One complaint sometimes levelled against Williams's work was that it was negative. Certain critics saw this book as vindication for that complaint. Williams was unbowed. He simply refused to allow philosophical system-building to eclipse the subtlety and variety of human ethical experience. 
In 1988 Williams resigned as provost of King's and took up the post of Monroe Deutsch professor of philosophy at the University of California in Berkeley. His departure to the United States was widely perceived as a significant part of Britain's 1980s 'brain drain'. Certainly he used it as an opportunity to express disenchantment with what he saw as the philistine contempt of the Thatcher government for British universities, though he later came to regret that he had left so publicly -- not least because of how soon, for entirely independent personal reasons, he returned. Several east coast American universities had wooed him, but Williams chose Berkeley because his recent visit there had been so idyllic and it offered him more of a change from the world of Oxbridge. 
Life in Berkeley was enjoyable and challenging, both intellectually and socially. But, although he loved America and had always felt at home there, Williams found the realities of emigration, at a comparatively late stage in both his and his family's life, more complicated than he expected. In particular he missed the instinctive understanding of the nuances and details of politics which he could take for granted in Britain. He once expressed this by saying that he would never know anything about any American politician to compare with his knowledge that Ken Livingstone, Labour MP and later mayor of London, had once kept newts. So it was that in 1990 he returned to Britain, under great pressure from Oxford University to take up the White's professorship of moral philosophy there. He simultaneously became a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Nevertheless he maintained his connections with the United States, and more particularly with Berkeley, where he retained his professorship until the end of his life, and where he continued to spend part of each year until illness prevented him. In the early to mid-1990s he also had visiting positions at several other American universities. Later he made several short academic visits to Europe. Honours continued to flow: in 1993 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts; and in 1995 he received an honorary doctorate from Keele University. From 1993 to 1994 he was a member of the Commission on Social Justice. 
In 1989, while at Berkeley, Williams had given the Sather classical lectures, having been invited several years earlier to do so and having thereby achieved one of the greatest distinctions in classical studies -- an honour which made him, as a philosopher, particularly proud. These lectures were published in 1993 as 'Shame and Necessity'. Williams used them to explore various currents in ancient Greek thought, finding compelling alternatives there to much of what he deplored in modern thought. In 1995 he brought out his third collection of essays, 'Making Sense of Humanity', and contributed a series of replies to the essays in a Festschrift for him edited by J. E. J. Altham and Ross Harrison entitled 'World, Mind, and Ethics'. 
After his retirement from the White's professorship in 1997, Williams was re-elected a fellow of All Souls College, bringing his academic appointments full circle. There were further honours: honorary doctorates from the universities of Chicago, Yale, Cambridge, and Harvard; and, in 1999, a knighthood. In the late 1990s he had further visiting positions in Europe, and from 1997 to 2000 he was a member of the independent inquiry into the 'Misuse of Drugs Act' 1971 (which, given that he had already served on commissions on public schools, gambling, and pornography, famously prompted him to quip, 'I did all the major vices'). 
Two more books were published before Williams died, and four collections of essays shortly after his death. 'Plato' came out in 1998: this was a clear, lively introduction to Platonic thought and, at less than fifty pages, a 'tour de force'. 'Truth and Truthfulness' came out in 2002 and constituted an ambitious Nietzschean study of the virtues of accuracy and sincerity, combined with an attack on 'the deniers' -- thinkers such as Jacques Derrida and Richard Rorty who denied the very possibility of truth, at least as traditionally conceived. Nietzsche had long been a significant influence on Williams, but it was in this book that the influence was most explicit. His friend Michael Tanner recalled how Williams had reproached him in the 1960s for studying Nietzsche and thereby 'wasting time over rubbish that Joad could have refuted'. Williams was evidently capable of changing his mind. 'Truth and Truthfulness' was written in the midst of Williams's final illness. He had been diagnosed as having cancer in 1999, and the treatment itself had had drastic effects. He was nevertheless determined to finish his book. Not only did he do so, albeit more hurriedly than he would have wished, but he lived long enough to enjoy its enthusiastic reception. 
The four posthumous collections, prepared by others, included three more collections of philosophical essays and a collection of his essays on opera. 'In the Beginning Was the Deed', published in 2005, consisted of material on political thought which was mostly previously unpublished and which he had been intending to weave together into a book. 'The Sense of the Past', published in 2006 (a collection on which he himself had done preparatory work), consisted of all his essays in the history of philosophy. 'Philosophy as a Humanistic Discipline', likewise published in 2006, served to complete the philosophical set. 'On Opera' was published later the same year. 
Williams died on 10 June 2003 during a brief holiday in Rome. The immediate cause of death was heart failure. He was cremated in Rome some time later. He was survived by his wife Patricia and his three children. 
Williams was a charismatic figure. He was renowned for his wit, erudition, brilliance, and devastating speed in discussion. These, together with his great zest and gaiety, made him a commanding presence in any social gathering. He loved an audience. Yet he was also in many ways a private man, devoted to his family and passionate about his work. He delighted in the variety of human experience. This in turn accounts for one of the most dominant strains in his work: his total impatience with all attempts, particularly the attempts of moral philosophers, to simplify life's complexity. 
Williams's work lies within the 'analytical' tradition of philosophy, whose fundamental aim is clarity of understanding and whose fundamental methodological tool is conceptual analysis. Although he was never a vigorous apologist for this tradition, he always maintained the standards of clarity and rigour which it prizes. Perhaps his greatest philosophical legacy was to show how it is possible to write sensitively about matters of importance, without sacrificing those standards yet without doing violence to the complexity of the matters either. 
Williams described himself as a pessimist. He thought that the truth was ultimately unconsoling; and he thought that one of the greatest tasks confronting all of us, not just philosophers, was to find ways of making sense of things which would enable us to face the truth without being broken by it. The titles of two of his anthologies capture well the contribution which he hoped and believed philosophy could make to this. Philosophy, for Williams, was a fundamentally humanistic discipline: it could help us to make sense of things by helping us to make sense, in particular, of humanity. Williams not only showed by example how it could do this; he argued persistently, passionately, and persuasively that it could do no more and should do no less. 


@@@@@


doc= 90067


Williams, Philip James Stradling (1939-2003), physicist and politician, was born on 11 January 1939 at the Maternity Home, Tredegar, Monmouthshire, the second of the three children of (William) Glyndwr Williams (1897-1972), schoolmaster, and his wife, (Kezia) Morfydd, 'nee' Davies (1906-1989), a teacher. His parents were then living at 6 Wood Street, Bargoed, a mining town dominated by an enormous coal-tip, on the border between Monmouthshire and Glamorgan, and it was in this ravaged but densely populated area, a cradle of the industrial revolution and at the very heart of the south Wales coalfield, that Williams was brought up. 
Williams's academic career began at Lewis School, Pengam, Glamorgan, from where he went to Clare College, Cambridge, to read natural sciences, winning the Greene cup and the Murgoci prize for physics. A brilliant student, and encouraged by an uncle, R. M. Davies, who was professor of physics at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, he stayed on at Cambridge for seven years after graduating, first doing research into synchrotron radiation in quasars (quasi-stellar objects) at the Cavendish Laboratory (obtaining his PhD in 1964) and then as a university demonstrator and fellow of Clare College. On 9 June 1962 he married Ann Green ('b'. 1941), a teacher and artist, and daughter of Thomas Henry Green, a builder's foreman; they had a son and daughter. They returned to Wales in 1967 when Williams took up a post as lecturer in the physics department at Aberystwyth; he was promoted reader in 1986 and became professor of solar terrestrial physics in 1991. He was an authority on incoherent scatter radar studies of the upper atmosphere and the complex relationship between the sun and the earth, his main contribution being in pioneering the study of solar wind using interplanetary scintillations. He played a leading role in getting Britain to join the European Incoherent Scatter Facility, of which he was scientific director in 1980-82. 
Having joined the Labour Party at the age of sixteen, an occasion made all the more memorable by Aneurin Bevan's having signed his copy of Marx's 'Capital', Williams had played an active part in student politics at Cambridge, and was joint author of 'Socialism for Tomorrow', a manifesto published by 'Socialist Commentary' which argued in favour of decentralizing power from London to the regions and nations of Britain. He had a fund of anecdotes illustrating the mutual incomprehension that dogged relations between Cambridge left-wingers from more privileged backgrounds and those who, like himself, were rooted in socialism as lived by the people of the south Wales valleys. 
It was the Labour Party's failure to get to grips with the blight settling on his country during the 1950s, a meeting with the Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell, whom he found less than inspiring, and the Nevin report of 1957, which showed that taxes raised in Wales exceeded the government's expenditure in Wales, that drove Williams out of Labour's ranks and into the arms of Plaid Cymru in 1961. He described his political odyssey in his book 'A Voice from the Valleys' (1981), a rigorous account of radical politics in Wales and a disarmingly forthright statement of his own views. He put his formidable intellectual gifts into thinking not only about what Plaid Cymru should adopt as its economic policies but also, as the momentum for self-government gathered pace in Wales, what kind of democratically elected body was needed to address the problems of a country suffering the worst effects of post-industrialism. 
Dr Phil, as he was widely known, threw himself into the hurly-burly of political life with great verve and relish. He stood in Plaid Cymru's name at six elections for the Westminster parliament, all in the Caerphilly constituency, where this boyishly affable, gregarious, and talkative man enjoyed a great deal of grass-roots support. At the by-election of July 1968, at the age of twenty-nine, he nearly unseated the Labour candidate with some 40 per cent of the votes cast, a swing of 29 per cent, at the time the second-largest ever recorded in a United Kingdom election. It was this close shave for Labour in its heartlands, together with Plaid Cymru's victory at Carmarthen in 1966 and a near-miss in Rhondda in 1967, that concentrated the Labour Party's mind on the case for a more effective measure of administrative devolution than Wales had hitherto enjoyed, a process that eventually led to a referendum in 1997 and the creation of a national assembly two years later. 
Williams's major contribution to the development of Plaid Cymru's policies was made in 'An Economic Plan for Wales' (1970), which he wrote with Dafydd Wigley, the party's future leader, and in 'The Welsh Budget' (1998), in which he demonstrated that Wales, far from being subsidized by England, was more than paying its way in the economy of the United Kingdom. These publications, widely circulated and discussed at the highest levels, were typical of his thinking: well informed and meticulously illustrated, strictly analytical, and rich in the ideas sparked by his deeply held conviction that Wales would become a prosperous, progressive society when freed from the baleful grasp of London control. He served his party as vice-president and national chair (1970-76), in which capacities he did much to promote its interests in the English-speaking parts of the country, which were always nearest his heart; he later also held discussions with the Green Party that led to the election of the Plaid Cymru candidate in Ceredigion. 
Williams had the satisfaction of being elected as a list candidate for the south-east region at the first election for the national assembly in 1999 and the following year was voted in a Channel 4 poll as Welsh politician of the year for his work on the Objective One European funding programme. His decision not to stand for election to the assembly for a second term, largely because after the minority Labour administration went into coalition with the Liberal Democrats there was no longer any genuine dialogue with the opposition in the shape of Plaid Cymru, allowed him to return to his career as a scientist, notably with an astronomy project in the Arctic, but caused dismay across the political spectrum, since he was one of the few figures of national stature to sit in the fledgeling body situated in Cardiff Bay. 
For relaxation, Williams enjoyed hill-walking, reading history and poetry, and jazz (he played alto saxophone). He suffered a heart attack on 10 June 2003, and was pronounced dead at the University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, later that day. His death meant the loss to Plaid Cymru of an extraordinarily able strategist and one of its most engaging personalities. He was survived by his wife, Ann, and their two children. 
In 'The Psychology of Distance' (2003), published posthumously, Williams examined the role of the political parties in making the Welsh assembly work and analysed the economic and social ills besetting contemporary Wales, addressing many of the tensions, contradictions, and paradoxes which characterized the nation's life and making a brave attempt to resolve them. The breadth and detail of his knowledge, and his passionate advocacy of the cause of full Welsh self-government, were also displayed in 'The Assembly Years, 1999-2003', a selection of the speeches he made during plenary sessions in the national assembly, which was published by Plaid Cymru in 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 90077


Erskine, Sir George, of Innerteil, Lord Innerteil (c.1567-1646), judge and supposed alchemist, was the third son of Sir Alexander Erskine ('c'.1521-1588x92) of Gogar, Stirlingshire, and Margaret Home (died in or after 1586), daughter of George Home, fourth Lord Home; his eldest brother, Alexander, died in 1578, and his second brother, Thomas Erskine (1566-1639), was later created Viscount Fentoun and earl of Kellie. Sir Alexander had guardianship of James VI within Stirling Castle, and George, like Thomas, was educated with the young king and their cousin, John Erskine (c.1562-1634), later eighteenth or second earl of Mar, by George Buchanan and Peter Young. It is likely that Erskine then attended university, since in 1602 he was designated Master George Erskine of Boquhan, Stirlingshire, the title 'master' suggesting that he was a graduate. 
In the 1590s Erskine was opposed to the Catholic grouping surrounding George Gordon, sixth earl of Huntly. By 1598 he was described by George Nicholson, an English representative in Scotland, not only as 'a gentleman of good account' but also as 'the chief guider' of Huntly's young political enemy, Archibald Campbell, seventh earl of Argyll ('CSP Scottish', 13/1.203-4); writing to Robert Cecil in 1601 Nicholson stressed several times (and apparently approvingly) that Erskine had the power of veto over Argyll's decisions. Some time between 1602 and 1606 Erskine married Isobel Brown (died 1640), widow of Patrick Murray of Gaynes; they had two surviving daughters, Anna or Anne and Margaret. By 2 August 1611 he had been knighted. A few months later he acquired the lands of Invertiel, Fife, which in 1618 were incorporated into the barony of Invertiel, known then as Innerteil. 
In 1613 Erskine was a justice of the peace for the county of Fife. Four years later he was admitted as an ordinary lord of the court of session, in place of Sir James Wemyss of Bogie. There is no indication that he was qualified in law, and he does not appear in the list of advocates, but at that time it was not unusual for Scottish judges to have no formal legal education. Admitted as a privy councillor in 1618, he attended the council regularly and was appointed to several committees and commissions. His brother Viscount Fentoun, resident at court, did his best to ensure that Erskine remained in the king's favour. 
Although Erskine's commitment to reformed protestantism persisted to the extent that in 1618 he disobeyed King James's order that churchgoers should kneel to receive communion, he maintained his connection with Argyll, who by this time was exhibiting increasing sympathy for Catholicism. Erskine had stood 'cautioner' or guarantor for the earl in great sums of money, advanced to cover the latter's mounting debts. When, in the same year, Argyll fled to the continent and announced his formal conversion to Rome, Erskine was given the life-rent of the escheat or forfeiture of the earl's estate. He was also appointed justice-general, the chief criminal judge in Scotland -- an office previously held by the earls and now declared void. He remained an active privy councillor until 1626, when Charles I decreed that there should be no common membership of the council and the court of session, and remained a judge until his death. According to Lord Hailes he made a collection of decisions of the court of session, but these have not survived. 
Erskine's wife's preference for Reformed protestantism continued into the 1630s, when she was among several women who gave financial support to the popular nonconforming preacher John Livingstone (1603-1672). However, Erskine himself at first refused to sign the national covenant of 1638, changing his mind only with visible reluctance. Lady Innertiel died on 6 August 1640 in the parish of Kinghorn, Fife. In 1645 Erskine sold his lands to his daughters, reserving to himself the life-rent. They were living at his death in February or March 1646. Anna, who had married in October 1627 John Melville, third Lord Melville (died 1643), was the mother of George Melville, fourth Lord Melville and later first earl of Melville. Margaret had married on 25 July 1629 Sir John Mackenzie (died 1654) of Tarbat, with whom she acted as executor to her father in 1654; she married as her second husband in 1661 Sir James Foulis (d. 1688) of Colinton. 
In June 1707 Margaret's son George Mackenzie (1630-1714), first earl of Cromarty, donated his grandfather's collection of alchemical and other manuscripts to the College of Physicians in Edinburgh. The earl's comments on that occasion served to establish Erskine's reputation as a notable alchemist. He was, said his grandson, 'a great student in the naturale philosophy, evn to considerable advancement in the Hermetic Schoole & had a correspondence in very remote parts wt the sonnes of Hermes' (McCallum, 214). The agent of this, claimed Cromarty, was one Dr Politius, a Pole or Silesian acting for the Rosicrucians of Hesse. No letters from Politius or the Hessian group survive among Erskine's manuscripts, but the former has recently been tentatively identified as Dr Jodocus Pellitius (Polytius) of Hamburg, court physician to Duke Heinrich Julius of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel (1564-1613), who had an important alchemical library and an interest in cabbalist literature, and whose wife was King James's sister-in-law. Whether and how Erskine made contact with these men remains a matter of conjecture, but even though his collection was clearly added to after his death, there seems little doubt that he accumulated a rich and important selection of alchemical manuscripts, some endorsed with his signature. While the conclusion of his 1870s biographer that he was 'one of Scotland's outstanding alchemists' (McCallum, 214) now looks premature, annotations in his hand testify to his close interest in some of those manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 90080


Box, Henry (1585-1662), educational benefactor, was born on 25 July 1585, the second son of Thomas Box ('bap'. 1552), fuller and farmer of Witney, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Rankell; he had at least two brothers and two sisters. The Box family had been settled in Witney by about 1450. Both Henry's grandfathers were substantial clothiers, while his father earned $100 per annum from dressing cloth at a mill that he built in the 1580s. 
Henry Box matriculated as a plebeian from Oriel College, Oxford, on 24 October 1600. Although he did not graduate, he showed his loyalty to his college in 1641 when he gave communion plate to its newly rebuilt chapel. In 1604 he was apprenticed to the London Grocers' Company, in which his kinsmen had served as master and warden under Elizabeth I. Having become free of the company in 1612 he was elected to its livery in 1621 and to its court in 1638. Box married twice. His first wife was the daughter of one Thompson: they had one daughter, Sarah, who married a Leghorn merchant. Henry's second wife, whom he had married by 1623, was 
Box was by trade a druggist, 'one of the best in all Europe', Samuel Hartlib noted in 1649; the following year he recorded that Box had a good stock of Virginia snakeroot (Hartlib papers, 28/1/2B). Box's clientele went beyond Hartlib's reforming circle. In 1649 the agent of Edward Conway, second Viscount Conway, wrote to his master of a three-year-old bill owed to Box. His business involved strong links with Norwich, where at the time of his death he owned a warehouse, and he also had important connections with Amsterdam, dealing in goods that, as he explained in 1651, 'are here much wanting both in the use of Phisick and Surgery' (BL, Add. MS 34326, fol. 14'r'). He was describing a consignment of commodities valued at almost $3000, one that witnesses both to the scale of Box's dealings and to the range of his imports: as well as drugs, he was importing verdigris worth $533, while 'Dutch hard barley' made up almost half the value of the cargo (ibid., fol. 15'r'). It also included clover seed worth $100, a highly profitable import at a time when demand from agricultural improvers, stimulated by the Hartlib circle's propaganda, was outrunning supply. 
Box was elected master of the Grocers' Company on 15 July 1640 but declined to serve for a fine of 100 marks, citing 'many infirmities' (Wales and Hartley, 2.426). He was as reluctant to serve in prominent civic offices. In 1639 he paid a fine to avoid serving as sheriff of London and Middlesex, and was equally unwilling when elected alderman of Bridge Within ward on 14 March 1650. He was committed to Newgate a week later for refusing to accept the office. When he was finally sworn on 15 August, he was discharged the same day upon a fine of $500. It is not clear how far these evasions of office were a matter of political prudence, or indeed, by 1650, alienation from the regime. A similar uncertainty attaches to the permission he received from the council of state in 1651 to send $25 to a Scottish colonel captured at the battle of Worcester and imprisoned in Windsor Castle. 
Box died, probably at Hammersmith, in 1662, between 13 February, when he made his will, and 7 July, when his widow, appointed sole executor, proved it. As he wished, he was buried in Witney church. The inventory of his house at Hammersmith valued his personal estate at $646 13's'. He had evidently not entirely withdrawn from his business: the inventory noted a warehouse, and in a loft hartshorn worth $100. By the time of his death he held property in London, Middlesex, Berkshire, Norfolk, and in Oxfordshire, where he leased half the fulling mill built by his father in Witney and, from September 1661, the manor of Dean and Chalford. 
Box's will included a range of charitable gifts: he left $20 to the poor of Witney and $10 to those of Hammersmith and $30 to the parish of St Mary Colechurch, and he gave the Grocers' Company $100, which was to be lent interest-free in succession to young freemen who were druggists, with preference to those who had been servants to Box or his late master. His most significant benefaction, however, was the grammar school that he endowed at Witney. In 1660 he built a schoolhouse on a site that he had bought adjoining the rectory. He had also probably acquired many of the books that became the core of the school's impressive library by the time of his death. His inventory records his ownership of '12 Tomes of the new translated bibles in the Orientall Tongues', suggesting that he possessed two copies of Brian Walton's six-volume polyglot 'Bible' (1654-7), one of which became part of the school library (TNA: PRO, PROB 4/13489). 
Box died before he could finish setting up the school, but he left an endowment of $50 per annum for its maintenance, and committed the school to the charge of his widow. In 1663 Mary Box procured an act of parliament establishing the school as the Witney Free Grammar School, with the four wardens of the Grocers' Company being appointed its governors and the provost and four senior fellows of Oriel College its visitors. However, Mary's influence over the school remained extensive. By the act she retained full control over the school, and in accordance with Henry's expressed wishes was authorized to draw up the school's statutes, which she signed in December 1674, and which were so detailed as to ordain the weekly dusting of the books in the library. To the master and usher who were to teach 'the originall and learned languages' (Latin, Greek, and, in theory, Hebrew) she added a master to teach the scholars to write and cast accounts, funded from an additional rent-charge of $13 per annum (Fleming, 4). She seems to have attended the annual meetings on the anniversary of Henry's birth when the Oriel fellows visited the school. On such days her statutes required that the boys were to pray for both Henry and herself as the school's founders. 
Mary Box's statutes provided for thirty foundation scholars, from the descendants of Henry Box or from the town or outlying hamlets of Witney, for whom the entrance fee was 2's'. 6died (reduced to 1's'. where the parents were poor). The master and usher could take on a larger number of non-foundation scholars, with whom they negotiated the fees: early pupils included one of Henry and Mary's grandsons. Mary Box also shaped the school through her choice of the first two masters of the school. Both were strong loyalist Anglicans of academic distinction: Francis Gregory, formerly master of Woodstock School and the author of a Greek-Latin dictionary, and Edward Hinton, later master of Kilkenny College. 
Mary Box remained an active manager of the family property. She renegotiated several of Henry's leases as they came due and invested heavily in restocking the demesne at Dean and Chalford. She bought land in Twickenham, Middlesex, and the manor and advowson of Iping, Sussex. For some years of her widowhood she lived in Teddington, Middlesex, with or near her daughter Alice, but by the time that she made her will on 1 June 1678 she was living in London. She died in December 1679 and was buried beside her husband in Witney church. Her third-born but only surviving son, Sir Ralph Box (1627-1694), followed his father as a druggist and was three times warden of the Grocers' Company. In the early 1680s he was caught up in the contest for the control of London between the crown and its whig adversaries, culminating in a bitterly fought election to the shrievalty in 1682. He and his tory colleague were declared the winners, but Box felt unable to continue and withdrew. He had necessarily been involved in securing the future of Witney school, but directed his own beneficence to the church and the City, contributing to the rebuilding of St Mildred Poultry after the great fire, and in his will making substantial bequests to Christ's Hospital, St Thomas's Hospital, Bridewell, and Bedlam (Bethlem Hospital). 
The school founded by Sir Ralph's parents still flourishes. In 1969, by now the Witney grammar and technical school, it was reorganized and renamed as the Henry Box comprehensive school. The original schoolhouse is now the Mary Box building. 


@@@@@


doc= 90081


Borlase, Sir William (c.1562-1629), politician and benefactor, was the only son of John Borlase (died 1593) and his wife, Anne (died 1622), daughter of Sir Robert Lytton of Knebworth, Hertfordshire. Although the family of Borlase or Burlace was Cornish in origin William's paternal grandfather, Edward, had prospered as a London mercer, and also through his three marriages; the children of these included two William Borlases, sons of his second and third marriages, who need to be distinguished from the subject of this article. Edward's first marriage, to Pernel, the daughter of Chief Justice Sir John Baldwin, enabled John, as their eldest son, to inherit estates at Nether Upton and Preston Bissett from his father-in-law, and thus to establish the Borlases among the leading gentry families of Buckinghamshire. Twice appointed sheriff for that county, in 1567 and 1588, John also acquired the manor of Little Marlow, a fifth share at a time, starting in 1561, and was thus able to transmit the whole of it to William as his heir. 
Little is known of William Borlase's early life or education, except that he was admitted to Gray's Inn on 21 October 1584. Following his father's death he acted quickly to extend and consolidate his holdings, acquiring a reversion upon the manor of Ludgershall in 1593. He disposed of Preston Bissett in 1594, and the following year bought property in the parish of Medmenham, just a few miles from his estate at Little Marlow, including the manor of Medmenham and what became the family seat at Bockmer or Bockmore. In 1601 he served as sheriff of Buckinghamshire, and his status was confirmed on 28 June 1603 when he was knighted by James I. 
By 1594 William Borlase had reinforced his position among the Buckinghamshire gentry by his marriage to Mary (died 1625), daughter of Nicholas Backhouse, whose recent forebears, like William's own, had been prominent London merchants before establishing themselves as Buckinghamshire landowners during the second half of the sixteenth century. The alliance of the two families was a double one, for William's sister Elizabeth married Mary's brother Samuel. There are hints that William Borlase himself had overseas trading interests, perhaps through connections with the Merchant Adventurers. In August 1604 John Chamberlain recorded that it had been 'heard lately from Sir Will: Borlas that the Hollanders went about to intercept him between the ship and shoare' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 197). An assiduous newshound and letter writer, Chamberlain seems for some years to have made a habit during July and August of staying with Sir William and his Buckinghamshire connections, and they, in their turn, sometimes went to London in the autumn. Alluding to their imminent arrival in October 1608, Chamberlain assured his correspondent Dudley Carleton that 'you may be sure to meet with a whole knot of goode fellowship' (ibid., 266). 
Chamberlain clearly counted Borlase among his friends. He actively assisted Sir William in dealing with the latter's eldest son, also William, who attended Magdalen College, Oxford, where in August 1605 he appeared as a scholarly disputant in a play performed before King James. After taking his degree he embarked on a European tour with the son of Sir Rowland Lytton, his kinsman by marriage, but the two ventured only as far as La Rochelle before retreating to Blois, where they remained 'at pawne for lacke of money, whereby their friends are nothing pleased having furnished them very sufficiently' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 272). With the authority of the ailing Sir Rowland, Chamberlain conferred with Sir William Borlase and in January 1609 arranged for the safe return of the two young men. Another eminent acquaintance was Ben Jonson. Sir William appears to have taken up painting as a hobby, producing a portrait of Jonson, which he sent to the playwright with a verse. It began '
To paint thy Worth, if rightly I did know it, 

And were the best painter halfe like thee, a Poet, 

Ben, I would shew it 

' Jonson was tactful enough not to comment on these lines, and penned instead an affectionate verse reply, concluding: '
Yet when of friendship I would draw the face, 

A letter'd mind, and a large heart would place 

To all posteritie; I will write Burlase. 
('Ben Jonson', 8.226-7)' Sir William Borlase was a conscientious, if hardly distinguished, MP, who shared many of the concerns of his fellow members. On 21 March 1610 he moved to give higher priority to a complaint against purveyance, and on 7 July following he was among the twenty MPs who transmitted ecclesiastical and temporal grievances to the king. Landowners worried that any agreement to end purveyance might remain legally vulnerable to assertions of the royal prerogative, and it seems possible that Sir William's own experience may have hardened his attitude on the issue. He (and others) found themselves in trouble in 1610 for refusing to compound with the crown over allegedly defective property titles in Barnwood Forest, Buckinghamshire (a similar dispute over lands in Windsor Forest was settled in November 1619). In 1614 Sir William was returned as one of the knights of the shire for Buckinghamshire. In the parliament's single brief session he sat on the committee for privileges, and was named to a delegation to attend a joint conference with the Lords. 
By this time John Chamberlain's health had deteriorated to the extent that he seldom visited Little Marlow. Five years later, in July 1619, he reported that Borlase himself was unwell, afflicted by the stone. Sir William's second son, Henry, of the Middle Temple, who was MP for Aylesbury in 1621 and for Marlow in 1624, died in the latter year of unknown causes. His father was deeply affected by this loss, which was soon followed by that of his wife, after a long illness; she was buried on 18 July 1625 in Little Marlow church. Nevertheless Sir William remained active in county affairs, and in the autumn of that year received a letter from the duke of Buckingham enclosing council instructions for the disarming of Roman Catholic recusants. He was not afraid to voice opposition to what he perceived as injustices, for instance to the forced loan of 1626. His old friend John Chamberlain died in March 1628, leaving Borlase a gold ring. 
Four years earlier, in 1624, Borlase had begun the construction of the school for which he is remembered. Perhaps the impetus came from personal sorrow, for an inscription on the porch of the original schoolhouse (which survives on the north side of West Street, Little Marlow) records it as having been built in memory of 'my good son'. It seems that during the rest of his life Sir William devoted much time and effort to the construction, organization, and endowment of the school, which appropriately bears his name. Through gifts and bequests he provided it with a generous yearly income of $58 from estates in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire; governors were appointed from among the townsmen of Great and Little Marlow and from Medmenham. The school was to educate boys between the ages of ten and fourteen whose parents, or other relations, had not the means to pay for their tuition. Primers and psalters, and two reams of paper per annum, were to be provided for each pupil. The schoolmaster, who was to have a salary of $12, more than many beneficed clergy, and to be provided with a house and garden, was to take twenty-four boys and teach them to read, write, and do sums; on their becoming competent in these skills, 'which I conceive in about 2 years they will be ready to doe' ('VCH Buckinghamshire', 2.214), six of the most able were to be awarded $2 per annum apiece to secure their apprenticeship in an appropriate trade, along with a blue cap and gown as a mark of their 'graduation'. Vacancies were to be filled promptly by the governors, so that the number of students remained at twenty-four. 
Sir William Borlase died on 4 September 1629, probably at Little Marlow, and was buried on the 10th in Little Marlow church, where he had requested interment 'neere my late deare and loveinge wife' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/156, fol. 282'v'). His boys' school had been functioning for at least a year, for Borlase remembered the master in his will, completed on 29 August 1628 and proved on 20 November 1629. It contained further charitable provisions, most notably for a dwelling place and school for twenty 'weomen children' of Great Marlow. The girls, who were to be selected by the governors from nominations submitted by the churchwardens and overseers, were to be taught spinning, knitting, and lacemaking. This endowment also provided for a workhouse for Great and Little Marlow, together with Medmenham. Its overseer was 'to whip all such offenders' as the petty constables or other officers should bring to him and to 'keep for four days in his house of correction any rogue or vagabond taken within the town or parish of Great and Little Marlow and Medmenham' (Plaisted, 114). 
Although Sir William clearly thought that the poor needed discipline as well as charity, he was generous to his own servants and his affection for 'my good sonne' and his grandchildren is evident. In his will he commented that: 'I give nothing to my grandsonnes and little to my granddaughters by this will because I leave it wholly to bee disposed and done by my sonne of whose true care to his Children (I thanke god) I have just cause to rely & bee confident. (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/156, fol. 283'v')' His principal estates in Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire passed to his eldest son, William, knighted by King James in 1617, who married Amy, daughter of Sir Francis Popham of Littlecote, Wiltshire, and was MP for Wycombe in 1627 and 1628. The second Sir William died in 1630, only a year after his father, and was succeeded by his own eldest son, John (1619-1672), who also sat in the House of Commons, representing Great Marlow in April 1640 and Corfe Castle from January 1641 until he was disabled in March 1644 following his departure to the king at Oxford. The last of Sir William's direct male descendants died in 1689, but his foundation continued as an elementary charity school until 1880, when it was reorganized under the 'Endowed Schools Acts', to reopen in the following year as a grammar school. Sir William's schoolhouse survives at the core of what is now a voluntary-aided co-educational grammar school serving Marlow and the surrounding area. 


@@@@@


doc= 90087


Frost, Thomas (1821-1908), radical writer, was born at Croydon, Surrey, on 16 December 1821, the son (he had two sisters and a brother) of William Frost (1785/6-1872), a tailor who read Cobbett's 'Register' and took part in the 'Reform Bill' agitation, and his wife, Martha (1789/90-1875). Frost was the product of a rich and complex local culture. He had little formal education, only attending day school (at Hollingbourne House, Norwood) until the age of eleven, but the tools of literacy and the imagination were part of the fabric of his everyday life. His childhood was peopled by storytellers of all kinds, especially gypsies, smugglers, and circus performers, and these influences as well as the periodicals and prints in his maternal grandmother's cottage inspired much of his later work. 
Frost became an apprentice in his cousin's printing office in 1836 and the year after he attended an Owenite meeting at Norwood. However, as he later recalled in his first volume of autobiography, it was not until he had read 'the grand and wondrous poems of Shelley' a few years later that he fully grasped 'the connexion between the influence of circumstances in the formation of character and the new organization which Owen desired to give society' ('Recollections', 15). 
In 1842 Frost met Jem Blackaby, a local Chartist leader and shoemaker-poet. This highly articulate and romantic 'organic' intellectual had a major impact on him, as Blackaby possessed qualities 'not often met with even amongst those who have enjoyed the highest educational advantages' ('Recollections', 33). Frost proved a zealous convert to Chartism and Owenism; he tried to join the New Harmony community at one stage and even flirted with the Concordists, a sect that advocated vegetarianism and celibacy. In the end, this proved too much for the worldly Frost and he settled for the more modest ambitions of the Chartist land plan. Nevertheless, the search for spiritual as well as material and political fulfilment was to remain vital throughout his life. In the late 1840s he thought and hoped that momentous political change was imminent, joined G. J. Harney's Association of Fraternal Democrats in 1847, and prophesied revolution in France. Though Frost also believed in 'the rightfulness of the meditated revolt' in England, he wisely backed out of a revolutionary conspiracy the year after in time to avoid arrest and imprisonment. 
Like many artisans of his generation, above all Frost desired independence. Consequently he borrowed money from his parents to buy a printing press in Croydon in 1843 and produced a local satirical paper, the 'Penny Punch'. The time was not propitious, as he could not compete with the London steam presses, and he eventually sold up in order to embark on a career as a professional writer. He initially regarded writing as an escape from wage labour and his first novel, 'Emma Mayfield' (1848), a semi-pornographic, radical critique of regency England, proved a great success. This emboldened him to embark on what he later ironically described as 'the flowery path of fiction' ('Recollections', 75) but he soon found it very difficult to make a decent living from writing. Many of his later fictional works flopped and from the mid-1850s he had to earn a living as a journalist on various regional newspapers, including the 'Birmingham Journal', 'Liverpool Albion', 'Shrewsbury Chronicle', and, in the early 1880s, the 'Barnsley Times'. When times were hard he also undertook various forms of hackwork, including producing adventure stories for the Religious Tract Society and ghost writing for middle-class patrons, an occupation that he deeply resented. 
Frost's later life was a dogged struggle for survival, plagued by money worries. It was no coincidence that the most intellectually productive period of his life occurred between the late 1860s and the mid-1870s, following the receipt of modest legacies from a spinster aunt and his mother. He later referred to these years, when he was living at Long Ditton, Surrey, as among the most pleasant of his life (T. Frost, 'Kingston-on-Thames', 1881, 13). His histories of fairs (1874), circuses (1875), and magicians (1876) published by William Tinsley at this time were pioneering works of social history. 
Frost's first volume of autobiography, 'Forty Years' Recollections, Literary and Political' (1880), is well known to modern historians of Chartism; the second, 'Reminiscences of a Country Journalist' (1886), though largely ignored, provides fascinating insights into the life of a subaltern author in Victorian England. Some reviewers of his work tried to read his life as evidence of the romance of improvement though Frost strongly rejected this, instead insisting that writing was a form of often poorly paid labour, and referring to himself as a 'humble individual', one of the many 'who work as methodically and as regularly as artisans, and support themselves and their families by the products of their brains' ('Reminiscences', v). However, in the end he failed to support himself and his family by his pen and had to apply for grants from the Royal Literary Fund thirteen times after 1887. 
The details of Frost's married life are obscure. His first wife, Lucy Jane Smith, whom he married in 1843, died early in 1851. They had a son, born in Croydon in 1845, who became a printer. He remarried hastily, and moved to London, but was deeply unhappy and eventually left his second wife, Julia ('b'. 1833/4), with whom he was living in Westminster in 1861 with their two daughters, and the son from his first marriage. There is no mention of his third partner, Elizabeth ('b'. 1844/5), in his autobiographical writings but he lived with her from 1867 until the end of his life and had at least two sons with this long-suffering woman. Latterly they lived at Derby. The Royal Literary Fund refused to grant her relief after Frost's death, which took place at his home, Sherwood Cottage, Littleover, Derbyshire, on 16 July 1908. 
Frost was a fascinating individual who did not seek 'respectability' and was therefore liminal, living on the margin between cultures and classes. He remained 'a Chartist and something more' ('Recollections', 38) all his life but also retained an affection for the pleasures of the common people, especially 'low' domains such as the music hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 92218


Dixey, Phyllis Selina (1914-1964), variety and striptease artiste, was born on 10 February 1914 at 330 Kingston Road, Merton, Surrey, the second child of Ernest Dixey (1891-1972), ship's steward and later railway attendant, from Sevenoaks, Kent, and his wife, (Phyllis) Selina (1891-1978), daughter of George Horsecroft, general labourer, of Kingston upon Thames, Surrey. It appears that her mother changed her name to Haycroft shortly before her marriage in July 1911; then employed as a dressmaker, Selina Dixey later worked at Fred Karno's Karsino on Tagg's Island in the Thames. Phyllis and her elder brother were educated at Fircroft Road primary school in Tooting before the family moved to Surbiton, Surrey. As a child Dixey took singing and dancing lessons paid for by her uncle, the textile manufacturer Nicoli (Nusli) Prestonji Whaddia (1879-1971), who had married her mother's sister and was known to Phyllis as Uncle Norman. 
Dixey made her professional acting debut aged fourteen. In 1929 she joined the chorus line of the theatre producer Wallace Russell Parnell (1894-1956) before moving on -- under Parnell's supervision -- to take leading roles in his stage tableaux. These comprised static ensembles of thinly veiled women who recreated scenes from classical art or adopted poses deemed of artistic merit, requirements then necessary to evade the censor. In July 1935 Dixey travelled to Australia with Parnell's 'Laughter Express', where she appeared on the Tivoli Theatre circuit, returning home in the following April when she was described on the ship's passenger lists as a 'theatrical artiste'. She now rejoined the comedian Ernie Lotinga in his play 'The Means Test', in which she had previously performed, and also appeared in Lotinga's film 'Love up the Pole' (1936). The ending of a relationship with Parnell was probably the motive for a failed suicide attempt in the same year. While in Australia Dixey had met the Irish-born comedian and musician John James (Jack) Tracy or Tracey (1897-1978), the son of John Tracey, a co. Wicklow lighthouse keeper, with whom she now began touring in a dual variety act. On 8 December 1938 they were married at Raynes Park register office, Merton. The couple, who had no children, lived at 10 Fairbourn Road, Brixton, and at Wentworth Court, Surbiton, before moving in the early 1940s to Strand Lodge, Epsom. 
During the late 1930s Dixey and Tracy developed the stage routine that brought her fame and notoriety. In November 1939, at the Hull Tivioli Theatre, Dixey gave her first performance of 'Confessions of a Fan Dancer', a humorous interpretation of her earlier tableaux in which she removed her clothes behind the cover of feathered fans before revealing her nudity. Hers was not the first fan dance routine, the acrobatic dancer Denise Vane (Doreen Mason) having performed this in 1937, followed by a regular routine at London's Windmill Theatre from 1938. Initially Dixey's act caused little concern but in March 1940 a show in Sunderland was stopped by the police. This in turn prompted George Titman -- in his capacity as theatrical censor in the lord chamberlain's office -- to ban future performances on the grounds of public decency. However, Dixey's personal remonstration led to the lifting of the ban and, over the next two years, she and her husband toured nationally with the fan and striptease routines, including a show at the Phoenix Theatre, London (November 1941), for which Dixey purchased tickets for an audience of servicemen. Instances of her popularity in this period include two photographic collections, 'The Phyllis Dixon Album: the Goddess of Allure' (1940?) and 'Phyllis in Censorland' (1942), both by Horace Narbeth, and her depiction on the nose cone of a Lancaster bomber from 50 squadron (1944). 
From July 1942 Dixey appeared at London's Whitehall Theatre in a series of popular revues, beginning with 'All's Fair' (July 1942). In the following April, Tracy and Dixey leased the theatre to produce and star in 'Step out with Phyllis' and 'Goodnight, Ladies!' (March and December 1943), followed by 'Peek-a-Boo!' and 'Peek-a-Boo Again!' (May 1944 and July 1945). Billed as 'England's popular pin-up girl', Dixey also directed the 'Peek-a-Boo!' revues, making her one of the first women to take on this role in the West End. Three shows were performed daily between 2 p.m. and 9 p.m. and comprised Tracy's comedy routine, conjuring, impersonations, and table tennis demonstrations, culminating in Dixey's striptease accompanied by her supporting dancers. In October 1944 Pathe News offered a day in the life of 'one of Britain's wartime stars' -- beginning with Dixey's early morning outdoor bathe, and followed by supervision of new routines at the Whitehall Theatre, finale performance, and her evening return to surburban respectability. Commercially successful, 'Peek-a-Boo!' was less appreciated by reviewers who wrote of songs 'unpleasantly suggestive' and jokes that were 'Stilton 'blue'' and of 'the nudity of Miss Phyllis Dixey, the blue-eyed blond who brings a prim manner to the business of the 'pin-up girl'' ('The Times', 17 May 1944). 'Peek-a-Boo Again!' fared no better as a show 'humourlessly built round the disrobing of Miss Phyllis Dixey, who treats her audience with the prim archness of a school-marm', while the revue's curious xylophone interlude 'outrages the devitalized atmosphere of the temple dedicated to the devotees of the Dixey cult' ('The Times', 18 July 1945). In February 1944 the Conservative MP Edward Keeling questioned the war ministry's decision to take over the Scala Theatre (then hosting a Shakespeare season), urging the secretary of state 'if he has to requisition a theatre... [to] consider Phyllis Dixey rather than Shakespeare' ('The Times', 23 Feb 1944). 
In 1946 Dixey and Tracy moved from Epsom to 101 Albion Gate, Hyde Park Place, London, and in the following year Phyllis made a second film appearance in the thriller 'Dual Alibi', alongside Herbert Lom. The couple returned to touring with a version of the 'Peek-a-Boo!' revue, produced by Tracy, with Dixey billed as 'the most talked about girl in England' ('The Guardian', 18 June 1946). Acts who joined the show in this period included Morecambe and Wise, Michael Bentinck, and George Martin (Birmingham Hippodrome, 7 April 1952). Reactions to Dixey's performances remained mixed. To some her fan dance and dance of the seven veils, 'though daring' were 'scenes presented with a delicate subtlety of timing that prevents them from giving offence' ('The Guardian', 26 Sept 1950). Others were sufficiently offended to bring charges for public indecency, and in June 1954 she was fined $5 by Scunthorpe magistrates. 
After the war Phyllis Dixey also faced the challenge of rival troupes, some offering increasingly explicit shows, and the decline of the appeal of variety theatre. In 1949 she took her act to Scandinavia, repeating the tours until 1954 though with declining levels of success and financial return. Indeed, on the final tour the performers' return to England was possible only with a loan from the British consul in Oslo. In February 1957 she and Tracy were charged with failing to pay their performers during an earlier show and, though Dixey was cleared, her husband was fined for abandoning the cast ('The Guardian', 15 March 1957). No longer able to stage her own revues, she appeared in summer 1956 in an early touring production by the future Soho impresario and publisher Paul Raymond, as 'The One and Only Phyllis Dixey'. Now suffering ill health, she made only a few more appearances before her final show at the Palace Theatre, Burnley, on 19 April 1958. By the following February the couple faced bankruptcy. At the height of her career Dixey had earned $100 a week but in February 1959 she was reported to owe $1282 to the Inland Revenue with just $4 in assets. Now required to live with relatives near Billingshurst in Sussex, Dixey was eventually discharged from bankruptcy in October 1961. The couple's final employment was for James Molyneux on his dairy at Loseley Park, near Guildford, where Dixey cooked for the family. In November 1960 Phyllis moved, without her husband, to live at The Retreat, the home of her maternal uncle at 45 Downs Wood, Tattenham Corner, Epsom. Four months later she was diagnosed with breast cancer and, in the final months of her life, converted to Roman Catholicism. 
Phyllis Dixey died at The Retreat, Tattenham Corner, on 2 June 1964 and was buried at Epsom cemetery. She was survived by her husband who, having found work as a golf course steward, remarried in 1966 and lived in Surbiton until his death on 11 October 1978. In the same month a television adaptation of her life, 'The One and Only Phyllis Dixey', was screened with Lesley-Anne Down in the title role. Dixey's grave was restored by the British Music Hall Society in 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 92240


Dennis, Richard William George (1910-2003), mycologist, was born on 13 July 1910 at 9 Gloucester Road, Thornbury, Gloucestershire, the only son of Samuel William Gallop Dennis, headmaster of the local Church of England school, and his wife, Mabel Kate, 'nee' Nash. He was educated at Thornbury elementary school and then Thornbury grammar school. From 1927 he studied at the University of Bristol, and obtained a first-class honours degree in botany in 1930. His thesis, on black canker of willows caused by 'Physalospora miyabeana', was the subject of his first paper, published in 'Transactions of the British Mycological Society' in 1931, and the start of the early part of his career devoted to plant pathology. He never abandoned the subject, but later turned to fungal systematics, on which he became one of the world's leading experts. 
Rejected by the colonial service, Dennis was appointed in 1930 to the plant husbandry department at the West of Scotland Agricultural College, Glasgow. He studied boron and manganese deficiency in oats and swedes as well as 'Helminthosporium' disease of oats, the subject of a thesis for which he gained a PhD from the University of Glasgow in 1934. On 10 February that year he married Ada Catherine Long, a 31-year-old schoolteacher and daughter of William Edward Henry Long, factory manager. In 1936 he started work at the Potato Virus Research Institute in Cambridge as assistant to the director, Redcliffe Nathan Salaman. However, he had little interest in the work and in 1939 obtained a position as assistant plant pathologist at the Department of Agriculture for Scotland, based at the seed testing station near Edinburgh. During the Second World War, while on night-time fire watch duty, he compiled a card-index catalogue of British fungi. This catalogue, extended in later years, long provided a basis for understanding the distribution of these fungi, a major research interest throughout his career. 
In 1944 Dennis was appointed assistant to Elsie Wakefield at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, succeeding her as head of mycology on her retirement in 1951. Together they published 'Common British Fungi' (1953), one of the few popular fungus guides of the time, which was illustrated with his own watercolour paintings. At Kew his research focused on the systematics of higher fungi, especially the ascomycetes, an immense group containing many important plant pathogens as well as others of economic importance. He travelled widely, notably making a three-month visit to Trinidad in 1949, which included brief visits to Venezuela and Jamaica, and a longer visit to Venezuela in 1958. These trips were a basis for research into neotropical fungi and resulted in many papers and, most notably, his book 'The Fungus Flora of Venezuela and Adjacent Countries' (1970). This classic account, again illustrated with his own watercolour paintings, remained a standard text for the area. He also became an international authority on the Xylariaceae, contributing seminal accounts for tropical America and the Congo which were described as 'the foundations of modern studies' of these fungi (Rogers, 1412). 
However, Dennis was perhaps best known as an authority on discomycetes, publishing accounts for South America, the West Indies, Australia, New Zealand, and parts of Africa and Europe, including the British Isles. His book 'British Cup Fungi and their Allies', the first modern account of British ascomycetes, copiously illustrated with his own line drawings and paintings, was published by the Ray Society in 1960. It was a highly successful and important contribution, widely used throughout Britain and beyond. It was later revised as 'British Ascomycetes' (1968, with a second edition in 1978), and remained at the time of his death one of the most useful works on the subject. 
At Kew, Dennis rose to the position of senior principal scientific officer, the highest available grade, and on retirement in 1975 he was appointed an honorary research fellow. During almost thirty years of retirement he continued working on fungal systematics and extended his interest in British fungi. He continued to undertake field work, especially in the Hebrides and elsewhere in Scotland, and made many published contributions, including two key books, 'Fungi of the Hebrides' (1986) and 'Fungi of South-East England' (1995), both published at Kew. The former, a comprehensive analysis of the Hebridean fungi, also provides a detailed comparison of these fungi with those of the rest of the British Isles. During a scientific career lasting more than sixty years, Dennis described many genera and species new to science, and published over 230 papers and books. Forty species and five genera of fungi were named in his honour during his lifetime. He also received several other distinctions, being elected an honorary fellow of the Botanical Society of Scotland, an honorary member of the British Mycological Society, and an honorary or corresponding member of several foreign mycological and botanical societies. 
From an early age Dennis had a keen interest in history and geography, and he developed a truly remarkable and almost encyclopaedic knowledge of these subjects, partly gained, he claimed, from an interest in postage stamps. He retained this interest throughout his life, and he was a great philatelist, amassing an extensive collection of stamps from all countries but with special emphasis on those depicting flowers and fungi. He had a deep knowledge of botany, having studied the British flora from an early age, and also of geology. He compiled an extensive fossil collection and, while at Glasgow, studied the limestone bands in the Lanarkshire coalfield and the geology of the Isle of Mull. 
Dennis was a great character and an immense store of knowledge, with an unrivalled understanding of the history of mycology, and especially the background and development of the Kew collections. Although an eccentric personality, who always bluntly spoke his mind, he was nevertheless a generous person, completely reliable and willing to help anyone who showed genuine interest in the subject. He also had a good sense of humour, once describing as new to science the genus 'Golfballia', based on material of burnt golf balls from east Africa and England received at Kew for identification. The original specimens are still preserved in the Kew collections. He had a distinctive and unforgettable appearance, balding and with a long beard, white with age, which he would frequently stroke when in conversation, and, except in the hottest of weather, always wearing an old Harris tweed sports jacket. He died at his home, 13 St Paul's Road, Richmond, London, on 9 June 2003, of heart disease, and was buried at the South Downs natural burial site near East Meon, Hampshire, on 30 June. He was survived by his son, Stephen, his marriage having ended in separation many years earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 92243


Graham, Winston Mawdsley (1908?-2003), novelist, was born at 66 Langdale Road, Victoria Park, Manchester, the younger son of Albert Graham, tea importer, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Mawdsley. He later admitted having had 'a certain amount of fun in deceiving people' about his date of birth: 'In 'Who's Who' I don't give my birth date, and in four other similar publications around the world I have given different dates, all of them wrong' (Graham, 180). His date of birth was given as 30 June 1908 on his death certificate. His elder brother, Cecil, was ten years older than he was, and his father died after a long illness when Graham was nineteen. His introverted childhood laid the foundations of a dedicated literary career spanning more than seventy years and forty-six books which made him, in his own words, 'the most successful unknown novelist in England' (ibid., 117) -- and a writer who did not cause surprise by calling his autobiography 'Memoirs of a Private Man' (2003). 
Privacy was always precious to Graham, though in his boyhood it was enforced rather than sought. He was expected to go to Manchester grammar school, but had contracted meningitis at the age of seven and, because of continuing ill health, went instead to Longsight grammar school, which was nearer his home. After his father had had a stroke at the age of fifty-four, the family moved to Perranporth, in Cornwall. That county, with its isolation and dark overtones, was to provide the setting and inspiration for much of Graham's writing. His first story was dictated to his mother at the age of five. She, even when widowed, determined to subsidize him until he succeeded: well ahead of his time, he was able to draw strong and determined women who were not prepared to accept a purely passive role. 
Graham's first published novel was 'The House with the Stained Glass Windows' (1934), a murder mystery. He made only $29 from it. During the 1930s he also sold stories to monthly publications such as the 'Windsor Magazine', and then worked for Ward Lock, the publishers of 'genre novels' whose writers churned out novels for as little as $30 a book. Some of his first novels he ruthlessly suppressed; or, as he put it, he saw to it that they were allowed to be 'designedly out of print' ('The Times', 12 July 2003). Having on 18 September 1939 married Jean Mary (died 1992) (daughter of Samuel Williamson, naval officer), with whom he had a son and a daughter, he served during the Second World War with the auxiliary coastguard service, while continuing to write and publish novels. Some he revised years afterwards, such as 'Night Journey' (1941, revised 1966) and 'The Merciless Lady' (1944, revised 1979). The only one of his early novels he gladly recognized was 'The Forgotten Story' (1945), possibly partly because it became an ITV production in 1983. It was not until 1947, when he worked for J. Arthur Rank on a film script of 'Take My Life', in which a woman travels to Scotland to prove her husband innocent of murdering a former girlfriend, that wealth began to be more than a dream. Required to work on the script in London, he was given $150 a week, plus a chauffeur-driven Rolls-Royce, a flat, and a secretary. But Graham was too aware of the main danger of scriptwriting -- that future novels would read like film scripts -- to be seduced by the film world, and returned without reluctance to Cornwall to write 'Cordelia' (1949), a historical novel that sold 560,000 copies in hardback. 
It was the series of twelve Poldark novels (each subtitled 'a novel of Cornwall') that made Graham internationally famous. He had sketched a few Poldark characters while waiting to be called up at the beginning of the Second World War, but only after the war finished the first complete novel in the series, 'Ross Poldark: a Novel of Cornwall, 1783-1787' (1945), having rewritten some chapters nine times before he was satisfied. The first Poldark was far from a runaway success, but it did firmly establish the character of Ross Poldark, adventurer and minor Cornish industrialist, who avoids being stamped upon by the ruthless landowner and banker Sir George Warleggan while also coping with his equally spirited wife Demelza, an emancipated female by the standards of 1945, let alone eighteenth-century Cornwall. He claimed that it was after writing 'Demelza' (1946), the second in the series, that he knew that he was a real novelist, not merely a craftsman who could tell a tale. 'Demelza' was followed by 'Jeremy Poldark' (1950), and 'Warleggan' (1953), bringing the story up to 1793. After four Poldark novels Graham continued to think that they were less successful than the suspense novels, and initially decided not to write any more in the series; but television made it unwise to implement this self-denial. The first four Poldark novels were made into a hugely successful BBC television series in 1975-6, and three further novels composed a second series in 1977. The 'Poldark' television series regularly attracted up to 15 million viewers. 'The Black Moon' (1973), the fifth novel in the series, took the Poldark saga into the nineteenth century. Graham thought that the eleventh book in the series, 'The Twisted Sword' (1990), would be the last. This was pessimistic. Instead, he decided to bring the saga to an end with 'Bella Poldark: a Novel of Cornwall, 1818-1820' (2002), the story of the young Poldark girl who goes to London to become an opera singer. 
Several of Graham's suspense novels were made into films, including 'Marnie' (1961), turned into a film directed by Alfred Hitchcock (1964). Other novels that were filmed included 'Fortune is a Woman' (1953, filmed 1956), 'The Sleeping Partner' (1956, filmed 1958), and 'The Walking Stick' (1967, filmed 1970), the latter a story of a girl polio victim who gets caught up in the criminal machinations of a painter she falls in love with; Graham claimed it to be his most financially successful novel. He won the first Golden Dagger award of the Crime Writers' Association in 1955 and was appointed OBE in 1983. 
Graham avoided the publicity machine as best he could, and clung tenaciously to the disappearing notion that a writer should appear on the printed page rather than the public stage (though he was an urbane and witty chairman of the Society of Authors from 1967 to 1969). By the time of his death, on 10 July 2003 (at Abbotswood House nursing home, Buxted, East Sussex, of heart failure), he had produced a host of believable, often off-centre, characters in highly charged emotional and professional situations -- while avoiding, he insisted, what he whole-heartedly detested, the so-called 'bodice-ripper'. He was a real writer of the old school, while drawing on some more contemporary mores, including giving his women an independent strength of character that was far from usual when he began his single-minded career. 


@@@@@


doc= 92249


Kelly, David Christopher (1944-2003), microbiologist and weapons inspector, was born on 14 May 1944 at Llwynypia Hospital, Llwynypia, Glamorgan, the son of Thomas John Kelly, a schoolteacher then serving as a signals officer in the RAF Volunteer Reserve, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Williams. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 5 Mount Zion, Tunbridge Wells. Both died when he was young, and he was brought up by his grandparents in south Wales, and educated at the County Grammar School for Boys in Pontypridd. From there he went to the universities of Leeds, where he graduated BSc in bacteriology, and Birmingham, where he took an MSc in virology. On 15 July 1967 he married Janice Vawdrey, a 22-year-old fellow student (training to be a geography teacher at Bingley Teacher Training College), and daughter of Wilfred Vawdrey, progress clerk. They had three daughters, Sian and the twins Rachel and Ellen. 
In 1968 Kelly joined the insect pathology unit at Oxford University, where he completed his DPhil on the iridoviruses of insects in 1971. He then spent three years at the University of Warwick, working on the multiplication of influenza virus with Nigel Dimmock, before returning to Oxford as a chief scientific officer at the Institute of Virology. There he and colleagues worked on the development of insect viruses as a means of pest control. 
In 1984 Kelly became head of the microbiology division at the Ministry of Defence's Chemical Defence Establishment (from 1991 the Chemical and Biological Defence Establishment) at Porton Down, Wiltshire. He oversaw a significant expansion in the size of the division, the successful completion (in 1986) of the decontamination of Gruinard Island, off Wester Ross, where the UK had conducted tests with anthrax during the Second World War, and the strengthening and diversification of the division's other activities. He was closely involved in the debriefing of Soviet defectors (most notably Vladimir Pasechnik in 1989) who gave evidence of a covert biological weapons programme in the Soviet Union, in direct contravention of the biological and toxin weapons convention of 1972. He then co-led the Anglo-American inspection team that visited a range of civilian facilities in Russia in accordance with the trilateral agreement signed by the USA, the UK, and the newly post-communist Russia in 1992. His patient investigative work helped establish the scale of the Russian programme, despite continuing obstruction from the Russian authorities, but the work was left incomplete when in 1994 Russia baulked at allowing visits to military facilities. 
'When Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, little did I realise that Saddam Hussein would dictate the next ten years of my life', Kelly later said ('Daily Telegraph', 19 July 2003). He led the first team of United Nations biological weapons investigators to Iraq in 1991, under the terms of the ceasefire arrangements provided for by UN security council resolution 687, and helped uncover Iraq's anthrax production programme at Salman Pak, and the main biological weapons site at al-Hakam, 60 kilometres south-west of Baghdad. Until 1998, when Iraq ceased further co-operation with the United Nations special commission on Iraq (Unscom), and Saddam Hussein singled Kelly out by name for expulsion, Kelly was a key figure in the United Nations investigation and uncovering of the Iraqis' biological weapons programme. He was (unusually for a government scientist) appointed CMG in 1996, and nominated for the Nobel peace prize. In all he visited Iraq thirty-seven times (the last in June 2003, after the American-led invasion of March that year). He loved Iraq, its culture, its people, and its literature, though he loathed the Iraqi regime. 
In his youth Kelly had been a keen sportsman, and he remained a keen musician (playing double bass and later saxophone). He was also a skilled gardener. A member of the Baha'i faith in later life, he was at one time treasurer of the spiritual assembly in Abingdon, Oxfordshire, near his home in Southmoor; he regularly played cribbage at his local pub, the Hind's Head. With his soft voice, twinkling eyes, and semantic precision, and his unfashionable brown shoes, saggy but comfortable pullovers, and ancient silver rimmed spectacles, he could have been the man from the welfare, but both the Russians and the Iraqis soon learned to their bitter cost that to underestimate Kelly was a mistake. His quiet persistence and avuncular nature made him the perfect interrogator. He treated everyone with respect and dignity, some humour, and never a threat. He often conducted six-hour interviews with only short coffee breaks, but with the exception of Rihab Taha (the head of Saddam Hussein's biological weapons research, whom Kelly reduced to hysterical tears), no one complained. Because of the nature of his work he was in frequent contact with journalists, though his views were rarely attributable, and he avoided broadcast interviews. His use of language was always precise, and no journalist could ever entice him to exaggerate or use hyperbole. His views were based either on hard facts or on highly intelligent analysis of incomplete information. 
Following the winding-up of Unscom, Kelly returned to his position as chief adviser on biological defence and warfare matters to the Ministry of Defence's proliferation and arms control secretariat (he had given up his position as head of the microbiology division at Porton Down in 1994, as a result of his full-time involvement in Unscom work) and continued to advise the government and the UN on the Iraqis' weapons programme. It was in this position that he was interviewed by a number of journalists in the late spring of 2003 about the joint intelligence committee dossier on the weapons of mass destruction possessed by Iraq. The dossier was prepared in the run-up to the American-led invasion, and had played a key role in the government's justification for the war. On 22 May 2003, at the Charing Cross Hotel, London, he met Andrew Gilligan, a BBC journalist. At this meeting Kelly threw doubt on the dossier's claim that Iraq was capable of launching biological and chemical weapons within forty-five minutes of an order to use them -- reflecting widespread scepticism on this point within the scientific and intelligence communities -- and indeed on the extent of Iraq's continuing biological warfare capability since the last Gulf War. 
Gilligan broadcast his report on the BBC's 'Today' programme on 29 May 2003, claiming that the government had deliberately 'sexed up' the dossier through the inclusion of the forty-five-minute claim, even though it knew the claim was doubtful. On 1 June he followed this up with an article for the 'Mail on Sunday' in which he named the prime minister's director of communications and strategy, Alastair Campbell, as the key figure in the decision to include this claim. Gilligan's allegations prompted a political furore. The government responded by demanding to know the source of Gilligan's story. The BBC stood by its report. At the end of June, Kelly confessed to his superiors that he had met Gilligan, though he was 'convinced that I am not his primary source of information' ('Report of the inquiry', point 257). The government then issued a statement saying that someone had come forward who might be the source, but whose views did not correspond with those reported by Gilligan. The announcement contained sufficient clues for journalists to guess that that person might be Kelly -- and the government then, highly unusually, confirmed his identity. The consequent publicity forced Kelly and his wife to flee to Cornwall, but he was called back to appear before the House of Commons foreign affairs select committee on 15 July, and its intelligence and security committee on 16 July. At his first appearance, which was open to the public, he was subjected to some notably hostile questioning and appeared under severe stress, speaking so quietly that the air-conditioning equipment had to be turned off. He admitted meeting Gilligan, but denied that he had said the things Gilligan reported his source as having said. He also denied being the source for some quotations used by Susan Watts, another BBC journalist, who had reported the story for 'Newsnight' on 2 June. 
On his last morning, 17 July, at home with his wife, Kelly was not an unhappy man. He sent wry but quite optimistic emails to close friends: he was looking forward to his daughter's wedding and, as ever, to returning to Baghdad. But at some stage in the morning he received a telephone call which changed everything. The most likely explanation is that he learned from a well-meaning friend at the Ministry of Defence that the BBC had tape-recorded evidence which, when published, would show that he had indeed said the things to Susan Watts that he had formally denied saying. Kelly must surely have realized instantly that he would be found out -- if he had lied about one quotation then he probably could not be trusted about others -- and his efforts to protect his reputation and survive the scandal would end immediately. At about 3 p.m. he told his wife he was going for a walk. He went to Harrowdown Hill, about a mile from his home, where it appears that he ingested a large (but not fatal) quantity of co-proxamol, a painkiller, then cut his left wrist. His body was found early the next morning. He was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Longworth. He was survived by his wife, Janice, and their three daughters. 
On 18 July the government immediately announced an inquiry into the events leading up to Kelly's death, to be led by Lord Hutton. The inquiry opened on 1 August, and took evidence from numerous witnesses, with cross-examination by QCs representing the inquiry, the government, the BBC, the Kelly family, and Gilligan. The final report, published on 28 January 2004, criticized the Ministry of Defence for not warning Kelly that his identity would become public, but was 'satisfied that Dr Kelly took his own life' ('Report of the inquiry', point 467) and exonerated the government and Alastair Campbell from the specific charge made by Gilligan, that the government had included the forty-five-minute claim despite knowing it was wrong. Deciding that any failures in the intelligence provided to the government were outside his remit, Hutton reserved his greatest condemnation for Gilligan, and for the editorial and management processes at the BBC, which he described as 'defective' ('Report of the inquiry', point 291). The Hutton report led to the immediate resignation of the chairman of the BBC, Gavyn Davies, and within two days to the resignations of Greg Dyke, the director-general of the BBC, and Gilligan, though none expressed agreement with the findings of the report. 


@@@@@


doc= 92250


Kerruish, Sir (Henry) Charles (1917-2003), politician and farmer, was born on 23 July 1917 at Ballafayle, Maughold, Isle of Man, the only child of Henry Howard Kerruish ('bap'. 1872, died 1938), farmer, and his wife, Clara May, 'nee' Kewin (1877-1961). Ballafayle, Kerruish's lifelong home, had been farmed by his family since 1725. He was educated nearby at the village school at the Dhoon, then at Ramsey grammar school. He showed little inclination for academic work, and left school in 1933 to work on his father's farm. There he learned ploughing, cattle-rearing, and sheep-shearing, and took a particular interest in the breeding and exhibition of horses. When his father died in 1938 he took over the farm, and negotiated a bank loan to buy the adjacent holding, doubling the size of his farm from 80 to 160 acres. During the Second World War he was, as a farmer, exempt from conscription, but served as a lieutenant in the Home Guard. On 12 November 1942 he married Margaret Gell (1918-1970) of Peel. They had four children, three girls and a boy, between 1945 and 1954. 
Among the young farmers' clubs in the north of the island Kerruish developed skills in public speaking and chairing meetings, and an interest in politics. He first stood for election to the House of Keys (the lower house of Tynwald, the Manx parliament) in 1943, his only defeat. In 1946 he was elected as member (MHK) for Garff, his local constituency. Like most MHKs he sat as an independent. At twenty-nine he was the youngest member of the Manx legislature. He soon established himself as a vigorous and capable MHK, attentive to his constituents. He argued against the continuation of conscription, and for higher pay for farm labourers. He was critical of the powers exercised by the governor and his appointed executive council, and campaigned for the Keys to control national finances and for genuine home rule. In 1955 he was co-opted to the executive council, and elected as chairman of the health services board, but this did not inhibit his reforming zeal. 
The appointment of Sir Ronald Garvey as the island's governor in 1959 (he served until 1966) initiated a period of reform and development during which Kerruish became the island's most prominent politician. As the holiday industry declined, new policies were developed to sustain the island's economy, including the encouragement of new residents and light industry, and lower taxation to stimulate business and finance. Kerruish was not primarily responsible for the details of economic policy, but he identified himself with the new initiatives and co-operated on most issues with Garvey. His popularity in the Keys led to his election in 1962, aged forty-four, as the youngest speaker of the Keys in Manx history. A month later Garvey appointed him as chairman of the executive council, and he also continued to chair the health services board until 1966. In 1964 he was appointed OBE. 
This accumulation of power aroused resentment against 'King Charles', as Kerruish was sometimes called. He was riding high in the 1960s, often leading deputations to the Home Office to protest about the threat of Common Market membership or restrictions placed on Manx Radio. But after 1966 most MHKs wanted him cut down to size. New laws were passed in 1968 making it impossible for the speaker to head a department or join the executive council. Henceforth Kerruish was restricted to his role as speaker, still an influential position. In 1970 he suffered a personal tragedy with the death of his wife, Margaret, but on 4 January 1975 he was married again, to an Englishwoman, Kathleen Emily (Kay) Warriner, 'nee' Hardie ('b'. 1923), a principal education assistant from Weybridge, Surrey. 
By the later 1970s Manx politics had entered a more settled period, the UK government having negotiated an acceptable associate membership of the EEC for the Isle of Man, which allowed the island to retain its own taxation system. The governor's powers were whittled down until he became more of a constitutional figurehead. Kerruish took a greater interest in issues of Manx culture and heritage, culminating in the historically dubious choice of 1979 as Tynwald's millennium year. Ceremonial events were his forte, and in 1979 he was knighted. Since 1957 he had found a niche on the international stage through attendance at Commonwealth Parliamentary Association conferences. This was a discussion forum which enabled him to travel widely, meet most leading Commonwealth politicians, and publicize the Isle of Man and its case for greater self-determination. He was on the executive for many years, and president in 1984 when the annual conference was held on the island. He was the longest-serving presiding officer in the Commonwealth. 
In the 1980s Kerruish continued, as speaker, to press not for complete independence, but for 'recognition as a self-governing territory'. In 1990 the governor relinquished his right to chair Tynwald and the legislative council, or upper house. Kerruish was elected by his colleagues as first president of Tynwald, and retired from the Keys, having held his Garff seat through nine elections. He was re-elected president of Tynwald in 1996. Throughout the 1990s he continued to criticize Manx governments for being too conciliatory towards the UK. His opponents argued that the island had already achieved the effective self-government he had always sought. In 2000 Kerruish finally retired from politics after nearly fifty-four years in the legislature. For his remaining three years he continued farming, now on some 6000 acres. On several occasions over the years his private activities as an entrepreneurial farmer had brought him into conflict with the Manx government. 
As a politician Kerruish had many devoted supporters, but also a number of critics. To his friends he showed warmth, charm, and courtesy, but he could also be a formidable enemy. His remarkable persistence, political longevity, and powerful character ensured his position as the dominant Manx politician of the second half of the twentieth century. As a constitutional reformer he made a large contribution to continuing and completing the agenda for Manx self-government begun by Samuel Norris in the first half of the century. He died after a series of strokes on 23 July 2003, his eighty-sixth birthday, in Noble's Hospital, Strang, Braddan, near Douglas, and was buried a week later in Maughold churchyard. He was survived by his second wife, Kay, and the four children of his first marriage, two of whom, Clare Christian and Anne Craine, were at the time of his death members of the Manx legislature. 


@@@@@


doc= 92251


Lewis, (John Frederick) Norman (1908-2003), traveller and author, was born on 28 June 1908 at Clifton, Carterhatch Lane, Enfield, Middlesex, the fourth child of Richard George Lewis (d''. 1936), a pharmacist, and his wife, Louise Charlotte,' nee' Evans (died 1950). His parents became practising spiritualists after their elder sons failed to reach maturity. The family was Welsh. Bullied at Forty Hill church school, Lewis spent a year with relatives in Carmarthen before returning to attend Enfield grammar school (1920-25). Marriage to Ernestina Maria Luisa Carmela Caterina Corvaja, the Spanish-educated daughter of Sicilian immigrants, broadened his horizons in the 1930s. He lived with his polyglot in-laws in Bloomsbury and made a living from photography and the sale of cameras, trading under his father's name. The R. G. Lewis business, based in High Holborn, grew into a chain of eight shops across southern England and remained in his ownership until 1978. 
A trip to Spain in 1934 was described in Lewis's first book, 'Spanish Adventure' (1935), and also -- quite differently -- in his last, 'The Tomb in Seville' (2003). 'Sand and Sea in Arabia' (1938) contained photographs of his travels in the Red Sea with the Hungarian journalist Ladislas Farago. During the Second World War he served as a sergeant in the field security section of the intelligence corps, helping maintain order in allied-occupied Algeria, Tunisia, Italy, and Austria. His memories formed the basis of 'Naples '44' (1978), a powerful portrayal of a devastated city. 
Lewis struggled to adjust to civilian life in 1946. Agreeing to separation from his wife and son, Ito, who had moved to Latin America, he set up home in London with Hester Reid (1909-1994), a Scottish military nurse he had met in Africa three years earlier. She changed her surname to his, and they had two children, Karen and Gareth, before splitting up in 1948. Lewis wrote two novels that reflected his wartime experiences: 'Samara' (1949), set in Algeria, and 'Within the Labyrinth' (1950), set in Italy. His publisher, Jonathan Cape, suggested further travel writing and financed a three-month trip to French Indo-China in 1950. The result was 'A Dragon Apparent' (1951), a great and immediate success, soon followed by 'Golden Earth' (1952), about Burma. Both vividly depicted traditional societies on the brink of radical upheaval. Thereafter magazines and Sunday newspapers every so often commissioned his impressions of other troubled lands, among them Guatemala, Paraguay, Haiti, Liberia, and Cuba. With characteristic deadpan humour, he claimed to prefer inaccessible places with despotic governments, mosquitoes, and malaria. Lewis was a tall, bespectacled man, slender and slightly stooped, with a clipped moustache and soulful eyes. He retained a trace of north London in his voice; his manner was self-effacing. Though he later teamed up with the photographer Don McCullin for a number of expeditions, he generally liked to travel alone, relying on his ability to get by in six foreign languages (French, Spanish, Arabic, Russian, German, and Italian). Collected in book form, his articles appealed especially to readers who were fond of the colourfully seedy, raffish, and bizarre. They relished his finely crafted prose and sharp eye for eccentricity. An understated style perhaps offset exaggerated content. 'Whatever I tell you, cut by a half or two thirds', he cautioned a journalist ('The Times'). Lewis was rather cavalier about dates and sometimes disguised places. For instance, he wrote of Farol in Catalonia and his home at Long Crendon in Essex; neither appears on any map. 
As well as travel books Lewis published a dozen more novels, typically cold war thrillers concerning CIA agents, guerrilla insurgencies, and assassination plots in South America or north Africa. These prompted comparisons to Graham Greene, who much admired his work (although they never met). 'The Volcanoes above Us' (1957), 'The Sicilian Specialist' (1975), and 'A Suitable Case for Corruption' (1984) were notable examples. Other books -- from 'The Day of the Fox' (1955) to 'Voices of the Old Sea' (1984) -- testified to his deep love of Spain before mass tourism. The 'New Yorker' serialized 'The Honoured Society' (1964), an expose of the Sicilian Mafia. 
Long a detached observer of humanity, latterly Lewis felt compelled to speak out against the damage inflicted in the name of progress: mankind had gone wrong when it invented money, navigation, and universal religions. He valued most highly of all his writings a report published in the 'Sunday Times Magazine' of 23 February 1969 entitled 'From fire and sword to arsenic and bullets', which publicized atrocities against Indians in Brazil, and inspired the founding of the Primitive People's Fund (renamed Survival International in 1971), a charity seeking to defend the rights of tribal communities. Insensitive American evangelists were his target in 'The Missionaries' (1988). 'A Goddess in the Stones' (1991) described the effects of industrialization on rural India, while 'An Empire of the East' (1993) offered a critical view of Indonesian rule in Aceh, Irian Jaya, and East Timor. 
Reprints issued in the 1980s won Lewis new readers and critical acclaim as the doyen of British travel writers. He lived from 1959 at the Old Parsonage, Finchingfield, Essex, with (Maureen) Lesley Burley ('b'. 1930), an airline ground stewardess from Australia, whom he formally married in 1975. Their children were Gawaine, Kiki, and Samara. Old age did not deter him from venturing abroad in order to add to his precious stock of notebooks. At home he wrote 700 words a day, always in the morning. His other interests included watching birds and cultivating rare lilies. Suffering from Alzheimer's disease, he died of bronchopneumonia and heart failure at the community hospital, Saffron Walden, Essex, on 22 July 2003. He was survived by his wife, Lesley, and his six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92256


Perry, Walter Laing Macdonald, Baron Perry of Walton (1921-2003), pharmacologist and university administrator, was born on 16 June 1921 at 5 Nelson Terrace, Dundee, the son of Fletcher Smith Perry (1888-1960), an officer (later head) of the customs and excise in Scotland, and his wife, Flora Macdonald (died 1966), daughter of Donald Macdonald. He was educated at Ayr Academy, Dundee high school, and the University of St Andrews, where he graduated MB ChB in 1943 (and MD in 1948 and DSc in 1958). 
In 1944 Perry joined the colonial medical service as a medical officer, and was posted to Nigeria. There he was thrown in at the deep end. Within a week of his arrival in Kaduna (400 miles north of the Niger delta), to replace the resident on leave, he operated successfully on the wife of the dispenser for a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. When the resident returned six months later Perry was transferred to Igbobi, near Lagos, to supervise the building and equipping of a rehabilitation hospital to provide for members of the Royal West African Frontier Force fighting in north Africa. He spent six months in Lagos ordering materials and equipment but never saw the hospital. His next posting was to Makurdi, the capital of Benue; there he was the only doctor in a region of about half a million people. The hospital had 120 beds with never fewer than 200 occupants, and Perry's day started with an outpatient clinic for about a hundred before breakfast. Much of his work consisted of treating parasitic diseases and the surgical treatment of serious accident victims. 
On returning to the UK in 1946 Perry was called up to serve briefly in the RAF, with the rank of flying officer. On 16 November the same year, at the cathedral church of St Paul, Dundee, he married the 23-year-old Anne Elizabeth Grant, medical practitioner, and daughter of George Macdonald Grant, draper; they had three sons. In 1947 Perry was released from the RAF to join the department of tropical medicine in the Medical Research Council's National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR) at Mill Hill to work in the physiology department, which had a worldwide reputation. In his first position he carried out an unusual array of different experiments that included an attempt to determine the extra-erythrocytic location of the malaria parasite and assays to look at the possible mode of action of paludrine, a novel antimalarial. This work, on monkeys and tissue culture, set him in good stead when later he was required to test batches of the Salk vaccine for the presence of live virus. In 1952 he became director of the department of biological standards at the NIMR. As director he was responsible to the Department of Health for implementing regulations for the production of all substances controlled under the 'Therapeutic Substances Act'; and to the World Health Organization (WHO) as custodian of all the international standard preparations other than those for vaccines, antisera, and antitoxins held by the State Serum Institute in Copenhagen. Virtually automatically, at the age of thirty-one, he became a member of the British Pharmacopoeia Commission and of the expert committee on biological standardization of the WHO. He was made an OBE in 1957. 
Perry now played a leading role in the government's attempts to provide adequate supplies of the Salk vaccine for poliomyelitis. But the constant political and public pressure limited his research activity and he began to look for a career change. Fortunately the Edinburgh medical school was looking to replace Professor John Gaddum, one of the world's leading pharmacologists, with a dynamic and innovative head of department, and Perry was appointed to the vacant chair of materia medica in 1958. His detailed knowledge of a wide range of research techniques and topics was crucial to rebuilding the department in Edinburgh and allowed him to promote the work of some and rejuvenate the work of others. While at Edinburgh he developed an interest in distance teaching, giving some students reading lists coupled with organized seminars; he found that these students did just as well as, if not better than, those taught traditionally in formal lectures. He also introduced computer marking of multiple-choice questions in examinations. He drew conclusions which were important later at the Open University, including that distance learning could not simply be left to reading, but had to include videos and other modern equipment to take the place of lectures. 
After a successful term of office as vice-principal at Edinburgh (1967-8) Perry was thinking in terms of a possible vice-chancellorship in a conventional university. But after seeing the advertisement for the new post of vice-chancellor of the Open University (OU) he began to think seriously about it. After consulting the Labour MPs Tam Dalyell and Jennie Lee he decided to apply and was appointed in June 1968. The magnitude of the task involved in setting up the OU could have been daunting for many people, but not to Perry. He led from the front in appointing academic and administrative staff, establishing the university structure and regional offices, initiating the operational side of course production, and liaising with the planning committee and the BBC. Not least he kept in touch with government, primarily through Jennie Lee, the minister of state at the Department of Education and Science, to whom Harold Wilson had given the responsibility for the OU. In all this work he was greatly helped by his new university secretary, Anastasios (Chris) Christodoulou. 
There were several major policy decisions that Perry was instrumental in making in the early days of the OU. The first was that while there was to be open entry -- school examination qualifications not being required -- there would be no compromise on standards. The OU degree was to be comparable and equivalent to that offered by conventional universities. The second was to design a wide range of courses, including a brave decision to teach science at a distance. The third was to teach in a variety of media, through written textual material circulated to all students, through radio and television, through backup tutorials and summer schools (organized by the regional offices), and through home experimental kits. This rich mix of excellent instruction was a major reason for the success of OU teaching. But Perry also placed great emphasis on the importance of the course team. Into each team were drawn academic writers, educational technologists, and BBC production staff. Administrators, and publication and regional staff provided help and advice; and most crucially external advisers and assessors became involved at later stages. Thus an OU course became a joint responsibility, not belonging to any one professor or lecturer, although authorship of the individual units of a course was stated. 
Perry was always a strong advocate of academic freedom but saw early on that academic freedom might be in danger of being compromised by the course team concept, for both staff and students. He realized that constant vigilance was needed at university level and this observation was borne out later by difficulties that the university encountered, with accusations of academic bias, both in the latter part of Perry's vice-chancellorship and later in the 1980s. The OU strongly and successfully defended its academic freedom on these occasions. 
The early development of the OU required an enormous amount of work from many people who joined Perry's band of inventors and explorers, and they were devoted to him. But the drive, enthusiasm, and energy came from the top. Throughout 1969 and 1970 the new vice-chancellor worked eighteen hours a day and seven days a week, apart from a weekly round of golf at the Woburn course in the new city of Milton Keynes, to which Perry had engineered the transfer of the OU from its original location in Belgrave Square. The reward for him and his colleagues came in the remarkable response in applications when the OU opened its doors to students. 40,000 people applied in 1970 for the 25,000 places. It was a major logistical success for those new students to receive their course materials and start on their new degree courses in 1971. Under Perry's leadership the university continued to grow successfully throughout the 1970s, primarily in the undergraduate school. As its first chancellor, Lord Crowther, memorably described it at its inaugural ceremony in 1969, it was a university 'open as to people, open as to place, open as to methods, open as to ideas'. By the time of Perry's retirement there were nearly 100,000 students enrolled on its courses. Perry also initiated activities overseas and set up a commercial arm for the sale of OU material. He undertook a limited number of personal outside activities -- for example, he joined the board of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. But his main focus remained within the university he had founded. He was a great first vice-chancellor of a very special university, and on retirement in 1980 he left a Rolls-Royce machine, purring along after the great alarums and excitement of the early days. His first marriage having ended in divorce, on 21 August 1971, at St Luke's Church, Bedford, Perry married Catherine Hilda Crawley, a 25-year-old medical practitioner, and daughter of John Ambrose Crawley, barrister; they had two sons and a daughter. 
Perry was knighted in 1974 and created a life peer, as Baron Perry of Walton, in the 1979 new year's honours list. He took up his new duties with his usual enthusiasm and energy. He was a regular weekly attendee at the House of Lords and played a major role in its scientific committees, taking the chair for several inquiries. From 1981 to 1983 he was deputy leader of the Social Democratic Party in the House of Lords. His warmth and enthusiasm was unchanging, and he had strong views on current political and scientific developments. He also gained great pleasure from his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1985, for services to education and science. (He had been elected FRSE in 1960.) He was chairman of the standing committee on continuing education of the University Grants Committee, and of the National Advisory Body for Public Sector Higher Education, from 1985 to 1989. He received honorary degrees from Bradford, Dundee, and Stirling universities, as well as from the Open University and several universities abroad. 
Perry was a man of great charm and charisma who enjoyed congenial company (he was a renowned musical performer and had a clear and assured voice). Nevertheless he was also tenacious, tactful, and tough, just the qualities that were required to establish the Open University. He lived in retirement in Edinburgh, but died at the Savile Club, Brook Street, Westminster, on 18 July 2003, following a heart attack. He was survived by his wife, Catherine, their three children, and the three sons of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 92258


Raine, Kathleen Jessie (1908-2003), poet and literary scholar, was born on 14 June 1908 at 6 Gordon Road, Ilford, Essex, the only child of George Raine, schoolmaster and Methodist lay preacher, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Wilkie. Her mother was Scottish and her first language Scots, a cultural inheritance that Raine regarded as key to the early 'language of my imagination' (Cookson, 56). It was her mother who introduced her to the Romantic poets and who would recite 'Paradise Lost' at the kitchen sink. Raine's father, an English teacher, also helped cultivate his daughter's nascent poetic sensibility. Declining to follow his father into the mines, he had written a thesis on Wordsworth at Durham University (where he met his wife) and would conduct regular visits to performances of Shakespeare at the London theatres. 
Raine would later come to resent the dreary indifference of her early environment, associating London's encroaching suburbs with the forces of a relentlessly advancing materialism which threatened all higher thought and finer feeling. If, as she put it, 'I was born in exile' (BL, Add. MS 80783A), she discovered her true home in the untamed beauty of Northumberland, where she spent the First World War with her mother's first cousin, Penny Black. It was this landscape which would inspire in her an enduringly Romantic belief in the numinous quality of nature and, through it, in man's capacity for spiritual enlightenment and creativity. 
After the war Raine returned to continue her education in Ilford where, aged fourteen, she fell deeply in love with a youth five years her senior whom she agreed to marry when she herself turned nineteen. Her father ended the relationship -- and with it, she reflected, 'my brief, sad womanhood, never to be restored' ('Love, Cambridge, poetry', 'PN Review', 37). She won a scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge, in 1926 to read natural sciences. Her botanical interests would ensure that her poems were strewn with flowers; her fascination with Jung would give them symbolic resonance. Cambridge, from which she graduated in 1929 with a third in psychology, brought her into contact with a wide circle of aspiring writers and artists, including Malcolm Lowry, Humphrey Jennings, Jacob Bronowski, and William Empson, the last two publishing her early poems in an undergraduate magazine, 'Experiment' -- possibly because 'they thought I was pretty' ('Kathleen Raine in conversation with Grevel Lindop', 'PN Review', 39). 
Empson later needled his friend to 'give up thinking you are Robert Graves' Ancient Murderous Bitch Goddess' (BL, Raine papers). Raine had indeed been regarded as the great beauty of her generation at Cambridge and this physical allure, combined with her clear-eyed quest for spiritual truth, proved a heady combination for many young men. One such was a gifted fellow student and surrealist poet, Hugh Sykes Davies (1909-1984), the son of Thomas Seaton Davies, Wesleyan minister, and a cousin of the art historian Herbert Read. They married on 26 August 1930, following Raine's fruitless attempt to secure a job at the Hogarth Press with Virginia Woolf (whom she had seen delivering her famous lecture 'A room of one's own' at Girton). The marriage -- a result, by her own admission, of not knowing what else to do -- lasted 'briefly and forgettably' ('The Independent'), ending in divorce. 
By 1932 Raine had settled in Blackheath, on the outskirts of London, with Charles Henry Madge (1912-1996), a poet, sociologist, and founder of Mass-Observation. They had two children, Anna ('b'. 1934) and James ('b'. 1936), and married on 22 December 1937, but this union also foundered and the marriage was dissolved. Raine had meanwhile fallen for Alastair MacDonald (referred to only by his forename in her published writings), a Cambridge contemporary and 'the handsomest Scot I have ever seen' (BL, Add. MS 80783A). Reflecting on the relationship later, in the confessional diary of 1951-2 she addressed to her mentor, Elias Canetti, she revealed that Alastair embodied for her 'lost Scotland'; and that she 'would have pretended to be Mrs Macdonald of Surbiton, so desperately did I desire him sexually' (ibid.). Her resolve to resist carnal temptation lay behind her decision to join the Catholic church: 'a very high price to pay and the worst thing I have ever done, a betrayal of all I honour in heaven and on earth. Still, it served its purpose, and I escaped the siren somehow' (ibid.). 
On the outbreak of the Second World War MacDonald enlisted, and Raine retreated with her children, first to her mother's beach hut in Devon and thence to Penrith, Cumberland, at the invitation of the poet Michael Roberts and his wife, Janet Adam Smith, who as literary editor of 'The Listener' had published some of Raine's earliest poems. She then spent a year in Martindale by Ullswater, Cumberland. In late 1941 she moved back to London, leaving her young children temporarily in the care of Helen Sutherland at Cockley Moor, 'too young and too soon' as she later ruefully saw ('Autobiographies', 212). In London she worked briefly in the Ministry of Information, then on a social survey, and then, in the latter stages of the war, in the political intelligence department of the Foreign Office. Nevertheless she returned frequently to Cumberland over the next twenty years, meeting many in the artistic set presided over by Helen Sutherland, including the poet Norman Nicholson, the artist Winifred Nicholson, and the artist and poet David Jones (about whom she later wrote with great sensitivity). 
Charles Madge had introduced Raine to the charismatic and chaotic poet and editor Tambimuttu, who had arrived penniless from Ceylon in 1938 to stir up bohemian London, and it was 'Tambi' who now agreed to take up Raine's cause following the rejection of her work by T. S. Eliot. The neo-romantic flavour of his magazine, 'Poetry (London)', together with the mercurial style of the man himself (whose claim to royal descent Raine believed and whom she admired to the end), appealed to poets seeking to move from the strictures of early high modernism on the one hand and the political preoccupations of the Auden set on the other. Raine became a regular contributor and was profiled in the magazine shortly before Tambimuttu published her first book in 1943, under his Editions Poetry London imprint. 'Stone and Flower: Poems 1935-1943' was illustrated by Barbara Hepworth and attracted positive attention. 'I want to give an enthusiastic if ignorant howl in your direction', Graham Greene wrote to her, 'Poems like 'Good Friday' I had already seen & admired, but I hadn't realised the quantity of the quality as it were' (BL, Raine papers). 
By 1949 Raine had published two further volumes and now embarked on the most significant and turbulent relationship of her life. Tambimuttu brought to her Chelsea home the artist, explorer, and shark fisherman Gavin Maxwell (1914-1969), introducing them by taking their photograph under a pear tree in the garden. Maxwell seemed everything for which Raine, a professed exile from her true geographic and social inheritance, had been searching. As a grandson of the duke of Northumberland he had aristocratic roots tapping deep into the land she regarded as her earthly paradise. At church, her mother had sat behind his, 'admiring her coils of shining hair' ('Autobiographies', 274). She had played on the earth and swum in the water owned by his family. 'Gavin belonged', as she put it, 'to my own people in the country lost before I was born' (ibid., 270). 
Raine once told Canetti 'the deepest truth I am capable of telling about myself, that I consider -- not my beauty, -- but the quality of my sexual love -- so high that I have never found any man whom I could consider worthy of it' (BL, Add. MS 80783A). She found this paragon in Maxwell, believing that to marry him 'would be the most wonderful thing in the world, something as sacred as Christmas, or sunrise, something unimaginable' (ibid.). Nevertheless, Maxwell's homosexuality rendered the dream impossible. He once kissed her passionately on the mouth and she once spent the night in his arms, but the relationship went unconsummated and she remained celibate for the rest of her life. Her deepest wish could be fulfilled only in the realms of poetry, something well understood by Maxwell himself, whose most famous work took its title from her poem of 1952, 'The Marriage of Psyche': 'He has married me with a ring, a ring of bright water / whose ripples travel from the heart of the sea.' 
Raine's growing resentment stemmed from more than just physical denial. She felt that Maxwell's mother had rejected her and that he regarded her as ill-bred, pushing her as a consequence to the edge of his life. It was in July 1956, while staying at his house at Sandaig on the west highland coast, that this sense of hurt brought the affair to an end of mythic high drama. After a period away Maxwell arrived back home with a friend to discover Raine still ensconced, an unexpected guest who had outstayed her welcome. He summarily banished her from his hearth and, after wandering distractedly through the storm-lashed night, she unleashed a curse under the nearby rowan tree which had earlier symbolized an almost magical happiness: 'let Gavin suffer, in this place, as I am suffering now!' (Botting, 218). Maxwell soon afterwards suffered the death of his pet otter, Mij, and in January 1968 the destruction of his house by fire, in which perished another otter, Edal, the subject of his famous book. In April 1968 (four years after the collapse of his marriage to a much younger woman) he wrote to Raine, 'whether or not your curse has been responsible for this terrible disaster I don't know and shall never know' (BL, Raine papers). A year later, in what was to be his last letter, he informed her that he had inoperable cancer. Although he assured her that 'your spirit accompanies me' (ibid.), Raine never forgave herself this litany of misfortune, and two autograph notebooks in the British Library document her use of mediums in a quest for resolution. 
In 1954 Raine secured a five-year research fellowship at Girton. There she continued to publish verse, Philip Larkin praising her 'Collected Poems' of 1956 as 'vatic and universal' ('The Times'), while launching herself into study of William Blake and W. B. Yeats. Her writings on these and other figures working in a metaphysical or visionary tradition (including Plotinus, Jacob Boehme, Emanuel Swedenborg, and Thomas Taylor) established her as a critic of major importance. 'Blake and Tradition' (1968) perhaps stands as her most notable achievement, while her collection of essays, 'Defending Ancient Springs' (1969), illustrates the essential and insistent theme behind her neo-Platonic thinking: that there exists an imaginative, spiritual realm apprehensible to true poets, thinkers, and artists across the ages through an eternal language of symbols; and that, importantly, these sacred groves must be defended against the contrary forces of secular materialism and all its social, political, and intellectual symptoms, chief among them Freudianism, Marxism, socialism, behaviourism, logical positivism, feminism (men were the only true visionaries), and, latterly, post-modernism. A major review of the book in the 'TLS' found much to admire in her 'impassioned diatribe against the intellectual idols of Philistia's market-place. Out flashed that keen critical sword, and kitchen-sink telly-drama bites the dust amid our latter-day dark Satanic mills' ('TLS', 11 July 1968). G. B. Shaw, Jean Genet, and Arnold Wesker were all targets. 
Raine's literary opinions could be astonishingly dismissive. During a trip to New York with David Gascoyne and W. S. Graham in 1951 John Berryman told her that he believed W. H. Auden to be a great poet. 'If he is', she replied, 'you can keep him' (BL Add. MS 80783A). Arthur Miller's 'Death of a Salesman' she considered the 'popular rock-bottom of American Society' (ibid.), while in the visual arts Ben Nicholson's abstraction was mere 'rubbish' ('Kathleen Raine in conversation with Grevel Lindop', 'PN Review', 40). Among the notable contemporaries she rated highly were T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound (whom she visited in his confinement), Marianne Moore, and later on Ted Hughes, whose 'Shakespeare and the Goddess of Complete Being' (1992) was the only work of literary criticism she would suffer to have on her shelves. Raine, in turn, attracted her share of critical censure over the years. The philosopher Ray Monk found 'transcendental twaddle aplenty' ('TLS', 27 Dec 1991) in her three gathered volumes of reminiscences, 'Autobiographies' (1991). 
By 1968 Raine commanded a sufficiently senior literary standing to campaign for Oxford University's professorship of poetry (losing, much to her chagrin, to Roy Fuller). John Betjeman wrote telling her that he felt she, instead of him, should have been appointed poet laureate in 1972 -- 'I could not v. well turn down a good offer' (BL, Raine papers) -- and in the same year a collection of poems, 'The Lost Country', won the W. H. Smith award. Raine's reputation also grew strongly in France. 
Raine's home, 47 Paultons Square in Chelsea, became the centre of a genteel counter-culture and it was from there in 1981 that she and like-minded others launched 'Temenos', a review in which poets and artists such as Cecil Collins, Peter Redgrove, and Vernon Watkins, as well as Raine herself, sought to restore an imaginative vitality to the arts -- atrophied, as she saw it, by modernity. 
In 1990 Raine launched the Temenos Academy with the patronage of the prince of Wales, to whom she had been introduced by Laurens van der Post and on whom, by his own admission, she would have an important emotional and intellectual impact. Beginning its work in the Prince of Wales's Institute of Architecture in Regent's Park, Temenos, and from 1998 the associated 'Temenos Academy Review' (the successor to 'Temenos', whose thirteenth and final issue had appeared in 1992), vociferously promoted the cause of spirituality and imagination in a modern age chill with secular humanism. Although declaredly universal in approach, a particular theme of interest to emerge was the mystical and religious traditions of the East, a reflection of Raine's own increasing preoccupation with the subject, especially following her own trips to India undertaken in the latter years of her life and written about in the fourth and final volume of her autobiography, 'India Seen Afar' (1990). 
In the last decade of her life, Raine perhaps captured some of the long-lost happiness she associated with her early years in Northumberland and Scotland. India felt for her 'home at last' (Cookson, 58) while such honours as the queen's gold medal for poetry in 1992 and appointment as CBE in 2000 were generally, but not always, received with satisfied good grace. In 1991 she refused an invitation from the Royal Society of Literature to become one of its ten companions of literature, considering other recipients, like Iris Murdoch and Anthony Burgess, no better than 'journalists' ('The Times', 18 April 1992). Many of her late poems, tinged with regret, express a great welling of love for her family. 
Raine was engaging, attractive, and always immaculate in a tweed suit. She could be abrasive and arrogant, but was kind and generous to many people, both obscure and highly distinguished. Despite her determination to fight the 'Great Battle' on imagination's behalf, she was practical and canny, negotiating good terms for the sales of artworks and her own manuscript material, invariably to support some needy poet. She hated almost all television (Kenneth Clark's 'Civilization' was a rare exception) but listened to the radio, sharing a three-barred fire with her cat in an elegantly cluttered front room adorned with painted inscriptions by David Jones and overlooked by a photograph of Tambimuttu. 
Raine was knocked down by a car while posting a letter at the end of her street and died on 6 July 2003 from resulting complications in the nearby Chelsea and Westminster Hospital. At a service of thanksgiving for her life at the Queen's Chapel, St James's Palace, on 4 December 2003, Prince Charles delivered a remarkable eulogy, quoting freely from her many letters to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 92264


Kirk, Alexander Carnegie (1830-1892), mechanical engineer and inventor, was born in the manse of Barry, Forfarshire, on 16 July 1830, the eldest son in the family of three sons and one daughter of John Kirk (died 1858), minister of Barry, and his wife, Christian Guthrie, 'nee' Carnegie (died 1865). Sir John Kirk (1832-1922), the naturalist who accompanied David Livingstone on his second Zambezi expedition, was his younger brother. The family became reduced in circumstances when John Kirk left the established Church of Scotland in the Disruption of 1843, relinquishing a comfortable home at Arbirlot, where he had been minister since 1837, to become Free Church minister at Barry. It was fortunate therefore that Kirk received a good education: initially at Arbroath Burgh Academy, followed by study for an arts degree at Edinburgh University from 1845, and evenings at Leith Mechanics' Institute. 
In 1850 Kirk began a five-year apprenticeship at the Vulcan foundry of Robert Napier & Sons on the Clyde, where many prominent marine engineers were to be trained. He left marine engineering in 1861 on appointment as chief draughtsman to Maudslay, Sons, and Field, London, though he returned to Scotland in the same year as an engineering manager in the burgeoning shale-oil industry working for James 'Paraffin' Young, where he remained for five years. Young and his partners had opened one of the world's earliest commercial mineral-oil refineries in Bathgate in 1851. Trading originally as E. W. Binney & Co. -- from 1866 as Young's Paraffin Light and Mineral Oil Co. Ltd -- these firms successively dominated the shale-oil industry until the late 1870s. Kirk was evidently aware of the technical challenges of the fledgling industry, and its potential, on moving back north to become Youngs' chief engineer. In 1876 Young's company produced nearly 4.5 million tonnes of oil. 
In essence the shale-oil refining process comprised three steps: distillation, the key to the refining process for crude oil; chemical treatment of the distillation products with acid and alkali; and, if required, cooling and filtration to produce paraffin wax. The solid nature of shale required modified designs of retort -- which had been previously developed for the coal gas industry -- within which shale could be injected and removed in a 'continuous' fashion, without blocking the retort and allowing the manual removal of spent shale. Kirk improved a vertical type of retort, first patented in 1839, which had a daily throughput of between 1125 and 1500 kilograms of shale and a yield of around 150 litres of oil per tonne of shale. Kirk produced a configuration of design whereby three retorts surrounded a central, coal-fired furnace, all enclosed in brickwork. A charging hopper for the crushed shale was mounted on top of each retort, and at the base a water bath acted as a seal and a quench for the hot spent shale that was removed. Steam was injected into the bottom of the vertical retorts to aid distillation efficiency, and the oil condensate was drawn off at the top and recovered. The Kirk retort was widely used but gradually superseded from 1877 by the Henderson retort, invented by N. M. Henderson (1839-1917). 
The paraffin wax was removed by cooling to about 25 degree C, which made it crystallize, followed by pressure filtration and washing in naphtha and treatment with charcoal. Kirk was able to improve the cooling process by applying a refrigeration device he had invented in 1856 for chilling brine. In fact he had produced the first practical air-compression refrigerator, which was made under licence by the Norman Co. of Glasgow, and sold all over the world for ice making. 
In 1865 Kirk joined the management of James Aitken & Co.'s engine works in Glasgow, engaged in designing diverse machinery. He married, in Croydon in 1869, Ada Waller. In 1870 he left Aitkens and practised as a consulting engineer. He re-entered marine engineering in 1871 as engine works manager at Randolph, Elder & Co., which was the creation of the brilliant marine engineer John Elder (who had also been trained at Robert Napiers). Elder, who died in 1870, invented the compound steam engine concept there, and patented it in 1856. The principle was to re-use the power of the piston-driving steam leaving the high-pressure cylinder by passing it through additional lower-pressure cylinders, thereby gaining in coal economy. The first trial of the principle was the installation of his new engine in the SS 'Brandon' in 1854. Elder took out patent cover for two-, three-, and four-cylinder configurations, though it was left to others to demonstrate the full advantages of compound engines in the 1880s when technology had matured through, for example, the availability of high-pressure steel boilers. Kirk's contribution was to demonstrate practically the efficacy of the compound arrangement in triple-expansion form, with the launch in 1874 of the commercial steamer SS 'Propontis'. 
In 1877 Alexander Kirk left Elders on being appointed senior partner at the nearby shipbuilders Robert Napier & Sons, a yard that had experienced mixed fortunes. In 1860 Robert Napier (1791-1876) had retired, handing over to his two sons, under whose management the firm began to decline. Kirk brought to Napiers experience in compound engine design, and was in an admirable position to install them in his ships, now that early patents had expired. At Napiers, Alexander Kirk and his engine-works manager, Walter Brock, perfected the triple-expansion engine. Kirk secured a patent for this improved engine, but later relinquished his rights when others made claims to primacy. In 1881 one of his engines was lifted into the screw-propeller ship the SS 'Aberdeen', which was built by Napiers Govan East yard for George Thompson & Co. This was the first steamer added to Thompsons' clipper fleet, and the ship's success in returning a 30 per cent economy in coal consumption vindicated their faith in the new propulsion method. Patent disputes apart, Kirk is generally credited with this first truly convincing demonstration of the triple-expansion steam engine. 
The mercantile marine readily adopted the compound steam engine, as it provided better economy than existing propulsion units and thereby extended steamships' voyages, enabling them to surpass sailing ships. However, the Admiralty remained sceptical of the new approach until Kirk informed them that he had sold compound engines of around 12,000 ihp (indicated horse power) to the imperial Russian navy from 1883. The Admiralty responded by placing two orders for cruisers at Napiers: the first of these, the SS 'Galatea', performed above their expectations at trials in 1885. 
The rival Clyde yards, Napiers and Elders (renamed Fairfield Shipbuilding and Engineering Co. in 1886), suffered mixed fortunes, especially during the severe slump in British shipbuilding in the 1880s due to world trade fluctuations. Fairfields gained orders for two Cunard liners in 1891, each equipped with two sets of triple-expansion engines. The technical success of the triple-expansion engine was by then proven and with its successor, the quadruple-expansion engine -- developed by Kirk's colleague Walter Brock at the marine engineers Peter Denny of Dumbarton -- became the preferred propulsion units for the world's merchant fleets for the next fifty years. 
Kirk's distinguished engineering career was recognized by Glasgow University with the award of an honorary doctorate of laws in 1888, and by service as president of the Institute of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland from 1887 to 1889 and as vice-president of the Institution of Naval Architects in 1888. He died at his home, 19 Athole Gardens, Kelvinside, Glasgow, on 5 October 1892, survived by his wife and their six children. His estate of about $600 was relatively modest for an acclaimed engineer and entrepreneur, whose level of achievement is indicated by his progression from apprentice to senior partner in Robert Napier & Sons in twenty-two years, and his thirty-seven patents. 
Kirk's engineering skills made an enormous impact both on marine engine design for ocean-going vessels and on processing equipment for the shale-oil extraction industry, especially his refrigerator invention. His range of expertise spanned thermodynamics, mineralogy, chemistry, metallurgy, hydrodynamics, and mechanical engineering. The combination of inventive skill and management expertise gained him an enviable reputation that extended far beyond the confines of his native Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 92266


Schapera, Isaac (1905-2003), ethnographer and social anthropologist, was born in Garies, Namaqualand, Cape Colony, on 23 June 1905, the youngest of five children of Herman Schapera and his wife, Rosa, Jewish immigrants from White Russia. His mother died in 1918. His father, who began as a pedlar and became a small shopkeeper, went bankrupt in 1924, and in 1925 committed suicide. 
Schapera left home at the age of fifteen, when his father remarried, and moved into a boarding house. (For the rest of his life he was to live alone in furnished rooms.) He graduated from the South African College School and entered the University of Cape Town in 1921. There he was drawn into social anthropology by Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-Brown, who held the first established chair in the subject anywhere in the British empire. Radcliffe-Brown introduced his students to a Durkheimian view of social systems, but Schapera was more impressed by his insistence that South Africa was becoming a single society, and that segregation was impossible. He went to the London School of Economics to study for a doctorate in 1925, just a month after his father's suicide. His thesis synthesized what was known about the Bushmen and Hottentot peoples of southern Africa, for whom he adopted the umbrella term Khoisan. Published in 1930, this study remained the standard reference work for a generation. He was greatly influenced by Bronislaw Malinowski, the dominant figure in social anthropology at the LSE, and would remark that, in contrast to Radcliffe-Brown, Malinowski always made his students think. He kept thinking for many years about Malinowski's ideas, but his feelings about him were decidedly ambivalent. 
Soon after his return to South Africa in 1929 Schapera began to do research among the Kgatla, a Tswana tribe in the Bechuanaland protectorate. His fieldwork took the form mainly of interviews with experts (including rain doctors, chiefs, and elders), while literate assistants conducted more routine interviews and collected texts and census and genealogical data. Between 1929 and 1934 he made annual visits to Mochudi, the Kgatla capital, usually in university vacations, spending just over fourteen months in the field over this period of five years. In 1930 he was appointed to a lectureship at the University of Cape Town, and was promoted to the chair of social anthropology in 1935. He was a conscientious but not inspiring teacher and department head. He was more active in broader academic circles, particularly in the national network of African studies. During this period he edited two survey volumes, 'Western Civilization and the Natives of South Africa: Studies in Culture Contact' (1934), and 'The Bantu-Speaking Tribes of South Africa: an Ethnographical Survey' (1937). 
In 1934 Schapera began studies on behalf of the Bechuanaland administration. His first commission was to produce a compilation of Tswana law. His 'Handbook of Tswana Law and Custom' (1938) was designed to represent the laws that were in force at the time. Schapera insisted on the emergence of a modern Tswana law, fed by traditional principles but also by tribal and governmental legislation, and responsive to social changes in Tswana society. His two other major commissions concerned labour migration and issues relating to land tenure. In 1940 he published another and very different study of social change, his one attempt to reach a broader audience. 'Married Life in an African Tribe' described courtship, love affairs, and sexual practices, including masturbation and homosexuality, and documented in remarkable detail the day-to-day life of married people. He also made pioneering statistical and demographic studies. He described the pattern of cousin marriage among the Tswana, relating it to the class structure and documenting changes over four generations. He published his monograph 'The Ethnic Composition of Tswana Tribes' in 1952. 
By the late 1940s Schapera's fieldwork days were over, and in 1950 he moved from the University of Cape Town to a chair at the London School of Economics. He continued to teach and to write about South Africa and published comparative essays on the traditional political systems of the region. He also edited important historical sources, notably 'Praise Poems of Tswana Chiefs' (1965) and five volumes of David Livingstone's letters and journals. He took early retirement from the LSE in 1969, bored with teaching (never his forte) and unsympathetic to the student insurgency of the time. 
Orderly and ascetic, lonely, and liable to depression, Schapera never married, and had no significant love affair. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1958 and dutifully undertook official functions in professional bodies, including as president of the Royal Anthropological Institute (1961-3), but after his retirement he withdrew within a small circle of loyal friends, although he enjoyed gossiping about anthropologists, kept up with new research on South Africa, and read widely. Frail but in good health to the end, he died from a heart attack, apparently while cooking himself breakfast, on 26 June 2003; he was declared dead at University College Hospital, Camden. 
Schapera's publications on the Tswana represent the most complete single-handed ethnography of an African people. They provide the baseline for modern studies of Botswana, and are valued by the educated people in the country. He tended to be dismissive of anthropological theories, preferring to describe himself as an ethnographer, a role which he thought of as very like that of an economic or social historian. 


@@@@@


doc= 92267


Schlesinger, John Richard (1926-2003), film and stage director, was born on 16 February 1926 at 53 Hollycroft Avenue, Hampstead, London, the son of Bernard Edward Schlesinger (1896-1984), paediatrician, and his wife, Winifred Henrietta, 'nee' Regensburg (1897-1986), who had studied music at Trinity College of Music and languages at Oxford. His parents had German-Jewish family backgrounds, and though their Jewishness was never repudiated it was overshadowed in his father's case at least by 'an embrace of his Englishness' (Mann, 52). The Jewish heritage nevertheless remained an influence in John Schlesinger's artistic development. He recalled a normal, middle-class childhood in Hampstead (he grew up at 15 Templewood Avenue), though he was not happy at the boarding-schools to which he was sent: St Edmund's, a preparatory school in Hindhead, Surrey, and Uppingham School. During school holidays he would rope in family members to perform plays of his own devising. Having no gift for games (unlike his father) he felt himself an outsider at Uppingham, and many of his best films featured protagonists at odds with their society. His homosexuality, which he did not acknowledge publicly until the 1990s, was another key influence on the sort of artist he became. 
On leaving Uppingham, Schlesinger made a ten-minute film called, starkly, 'Horror' (1946), shot on 16 mm; but before he could pursue his film-making intentions (a goal displacing the earlier one of architecture) he was conscripted into the army to do his national service with the Royal Engineers. He predictably detested the army, but life improved when he transferred to the combined services entertainment unit, and 'he started entertaining troops with a magic act' ('The Independent'). This, and drag shows performed with a fellow conscript, Kenneth Williams, gave him his first serious whiff of show business. Having completed his national service, he read English at Balliol College, Oxford (1947-50), where he seems to have spent most of his time as an actor, scoring a success as Trinculo in Nevill Coghill's production of 'The Tempest'. At Oxford he also made two films with Alan Cooke, 'Black Legend' (1948) and 'The Starfish' (1950), the former 'financed by his doting grandparents' ('Sunday Telegraph'). 'Black Legend' was praised by the 'Sunday Times' reviewer Dilys Powell, but Michael Balcon, head of Ealing Studios, allegedly dismissed it as 'amateur' -- which of course it was, as was 'The Starfish', for which, nevertheless, Schlesinger and Cooke managed to engage the well-known Welsh actor Kenneth Griffith. 
These early films, in their liking for horror and fantasy, pointed to Schlesinger's later sorties into genre film-making; the realist elements in his work, particularly in the films that made his name, more likely derived from his years as a television film-maker, on the highly regarded current affairs programmes 'Tonight' and 'Monitor', first screened in 1957 and 1958 respectively. In addition, during the 1950s he acted in films, including two for the Boulting brothers ('Single-Handed', 1952; and 'Brothers in Law', 1956), and episodes of the television series 'Robin Hood' (1956), directed by his Oxford contemporary Lindsay Anderson, and 'Ivanhoe' (1958). He also acted in sixteen plays between 1950 and 1955, first for the Oxford Players, later for Colchester and Nottingham repertory companies, for the British Commonwealth Theatre Company, and on tour with the Wilson Barrett Company. Years later he disparaged his acting ability, claiming he would never have hired himself as an actor. Nevertheless he became a very notable director of actors, many of whom attested to his sympathetic understanding. Moreover, his wide-ranging activities in the 1950s prefigured a film-maker who, unlike many of his peers, went on to be very prolific. He loved to work and was not prepared simply to wait for the perfect project to drop into his lap. 
Television was undoubtedly Schlesinger's great training ground, as it was for many British directors. He made twenty-six films for the BBC, 'all reflecting his curiosity about people' (Hacker and Price, 384). 'Tonight' was a light-hearted, weeknightly programme based on, and exploring further, items currently in the news. Schlesinger directed six of these, the first of which required him to create the flavour of London's Petticoat Lane market. This, and a later one, 'Song of the Valley', a narrative based on a song (made popular by Dorothy Squires) about a prisoner returning to his Yorkshire home, hinted at the kinds of films he would make in his features career. 'Monitor', produced by Huw Wheldon, offered him greater creative freedom. Schlesinger's film 'Circus' (1958) introduced the series, and he did some very distinguished work there, including 'Benjamin Britten at Aldeburgh' (1959) and 'The Italian Opera' (1960), the latter featuring a barn-storming Italian opera company that came to Drury Lane. 
In his television films Schlesinger had shown himself an acute observer of human behaviour, aware of human frailty and the needs for compromise, and he had learnt too a capacity to render narrative in cinematic terms. What clinched his reputation was 'Terminus' (1960), a half-hour film he made for British Transport Films, under the producer-in-charge, Edgar Anstey. In this he combined narrative (a little boy lost and weeping) with documentary-style observation of a 'day in the life of' Waterloo Station. A near-perfect melding of the real and the invented, it was particularly notable for its sympathetically observant portrayal of ordinary people, some of them caught in bewildering circumstances. On the basis of 'Terminus' the producer Joseph Janni told Schlesinger, 'I'd like to discover you' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema', 510), thus beginning a very fruitful working relationship that accounted for six of Schlesinger's best films. 
Between 1958 and 1963 Britain produced a batch of films which came to be bracketed by the term 'new wave', a British riposte to the French 'nouvelle vague'. In Britain its roots were in the poetic documentaries of the Free Cinema programmes at the National Film Theatre, in the Royal Court Theatre in the period ushered in by 'Look Back in Anger' (1956), and in the provincially set novels of John Braine, Kingsley Amis, and others. These manifestations of a new spirit at work in British culture drew praise for their explorations of kinds of life not usually depicted in the arts and especially not in the British cinema of the earlier 1950s, which was an essentially middle-class affair. Lindsay Anderson, Tony Richardson, and Karel Reisz, all Free Cinema alumni, made their feature debuts at this time, as did Jack Clayton with the seminal 'Room at the Top' (1959). Schlesinger contributed 'A Kind of Loving' (1962). He always felt an outsider with the Free Cinema group and bridled at Anderson's telling him, 'You've got to set your sights higher than television'. Schlesinger recalled, 'I felt resented, frankly' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema', 511). Nevertheless, 'A Kind of Loving' still seems very much a part of that short-lived realist, working-class, northern-set renaissance -- and, if it seems less politically slanted in class matters than some of the others, it remains an affectingly humane document. Alan Bates, with whom Schlesinger enjoyed a long working relationship and friendship, plays a young man who gets himself trapped into marriage with a vacuous young woman. Both he and the girl are treated with sympathy for their plight and for the way they knuckle down to find 'a kind of loving'. The film was characterized by superb acting, astute observation of its everyday setting, and a tonal command which steered clear of sentimentality, settling for astringent, heartfelt truth instead. 
Schlesinger's other 'new wave' film, 'Billy Liar' (1963), was less commercially popular but was in some ways more adventurous, combining realist observation of the grim northern town in which the mendacious eponym is entrapped with flights of fancy in which he imagines a more glamorous existence. It is a wry, witty film, now vividly remembered for how it 'made a star of Julie Christie, whose entrance down a drab northern street is one of the most potent film moments of the decade' ('The Independent'). Like Bates, Christie became a Schlesinger regular and in his next film she became an international star. This was 'Darling' (1965), which won three Oscars -- awarded to Christie as best actress, Frederic Raphael for his original screenplay, and Julie Harris for costume design. In spite of Schlesinger's own later distaste for it, 'Darling' remains a film immensely evocative of its period and of a throwaway hedonistic culture. To eschew the contemporary, Schlesinger and Janni next turned to Thomas Hardy's 'Far from the Madding Crowd' (1967), which co-starred Bates and Christie and brought Peter Finch into Schlesinger's orbit. The film failed to find much favour, but was stunningly location-shot by Nicolas Roeg, had sumptuous production design from Richard MacDonald, featured a highly effective starring quartet (Terence Stamp was the fourth), and provided Schlesinger with a calling card for Hollywood. 
Schlesinger scored a major critical and commercial success with his first American film, 'Midnight Cowboy' (1969), winning Academy awards for best film, best director, and best adapted screenplay. The film deals with the experiences of a midwestern boy who comes to New York expecting a lucrative career as a hustler, but finds friendship with a dying down-and-out instead. Schlesinger was aware 'that there are very delicate areas in the film' but ran into 'no censorship problems, although there were individuals who disliked some sections of it' ('A buck for Joe', 'Films & Filming', Nov 1969). He was no doubt referring to a scene of homosexual activity followed by some alarming violence, but the film's real strength was in the growth of the feeling between the characters played with such empathy by Dustin Hoffman and Jon Voight, and the vicious, vivid city they struggled to survive in. While in America, Schlesinger entered a stable relationship with the photographer Michael Donald Childers, which endured until Schlesinger's death. 
Schlesinger's capacity to render complex feelings between ill-assorted people was also the central strength of his next film, 'Sunday Bloody Sunday' (1971), for which he returned to England and which reunited him with Janni and Peter Finch. Finch, with remarkably shrewd sympathy, played a homosexual Jewish doctor, in love with an attractive young man (Murray Head) who is having a concurrent affair with an employment counsellor (Glenda Jackson). All three know about each other and the film with painful honesty settles for the notion of compromise in human relations. It was probably Schlesinger's finest film, of which he said 'It's a film I wanted to make and the opportunity was there to do it' (Gow, 13), and 'It's the most personal of all my films' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema', 513). 'Sunday Bloody Sunday' was his last wholly successful cinema film, winning BAFTA awards for Schlesinger, Finch, and Jackson, and also an award as best film. 
Most of Schlesinger's subsequent cinema work was American and of little lasting significance, though 'Marathon Man' (1976), with Hoffman and Laurence Olivier, was an accomplished thriller, as was 'Pacific Heights' (1990), with an alarming Michael Keaton; while 'The Falcon and the Snowman' (1985) has some interest as a study of contrasting motivations among spies. In Britain 'Yanks' (1978) perceptively dramatized the effects on a northern English town of American servicemen billeted there during the Second World War, though its forte was verisimilitude rather than perspective; and 'Madame Sousatzka' (1988) overdid the eccentricity in its tale of a piano teacher and her star pupil. The American films included failures such as 'The Day of the Locust' (1974), an overblown version of Nathanael West's scathing satire on Hollywood, and 'Honky Tonk Freeway' (1981), a disastrously unfunny farce. The latter was savaged by critics and ignored by audiences, and Schlesinger did not film again for four years, except -- and it is a major exception -- on television. In 1983 he directed Alan Bates (as Guy Burgess) and Coral Browne (as herself twenty-five years earlier) in 'An Englishman Abroad'. From a witty and touching screenplay by Alan Bennett, Schlesinger explored the Moscow meeting of the exiled spy and the actress on tour there with 'Hamlet'. It became a classic of the small screen. 
All Schlesinger's best subsequent work was for television, including 'A Question of Attribution' (1992), in which another (former) spy, Anthony Blunt, discusses the provenance of a Titian with the queen (Prunella Scales), and a charming and funny version of Stella Gibbons's 'Cold Comfort Farm' (1995). He also kept himself busy with theatre -- directing John Gielgud in 'Julius Caesar' (1977) and Placido Domingo in 'Un Ballo in Maschera' (1990), among others -- and numerous television commercials. In 1991 he was hired to make a brief campaign film for the prime minister, John Major; though not strongly political, he admired Major, and perhaps impishly was tilting at his left-wing friends. 
Schlesinger's was an erratic career, sprawling over theatre, opera, and television as well as, pre-eminently, screen, and including low points when he was out of favour with both public and critics. However, his best work, of which there was a good deal, was distinguished by its humanity and the honesty of its perceptions -- as was the man himself. He was made CBE in 1970 and a fellow of BAFTA in 1995; among his other awards was one for outstanding achievement in directing from the Hollywood film festival in 1999. He suffered a stroke in late 2001, from which he never fully recovered, and died on 25 July 2003 in Palm Springs, California. He was cremated and his ashes were interred at the Liberal Jewish Synagogue cemetery in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 92268


Shawcross, Hartley William, Baron Shawcross (1902-2003), barrister, politician, and businessman, was born on 4 February 1902 at Giessen, a small university town in Germany, the elder son (there were no daughters) of John Shawcross (1871-1966), lecturer in English literature at Giessen, and his Danish wife, Hilda Constance, 'nee' Asser (died 1942), an ardent suffragette. While still an infant he was brought to England, living first near Oxford and then on Clapham Common, although a cottage in the heart of Ashdown Forest was, in his own words, 'the real family home' (Shawcross, 13). At first privately tutored at home, at the age of twelve he gained entrance to Dulwich College. He joined the Labour Party in 1918 and served as ward secretary for Wandsworth Common, and in 1922 as the official election agent for Lewis Silkin, later a fellow minister in the Attlee government. 
Unwilling to follow his father to Oxford, Shawcross decided to become a doctor but spent a gap year at Geneva University studying French. When in 1923 the Second Socialist International convened in Geneva, he boldly offered his services as translator, and so became a protege of Herbert Morrison, who urged him to forsake medicine for the law as being the better route into politics. He joined Gray's Inn, and in 1925 came top of his year in bar finals, winning the certificate of honour. Briefless in London (supporting himself by coaching Malay princes for the bar examinations, one of whom became the first prime minister of Malaysia), in 1927 he moved to Liverpool. There he became a part-time lecturer in law at Liverpool University. Ensuring that his lectures took place at a time convenient to his court work, he joined the northern circuit in the chambers of David Maxwell Fyfe, the future home secretary and lord chancellor. 
A rising star at the provincial bar, in 1933 Shawcross became head of his own set at 43 Castle Street, Liverpool (where the members included Rose Heilbron), while also a door tenant at 1 Hare Court in the Temple. In 1939 he took silk, and became a master of the bench of Gray's Inn. With a fixed place in the legal firmament he practised thereafter exclusively from London chambers. He gained judicial experience as an assistant chairman of east Sussex quarter sessions in 1941, recorder of Salford from 1941 to 1945, and recorder of Kingston upon Thames from 1946 to 1951. 
Immediately after the outbreak of the Second World War, Shawcross became chairman of the enemy aliens tribunal for the Golders Green-Hampstead area. A member of the emergency reserve of officers since 1937, he was dissuaded by the Admiralty from taking a commission in the navy. In 1940 he became legal adviser to the regional commissioner (a crown appointee whose role was to co-ordinate the machinery of government and liaise with the military) for the south-east region, and soon afterwards a deputy commissioner. Between 1942 and 1945 he was regional commissioner for the north-west region. From 1940 to 1945 he was independent chairman of the Kent district coalmining board. In 1943 he became chairman of the Catering Wages Commission, and sought to improve conditions for workers in the industry. Multi-tasking, in the jargon of a later era, was a constant theme of his professional life. 
Returning to the bar after the war, Shawcross was approached by various constituency parties in the north-west, where his reputation had grown during his years as a commissioner, to become a candidate (not all in the same interest, for his particular socialist sympathies, the product more of emotion than of economics, had not been widely publicized for some twenty years). He chose to become Labour candidate for the St Helen's constituency, and duly won the seat in the general election of July 1945. 
Appointed in August 1945 attorney-general in the first Attlee government, Shawcross was the lead British prosecuting counsel in the Nuremberg trials (assisted by two future lord chancellors, Maxwell Fyfe and Elwyn Jones). He made memorable opening and closing speeches, the latter described by the writer Rebecca West as 'full of a living pity which gave the men in the box their worst moment' (R. West, 'A Train of Powder', 1955, 21). Decades later he spoke out in the House of Lords against what became the 'War Crimes Act' (1991), which conferred jurisdiction on United Kingdom courts to try persons suspected of war crimes in Nazi Germany. In his view the identification of suspects, difficult enough after five days, would be all but impossible after fifty years. 
As attorney-general, Shawcross was active on the crown's behalf in litigation, pursuing a tradition which waned in the years after his departure from office and was only intermittently revived. Abandoning the practice by which fees were paid in addition to the attorney-general's salary, he arranged with the Treasury for the latter to be fixed at $10,000 per annum -- the equivalent of the prime minister's. After initial demur, in 1945 he accepted the knighthood which then conventionally went with the office and in June 1946 he was made a privy councillor. He prosecuted William Joyce (Lord Haw-Haw) and John Amery for treason, Alan Nunn May and Klaus Fuchs for disclosure to Russia of British nuclear secrets, and John George Haigh, the so-called 'acid bath murderer'. In 1948 he represented Britain at the International Court of Justice in The Hague in a case arising from the mining by Albania of British ships in the Corfu channel. He was widely recognized as the finest advocate of his generation. 
In 1948 Shawcross took the lead role in the Lynskey tribunal into suspected corruption amongst civil servants and government ministers. His characteristically devastating cross-examination of Sydney Stanley, one of the key suspects, prompted the latter to exclaim, 'Sir Hartley, you are trying to trick me with the truth' (A. Smith, address at memorial service). While his public profile was raised, so was the level of suspicion of him in the Labour Party, and such suspicion was further increased in 1951 by his prosecution for conspiracy of communist strike leaders in the docks. He also incurred the enmity of Hugh Dalton, a witness, who referred to him as 'Sir Peacock'. His critics were unsympathetic to the constitutional principle sometimes known as 'the Shawcross doctrine', that an attorney-general's decisions on prosecution had to be taken independently of governmental instructions. He was offered but declined the chance to become lord chief justice in 1946, and master of the rolls in 1949. Lord Goddard, who served in the former position from 1946 to 1958, privately favoured him as his successor, but with the advent of a series of Conservative administrations his chance had passed. 
On the political front, Shawcross led in 1946 in the Commons on the repeal of the trade union legislation of 1927 and spoke in favour of the nationalization of the coal industry, with which he had become familiar in representing in 1937 the pit owners at an inquiry into the gas explosion at the Gresford colliery in 1934. He was best remembered for his -- frequently misquoted and abbreviated -- observation in his winding-up speech on the third reading of the former bill, 'We are the masters at the moment. And not only at the moment but for a very long time to come' (Shawcross, 141-2). In 1946 he made an attack on the press barons lords Kemsley and Beaverbrook, for which Attlee compelled him to apologize. His aggressive forensic skills were not always shown to their best advantage in the political arena. From 1945 to 1949 he served as a principal British delegate to the peripatetic United Nations assembly. In consequence, in April 1951 he was considered (but rejected by Attlee, who was averse to having a lawyer in that position) as a possible successor to Ernest Bevin as foreign secretary. Instead he became president of the Board of Trade. His promotion to the cabinet compensated for the halving of his income. 
After the general election of October 1951, when he participated in the first televised election broadcast, but unwilling to oppose tory economic policies with which he essentially agreed, Shawcross declined to shadow his old department and became a shadow spokesman on foreign affairs. His attendance in the House of Commons became increasingly sparse, and he resumed in lieu a highly successful legal practice. He represented the 'Daily Mirror' against Winston Churchill's claim for libel for the newspaper's headline 'Whose hand on the trigger?', but later had Churchill himself as a (non-paying) client and friend. A projected profile by Woodrow Wyatt, 'Man or superman', for the 'Sunday Express' in 1953, which might have been perceived (unfairly) as breaching the bar's code of conduct against self-advertisement, was never published because of Churchill's intervention with Lord Beaverbrook. He was chairman of the bar council from 1954 to 1957 and treasurer of Gray's Inn in 1954. 
In 1956 some of his Labour Party colleagues pressed Shawcross to contest the party leadership, but he would not stand against his old patron, Morrison, even though he realized that Morrison's was a lost cause. Furthermore, he was by now moving rapidly to the right -- or, as he put it, 'my political opinions became more mature' (Shawcross, 232). He was against unofficial strikes and nationalization, and in favour of moral values, lower taxation, and a strong relationship between the United Kingdom and the USA. He was never shy to promulgate his views in articles for and letters written to newspapers. His lifestyle was that of a champagne socialist. He enjoyed the benefits of an apartment in London, a country house (Friston Place, a grade one listed building in Sussex), a yacht (his hobby was sailing), two cars, horses, nannies, and staff, and described his existence with a degree of meiosis as 'not living in a particularly modest way' (ibid., 223). From 1953 he was a member of the Other Club. He had realistic hopes of the woolsack had Hugh Gaitskell become prime minister. (Woodrow Wyatt later commented waspishly in his diaries, 'I had the impression that the only person Hartley thought would have been suitable as Lord Chancellor in this lifetime was himself' ('Journals of Woodrow Wyatt', 1.379).) However, in 1958 he decided to quit both politics and the bar. He resigned his seat and in 1959 became a cross-bench life peer, as Baron Shawcross, of Friston, Sussex. 
It was Bernard Levin (not Churchill) who dubbed Shawcross 'Sir Shortly Floorcross', but he never became a card-carrying Conservative. From the early 1950s he was an instinctive coalitionist but, while showing an interest in the new Social Democratic Party in the early 1980s, he ended up a devotee of Margaret Thatcher. He was not the only man of the left whose political pilgrimage reached the same destination. He based the latter part of his career in the City. He became a director of many blue-chip companies, including Ford, Rank Hovis McDougall, Hawker Siddeley, and Thames Television Ltd (of which he was chairman from 1969 to 1974), as well as being special adviser to Morgan Guaranty Trust of New York between 1965 and 1994. He also became a classic establishment figure with what he called a parcel of 'odd-jobs' -- chancellor of Sussex University (1965-85), governor of Dulwich College, chairman of the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (1969-80), chairman of the Press Council (1974-78), and chairman of Justice (1956-72). He was the recipient of nine honorary degrees and sundry other distinctions, including, reflecting his adolescent ambitions, honorary membership of two royal medical colleges. 
Shawcross's public success was not always mirrored in his private life. A handsome man, he was always attracted by (and attractive to) women -- a flirt, but never promiscuous. On 24 May 1924 he married, at St Joseph's Roman Catholic church, Romford, Alberta Rosita Shyvers, the 23-year-old sister of a fellow Gray's Inn student, and daughter of William Shyvers, ship broker; she became a chronic invalid. In his autobiography he revealed that in consequence he had never had sexual relations with her. In 1943 she died of an overdose. On 21 September 1944 he married, at Rotherfield parish church in Sussex, Joan Winifred Mather, aged twenty-six, the only daughter of Hume Mather, a Yorkshire banker. She had been his wartime driver. They had two sons, William and Hume, and a daughter, Joanna. Tragically, Joan Shawcross died in a riding accident in 1974. In his last decade Shawcross's increasing incapacity compelled his family to put him under the care of the court of protection. His third marriage, on 18 April 1997, to Susanne Monique Huiskamp (died 2013), the former wife of Bob Huiskamp, which his family opposed, was for that reason contracted in Gibraltar. He died on 10 July 2003 at Cowbeech Farm, Cowbeech, near Hailsham, Sussex, and was survived by his third wife and the three children of his second marriage. He was buried at St Andrew's Church, Jevington, next to his second wife. A memorial service was held at St Clement Danes on 4 February 2004. 
Shawcross had a career of both brilliant achievement and unfulfilled promise. Identified at various junctures of his life as a candidate for the highest political and legal offices in the land, he attained none of them. His self-deprecatory memoirs, 'Life Sentence' (1995), written in his ninetieth year, suggest a wistful, though not painful, awareness of the limits of his considerable success. But if, for all his many achievements, he could fairly be described as the 'nearly man' of British law and British politics in the mid-twentieth century, few, if any, of his contemporaries came so close to the top of both trees. 


@@@@@


doc= 92270


Theodore Cressy Skeat (1907-2003), palaeographer and librarian, was born on 15 February 1907 at Romeland Cottage, St Albans, Hertfordshire. From Whitgift School, Croydon, he went to Christ's College, Cambridge, and then spent the years 1929-31 at the British School of Archaeology in Athens. In 1931 he joined the department of manuscripts at the British Museum as an assistant keeper. He became deputy keeper in 1948 and keeper (and Egerton librarian) in 1961, remaining in that post until his retirement in 1972. On 30 April 1942 he married Nellie (Olive) Martin (1904/5-1992), daughter of Thomas Bertie Martin, coal merchant; they had one child, a son, Jonathan. Among Skeat's earliest publications were (with H. Idris Bell) 'Fragments of an Unknown Gospel' (1935), an edition of the apocryphal gospel later known as the 'Egerton 2 papyrus', and (with H. J. M. Milne) 'Scribes and Correctors of the Codex Sinaiticus' (1938). There followed almost 100 published articles and books on all aspects of ancient book production from dictation to the cost of papyrus, including a magisterial chapter on early Christian book production in the 'Cambridge History of the Bible' (1969) and (with Colin Roberts) 'The Birth of the Codex' (1983). Skeat was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1963, but renounced his fellowship in 1980 in protest at the academy's conduct in the Anthony Blunt affair. A modest, even shy man, he disliked the attendant publicity. In retirement he lived in Ealing, London. He died at Ealing Hospital, Southall, on 25 June 2003, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 92273


Stuart, John Spencer Innes (1940-2003), Russian scholar and art historian, was born on 20 May 1940 at 55 Queen's Road, Aberdeen, the son of Innes Stuart (1905-1992), a Scottish landowner and insurance official then serving as a captain in the Gordon Highlanders, and his wife, Audrey Ruston, 'nee' Spencer (1907-1994). His early years were spent in Angus, where his father took up farming after the Second World War. He was educated at Eton College, where his art master, Wilfrid Blunt (brother of Anthony, the art historian and spy), and regular trips to London sale rooms nurtured his love of painting and the decorative arts. His love of Russian history, too, originated at Eton when, urged by Stuart's protestant parents to curb their son's interest in Roman Catholicism, his housemaster gave him a book on the Russian imperial family. The distraction succeeded but it was a pyrrhic victory, for Stuart became so fascinated by Russian culture that he promptly converted to Russian Orthodoxy. 
In 1959 Stuart went on to read Slavonic studies at St John's College, Cambridge, under Nikolay Andreyev, the Russian historian and medievalist. On graduating in 1963 he devoted himself to the study of the Eastern Christian world through more direct means, travelling extensively in the eastern Mediterranean, the Middle East, and Russia, which he first visited in the mid-1960s with Camilla Gray, the historian of Russian avant-garde art. In 1963 he had joined Sothebys as a porter. George Costakis, a renowned collector of Russian avant-garde painting, remarked to the chairman that the new porter's erudition outshone that of the resident icon expert, and Stuart was soon promoted to work as an assistant in the Russian section of the art department. His was no ordinary progression through the auction house ranks: he temporarily left Sothebys to work with Marina Bowater at her gallery, which specialized in Russian art; in 1970 he studied for a year at the Grabar Central State Restoration Workshop for Medieval Painting in Moscow; and he also spent a year in Greece. His resulting knowledge of the technical production and conservation of icons, as well as of their aesthetic, theological, and historical significance, underpinned his first book, 'Ikons', which appeared in 1975 to wide and lasting acclaim. The following year he rejoined Sothebys in their new Russian department, which soon became one of the highest earning departments in Sothebys history. 
Stuart worked as a consultant for Sothebys Russian department for nineteen years. Those two decades were an era of heady excitement in London's Russian cultural scene, and Stuart stood at its epicentre. His homes in Notting Hill, first in Kensington Park Gardens and later in Colville Mews, were the setting for soirees frequented by the most eminent Russian emigres, the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich and his opera singer wife Galina Vishnevskaya among them. In 1990 Stuart co-curated the exhibition 'Gates of Mystery' at the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the same year he co-wrote 'St Petersburg: Portrait of an Imperial City'. At Sothebys his discerning eye rescued many objects from oblivion. An icon purportedly by a nineteenth-century Russian painter, for example, was identified by Stuart as the only known Byzantine image of the triumph of orthodoxy, and was subsequently bought by the British Museum. Most memorable of all was the panache with which he presided over Sothebys increasingly flamboyant Russian sales. These culminated in the record-breaking 'Russian week' in 1995, when such was Sothebys embrace of all things Russian that even the doormen dressed as Cossacks. Stuart, invariably late for appointments and deadlines (a crucial sale catalogue once appeared just one day before the event) but with a fine sense of timing for the pivotal events in life, chose that moment to leave Sothebys. He set up an art consultancy and continued to work on 'Icons: the triumph of Orthodoxy', which was unpublished at the time of his death. 
Stuart was far from the establishment figure that his education and primary employment might suggest. An avid motorbike owner, in 1987 he published 'Rockers!', an account of British bike culture that was reputedly the most shoplifted book in London for a time. When not charming Russia's intelligentsia and aristocracy, he was advising pop singers and their video producers on rock culture. Among others, The Clash, Duran Duran, and Kylie Minogue consulted him. Many a Sothebys client was taken aback by Stuart's arrival on a noisy British (never Japanese) motorbike, and he lent bikes, leathers, and accessories to the Victoria and Albert Museum's exhibition, 'British Street Style'. For all his passion for biking, however, his greatest pride in his final years was an apartment in the heart of St Petersburg, in the building in which the writer Ivan Turgenev once lived, which he renovated so beautifully that it featured in Russian 'Vogue'. He never married, but was a popular uncle and godfather. He died of cancer at Jayes Park, Ockley, Surrey (the home of his sister and brother-in-law), on 12 July 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 92276


Walker, Alexander Alfred (1930-2003), film critic and biographer, was born on 22 March 1930 at Carleton Home, Portadown, co. Armagh, Northern Ireland, the son of Alfred Walker, commercial traveller, and his wife, Ethel Linda Harris, 'nee' Andrews. At the time of his birth his parents were living at 2 Erin Crescent, Portadown. He was educated at Portadown grammar school, the Queen's University, Belfast, where he took a degree in political philosophy, the College d'Europe, Bruges, and the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. It had been his intention to become a diplomat, but his experience of the burgeoning international civil service at Bruges proved disillusioning. While teaching in America (he was a lecturer in political philosophy and comparative government at the University of Michigan from 1952 to 1954), and partly through a meeting in New York with the newspaper tycoon Lord Beaverbrook, he began to consider a career in journalism and the possibility of turning a long-standing passion for the cinema into a vocation. Returning to Britain he joined the 'Birmingham Gazette' in 1954, and on its absorption by the 'Birmingham Post' two years later he became a leader writer for that paper and its film critic. In 1960 he joined Beaverbrook's 'Evening Standard' as film critic and remained in this position until his death. Over these years Walker became a pre-eminent figure in his profession despite writing for a newspaper that circulated only in the home counties. He was thrice named critic of the year in the British press awards, and was one of only three British film critics to have served on the jury at the Cannes film festival. 
An only child of a middle-class protestant family, Walker grew up in a small Ulster town with three cinemas, and this background shaped his view of the world and his approach to the movies. The 'fillums', as he continued to call them with the slight Irish accent that never left him, were 'consolation entertainment' for the strait-laced protestant majority that lacked the fortifying 'performance culture' of the Roman Catholics in their midst (Walker, 4). In his schooldays the young Walker appeared in Northern Ireland contributions to the BBC's 'Children's Hour', which prepared the way for him to become a fluent and confident broadcaster as an adult. From the age of four he was a voracious cinema-goer, initially accompanied by a doting mother and a compliant 'maidservant-cum-nanny' (ibid.). In his early teens he developed a discriminating perception of film through reading C. A. Lejeune in 'The Observer', Dilys Powell in the 'Sunday Times', and the few serious books on the cinema available in his local library. His time in the United States and a spell of psychoanalysis helped him understand the connection between Hollywood cinema, politics, and the aspirations and anxieties of the cinema-going public. The association with Beaverbrook, with whom he established an amusing, dangerously poised relationship, made him understand the need to entertain a popular readership; the protestant work ethic in which he was reared compelled him to approach his job with dedication and treat the film industry with appropriate seriousness. 
Walker was the youngest film critic of a major newspaper when he first took his seat at London press shows. When he died he was the oldest and longest-serving member of a critical fraternity that had become larger (through the addition of reviewers from radio, TV, listings magazines, websites, and free sheets), and increasingly raffish and indiscriminate. With his grey, neatly coiffed hairdo (bouffant to add to his slightly less than average height), he came to cut a self-consciously anachronistic figure in his white collars, silk ties, bespoke suits, and well-polished shoes. He never wore a hat, never carried anything other than a newspaper or a bag from Fortnum and Mason's or Hatchard's, and his umbrellas were models of miniaturization. His legendary anti-smoking campaign (which occasionally led to fracas in the foyer and once came near the courtroom) had its slogan on his telephone answering machine: 'And remember, smoking is the slow way to suicide.' 
From his earliest days in London, Walker stood apart from the throng. He became friends with film-makers, his particular acquaintances in the industry being Stanley Kubrick and Peter Sellers, and he wrote books about both. He was a genial presence among his colleagues, although he eschewed membership of the Critics' Circle, but this very private person played an active role in film culture. He was an elected governor of the British Film Institute (1989-95) and a member of numerous advisory bodies on the film industry, the arcane financing of which he understood better than any other critic. His private life, however, was as much a puzzle to those who thought they knew him well as it was a matter of speculation for the numerous people he estranged through his right-wing politics (he was deeply involved for a while with the Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos and his acquisitive wife Imelda), his often abrasive manner, his outspoken contributions to public forums, and his robust letters to the press. His mind instantly leapt from indignation to protest or litigation. He vigorously pursued numerous causes, his targets including film-makers who misrepresented events in Ulster, fellow travellers apologizing for left-wing totalitarian regimes, and public censors, whom he first excoriated for their severity before making a U-turn and attacking them for their leniency, especially towards screen violence. 
Soon after arriving in London, Walker began writing books, all well researched, some scholarly ('The Shattered Silents', 1978, his monograph on the arrival of sound film, for instance), none of them potboilers. His first book, 'The Celluloid Sacrifice' (1965), published in paperback with the blunter title 'Sex in the Movies', concerned the difference between the real identity of stars and their screen personas, a subject close to his own life. He wrote a number of best-selling, widely translated biographies of such figures as Rudolph Valentino, Marlene Dietrich, Greta Garbo, Joan Crawford, Vivien Leigh, Rex Harrison, and Audrey Hepburn. These books provided the wherewithal to pursue the third of his major non-cinematic preoccupations. After serious wining-and-dining and skiing, this third obsession -- with the visual arts -- led to the accumulation of a magnificent collection of over 200 prints and drawings ranging from Matisse to Lucian Freud. For years these pictures covered every available wall space in his small, elegant flat, as well as being stacked in the bath and hallway. Their posthumous disposition became a matter of some discussion. Eventually they were left in his will to the British Museum. He died suddenly of a brain haemorrhage on 15 July 2003, while undergoing tests at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Westminster. The funeral took place at Golders Green crematorium on 22 July 2003. He was unmarried. The exhibition of 'The Alexander Walker Bequest' at the British Museum in 2004 attracted 180,000 visitors. 


@@@@@


doc= 92277


Welch, Elisabeth Margaret (1904-2003), singer and actress, was born on 27 February 1904 at West 61st Street, New York. Her father, John Wesley Welsh, was born in Havre de Grace, Harford, Maryland, about 1860, of mixed African-American and American Indian ancestry (his mother came from the Lenape tribe in Wilmington, Delaware). At the time of her birth he was the head gardener and coachman on a large estate in Englewood, New Jersey. Her mother, Elizabeth, 'nee' Kay, was born in Leith, Edinburgh, in 1872 of Scottish and Irish ancestry. She had travelled to the United States in 1898 to work as an assistant to the nanny of the family that Welsh worked for in Englewood. Welsh and Kay were married in New York on 18 October 1902, a few months after Elisabeth's elder brother, Edward (1902-1979), was born. Elisabeth also had a younger brother, John (1906-1999), and the family lived in a racially mixed neighbourhood. She later said: 'I never had any feeling about being different from anybody else. It equipped me to be an international person all my life' (Bourne, 3). 
Elisabeth Welsh was educated at public school 69 and Julia Richman High School, both in New York. As a youngster she attended St Cyprian's, a local Episcopalian church and community centre. It was there that she started singing in the church choir at the age of eight and became known as 'the loud alto' because of her strong voice. As a choir member she found herself drawn into musical theatre and throughout the 1920s she appeared in a succession of black Broadway shows at the height of the jazz age. After making her debut in 'Liza' in 1922, the 'loud alto' was pulled out of the choir to introduce the song 'Charleston' in 'Runnin' Wild' the following year, thus launching the famous dance craze. On 26 February 1924 she married the jazz musician Luke Smith in New York. His brother, Joe, a cornet player, often accompanied the blues legends Bessie Smith (no relation) and Ethel Waters. However, the marriage was short-lived. By the time Welsh turned professional (and changed her surname from Welsh to Welch) in 1928 the couple had separated, and Smith died on 20 June 1936. 
Welch acknowledged her professional stage debut as Lew Leslie's hit Broadway revue 'Blackbirds of 1928', starring Adelaide Hall and Bill 'Bojangles' Robinson. Welch sang with Cecil Mack's Choir in the show, and understudied various leading ladies, including Hall and Aida Ward. In 1929 she travelled with the cast of 'Blackbirds' to Paris, where they became a hit at the Moulin Rouge. The following year she returned to Paris to launch her cabaret career, singing in the original Boeuf sur le Toit and Le Grand Ecart -- two smart cocktail and dinner clubs designed by Jean Cocteau. Later that year, during a cabaret engagement in New York, she was asked to replace the singer of Cole Porter's 'Love for Sale' in the Broadway revue 'The New Yorkers'. For Welch 'Love for Sale', a prostitute's lament, was 'beautiful poetry because it was like one of the street cries of London' (Bourne, 23). 
On her return to Paris, Welch met Porter, who cast her in 'Nymph Errant', a musical extravaganza starring Gertrude Lawrence which opened in London in October 1933. Welch stopped the show with Porter's 'Solomon'. Prior to this appearance, she made her London debut in the summer of 1933 in a revue called 'Dark Doings', in which she introduced the classic song 'Stormy Weather' to Britain. Other career highlights of the 1930s included appearances at the London Palladium with Cab Calloway (1934); at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in Ivor Novello's musical 'Glamorous Night' (1935); and at Blackpool's Opera House in the revue 'All the Best' (1938), as well as in many cabaret shows, including a successful run at the Cafe de Paris. From 1934 to 1936 she broadcast in her own BBC radio series, 'Soft Lights and Sweet Music'. Also for the BBC, in 1936, she began making television appearances when the corporation launched the first high-definition television service. Early programmes were transmitted live from the Alexandra Palace studios in north London. Welch later said, 'Television was born, and I was in at the birth!' (Bourne, 37). In addition to several guest appearances in films, in 1936 she co-starred with the African-American actor and singer Paul Robeson in 'Song of Freedom', a melodrama with songs. She recalled: 'he [Robeson] tried to persuade me to do something for our people. I had to answer. I'm of mixed blood -- African, American Indian, Scots, and Irish. So I said: 'Paul, I belong to 'four' peoples! I can't make a stand for all of them. You must excuse me!' (Bourne, 47)' When the Second World War broke out, Welch, who could have returned to the safety of New York, decided to stay in London and continue her career. In addition to stage, film, and radio work, she entertained the troops at army and Royal Air Force camps all over the country. In 1942 she travelled to Gibraltar with an all-star company that included John Gielgud, Edith Evans, and Beatrice Lillie, in a special 'concert party' for the troops stationed there. Her relationship with David Astor (1912-2001) ended during the war when his formidable mother, Nancy, Lady Astor, the American-English tory politician, expressed strong disapproval of her son's interracial affair. Much later, in 1987, Welch accepted an invitation to attend and sing for David Astor and his guests at his seventy-fifth birthday celebration at the Waldorf Hotel. 
After the war Welch reigned supreme in London's West End in three sophisticated revues: 'Tuppence Coloured' (1947), in which she introduced Edith Piaf's 'La vie en rose' to the British public, 'Oranges and Lemons' (1949), and 'Penny Plain' (1951). Other post-war career highlights included West End triumphs in the musicals 'The Crooked Mile' (1959), 'Cindy-Ella' (1962), and 'Pippin' (1973), and in 1964 there was a leading role in 'The Rise and Fall of Nellie Brown', an original television musical, specially written for her by Robert Gould. In 1969, on the occasion of Noel Coward's seventieth birthday, she took part in 'A Talent to Amuse', an all-star tribute at the Phoenix Theatre, and in 1970 she began a long succession of one-woman shows with 'A Marvellous Party' at the Hampstead Theatre Club, which continued into the 1990s. When she appeared as a Goddess in Derek Jarman's imaginative 1979 screen version of Shakespeare's 'The Tempest' -- singing 'Stormy Weather' to a group of handsome young sailors -- the writer and jazz singer George Melly described it as 'arguably the campest, most sparkling moment in the history of cinema' ('The Independent', 13 May 1989). 
In 1985 Welch won rave reviews and a nomination for a Laurence Olivier award for her performance in the revue 'Jerome Goes to Hollywood', a celebration of the work of the composer Jerome Kern, at the Donmar Warehouse. She received more praise from the critics, as well as a Tony nomination, when the renamed 'Jerome Kern Goes to Hollywood' transferred to Broadway in January 1986. Frank Rich wrote in the 'New York Times' (24 Jan 1986): 'We must write letters to our Congressmen demanding that Elisabeth Welch be detained in the United States forthwith as a national resource too rare and precious for export.' In 1985 she took part in her second royal variety performance and was the subject of Thames Television's 'This is Your Life'. In 1987 a documentary film, 'Keeping Love Alive', described as a 'self-portrait in words and songs', captured her live performance at London's Almeida Theatre, and this was screened at various international film festivals. Perhaps the crowning achievement of her long and illustrious career was the 1992 all-star tribute concert, 'A Time to Start Living: a Celebration of the Great Elisabeth Welch', a World AIDS Day gala in her honour, at the Lyric Theatre, featuring the cream of British show business, who paid tribute to Welch and then joined the audience to give her an unprecedented (as far as anyone there could remember) five standing ovations. Welch made her final professional appearance in 1996, in the Channel 4 television documentary 'Black Divas', singing 'Stormy Weather' publicly for the last time. By the time she made this appearance, Welch had retired and, when a journalist inquired about the singing technique she had sustained for over eighty years, her simple, direct reply was: 'I have no technique. No art, no training. Nothing! Just myself. I describe myself as a singer of popular songs' (Bourne, xvii). 
Welch died on 15 July 2003 at Denville Hall, 2 Ducks Hill Road, Northwood, London (the retirement home for actors and entertainers, where she had lived since 1995); she was cremated on 21 July at Breakspear crematorium. After her death Miles Kreuger, president of the Institute of the American Musical, a Los Angeles research library, told the 'Los Angeles Times' (19 July 2003): 'Elisabeth Welch wasn't just another singer; she was a cultural icon, like Ella Fitzgerald is to this country. She could do anything... with the most sweet and plaintive voice, and she had absolutely impeccable diction and taste. In a recording career that began in 1928 and lasted into the 1990s her voice was absolutely untouched by time.' 



@@@@@


doc= 92278


Wells, Alberta Constance (1925-2003), journalist, novelist, and broadcaster, was born on 19 March 1925 in Providence, Rhode Island, USA, the elder daughter and second of four children of John William Chapman (1898-1967), journalist, and his wife, Hazel Gertrude, 'nee' Young (1899-1995). She was descended on her father's side from the Scots theologian Alexander Campbell (1788-1866), who co-founded the Disciples of Christ, and on her mother's from the Llewellyns of Prince Edward Island. Her genetic inheritance came largely from the Llewellyns. She was known to them as Deezie and had her Welsh grandmother's tawny chestnut hair, sculpted face, and bright blue eyes. Her father, a journalist on the family newspaper, the 'Providence Evening Journal', and in awe of his wife, moved the family to the old whaling town of New Bedford, Massachusetts, to be public relations officer with the New England Telephone and Telegraph Co. She described her mother as 'the most untrustworthy, destructive person I have ever known'. She became an atheist aged seven and grew up 'a crafty quick witted savage' (Rogers, 244) with a jaundiced view about the existence of goodness. 
In 1943 Dee Chapman joined the Canadian Women's Army Corps, where she met the poet V. R. (Bunny) Lang, a gifted eccentric who became her greatest friend. It was the beginning of doing what she liked. She worked for the New York publisher Random House, but in 1947 bought a one-way ticket to Paris. Originally destined for the Sorbonne, she ended up modelling surrealist gowns for Schiaparelli and working in the American embassy. There she met Alfred (Al) Wells, a career diplomat. They married in 1948 but were divorced in 1954 after Dee, with her daughter Alexandra (Gully) ('b'. 1950) in tow, left her husband in Rangoon. 
By the early 1950s Dee Wells was resident in Holland Park, London. Her defining personal event came in 1956 when she danced the foxtrot with Alfred Jules (Freddie) Ayer (1910-1989), the most famous English philosopher of his age. She had been living with the economist Robert Neild, but Ayer had a 'pagan vitality' and a 'sharp, sham-destroying mind' which proved irresistible (Rogers, 7). The two of them were bohemian, indefatigable socializers, and part of Hugh Gaitskell's Hampstead set of intellectuals; their powerful synergy turned them into 'iconic public figures' ('The Observer', 20 June 1999). They married on 18 July 1960, found an old farmhouse in the hamlet of La Migoua, outside Le Beausset, Var, France, in 1962, and had a son, Nicholas Hugh, in 1963. By then Dee had established herself as a journalist in Britain. A staff job as books editor for the 'Sunday Express' in 1958 was followed by broadsides for the 'Daily Herald', a socialist paper that looked as if it had been printed on bread. When it was relaunched in 1964 as the broadsheet 'Sun' she continued her lively, opinionated column. 
The most talented communicators in the 1960s gravitated towards television. Dee Wells's gifts as an expositor made her a natural for the satire boom. Her appearances on the late evening vaudeville-cum-current affairs show 'Not so Much a Programme, More a Way of Life' (1964-5) propelled her into the Rediffusion programme 'Three After Six', one of the first chat shows, appearing four evenings weekly with her co-hosts Alan Brien and Benny Green. Her husky, let's-get-it-straight voice could turn the air blue. But if hectoring was her great fault, her soft spot for animals and her hatred of social injustice redeemed her. She became vice-president of the Abortion Law Reform Association, and in the early 1970s, with the activist Chris Spotted Eagle, mounted a benefit for the Lakota Indians in memory of the massacre at Wounded Knee. 
In 1964 the Ayers moved from 13 Conway Street, Fitzrovia, to another tall Georgian house in Regent's Park Terrace, Camden. Alan Bennett's sketch 'Life and Times in NW1' (BBC2, 1964) identified their particular set, and Marc, the cartoonist Mark Boxer, took up the baton, deploying the awful String-alongs, parodying Freddie and Dee, in a cartoon strip for 'The Listener' in 1967. While they were being profiled in magazines as 'particularly happy' ('Sunday Times'), fault lines were nevertheless appearing in the Ayers' open marriage. Freddie later said, 'I grew predatory and less nice' ('Evening Standard', 31 Aug 1984). In 1971 Dee began a relationship with Hylan Booker, an African-American fashion designer, and described their time together as her years of 'sex 'n' drugs 'n' rock 'n' roll' (Rogers, 307). She said of her roman a clef, 'Jane' (1973, dedicated to Lang, who had died in 1956), 'I was idle and I had a perfectly good typewriter and half a box of paper' ('Daily Telegraph', 12 July 2003). The novel became an international bestseller, was translated into seven languages, and sold a reputed two million copies. In 1979 Dee, who had become Lady Ayer when Freddie was knighted in 1970, gave 'up the unequal struggle to become a true English lady' (Rogers, 315), and moved with Hylan to New York. The 1980s were her doldrum years. Hylan left her about 1984, her health was ruined by smoking (her lower leg was amputated in 1992), and she had become the 'prematurely retired' character of Tom Stoppard's biographical play 'Jumpers' (1972). She wrote to Freddie in 1983, the year before they divorced: 'I sit all day at the typewriter, and nothing comes; it's a terrible feeling.' 
Dee later told Jonathan Miller, 'Freddie became so much nicer after he died' (referring to the fact that Ayer's heart had stopped for four minutes in 1988, after a cardiac arrest) (Rogers, 347). Freddie's third wife, Vanessa Lawson, had died in 1985. Dee, who 'said she saw herself as a character in 'Rebecca' but she couldn't figure out which one' (Fairey, 220), married him once again, on 26 April 1989, at Westminster register office. Freddie died that same year. Dee lived on at 51 York Street, London, surrounded by deep green walls, her nineteenth-century journeyman portraits of prize bulls, and Phillip Bradley's magic realist portrait of her looking like a puritan mother from the 'Mayflower'. She made peanut butter sandwiches for the squirrels in Regent's Park and appeared in 1990 on Ned Sherrin's programme 'Plunder', contributing personal memories of BBC TV moments. 
Dee Wells died on 24 June 2003. She was survived by her daughter and son. After a funeral at Golders Green crematorium her ashes were buried with Freddie's under the lime tree behind La Migoua. The Danish-born aristocrat Claus von Bulow, who had transformed the independence of her last ten years, spoke of her 'Zolaesque fervour' and 'American willingness of heart'. She never lost that 'combination of boredom and rebelliousness' (St Aubyn, 'Never Mind', 158). Her motto was 'never apologize, never explain'. 


@@@@@


doc= 92279


Wilkins, Sir Graham John (1924-2003), industrialist, was born in Mudford, Somerset, on 22 January 1924, the son of George William Wilkins, the village schoolmaster, and his wife, Annie May, 'nee' Clarke. An elder sister (out of six children), unable to pronounce Graham, called him as an infant 'the beautiful Bobby', and he remained Bob for life. A scholarship pupil at Yeovil grammar school, he went on to study chemistry and mathematics at the University College of the South-West, Exeter. In 1944 he graduated and met Daphne Mildred Haynes, daughter of Charles Haynes, provision merchant. They married on 14 July the following year, when both were aged twenty-one. 
On graduation Wilkins had been directed into wartime scientific work with the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, subsequently British Petroleum, but in 1945 he left to join the Beecham Group as a research chemist. For four years he tested the properties of Macleans toothpaste, Lucozade, and shampoos. Deciding that he was 'better at managing people than molecules' ('The Observer'), he was dispatched at short notice to turn round a failing toothpaste factory in India. From 1954 to 1959 he ran the group's operations in the western hemisphere, building factories in Latin America. Meanwhile Beecham had, under Leslie Lazell as chairman, developed the world's first semi-synthetic penicillins. Lazell needed to oversee the creation of an organization to market these new products, and brought Wilkins home for that purpose. In Britain, Wilkins set up a team of representatives to canvass doctors, and made licensing arrangements in overseas countries until such time as he could create the company's own sales branches. He thus played a key role in transforming Beecham, until then famed as the maker of pills, powders, and household products, into a fully-fledged pharmaceutical enterprise. 
As head of Beecham's newly created pharmaceutical division from 1964 onwards, Wilkins established manufacturing units in locations as far apart as Scotland, Belgium, and Singapore. Appointed executive vice-chairman in 1974 by Sir Ronald Edwards, Lazell's successor, he took over from Edwards as chairman in the following year. A committed Conservative, he vigorously opposed Labour's threat to nationalize selected UK pharmaceutical companies and also campaigned against official price controls, with enhanced authority as the former president of the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry from 1969 to 1971. Supportive (with reservations) of the post-1979 Thatcher government, he accepted a knighthood in 1980 for services to exports. 
As chairman of Beecham from 1975 to 1984, Wilkins encountered a number of problems. Although he launched the popular antibiotic Augmentin in 1971, no comparable new drugs followed during his period of office. Hence the pharmaceutical division's share of total turnover declined from 38 to 28 per cent and of profits from 61 to 47 per cent. He approved the acquisition of numerous companies, but those were largely on the consumer goods side, too many in non-core activities such as home improvements. Since the pharmaceutical and consumer product divisions had so little in common with one another, he was unable to enforce a unified corporate strategy. In 1984, at the age of sixty, he took early retirement (though he remained president of the Beecham Group), so as to devote more time to family life, golf, travel on Britain's waterways and abroad, and enjoyment of good food and wine. 
Wilkins kept on his outside directorships, most notably of the merchant bank Hill Samuel. Appointed deputy chairman of the electrical giant Thorn EMI (of which he had been a director since 1978), he was dismayed when his chairman, Peter Laister, made a number of policy miscalculations which in 1985 reduced profits by 30 per cent and halved the share price. In arguably the most dramatic boardroom coup in British industry for some years, the non-executive directors ousted Laister and appointed Wilkins as chairman. He overhauled Thorn EMI's unwieldy organization by selling off non-core businesses, acquiring more profitable defence and electronic companies, and instilling into that production-orientated group the kind of marketing drive he had encouraged in Beecham. He retired from Thorn EMI in 1989; he was already chairman (from 1986 to 1990) of the Doctors' and Dentists' Remuneration Board. To address the contentious issue of the long hours worked by junior hospital doctors, he persuaded the government to authorize double payments for excessive hours on call or standby duty. In 1994 he was made honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and of the University of London school of pharmacy. 
In 1989 Wilkins's wife died, and on 26 April the following year he married Helen Catherine McGregor, a co-ordinator in the International Chamber of Commerce, of which he had been chairman from 1985 to 1989. She was the daughter of Ian Robert McGregor, company director. There were no children of either marriage. A well-built man whose calmness under pressure and complete integrity won him widespread trust, Wilkins was the image of a reassuring country doctor. Yet he could be forceful and decisive, undoubtedly showing those qualities to greater effect in Thorn EMI than in Beecham. He died on 2 July 2003 of heart failure in Ashford Hospital, Stanwell, Surrey. He was survived by his second wife, Helen. 


@@@@@


doc= 92281


Worsley, Jack Reginald (1923-2003), acupuncturist, was born on 14 September 1923 at 45 Colchester Street, Coventry, the youngest of four children of Harry Worsley, a tool maker in the engineering trade, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Hockton. His first foray into the healing arts began at the age of eleven when he joined the St John's Ambulance Corps and became certified in first aid. He left school at the age of fourteen to begin working at the Standard motor car factory in Coventry, using his earnings to help support his family. In late 1940 he spent his days building bombers for the Royal Air Force and his evenings at a first aid post assisting injured soldiers. As the Second World War progressed, he joined the British army, soon attaining the rank of sergeant, responsible for the training of new recruits. He later became a warrant officer and was transferred to the Royal Army Education Corps. At his discharge in 1947 he received a commendation for his work as education officer in charge of the northwest command. On 19 July 1945 he had married his 21-year-old sweetheart, Elsie Buckland, whom he had known since the age of sixteen. She was the daughter of Owen Buckland, showman, and at the time of their marriage was living in Kenilworth. They had a daughter, Hilary, and a son, John. 
After demobilization Worsley returned to the Standard factory while using his evenings to pursue studies in physiotherapy and continue his study of naturopathy and osteopathic medicine. During the war he had met a man who had suffered from severe arthritis and had been completely cured as a result of receiving acupuncture in Hong Kong. Worsley was motivated to learn this art. At the time it was not possible to receive professional qualifications in Chinese acupuncture in England. Thus he began extensive travels to the Far East, serving as an apprentice to two masters, Hsui and Ono. In time they bestowed the rare and honoured title of 'master' upon him. 
During the mid- and late 1950s Worsley maintained a busy practice and also found time to treat and work with Coventry City Football Club. Continuing his studies in the East, he earned a doctorate in acupuncture from the College of Chinese Medicine in 1960. In the same year, he founded the College of Traditional Acupuncture (UK), the first school of acupuncture in England. In the late 1960s and early 1970s he continued to travel to the East to expand his knowledge of classical acupuncture, appeared on television, taught, and lectured extensively throughout Europe and the United States. In 1974 he founded and was president of the Traditional Acupuncture Institute, the first school of acupuncture in the United States. In 1978 Lord Hume dedicated the new premises of the College of Traditional Acupuncture at Leamington Spa. 
In 1984, after nearly forty years together, Worsley's wife, Elsie, died. In the following years, he continued to travel extensively, teaching and consulting with patients of his students in both the UK and America. On his travels Judith Elaine (Judy) Becker ('b'. 1947), one of his first American students, accompanied him. She was the daughter of Melvin Louis Becker, oral surgeon. In 1988 Worsley and Becker jointly founded the Worsley Institute of Classical Acupuncture in Miami, Florida. On 3 August 1991 they married, and the following year they moved to Church Hill Farm, a sixteenth-century farmhouse in Burton Dassett, Warwickshire, which they remodelled extensively, and which Worsley adored. Worsley (known both professionally and to friends as J. R.) published extensively on acupuncture in books and journals, and received many honours and honorary professorships. 
In 1996 Worsley suffered a massive heart attack, requiring major surgery. His recovery was both extraordinary and transformational. Though he was not expected to survive, he began painting, continued teaching, and, in his words, 'learned to live from the heart' (private information). He decided, after recuperating, to focus his teaching on a selected group of students who were truly committed to learning the system of medicine he brought to the Western world -- formal apprentices. Thus the first master apprentice programme was founded in 1997. Members of this first group founded the Worsley Institute of Classical Five-Element Acupuncture, a not-for-profit organization to protect the integrity of this lineage and to make Worsley's work available to all interested patients, practitioners, and schools. In 2002 popular demand from his students influenced Worsley to begin a second master apprentice class. In May 2003 Worsley was diagnosed with pneumonia and severe heart failure. Hospitalized in Miami, he continued to see patients from his hospital room and, with his beloved wife, Judy, and sustained by the love of family, friends, and his many grateful students, continued to oversee many Worsley Institute projects virtually until his death. He died in Miami in the early hours of 2 June 2003, and was survived by his wife and the two children of his first marriage, both of whom had trained and practised as acupuncturists. He was cremated on 26 June. After his death the master apprentice classes continued under the direction of his widow, his designated successor as 'master of the lineage'. 


@@@@@


doc= 92285


Haydn, (Franz) Joseph (1732-1809), composer, was born on 31 March 1732 in Rohrau, Lower Austria, the second of six surviving children of Mathias Haydn (1699-1763), wheelwright, and his wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Koller ('bap'. 1707, died 1754), a cook; the third surviving child, Johann Michael Haydn (1737-1806), also pursued a career as a composer. 
Haydn's forebears had lived in the area as artisans for several generations and he grew up in a supportive environment in which music was a favoured social recreation. At the age of five or six he moved to Hainburg, also in Lower Austria, to live with a distant relative, Johann Mathias Franck (1708-1783), who as head of the local school and music director at the church developed the young boy's talents as a singer, harpsichord player, and violinist. His musicianship caught the attention of Georg Reutter (1708-1772), kapellmeister of St Stephen's Cathedral in Vienna, who was searching for new recruits for the choir school. In 1739 or 1740 Haydn moved to Vienna where for the next ten years he was immersed in the ritual and rich musical legacy of the Catholic church, nurturing a simple unquestioning piety, the distinctive 'pietas austriaca', that was to characterize the composer's outlook for the rest of his life. His formal education was patchy -- some Latin, religion, arithmetic, and writing, but only minimal theoretical training in music. 
At the age of eighteen Haydn's voice broke and he spent most of the 1750s as a freelance musician in Vienna. At the end of his life Haydn liked to imply that he suffered a hand-to-mouth existence but the extent and regularity of his various musical employments suggest that it was a viable and stimulating existence. He met the librettist Pietro Metastasio (1698-1782), the composers Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714-1787) and Georg Christoph Wagenseil (1715-1777), and especially profited from the experience of the Italian composer Nicola Porpora (1686-1768) who, according to Haydn, taught him 'the true fundamentals of composition' (Robbins Landon, 2.398). He played the violin at court balls during carnival, was an occasional singer at the imperial chapel and at St Stephen's, played the organ and violin in various church services, taught the keyboard, took part in the local tradition of instrumental serenading, and composed music for a German theatre company. As the range of patrons expanded so did Haydn's compositions, which by the end of the period embraced church compositions (including organ concertos), keyboard sonatas and trios, string trios and quartets, and a variety of works for mixed ensembles of wind and strings. 
In 1757 (perhaps a year later) Haydn received his first full-time position, as kapellmeister to Count Carl Joseph Franz Morzin (1717-1783) who, like many members of the aristocracy, spent the winter season in Vienna and the summer in a country palace, in his case at Lukavec (Dolni Lukavice) in the Bohemian countryside south of Pilsen. It was for Morzin that Haydn wrote his first symphonies, perhaps a dozen or more. On 26 November 1760, at St Stephen's, Haydn married Maria Anna Aloysia Apollonia Keller ('bap'. 1729, died 1800), the daughter of a wig maker. It was never a happy marriage. Haydn stated that she was not interested in music, and was excessively religious and a spendthrift. There were no children. At about the same time as the wedding Haydn must have become aware of the increasing financial difficulties at the Morzin court; these led in the following months to the disbandment of the musical retinue. 
By a stroke of good fortune, Prince Paul Anton Esterhazy (1711-1762), one of the richest and most influential aristocrats in the Austrian dominions, had heard some symphonies by Haydn and engaged him in April 1761 as vice-kapellmeister, an assistant to the Esterhazys' long-serving but infirm kapellmeister, Gregor Werner (1693-1766), with the promise that he should succeed to the senior position in due course. In one of the most extended and fruitful patronages in the history of music, Haydn was to serve the Esterhazy family for the rest of his life, nearly half a century; Prince Paul Anton would be succeeded by his brother Nicolaus (I) (1714-1790), Nicolaus's son, Anton (1738-1794), and, finally, Anton's son, Nicolaus (II) (1765-1833). 
Of the four princes Nicolaus (I) was the most enthusiastic in his support of music at his court and of Haydn's development as a composer. As full kapellmeister from 1766 Haydn had an orchestra of between fifteen and twenty-two players at his disposal (the norm for a court orchestra in the Austrian territories) for whom he wrote over sixty symphonies, works that challenged their musical imagination as well as their technique. Rather than follow the typical routine of winters in Vienna and summers in Eisenstadt, a small town near the western border of Hungary, 26 miles south-east of Vienna, Prince Nicolaus preferred to reside in Eisenstadt in the winter and in a new, sumptuous palace named after the family, Eszterhaza, a further 27 miles to the south-east, deep in the Hungarian countryside; visits to Vienna were typically restricted to a few weeks either side of Christmas. Nicolaus built two opera houses at Eszterhaza, one for Italian opera, the other for marionette opera in German; as kapellmeister Haydn was responsible for the smooth running of these two establishments and between 1776 and 1790 prepared and directed over 1300 performances of 100 operas, including several of his own composition. 
Among the singers at the Esterhazy court was Luigia Polzelli, 'nee' Moreschi (1749/50-1832), a mezzo-soprano who joined the Esterhazy company in 1779 with her husband, Antonio, a violinist. She and Haydn became lovers, and Haydn was probably responsible for the reinstatement of the Polzellis when both were dismissed for not meeting the musical standards of the court in December 1780. Haydn was widely regarded (though apparently never by himself) as the father of Polzelli's second son, Alois Anton Nikolaus, known as Antonio ('b'. 1783). The relationship endured beyond Haydn's move to London in 1791. 
Haydn said of his period at the court of Prince Nicolaus Esterhazy, 'I was set apart from the world, there was nobody around to confuse and annoy me in my course, and so I had to be original' (Griesinger, 24-5). While it is easy to exaggerate Haydn's isolation it is also true that he was, until his late fifties, one of the least travelled of major composers. Gradually, however, and with increasing momentum towards the 1780s, Haydn's instrumental music became known throughout Europe. His symphonies were first published in Paris in 1764 and his earliest quartets were available in imported editions in London in the following year. In these two cities in particular Haydn's music by the 1780s dominated concert life; there was hardly a concert that did not feature a work by him. Eager to capitalize on the enthusiasm of the public for Haydn's music, the English publisher William Forster (1739-1808) in 1781 established direct contact with the composer, which effectively gave him the English rights for many of Haydn's latest symphonies and quartets. From this popularity arose regular invitations in the 1780s to visit London, where it was envisaged that Haydn would write an opera for the King's Theatre as well as new symphonies. But Haydn's duties as kapellmeister at the Esterhazy court obliged him to turn down these invitations. More frustrating for the composer was the limited time he was able to spend in Vienna, whose burgeoning salon culture he valued. Although contact with Mozart was, consequently, rather sporadic it was firmly founded on mutual admiration and affection; in 1785 Mozart dedicated a set of quartets to Haydn, the pre-eminent master of the genre, 'celebrated Man and my dearest Friend' (published letter of dedication, 1 Sept 1785, Robbins Landon, 2.673). 
In September 1790 Prince Nicolaus died. His successor, Prince Anton, wished to curtail the expenditure of the court and disbanded most of the musical retinue, but out of affection and loyalty retained Haydn in what was now a sinecure position. For the first time for over forty years he was a free agent. Offers of employment were received from Ferdinand IV of Naples and Prince Nicolaus's son-in-law, Prince Anton Grassalkovics, but Haydn's imagination was captured by the proposal of the London impresario and violinist Johann Peter Salomon, who had travelled especially to Vienna to secure his services. By mid-December, Haydn had agreed to visit London to become the central attraction in a hastily arranged subscription concert season, and to compose an opera for the King's Theatre. For London audiences the visit was a natural enhancement of the central position that the composer already enjoyed in the city's musical life. Haydn was to respond with a notable expansion of his musical style and, no less remarkable for this dutiful kapellmeister, a willingness to assume the role of a social celebrity. 
Haydn arrived in London on 2 January 1791 and was soon introduced to members of the London musical world, including the music historian Charles Burney. Within a few days he had taken lodgings at 18 Great Pulteney Street, which remained his main London residence during his stay, although in spring 1791 he lived for a while in Lisson Grove. He made his first appearance at court on 18 January, at the ball for Queen Charlotte's birthday. The following day he performed for the prince of Wales (afterwards George IV) at Carlton House; he became a regular participant in the prince's private concerts, where he no doubt welcomed the opportunity to converse in German. The subscription series known as Mr Salomon's concert, after several postponements, began on 11 March in the concert room at Hanover Square; Haydn and his compositions were the principal attractions. Following Haydn's debut the 'Morning Chronicle' remarked 'It is not wonderful [not to be wondered at] that to souls capable of being touched by music, Haydn should be an object of homage, and even of idolatry; for like our own Shakespeare, he moves and governs the passions at his will' ('Morning Chronicle', 12 March 1791; Robbins Landon, 3.49). The detailed coverage of musical matters in the London newspapers was novel to Haydn; it promoted the image of the composer as a celebrated artist and offered descriptive comment on his music that pointed to the nature of its appeal. 
The outstanding product of Haydn's two visits to England were his twelve 'London' symphonies (nos. 93-104), a major chapter in the history of the genre, but, while in London, Haydn also composed quartets, piano trios, piano sonatas, English songs (canzonettas), and settings of Scottish folk-songs. He completed the commissioned opera, 'L'anima del filosofo', based on the Orpheus story, but it was never performed, as the manager of the King's Theatre, Sir John Gallini, was unable to renew the licence for opera performances there. The concert season ended in June, giving Haydn ample opportunity to recover and prepare for the following season, as well as to travel. In July 1791 he visited Oxford, where he gave a series of three concerts and on 8 July received the degree of DMus. In November he visited Cambridge, where he observed that 'The students bear themselves like those of Oxford, but it is said they have better teachers' (Robbins Landon, 3.112). This was one of many impressions of life in England that Haydn entered in the four notebooks he kept while living in the country: subjects ranged from the drinking habits of the British aristocracy to the price of oranges. November also saw Haydn invited to spend two days at Oatlands, the Surrey seat of Prince Frederick, duke of York, and his new wife, Princess Frederica of Prussia; the duchess became one of Haydn's principal British patrons. Following this visit the prince of Wales commissioned a strikingly robust portrait of the composer from John Hoppner. Haydn wrote to an acquaintance in Vienna that 'The Prince of Wales is the most handsome man on God's earth; he has an extraordinary love of music and a lot of feeling, but not much money' (Robbins Landon, 3.118). This naive remark about the prince's finances foreshadowed a pressing issue a few years later, when a fee of 100 guineas owed to Haydn featured in the business of the parliamentary commissioners charged with settling the enormous debts of the prince. 
By late 1791 Haydn had become distant from Luigia Polzelli; despite the presence of her sister Theresa Negri on the London stage Haydn never sent for Polzelli to join him. In June he had met Rebecca Schroeter, nee Scott (bap. 1751, d. 1826) ['see under 'Schroeter, Johann Samuel], the wealthy widow of a German-born composer and pianist; their correspondence suggests that by the start of 1792 they were almost certainly having an affair. In addition to providing Haydn with a domestic life away from his lodgings, she acted as copyist for some of his London compositions. Meanwhile, the second series of concerts at Hanover Square began on 17 February 1792. The first concert saw the first performance of symphony no. 93. The review in 'The Times' ran through a lexicon of attributes important in eighteenth-century aesthetics: 'Novelty of idea, agreeable caprice, and whim combined with all Haydn's sublime and wonten grandeur, gave additional consequence to the soul and feelings of every individual present' ('The Times', 20 Feb 1792; Robbins Landon, 3.134). 
During this season Haydn complained of overwork and in March he was bled. By April he had decided to return to Europe, although it was expected he would return for a third season in January 1793: it was even reported 'that he has declared his intention of concluding the finale of his days, with the 'Roast Beef of Old England'' ('Public Advertiser', 12 April 1792; Robbins Landon, 3.153) and it is probable that Haydn did contemplate settling in London. Haydn left in June after visiting William Herschel at Slough, and after narrowly dissuading his friend John Hunter, the surgeon, from performing an operation to remove his prominent nasal polyp. 
Haydn spent eighteen months in Vienna from July 1792. His activities included teaching Ludwig van Beethoven, an experience less financially lucrative than taking private pupils had been in London, and spiritually rewarding for neither party. Haydn's compositions included twelve minuets and twelve dances for a charity ball. His decision not to return to join Salomon for the 1793 season was blamed on his nasal polyp but probably reflected a wish to recover from the pressures of performing in London and to concentrate on composition. In addition the onset of the Revolutionary War with France made travel dangerous. Haydn may also have feared a Jacobin rising in London; he was politically conservative, although his London acquaintances included the radical writer Thomas Holcroft. 
Haydn eventually returned to London in February 1794 to fulfil his arrangement with Salomon, taking up residence at 1 Bury Street, St James's, near Rebecca Schroeter's house, and beginning a third season at Hanover Square. In addition to three new symphonies by Haydn, the season saw the publication of six canzonettas with words by Anne Hunter, widow of Haydn's friend the surgeon; six more followed in 1795. 1794 also saw Haydn gain the accolade of being the only living composer to have his work included in the concerts of the Society of Antient Music, alongside composers from the early part of the century such as Handel. Encountering the music of Handel, which at events such as the Handel commemoration concerts in Westminster Abbey would be performed by forces of several hundred, thrilled Haydn; he told an early biographer that 'He meditated on every note and drew from those most learned scores the essence of true musical grandeur' (Carpani, 167). 
Haydn intended to see out a further season in London, but by summer 1794 it was apparent that he would then return to Austria; the new Prince Esterhazy, Nicolaus (II), had decided to reassemble the family's musical household, with Haydn restored as kapellmeister. Meanwhile Haydn visited Portsmouth, the Isle of Wight, and Winchester in July, and Bristol and Bath in August, where he stayed with the castrato Venanzio Rauzzini. In late 1794 he was commissioned to write a patriotic ode by Willoughby Bertie, fourth earl of Abingdon, a leading music patron who was Gallini's brother-in-law. The work was not finished, perhaps because the text, by Marchamont Nedham, was of poor quality or because of Abingdon's disgrace following his conviction for libel in 1795. 
Salomon abandoned his own concert series in 1795, because of the difficulty of securing new singers from war-torn Europe, and joined forces with the management of the King's Theatre to present a series termed the opera concert, given in the concert room that abutted the main stage. Haydn went with him and, though he nominally shared the role of resident composer with three others -- Francesco Bianchi, Muzio Clementi, and Vincente Martini -- he was the central attraction of the series. The orchestra, with about sixty players, was the largest Haydn had worked with. He presented his three final symphonies in London, as well as composing a variety of other work. Haydn maintained his connection with the royal family; he mediated a settlement between the leading musicians in the royal household over who should conduct the orchestra at the marriage of the prince of Wales, and performed several times for members of the royal family. He told Griesinger that George III and Queen Charlotte asked him to remain in Britain, and offered to give him summer accommodation in Windsor and arrange for his wife to be brought over from Austria; the devoted royal couple were presumably ignorant of the unhappy state of Haydn's marriage. 
Haydn's final benefit concert took place on 4 May 1795, a fortnight before the end of the original scheme of subscription concerts. It included the first performance of what was to be his last symphony, no. 104, and elicited a valedictory, if rather gauche, comment on Haydn's legacy: 'for fifty years to come Musical Composers would be little better than imitators of Haydn, and would do little more than pour water on his leaves. We hope the prophecy may prove false; but probability seems to confirm the prediction.('Morning Chronicle', 6 May 1795; Robbins Landon, 3.308)' Haydn lived quietly for a few months, composing, and left London in the middle of August 1795. 
Plans for a third visit to London in 1796 were mooted, but Haydn, conscious of advancing age, chose to concentrate on the revival of musical life at the Esterhazy court. Unlike his grandfather, Prince Nicolaus (II) liked to spend the entire winter season in Vienna, moving to Eisenstadt in the summer months. Apart from administrative duties, Haydn's responsibilities were largely focused on the annual celebrations in September of the name-day of Nicolaus's wife, Princess Marie Hermenegild Esterhazy, 'nee' von Liechtenstein, for which five masses were specifically composed. Haydn's continuing employment and the substantial money he had accrued in London (over $1500 according to one source) had enabled him to purchase and renovate a comfortable house in the Viennese suburb of Gumpendorf, much later to become Haydngasse 19, into which he and his wife moved in 1797. For the first time since the 1750s Haydn became a truly Viennese composer. His ready patriotism was demonstrated by the extraordinary success of 'Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser', a national anthem commissioned in autumn 1796 by the Habsburg court, to encourage pro-dynastic sympathies and a sense of Austrian patriotism in the face of revolutionary nationalism spreading from France to the German-speaking lands. It was directly inspired by 'God Save the King', and was first performed on 12 February 1797, at the birthday of Francis II, with words by Lorenz Haschka. With changes to its text, Haydn's composition remained the Austrian anthem until after the Second World War; as 'Deutschland, Deutschland uber alles' it became popular in nineteenth-century Germany before being formally adopted as the national anthem in 1922. As early as 1801 it was adapted in Britain as a hymn tune, later usually entitled 'Austria'. 
Haydn's most substantial works in the late 1790s were both inspired by his admiration for Handel's music. On his departure from London, Salomon had apparently given him a libretto, 'The Creation of the World', supposedly written for Handel. With the sponsorship of a group of noblemen, the Gesellschaft der Associierten, led by Baron Gottfried van Swieten, this led to the composition of Haydn's oratorio 'The Creation', first performed in March 1798. Haydn published it himself, by subscription, in both English and German versions -- it has been claimed as the first bilingual composition -- promoting its arrival with the help of London friends including Burney. The Gesellschaft also sponsored a further oratorio, 'The Seasons', with a libretto based on the cycle of poems by James Thomson, which premiered in April 1801. The first performances of both were private, but later ones were associated with charitable causes, and promoted the composer as a public figure of esteem. 
Despite the travails of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, Haydn maintained his profile as Europe's leading composer, mainly through contact with publishers in Paris, London, and Leipzig. To the doctorate from Oxford University were added membership of the Royal Swedish Academy of Music (1799), and medals from the Paris Conservatoire (1805) and the Philharmonic Society in St Petersburg (1808). In 1803 he received a medal of honour from the city of Vienna for his services to charity. Haydn's response to the last-mentioned was typical in its directness and humility: 'vox Populi, vox Dei'. He was made an honorary citizen of Vienna in 1804. 
Haydn's last major composition was completed in 1802, the 'Harmoniemesse', though he continued to forward some settings of national folk-songs to the publisher George Thomson in Edinburgh for a further two years. Although virtually housebound from 1806 Haydn's last years were comfortable ones, sustained by regular visitors and an inner contentment. He became noticeably weaker in the early months of 1809 and died peacefully in his sleep at his home in Gumpendorf, Vienna, on 31 May 1809. The official cause of death was given as 'debilitation'. He was buried in the cemetery in Gumpendorf on 1 June. Most of his remains were transferred to the crypt in the Bergkirche in Eisenstadt in 1820; Haydn's head, however, was missing, having been stolen from the grave in Gumpendorf to aid the work of the Viennese phrenologist, Franz Joseph Gall. Only in 1954 was it finally reunited with the rest of his remains. 
In the nineteenth century, in Britain as in Europe generally, Haydn's reputation was soon eclipsed by that of Beethoven, and his historical significance was that of a necessary precursor, an attitude that was aggravated by a romantic sensibility that interpreted his life-long position as kapellmeister as a lack of ambition and creative individuality. Haydn had been affectionately called Papa Haydn by many of his acquaintances; for much of posterity evoking this sobriquet was a convenient way of belittling his musical mastery. Johannes Brahms was a rare admirer, and his musical thought processes owe a great deal to Haydn. Although the composer became known as the 'father of the symphony' and the 'father of the quartet' full understanding of his 'oeuvre' was not possible until the last decades of the twentieth century, when most of his music finally became available in modern editions. 
Scholars have long established that this alleged father did not invent the symphony or the quartet but he was certainly the first composer to appreciate their potential and it is undoubtedly true that Beethoven's achievement would not have been possible without Haydn's example. In his quartets and symphonies, as well as other instrumental works such as piano sonatas and the piano trios, Haydn projected an unequalled mastery of the language of music, to the extent that his music often seems to be about the very power of the language itself. Opinions on his status as a composer of vocal music remain mixed. His operas have never figured in the standard repertory, and while his Catholic church music has always been a mainstay of liturgical services in his native Austria, elsewhere his masses in particular are most usually encountered as concert works. His two late oratorios, 'The Creation' and 'The Seasons', especially the former, have enjoyed continuous popular acclaim from the end of the eighteenth century to the present day, though often blighted by patronizing sentiment rather than a recognition of the remarkable certainty and beauty of Haydn's vision. 
Although Haydn spent only a small part of his long life in Britain, his role in its musical life was a dominant one from about 1780 until the 1820s. For many commentators he was the modern equivalent of Handel, a German composer whose greatness was nurtured by the rich and progressive musical life of Georgian Britain. For that reason the provocative view that London was as important as Vienna in developing Haydn's artistry has much to commend it. 


@@@@@


doc= 92286


Green, Stanley Owen (1915-1993), dietary reformer and author, was born on 22 February 1915 at Harringay, north London, the youngest of the four sons of Richard Green (died 1966), a bottle-stopper maker's clerk, and his wife, May (died 1967). He was educated at Wood Green School and may have worked as a clerk or draughtsman before joining the Royal Navy in August 1938. Following his demobilization in September 1945 Green undertook a series of jobs, beginning with the Fine Art Society, during which time (March 1946) he failed the entrance exam for London University. Thereafter he worked for Selfridges, the civil service (possibly at the Ministry of Works), and between 1956 and 1961 at Ealing borough council, where he was employed as a storeman and in the surveying and parks departments. In early 1962 he worked briefly for the General Post Office, after which he appears to have earned his living as a self-employed gardener. Throughout this period he lived with his parents until their deaths in the mid-1960s. 
In later interviews and correspondence Green described himself as having 'always been a moral sort of person' who had been shocked during the war by the bawdiness or 'passion' of fellow sailors ('Sunday Times Magazine'). By about 1958 he claimed, through personal experience, to have equated this passion, in both men and women, with an excessive consumption of protein-rich foods (letter, 31 May 1981, Museum of London). The solution, which crystallized into a personal philosophy of 'protein wisdom', was a regime of moderation enshrined in the doctrine of 'less lust from less protein'. In June 1968 Green, aged fifty-three, began a public campaign of dietary and social reform among Saturday shoppers in south Harrow. After six months he dedicated himself full-time to the cause, which he now took to central London. Between 1969 and 1993 he became an almost daily sight for the office workers, shoppers, and tourists in and around Oxford Street. Saturday evenings were spent attempting to improve the habits of cinema-goers in Leicester Square. 
Initially Green's principal means of communication was a board, carried above the crowd, on which he warned against passion and its eight key sources: '
Less Passion 

From Less Protein: 

Meat Fish 

Bird; Egg 

Cheese; 

Peas incl. lentils 

Beans; Nuts 

' Central to his message was the need to moderate, rather than forgo, protein consumption. In childhood protein-rich foods were essential for growth and remained an important source for what Green termed the body's 'survival system'; however, adults required less protein, with the unnecessary excess being directed to the 'reproductive system' and so principally to sexual activity ('Eight Passion Proteins with Care', 1968). 
To the original eight 'passion proteins' Green later added sitting to warn of the link between sedentary living, enhanced protein build-up, and lust. But 'and sitting' was the only significant revision of the banner which he carried for twenty-five years and described in 1981 as 'the most important... part of my dedicated work'. This was supplemented by an 'oral message' which, as his diaries indicate, Green carefully refined to appeal to the passing crowd. On 12 November 1968, for example, he determined that 'my orals must be terse and printed for the 12 o clocks, and longer messages can be used when people are inclined to stand about; after lunching'. Later entries show Green's close observation of his effectiveness in new areas: 'People in the district behind Bayswater Road etc. are beginning to take notice of me' (diary, 16 June 1970, Museum of London). This publicity was furthered by the familiarity of Green's unchanging uniform of cap, overalls, satchel, and wire-rimmed glasses. During his campaign he was twice arrested, in 1980 and 1985, for public obstruction. 
From the early 1970s Green began producing literature to distribute to passers-by. Two editions of his 'protein wisdom' pamphlet were printed commercially in 1973 after which he acquired a press and produced fifty revised editions from the front room of his council flat in Northolt, Middlesex. On average he sold twenty pamphlets on weekdays and up to fifty on Saturdays; by February 1993 he claimed to have sold 87,000 copies, always at the lowest possible price (for example, 11 pence in 1985). Green proved less successful with several fuller statements on 'protein wisdom' from which the shorter booklets derived. His novel, 'Behind the Veil: More than Just a Tale' -- a colourful account of the danger of passion and the possibility of redemption -- remains in manuscript, despite Green's best efforts with the country's leading publishing houses. A similar fate befell a 392 page version of 'Eight passion proteins' (rejected, among others, by Oxford University Press in October 1971), and a 67 page text, 'Passion and protein'. Unbowed by rejection, Green combined his street work with a letter-writing campaign which saw booklets sent to five British prime ministers (Ted Heath to John Major), numerous cabinet ministers, and MPs -- especially those who spoke out on declining moral standards -- as well as to the prince of Wales, the archbishop of Canterbury, the director-general of the BBC, the editor of 'The Times', the British Medical Association, the National Marriage Guidance Council, the newsagency W. H. Smith (who declined an offer to stock Green's work), the American government, and Pope Paul VI. An additional campaign during the early 1970s targeted British prison governors, who were urged to introduce dietary reform to reduce disturbances among inmates. 
Green's interest in prison life demonstrates that the 'passions' he warned against took forms other than sexual activity. In his booklet 'Eight Passion Proteins with Care' he argued that an excess of proteins left the elderly prone to corpulence, while mothers and fathers would suffer from bad temper and so deny 'our children, friendliness and conversation, compensating them, with dead things, like sweets and toys, merely pretending to be good parents'. None the less, sex remained Green's preoccupation as the principal manifestation of 'passion proteins'. Those consuming in excess would find it 'very hard to be well-behaved with a sexual friend, and to be headstrong in one's lonely bed, and difficult to keep to a responsible moral code, in the years before marriage'. Sexual intercourse, described by Green as 'married love', was to be the preserve of married couples and then only in moderation: 'Wives particularly, should not dress to seduce, all the time: single women never'. 
Green's campaign for social reform was as remarkable for its durability and privations as it was for the idiosyncrasy of its message. Until qualifying for a free travel pass, he cycled twelve miles daily from Northolt to central London with his board and publications, a journey that took up to two hours in a headwind. On weekdays and Saturdays he campaigned until 6.30 p.m. and spent Saturday evenings in Leicester Square; Sundays were taken up with printing booklets for the following week. By 1985 he had reduced his visits to four days, but continued to make the journey three times a week until the age of seventy-eight. In line with his own teachings, Green limited his daily protein consumption to one egg and a concoction of milk powder and barley water. Otherwise he survived on oatmeal porridge, chopped dates, infusions of root vegetables, and home-made bread. In his dedication to the cause -- together with his focus on the dangers of excess and indolence, and reform through self-regulation -- Green is reminiscent of self-styled prophets of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. However, his motivation was less spiritual (Green was a declared agnostic) than philanthropic and civic. Hence 'protein wisdom' was developed to moderate the effects of excessive passion for the common good and to make 'better, kinder, happier people' (letter to the US government printing office, 1981, Museum of London). For Green his campaign was always 'a public service' ('Sunday Times Magazine'). Moreover, in its connection between diet, health, and social conduct, and on fathers' role in the raising of children, aspects of his message foreshadowed later mainstream commentators. 
For some of his correspondents, Green's 'protein wisdom' offered a new direction; for others he was a charlatan or a potential menace, especially to young women. But to the majority he was tolerated and, over time, celebrated as an eccentricity of London street life. From the 1970s he gained wide publicity in the British and foreign press, acquired the nickname Protein Man, appeared on television and radio programmes, and featured as an 'Oxford Street character' on a tourist postcard. His principal message -- 'less passion, less protein' -- was also used in a design range by the London fashion house Red or Dead, a move Green welcomed as a further opportunity to spread the word. Posthumously his printing press featured in an exhibition, 'The Maybe', at London's Serpentine Gallery in 1995. Stanley Owen Green died unmarried at his home, 34 Haydock Green, Northolt, Middlesex, on 4 December 1993. His message board, copies of his booklets, and other papers are now held by the Museum of London, with further artefacts at Gunnersbury Park Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 92290


Clayton, John (1792-1890), civic leader and antiquary, was born on 10 June 1792 at Newcastle upon Tyne, the fourth child and third son of Nathaniel Clayton (1760-1832), town clerk and solicitor, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Atkinson (1764-1827), daughter of George and Bridget Atkinson, of Temple Sowerby, Westmorland. Clayton was baptized at St John's Church, Newcastle, on 24 November 1792, close to the family's home, Westgate House, Fenkle Street. He was educated at Kirkoswald School, Northumberland, and at Uppingham School where he developed a lifelong affinity for the classical world, becoming proficient in Greek and Latin. Clayton's classical interests, which led him to become a noted collector and conserver of Roman artefacts, may have derived in part from his maternal grandmother, Bridget Atkinson. She was made an honorary member of the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne on its foundation in 1813. John likewise became a member in 1832 and was an active participant, publishing many papers in the society's journal, 'Archaeologia Aeliana'. 
In 1809 Clayton was articled as a clerk in his father's firm and qualified as a solicitor five years later. He worked for a time with his father before taking over -- with his brothers Matthew and Michael -- what at his death was among the 'largest and most extensive legal practices in the North of England' ('In memoriam', 'Daily Journal', 1890, 8). Clayton became under-sheriff in 1816 and succeeded his father as Newcastle's town clerk in 1822 -- a post for which Nathaniel had paid $2100 in 1785 and in which capacity his son served until June 1867. This was one of many offices held by Clayton, often as clerk, in Newcastle and the surrounding region. 
From the mid-1820s Clayton -- in association with the speculative builder Richard Grainger and the architect John Dobson -- played an important role in the development of central Newcastle. Grainger's early schemes -- at Blackett Street (1824), Eldon Square (1825-31, to Dobson's design), and Leazes Terrace (1829-34) -- were followed with his construction, between 1834 and 1840, of a new market, commercial area, and street plan on the central site of Anderson Place. From September 1826 Clayton was one of Grainger's principal investors, with loans of $4000 for the construction of Eldon Square and $7500 in 1832-3, and he acted as the builder's legal adviser from as early as March 1827. Clayton subsequently championed Grainger's substantial and innovative plan to rebuild the city centre and, in his capacity as town clerk, pressed for its acceptance by Newcastle's common council in July 1834. Between July 1835 and November 1838 he contributed a further $7500 to the project while encouraging prominent city figures, and family members, to provide additional loans. Grainger's scheme made Newcastle 'the best designed Victorian town in England' (Pevsner, 56) with Clayton one of the 'three men who transformed the town's landscape... and gave to Newcastle a planned late Georgian elegance' (Wilkes and Dodds, 22). However, following this success Grainger overreached himself and in 1841 he was saved from bankruptcy only by Clayton's covert negotiations; the latter's involvement with Grainger's financial affairs would continue until after the builder's death in 1861. 
In addition to civic development, Clayton was heavily involved in plans for the creation of the Newcastle to Carlisle Railway which began to carry passengers from 1836. Having taken its proceedings before a Commons committee in the late 1820s, he served as the company's legal adviser in which capacity -- and though not on the board -- he 'wielded more power than most directors' (Fawcett, 23). With members of the city council, Clayton also opposed, unsuccessfully, the 'Tyne Improvement Bill' of 1850. This resulted in Newcastle losing its sole claim to dues from river trade which were subsequently divided with Gateshead, South Shields, and Tynemouth in return for a shared commitment to river maintenance. Clayton served as clerk to the conservancy commission until 1873. 
A long-serving, prosperous, and powerful civic leader, Clayton attracted diverse opinions. An anonymous biographical sketch from 1838 described how his 'great talents, indefatigable industry, immense wealth, and wonderful tact and facility in conducting business' had given him 'an influence in society rarely possessed by one individual', though he displayed 'the craft and subtlety of the devil' ('Corporation Annual', 57). Seventeen years later, and still in power, Clayton was described in a revised set of sketches as a 'Sphinx in the desert', resistant to political reform and modernization ('Second Series', iii-iv). Others resented Clayton's dominance of the corporation and his effect as a 'dead weight upon the town' ('Sketches of Public Men', 78). Clayton Street, part of Richard Grainger's rebuilding of central Newcastle, is named for him. 
On his father's death in 1832 Clayton inherited the family's country estate of Chesters, near Hexham, which incorporated the site of Cilurnum, Chesters Roman fort. He now combined his civic and legal duties with studying and conserving Chesters and neighbouring Roman sites which he purchased in 'one of the first acts of deliberate archaeological conservation in the world' (Woodside and Crow, 84). From 1834 he began to purchase land along Hadrian's Wall, beginning with Steel Rigg, to which he added Cawfields (1844), Shield on the Wall (1848), and East Cawfields in 1874. In 1838 Clayton acquired Housesteads Farm, which included the Roman fort of Vercovicium, following this with the forts at Carrawburgh (Procolitia), Chesterholm (Vindolanda), and Carvoran (Magna). 
Clayton's extension of his estate ran hand in hand with an annual programme of excavation. This began at Chesters in 1843, where he uncovered much of the site of Cilurnum, and was followed six years later by surveys at Housesteads and along what came to be known as the Clayton Wall; this led, as at Cawfields Milecastle (excavated between 1848 and 1851), to Clayton's important discovery that the wall comprised regular gateways in its structure. The finds were brought to Chesters and stored in the mansion, verandah, and the summer (or 'antiquities') house. By Clayton's death the collection numbered 11,000 items, including 95 altars and 53 centurial stones, as well as ceramics, tools, and coins. In recording and publicizing the excavations -- principally to members of Newcastle's Society of Antiquaries -- Clayton worked closely with John Collingwood Bruce who had first visited the wall's central section in 1848 and whose study, 'The Roman Wall' (1851), was dedicated to Clayton. Both men identified the wall to be the work of Hadrian and not the emperor Severus, as some maintained at this time. Clayton also collaborated with the numismatist Charles Roach Smith on the coin collection at Chesters and corresponded with the German classical scholars Emil Hubner and Theodor Mommsen; he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in February 1866. 
Alongside excavation and collection, Clayton had sections of Hadrian's Wall cleared of rubble to expose the original Roman core and surviving masonry courses, and then rebuilt using the Roman stone; he also instructed that his stretch of the wall be sealed with a turf cap -- a practice applied to other sections during conservation work in the twentieth century. Clayton's decision to end quarrying and the reuse of Roman stone in new buildings also saved large sections from destruction and is considered by modern conservationists to be 'one of the most important factors in the survival of the Wall' (Grenville and others, 15). In a bid to improve the site, Clayton also had a number of farm buildings relocated further away from the wall -- as at Housesteads, Peel Cottage, and Shield on the Wall where the house had previously occupied the site of Milecastle 41 on Melkridge Common. In addition, large areas of land close to the wall were drained and given over to the grazing of livestock. 
John Clayton died, unmarried, on 14 July 1890, at Chesters, having outlived all but one of his eleven siblings. The estate passed to his nephew Nathaniel George Clayton (1833-1895) and building work on a museum at Chesters began shortly afterwards. In 1929 the estate was put on the market with the farms along Hadrian's Wall offered for sale as separate properties. Housesteads was not sold, however, and in January 1930 the fort was given to the National Trust; four years later the farm's land was also presented to the trust by the historian G. M. Trevelyan. In the early twenty-first century the Clayton collection at Chesters Roman Fort and Museum -- under the care of English Heritage -- remains an internationally recognized site of Roman history and Victorian collecting practices. 


@@@@@


doc= 92318


Watson, David (1859-1943), Church of Scotland minister and social reformer, was born on 7 February 1859 in the village of Alva, near Stirling, one of seven children of David Watson (1820-1870), boot- and shoemaker, and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Crawford (1824-1886). Educated at Alva Academy, he left school at the age of twelve, following the death of his father after a short illness. He became an indentured apprentice in the provision trade, developing regular business habits which benefited him in later life. At the age of sixteen he felt called to the ministry. With the help of the parish minister, Andrew Kelly, who tutored him in Latin and Greek, Watson won a bursary to the University of Glasgow, matriculating at the age of eighteen in 1876. He completed the four-year arts course, studying moral philosophy under the celebrated Hegelian Edward Caird, later master of Balliol College, Oxford, and natural philosophy under the renowned physicist Sir William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin. Watson then entered the divinity hall at the University of Glasgow, finishing his course in March 1884. A few months later he was licensed to preach in the Church of Scotland by the presbytery of Stirling, and became assistant to the Revd A. Fyfe Burns of St George's parish in the manufacturing town of Paisley. 
At Paisley, Watson grew deeply concerned with the problems of urban poverty. Andrew Mearns's 'Bitter Cry of Outcast London' was published in 1883; like many others Watson was distressed by its revelations of acute social deprivation, especially the horrors of slum housing. He had also become personally acquainted with the English Congregationalist journalist W. T. Stead, whose sensational series of articles in 1885, 'The maiden tribute of modern Babylon', exposed widespread child prostitution in London. Watson's own pastoral visiting in Paisley brought him into close contact with the often appalling living conditions of the urban poor, and he wrote a series of vividly descriptive articles for the 'Paisley Gazette' entitled 'How the Paisley poor live!' which received considerable attention. 
Watson's concern for the urban poor led him to accept, in November 1886, the call to a small Church of Scotland 'chapel-of-ease' or mission chapel -- St Clement's -- in the east end of Glasgow. Within fifteen months he had managed to secure endowments and to increase the membership, ensuring that St Clement's was elevated from a chapel-of-ease to a parish church. Over the next several years St Clement's became a model urban working-class church, with an attractive, welcoming interior, a membership of over 1000, and a church hall that provided a meeting place for the surrounding community. As well as pastoral visiting, Watson commenced a series of regular week-night lectures for young people, which he continued for over twenty years. He organized a rambling club to enable working-class parishioners to enjoy Saturday afternoon walks in the surrounding countryside. He co-operated with the Glasgow Workmen's Dwellings Company in developing affordable and attractive housing. He established a club room in his church hall, with games and magazines, to provide young people with an alternative to the street. 
By the 1890s Watson was also taking a leading role in charitable and social reform activities outside his parish. From the early 1890s he was active in the Charity Organization Society, serving as chairman of the Mile-End district, attending conferences across Britain, and embracing its ethos of promoting self-help and independence among the poor. He was also active on the Scottish Council for Women's Trades, and served for a time as chairman. In 1901, influenced by the Christian Social Union in England, Watson took the lead in forming the Scottish Christian Social Union, to promote the social mission of the Scottish Presbyterian churches. On Watson's urging, the new union made the improvement of child life its first major cause. He served as president of the union from 1901 to 1938. In 1910 he was appointed chaplain of Barlinnie prison in Glasgow, the largest prison in Scotland, a post he held until 1915 in conjunction with his parish charge. This experience convinced him of the lasting social damage caused by incarcerating youths for petty infractions. 
From 1899 Watson became a major force in convincing the Church of Scotland to embrace social work and social reform in a more informed and systematic manner. He was not by nature an ecclesiastical politician and disliked the practical work of church governance through the church courts. He did, however, throw himself into the work of educating the church on social evils and problems. He served for many years on the committee on social problems of the presbytery of Glasgow. In 1907 he undertook for this committee a personal investigation, while dressed as a poor labourer, into conditions in the lodging houses of Glasgow. It was journalistic investigation in the manner of W. T. Stead, and Watson's report revealed a dark underworld of alcoholism, violent crime, and child prostitution. The report led the presbytery of Glasgow and later the Church of Scotland as a whole to set up missions to the lodging houses. He helped to organize a series of church congresses in Scotland between 1899 and 1904 to explore pressing social, moral, and intellectual questions. In 1904 he was active in the formation of the Church of Scotland's standing committee on social work. He served as vice-convenor of the committee from 1904 to 1927, and convener from 1927 to 1935 -- promoting the establishment of improved lodging houses for men and women, farm colonies for training the urban unemployed, orphanages and hostels, retirement homes, soup kitchens, and homes for unmarried mothers. When the committee was criticized by some for simply providing ambulance work for the victims of social injustice, Watson responded that the church must address the immediacy of human suffering in an imperfect world. At the same time he also worked for social reforms aimed at reducing poverty. During the First World War he served on the church's commission on the war, and took a leading role in planning for post-war social reconstruction, insisting that out of the suffering of the war there should come a new, more just social order. He was commissioned by the church to edit, with Professor W. P. Paterson, a wide-ranging volume of essays under the title 'Social Evils and Problems' (1918), intended to educate the church to take an active role in post-war social reconstruction. He assisted in the formation in 1919 of the church's standing church and nation committee, and served as convener of the sub-committee on social and industrial life from 1919 to 1930. 
Watson was a prolific and fluent author, who produced a large number of books and pamphlets on the social aspects of Christianity. Among his major works were 'Social Problems and the Church's Duty' (1908), 'Social Advance: its Meaning, Method, and Goal' (1911), and 'The Social Expression of Christianity' (1919). Watson's social writings reflected careful research into social questions, a command of statistics and practical detail, a willingness to draw upon his own experiences as an urban pastor, and a broad familiarity with history and literature. Although sympathetic to many of the ideals of socialism, he was not a socialist, believing that socialism was overly materialistic, that it placed too much emphasis on economic interpretations, and that it would stifle individual human potential. His own social and political philosophy was rooted in the Christian communal traditions he had experienced in his youth in rural Alva and in the ethical Liberalism of Gladstone and John Bright. After 1906 he embraced the social commitments of the new Liberalism, including support for increased state involvement in social welfare. He emphasized policies aimed at promoting individual responsibility and independence among the poor. Although disappointed by the limited achievements in social reconstruction following the First World War, he retained his strong belief in human progress. In theology he was an evangelical, who preached a gospel of personal salvation through divine grace. He believed strongly that the church must advance on two fronts, combining its work for the conversion of individuals with striving for a more just social order. 'Social reform and personal regeneration', he observed in 1935, 'were both needed -- a better social order and better men -- but we would attain neither unless we strove for both simultaneously' (Watson, 82-3). 
Watson married Janet Martin (1862-1932), the daughter of John Martin, a merchant in Dunning, on 1 March 1887. It was a long and happy marriage. They had two sons and three daughters. The eldest son, David Crawford Watson, followed his father into the ministry of the Church of Scotland; the other son, John Martin Watson, died in 1919 of pneumonia, aged twenty, while preparing for the ministry. One of Watson's daughters, Florence Jean, became a missionary with her husband, Professor William Lillie, at Murray College in India. Watson was awarded the degree of doctor of divinity by the University of Glasgow in 1913. He demitted his ministerial charge of St Clement's on 31 December 1928. His wife died on 12 November 1932, and a few years later, in 1935, he resigned as convener of the social work committee. He died at his home, 8 Clayton Terrace, Glasgow, on 5 November 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 92320


Corbett, Harry (1925-1982), actor, was born in Rangoon, Burma, on 28 February 1925, the youngest of seven children of George Corbett (1885/6-1943), a staff sergeant in the South Staffordshire regiment stationed in Burma, and his wife, Caroline Emily, 'nee' Barnsley (1884-1926). Following his mother's death a year after his birth, he and two brothers were shipped from the comparative comfort of Rangoon to working-class Ardwick in Manchester, where an aunt, Annie Williams, became a surrogate mother. Corbett's early experiences there informed his political attitudes later in life, and also led to his notable involvement in charity work. 
Corbett attended Ross Place county primary school in Ardwick, and then Benchill primary and Sharston high school, both in Wythenshawe. He early on developed a passion for the cinema, and was also encouraged by a school teacher at Sharston to take up amateur dramatics. He went on a school outing organized by her to see '1066 and All That', and this convinced him that acting was his calling. He left school at fourteen in 1939, finding work in a biscuit factory. During the Second World War he joined the Royal Marines in 1942, and saw service in the north Atlantic and the Far East. 
In the immediate post-war period Corbett had various labouring and building jobs, and developed an interest in medicine, attending a course on radiography. He maintained his love of acting, took voice lessons, and at twenty-three managed to get acting work at Chorlton Repertory Theatre Club, where he also learned about stage management, lighting, and generally how the theatre operates. He became engaged to (Mildred) Avis Bunnage (1923-1990) who was also in the company, and who went on, like Corbett, to become a stalwart of Joan Littlewood's Theatre Workshop. 
In 1951 Littlewood hired Corbett in Manchester and he proved himself an invaluable actor. Littlewood later offered him leading and classical roles, claiming that for him film-going had been his acting school. Corbett was a moving Sir Andrew Aguecheek, and when the company settled in London in the Theatre Royal, Stratford East, in 1953 he was given the lead in 'Richard II', and main roles in 'Le Malade imaginaire' and 'Arden of Faversham'. It was while working with the company that he developed an abiding interest in the methods of Rudolf Laban and Constantin Stanislavsky. Despite an uneasy relationship developing between Littlewood and Corbett she allowed him to direct Alun Owen's 'Progress in the Park', which he did successfully, and he also played Sherlock Holmes in James Goldman's 'They Might Be Giants'. Kenneth Tynan disliked the company's touring version of Brecht's 'Mother Courage' (1955), but recognized Corbett's ability -- 'abounds in hints of the performance this actor might have given in more favourable surroundings' (Tynan, 230). Elsewhere Tynan had already termed him 'an actor of genius' (Corbett, 128). 
Although politically Corbett was sympathetic to Theatre Workshop's ethos he left the company in 1955. He remained in touch, however. When Margaret Bury, one of the Theatre Workshop company, started East 15 Acting School, Corbett bought a barn in Ditchling, Sussex, and paid for its transportation to the school in 1965. This became the school's Corbett Theatre. 
Corbett worked on and off in the West End and at the Royal Court, though his political opinions had hitherto seen him turning down parts in non-left wing theatre. For an actor with only empirical training his was a remarkable trajectory. Having played classical leads for Joan Littlewood, he was now offered parts in 'The Family Reunion', Peter Brook's 'Hamlet', 'The Power and the Glory', and 'The Way of the World'. 
Corbett's film career started soon after the Workshop period, initially with small parts in a variety of features -- 'Floods of Fear' (directed by Charles Crichton, 1958), 'Nowhere to Go' (Seth Holt, 1958), a slightly larger role in 'Sammy Going South' (Alexander Mackendrick, 1963), and a substantial comedy role as a scoundrel property developer thwarted by working women in C. Pennington-Richards's underrated 'Ladies Who Do' (1963). 
Corbett had also featured in television drama from 1955, and in the meantime, in line with Equity rules, had added the 'H' between his first and last names to avoid confusion with the children's television puppeteer of the same name. Various television roles, usually of a gangster/low life nature, had flowed in since he left Littlewood's company: his was a muscular and imposing presence, with a generous, flashing smile and both innocence and wickedness in the eyes. 
The part which was to make Corbett a household name came about as the result of a successful BBC television 'Comedy Playhouse' episode, 'The Offer', broadcast in January 1962. This led to the commissioning of a series, 'Steptoe and Son', first broadcast in June 1962. As Harold Steptoe he was the son of Albert -- Wilfrid Brambell, the Irish veteran of stage and screen -- both of them in what was then termed the 'rag-and-bone' business. Corbett's ability to play comedy and believable pathos made him a suitable match for Brambell's self-pitying and sly old man. Scripted by Alan Simpson and Ray Galton, who had made a national institution of the comedian Tony Hancock on radio and television, 'Steptoe' ran from 1962 to 1967, 1970 to 1976, and a single repeat episode -- watched by over 13 million viewers -- in 1988. 
The strength of the 'Steptoe' writing was reflected in the casting. Harold is constantly trying to break out of the shabby, working-class mould in which he is trapped, always undermined by his father, by his own inadequacies, or simply by circumstances. Corbett brought a sympathy to the part with which the viewer identified, the sadness of his situation never far below the comedy surface. In this respect the character shares something of what Simpson and Galton created for Hancock -- the little man with aspirations, the assumed right to meet the bourgeois world on an equal footing. 'The Times', in its obituary of Corbett, said rightly that the programme 'was a profound statement about human relationships' (23 March 1982). 
Two film spin-offs -- 'Steptoe and Son' (Cliff Owen, 1972) and 'Steptoe and Son Ride Again' (Peter Sykes, 1973) -- were not up to the standard of the small-screen shows. In the meantime, however, Corbett had made better films, also in starring roles: 'The Bargee' (Duncan Wood, 1964), based closely on the Harold Steptoe character, and 'Rattle of a Simple Man' (Muriel Box, 1964), based on Charles Dyer's hit play. His fame and familiarity on television were such that he guested as the lead in 'Carry On Screaming' (Gerald Thomas, 1966). Among other films he appeared in Terry Gilliam's 'Jabberwocky' (1977); and also James Kenelm Clarke's 'Hardcore' (1977), in which Corbett's (and everyone else's) talents are hardly used. 
Corbett married twice. His first marriage, on 20 October 1958, was to the South African comedian and actor Sheila Frances Steafel ('b'. 1935), daughter of Harold Steafel, engineer. They divorced in 1965. He married, second, on 2 September 1969, the actor Maureen Patricia Blott (stage name Maureen Crombie) (1943-1999), who had previously adopted the surname Corbett; she was the daughter of Sydney Blott, clerk, and was formerly married to Anthony Boden, from whom she was divorced. They had two children, Susannah and Jonathan. 
Corbett was awarded an OBE in 1976. A severe heart attack in 1979 stopped him only temporarily from working. He died at St Helen's Hospital, Hastings, Sussex, of a second attack, on 21 March 1982, and was buried in the churchyard at Penhurst, near to his home at Ashburnham in the Sussex Weald. From the general public's point of view he was identified solely with Harold Steptoe. At one level this denies him a richer legacy as a versatile actor; but at another it indicates the great affection in which he was held by the many millions who knew Harry H. as Harold. 


@@@@@


doc= 92322


Hughes, Victoria (1897-1978), lavatory attendant and author, was born on 22 June 1897 at Woodbury Lane, off Blackboy Hill, Bristol, the fifth of ten children of Alfred William Rogers, a scaffolder, and his wife, Ellen Rogers. She was educated at Anglesea School in nearby Worrall Road, Clifton, and, like many Bristol girls in the early twentieth century, took her first job in the Wills tobacco factory in Bedminster. It was on her regular walk to work that she met Richard Hughes (1896-1965), an apprentice ironmonger. His family disapproved of their subsequent engagement, so he moved in with hers. They married on 16 July 1916, the day that Richard left for the Somme with the Royal Berkshire regiment. After the armistice he returned to Bristol suffering from trench foot, a limp, and failing eyesight. Jobs were scarce even for the fully fit, and Victoria eventually became the main breadwinner for her husband and their two daughters, Margaret ('b'. 1920) and Barbara ('b'. 1931). 
Hughes was, in her own words, 'a homely little housewife' who attended a church fellowship and led a happily conventional existence, with hobbies like sewing, cycling, and 'the ambitious kind' of cooking. But she found unexpected fame at the age of eighty as the author of 'Ladies' Mile' (1977), a book of personal reminiscences which revealed a hitherto hidden aspect of the city's social life. Although the book reportedly shocked Bristol's civic dignitaries when it was published and serialized in a local newspaper, it has since been acknowledged as a valuable contribution to the city's social history. 
For thirty-three years until her retirement in May 1962 Hughes worked as what she described as a 'loo lady' at a public convenience in Stoke Road on Bristol's Durdham Downs. Her official duties involved issuing tickets, cleaning, and selling sanitary supplies. Although she considered her work a lowly -- even embarrassing -- way to make a living, in the summer of 1929 she welcomed the opportunity to earn 4's'. 6died for two days a week at the toilets next to Clifton suspension bridge. She was eventually offered the full-time post at Stoke Road for 2 guineas, paid in cash every Thursday. There she realized that many of the women who regularly visited the lavatory were involved in prostitution on the nearby Ladies' Mile. 
Nothing in her upbringing had prepared Hughes for these encounters, which both shocked and fascinated her. Though always resolutely respectable herself, she became a companion and confidante to scores of prostitutes during her time as an attendant. She cheered them up with tea and sympathy in her little office where she kept a kettle and her knitting, and helped them out of difficult and dangerous situations with money, advice, and, occasionally, direct intervention. In a collection of notebooks she recorded with compassion and humour the events and characters involved in Bristol's sex trade between the depression and the early 1960s. The notebooks formed the basis for 'Ladies' Mile', whose editor, David Foot, described it as the work of an 'honest, loyal, hard-working and unworldly' author who 'happened to be a first-class observer with a natural turn of phrase, wry and happily unsophisticated' (p. vii). Hughes herself maintained that there was 'nothing especially sensational about prostitution... As a maritime city, Bristol's whores have usually found it a good market place. But what went on among the trees on the Downs before, during and after the last war is still, I feel, a little piece of the city's history.' To the women she met Hughes hoped that she 'showed some compassion... They, in turn, gave me a sort of companionship and warmth... My job was to take the pennies and not to moralise. I'll leave others to huff and puff about what went on. (pp. 58-9)' From 1958 the Hughes family lived in a terrace house at 255 Gloucester Road, Bishopston, Bristol, which was where Victoria died from cancer on 30 August 1978. She was cremated at Canford cemetery, Westbury-on-Trym, Bristol, on 6 September. On 22 September 2003 a Bristol city council blue plaque was unveiled above the door of the Stoke Road ladies' toilets, commemorating 'Victoria Hughes (1897-1978), who befriended and cared for prostitutes when she worked here as a lavatory attendant from 1929 to 1962'. 


@@@@@


doc= 92324


Harrower, John (1733-1777?), indentured servant and journal writer, was probably born in Scotland, though further details of his parentage and upbringing are unknown. Some time after 1750 he moved to Twageos, a small community contiguous to Lerwick in the Shetland Islands. There Harrower worked as a shopkeeper and merchant. On 17 March 1755 he married Ann Graeme (died in or after 1780), the half-sister of Captain James Craigie, a prosperous merchant in the town. Their first son, Jock, was born in November 1762; they had at least two other children, George and Bess. On 6 December 1773 Harrower, aged forty, left his family and boarded a ship for Leith in 'order to travel in search of business'. In his own words he was then 'Master of no more Cash but 81/2d and stockins &ca. to the amount of $3 Str. or thereabout, a small value indeed to traviel with' (Harrower, 3). 
The economic hardship suffered by Harrower and his family was typical of many Scots who faced extreme poverty during the 1770s, in large part due to excessive crown rents levied on tenant farmers, shopkeepers, and merchants. Following the financial crisis of 1772 as many as 40,000 Scots left their homes in search of work in southern Scotland and England, or as indenture servants in the American colonies. The great majority of colonial indentured labourers remain anonymous, aside from a name on a ship's register or in records of persons indentured. What makes Harrower's experience remarkable is the journal he kept for three and a half years from December 1773, which provides a detailed picture of one man's experience of the process of indenture and life in service. 
Harrower had initially expected to find employment in a Scottish or English port. In this he was unsuccessful, as was his attempt to secure a passage to the Netherlands, having landed at Portsmouth. He therefore walked 80 miles from Portsmouth to London, during which time he lived on money made from selling the stockings he had brought from Shetland. He arrived in the capital on 18 January where he described himself as being 'like a blind man without a guide, not knowing where to go being friendless' (Harrower, 14). In London Harrower appealed to merchants and shipmasters in the hope of finding work, but without success. He also saw 'Hundreds... sterving for want of employment, and many good people... begging'. After almost two months, and 'reduced to the last shilling', Harrower 'was oblidged to engage to go to Virginia' to serve four years as a schoolmaster in exchange for room, board, washing, and payment of $5. On 6 February 1774 he sailed on the 'Planter' with seventy servants who were similarly 'indentured to serve four years' (ibid., 17, 19). A difficult passage lasted sixteen weeks during which Harrower recorded periods of acute seasickness ('There was some sleeping, some spewing, some pishing, some shiting... some Blasting their leggs and thighs, some their Liver, lungs, lights and eyes'; ibid., 24-5) and noted on 31 March that fifty passengers had fallen ill, mostly with fever. He too succumbed, but recovered after a few days. 
The 'Planter' docked at Fredericksburg, Virginia, on 10 May 1774. On the recommendation of the ship's captain, Harrower was singled out by the merchant responsible for selling the servants' indentures. He remained in Fredericksburg and was introduced to a local planter, Colonel William Daingerfield, who visited the town for the fair day in search of a tutor for his children. The meeting went well and on 23 May 'my Indenture... was then delivered him and he was to send for me the next day' (Harrower, 40). 
From May 1774 Harrower lived at Daingerfield's 1300 acre plantation, Belvidera, about 7 miles south of Fredericksburg, on a high bluff overlooking the Rappahannock River. Like many planters in late eighteenth-century Chesapeake, Daingerfield grew a mixed crop of wheat and maize to solve the problems of soil depletion caused by tobacco cultivation. Belvidera clearly fascinated Harrower and provided him with much material for his journal and for the letters he wrote to his wife and brother-in-law in Shetland. His life on the plantation differed significantly from the experiences of most indentured servants and he appears to have been more a member of the family than a contract labourer. His primary responsibility was to teach Daingerfield's three sons to 'read write and figure' (Harrower, 42). Like many private tutors he was able to take on additional students for 'five shillings currency per Quarter' and was permitted to keep this money. With nothing on which to spend his income, Harrower promised his wife on 14 June 1774 that 'every Shillg.... shall be carefully remitted you' (ibid., 56). 
Though clearly missing his wife and family, Harrower also noted his good fortune in Virginia. At Belvidera he ate at his master's table, was included when visitors were present, often attended church with the family, and claimed that he had never 'lived a genteel regulare life until now'. His only difficulty was an obligation to 'talk english the best I can, for Lady Daingerfield speacks nothing but high english' (Harrower, 54), which required Harrower to lose his Scottish brogue. In addition to information on agricultural practice, and the economic hardships of plantation life, Harrower's correspondence provides a personal perspective on the worsening international situation. A letter of June 1774, for example, informed his wife of the absence of tea from his diet, there being 'none drunk by any in this Government... which is owing to the difference at present betwixt the Parliment of great Brittan and the North Americans... and I'm afraid if the Parliment do not give it over it will cause a total revolt as all the North Americans are determined to stand by one another. (ibid., 56)' In the last extant letter to his wife (15 September 1775) Harrower repeated his wish that she and his children join him in Virginia, though he predicted that this would be delayed by 'the National disputes & the stopage of trade betwixt this and the Mother Country' (ibid., 116). 
Harrower's final journal entry on 28 July 1776 provided no indication that anything in his life was amiss. However, within months he had died of unknown causes. The little that can be gathered comes from a letter written by his wife to Colonel Daingerfield, sent on 24 May 1780, in which she acknowledged Daingerfield's correspondence of 14 April 1777 with news of her husband's death, the cause being a disease of 'that kind [which] baffles all the power of medicine' (Harrower, 164). Ann Harrower also acknowledged Daingerfield's earlier promise of $70 and commented that her husband had considered himself well treated at Belvidera. During the nineteenth century Harrower's manuscript journal remained in private hands, in which period some pages were lost, before it was given to the Virginia Historical Society about 1900 and published in 1963. His story illustrates how, for an educated and well-placed indentured servant, late eighteenth-century America offered considerable promise. However, Harrower's premature death closed all possibility that his family might begin a new life in the colonies. 


@@@@@


doc= 92325


Moraley, William (1698-1762), indentured servant and writer, was born on 25 February 1698 and baptized on 1 March at Christ Church, Greyfriars, Newgate, London, the only child of William Moraley (died 1725), a journeyman watchmaker, and Martha, 'nee' Mason (died 1740), the daughter of a London founder. By Moraley's own account he studied Latin, arithmetic, music, dancing, and natural philosophy as a child. His later writings indicate that he was also well read. Aged fifteen he was bound as clerk to an attorney, but he pursued a life of pleasure rather than studying the law. His father took him on as an apprentice watchmaker in 1718, but theirs was a contentious relationship that was compounded by William senior's loss of $800 following the collapse of the South Sea Company in 1720. Three years later the family moved to Newcastle upon Tyne. His father died in 1725 and left the bulk of his estate to his wife, with only a few shillings and tools being bequeathed to his son. Moraley subsequently quarrelled with his mother over the inheritance, of which the perceived injustice troubled him for the rest of his life. 
Moraley's spendthrift habits, his estrangement from his family, and the economic downturn of the late 1720s brought imprisonment for debt. He was freed from Newgate prison, Newcastle, following parliament's general amnesty of May 1729 and travelled to London, where officials arrested him almost immediately for stealing food; he was acquitted in July because of lack of evidence. Hungry and with few job prospects, in October 1729 Moraley sold himself as an indentured servant and agreed to serve five years as (in his own words) one of the 'Voluntary Slaves' in the 'American Plantations'. He sailed to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, where Isaac Pearson, a Quaker clockmaker from Burlington, New Jersey, purchased him for $11. Having run away and been recaptured, Moraley was inexplicably able to negotiate a shorter term of service: three years as a blacksmith, cow tender, general labourer, and watch- and clockmaker. He was freed by early 1733 and then travelled through several colonies, rollicking with friends and eluding his creditors, but also failing to find sufficient work. Moraley was now penniless and, having signed on as a ship's cook, returned to England in late 1734 in the hope of securing a larger portion of his father's estate. He lived in Newcastle with his mother -- who remarried twice after 1725 -- until her death in 1740. His objections to her will, which sought to protect the estate from his wastrel ways, led to heated disputes with her executors. About this time he may have suffered a mental breakdown. 
In 1743 Moraley published 'The Infortunate, or, The Voyage and Adventures of William Moraley', the work for which he is now remembered. The memoir is an entertaining and informative 64 page account that combines a picaresque autobiography with extended descriptions of the middle American colonies, and three interspersed sensational stories. A final section explains the legal basis for his disputes with his mother's executors. 'The Infortunate' also provides a rare study of colonial life and thought from the perspective of a down-and-out servant. Moraley's assessment of Pennsylvania as the 'best poor Man's Country in the World' has been widely cited by historians as an accurate characterization of British North America. However, many scholars have overlooked Moraley's contention that American servants experienced 'very hard' conditions, while those of slaves were 'very bad' and transatlantic landowners prospered because they paid no wages to bound workers. 
The first edition of 'The Infortunate' had a small press run and sold few copies. However, it reached a larger audience when an 1884 edition, slightly bowdlerized and omitting the sensational stories, appeared in Britain in the 'Newcastle Weekly Chronicle' and in the United States in the 'Delaware County Republican'. An annotated edition was published in 1992 and a second, revised edition in 2005. Representative segments from 'The Infortunate' are included in many historical and literary anthologies since Moraley offers a unique perspective on the colonies, and because his account provides a balance to the exceptional success story portrayed in Benjamin Franklin's autobiography. 
Little is known of Moraley's life following publication of 'The Infortunate'. He may have married and perhaps had a child, but none of the existing records can be conclusively linked to the author as the name was common in the Newcastle area. Moraley is known to have published two pamphlets in the 1750s, an indication that his financial status may have improved. The first of these, 'The Orphan, or, Revived Fugitive: humbly dedicated to the Right Hon. the Lord Mayor of London' (1753), has not been located. It most probably rehearsed the argument for overturning his mother's will, since Moraley hoped to bring his case to the equity courts presided over by the lord mayor. In the following year he published, pseudonymously, a 12 page pamphlet, 'The Proceedings and Humours of a Late Election in the City of Sandburg... by Wm. Thompson, Gent.', of which only one copy survives. Moraley's text is an elaborate satire on the parliamentary election of 1754 and indicates that he became increasingly radical from the mid-1740s as Newcastle suffered economic dislocation and violent protests. His satire imagines a world turned upside down in which commoners are elevated, aristocrats ridiculed, and the local government holds contested elections, abolishes monopolies, and protects religious dissenters. 
William Moraley was listed as a watchmaker at the time of his death in Newcastle in 1762, and was buried on 19 January 1762 at St Nicholas's Church. He died intestate but in 'The Infortunate' Moraley left an important literary legacy that reveals the lives of poorer inhabitants of the American colonies, Britain, and the Atlantic world. 


@@@@@


doc= 92326


Chisholm, Sir Samuel, baronet (1836-1923), local politician and temperance campaigner, was born in Dalkeith, Midlothian, on 23 September 1836, the eldest son in the family of four sons and three daughters of John Chisholm ('c'.1810-1882), a tobacco manufacturer, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Wilson ('c'.1810-1888). He grew up in a highly politicized environment. The reform struggles of the 1820s and 1830s had galvanized local Liberalism, and his father became a dedicated supporter. The family's radicalism was further consolidated by membership of the United Secession church, which was characterized by its independent, evangelical outlook. Samuel Chisholm was baptized on 7 November 1836 by Joseph Brown, the minister of Dalkeith's largest Secession congregation, who openly embraced a range of progressive causes, including anti-slavery and temperance. For the rest of his life Brown was to exert a major influence on Chisholm, passing on his formidable public speaking skills and organizational energy. 
Chisholm was educated locally, attending two elementary schools and, briefly, Dalkeith grammar school up to the age of eight. He then moved to a school run by the evangelical Free Church of Scotland. In 1850, at the age of fourteen, he began an apprenticeship with Mitchell Brothers, wholesale grocers and spirit merchants, headed by Alexander Mitchell, one of Dalkeith's most prominent Liberals and a co-religionist of John Chisholm. In 1847 the Secession church had become part of the United Presbyterian church, and both men were on the kirk session of the town's East United Presbyterian congregation, under Brown's spiritual direction. It was ironic that Samuel Chisholm commenced working life in a business that supplied alcohol, given that he claimed unswerving commitment to the temperance movement from the age of ten. In later years there was friction between Mitchell and Chisholm over the latter's forthright denunciation of the drinks trade, but during the 1850s Chisholm's employer played an important role in shaping his radical Liberal politics. 
In 1861 Chisholm set up on his own as a wholesale grocer in Dalkeith, assisted by his youngest brother, Robert Fraser Chisholm ('c'.1847-1892). He married, on 13 June 1866, Charlotte ('c'.1836-1900), the Glasgow-born daughter of J. B. Thompson, a United Presbyterian minister. In 1863 Brown had departed for a new congregation, becoming minister of Kent Road Church in Glasgow. While Chisholm was aware that Glasgow presented promising opportunities to enhance his business interests, the call from Brown to be part of the Kent Road mission was a strong motivating impulse for him to move to the city in 1870. He immediately began a long involvement with the Glasgow Foundry Boys' Religious Society, serving as its president from 1890. He was also associated with various temperance organizations, notably the Scottish Temperance League, of which Brown was vice-president. For Chisholm temperance activism led to political activism. Glasgow's teetotal radicals saw drunkenness as the most corrosive factor in retarding the city's regeneration and aimed to return a corps of municipal representatives who would alter local licensing policy. 
The Chisholm brothers had set up the firm of S. and R. Chisholm in 1870, but the partnership ended about 1881 and Samuel continued on his own as head of Samuel Chisholm & Co. Determined to promote his political career, he eventually left the day-to-day running of the business to others. In the Glasgow corporation elections of 1888 he was returned unopposed as a town councillor for the eleventh ward, covering the Woodside district. He embraced housing as a campaigning issue and soon became closely identified with the affairs of the corporation's city improvement trust. Originating in 1866, the trust had the objective of clearing some of the worst slum areas and reconstructing much of the city centre. After a promising start progress had slowed down, and by the 1880s there was considerable public unease about the trust's ineffectiveness. Chisholm, who became the trust's convener in 1892, not only advocated the reactivation of the clearance programme but controversially argued that the corporation should build model dwellings to replace the slums. 
Chisholm's plans for municipal housing, paid for by local taxation, antagonized middle-class ratepayers and private landlords. By directly linking slums, poverty, and anti-social behaviour with the availability of alcohol, he made bitter enemies in the drinks trade. His confident and sometimes abrasive style further infuriated his opponents, and he was castigated as a 'faddist' who represented the worst excesses of radical Liberalism. In 1895 he attempted to enter parliament, standing for the working-class constituency of Glasgow Camlachie. The sitting Liberal Unionist retained the seat and Chisholm blamed the intervention of a Labour candidate, the miner Robert Smillie, for undermining his chances of success. After the Camlachie defeat he abandoned his ambitions of becoming an MP and concentrated on municipal politics. 
In 1899 Chisholm was elected lord provost of Glasgow, the first Liberal incumbent of the post since 1880; ironically his election was ensured by the support of Labour councillors. His three-year term coincided with the South African War and he made strenuous efforts to distance himself from pro-Boer sentiments by becoming involved in fund-raising efforts for wounded combatants and bereaved families. He was prominent in events such as the 1901 Glasgow International Exhibition, which served as a showcase for the city's industrial and cultural achievements. He nevertheless remained a controversial figure. Glasgow at the turn of the century had Britain's largest municipal administration outside London, and public enterprises like water, gas, and tramways were conducted on the grand scale. Increasingly, civic interventionism was being criticized for skewing market forces and suppressing competition, and his housing strategy was exposed to criticisms of municipal empire-building. The Glasgow corporation was spotlighted in a series of articles in the London 'Times', where the civic leadership was depicted as transforming the city into 'a communistic society' (30 Sept 1902). 

'The Times' had been briefed by the lord provost's Glasgow adversaries, who during the course of 1902 were becoming alarmed by the direction of Chisholm's policies. Plans to borrow $750,000 to fund a new housing project had rallied landlords', builders', and ratepayers' groups against him. However, his most outraged opponents belonged to the drinks trade. New licensing regulations were in the course of being implemented in Glasgow, which, among other strictures, cut the hours of public house opening and banned the employment of barmaids. The trade viewed this as the start of prohibition by stealth and a major threat to their livelihoods. That Chisholm intended to seek a further term as lord provost, contrary to municipal convention, reinforced fears that worse would follow. By funding a candidate to stand against him, trade leaders played a key role in the concerted bid to unseat the lord provost at Woodside in the municipal elections of November 1902. The result caused a local sensation, as Chisholm was defeated in an acrimonious contest by 4093 votes to 1981. An immediate effect of his departure was that his housing proposals for Glasgow were not followed through and the initiative on the issue passed decisively to the Independent Labour Party. 
Chisholm had aroused strong feelings because of his single-minded belief in the evils of alcohol. His reputation for being overbearing and humourless also did not help his cause. Yet Chisholm relished public debate and was a platform performer of considerable presence, whose style owed much to the dramatic tradition of temperance oratory. He was striking in appearance, with a flowing silver beard that added to the patriarchal image. He did not return to municipal politics after 1902, although he remained influential in local Liberal circles, where he was noted as a strong supporter of Scottish home rule. He also became active in various charitable and philanthropic organizations, particularly for promoting education. 
On 7 November 1902 Chisholm was made a baronet, in recognition of public services. Following the death of his first wife, he married on 17 January 1903 Agnes Gibson ('c'.1848-1921), daughter of Andrew Carnduff and widow of the Glasgow shipping magnate Thomas Henderson. The relationship was particularly happy, although Chisholm's enemies could not resist attacking him through his wealthy and glamorous wife, who they alleged had brought her well-stocked wine cellar when she moved to his home. In old age Chisholm developed a passion for motor cars. He died on 27 September 1923 at his home at 20 Belhaven Terrace, Glasgow, having contracted a bronchial infection while out motoring, and was buried on 1 October in Cathcart cemetery. He had no children, and the baronetcy became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 92329


Godolphin, Henrietta, 'suo jure' duchess of Marlborough (1681-1733), patron of the arts, was born on 19 July 1681, the second child (and first to survive infancy) of John Churchill, later first duke of Marlborough (1650-1722), and his wife, Sarah Churchill, nee Jenyns (1660-1744). Called Harriet within her family, she was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 29 July 1681, and was educated privately at home under her mother's direction. On 28 April 1698 she married Francis Godolphin (1678-1766), only child of Sidney Godolphin, afterwards first earl of Godolphin (1645-1712). Princess Anne, a close friend of the couple's parents, contributed $5000 to Lady Henrietta's dowry. Lady Henrietta and her husband had four children: William (nicknamed Willigo), born prematurely on 6 February 1699, Henrietta (known as Harriet), born on 12 April 1701, and Margaret and Henry, who both died in infancy. 
Lady Henrietta and her husband at first lived in her mother's apartments at St James's Palace, which her mother held as lady of the bedchamber to the princess. Lady Henrietta and her mother were close until the young Godolphins moved to Lord Godolphin's house, on the south-west corner of the palace, in 1701. Lady Henrietta was allowed more independence by her father-in-law, and soon came to resent her mother's attempts to maintain restrictions on whom she saw. Queen Anne -- to whom Lady Henrietta was a lady of the bedchamber from 1702 to 1712 (at a salary of $1000 p.a.) and who was godmother to her son Henry in 1704 -- also encouraged the expansion of her social life. 
Lady Henrietta's circle came to include not only young aristocrats but also writers, whom she was patronizing by 1704 when her mother wrote of her as 'having a great mind to be thought a Wit' by associating with 'Mr Congreve and several Poets, and in short the worst company that a Young Lady can keep' (BL, Add. MS 61451, fol. 20). She probably first met William Congreve (1670-1729) in 1703. It is not known when they became lovers but he may have been the fellow sinner when in 1711 it was said that Henrietta had 'latly been in Pickell for her sins' ('Wentworth Papers', 214). Lady Henrietta's relationship with Congreve was tolerated by her complaisant husband, but contributed towards her estrangement from her mother. Yet while both her parents lived, Lady Henrietta -- who became countess of Godolphin when her husband succeeded to the earldom in 1712 -- was substantially dependent on their influence. In 1715 she sent her daughter Lady Harriet Godolphin to live at Marlborough House so that Sarah could arrange her marriage; Lady Harriet was married to the rising whig politician Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, in 1717. 
On her father's death in 1722 the countess of Godolphin succeeded as duchess of Marlborough in her own right, an act of parliament in 1706 having allowed Marlborough's daughters to inherit his titles. She was reported to have an annual income of $40,000, but in fact her income was severely curtailed by her father's will, which appointed seven trustees to invest his wealth in the interest of specific beneficiaries, chief among whom was the dowager duchess, Sarah, who enjoyed $20,000 p.a. and the ducal residence of Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, for her lifetime. None the less, the new duchess was able to support the arts more lavishly. She sponsored concerts by Handel's rival Giovanni Bononcini, and settled $500 p.a. upon him in 1724. She received dedications from John Gay, David Mallet, and lesser poets. She and other titled ladies competed to fund Gay and were satirized for this in 'The Female Faction' (1729). 
The duchess's inheritance may have given her more freedom to pursue her affair with Congreve. On 23 November 1723, aged forty-two, twenty years after the birth of her last child, she gave birth to a daughter, Mary. The child was acknowledged by the earl of Godolphin and lovingly brought up by him, but she was almost certainly Congreve's daughter. The dowager duchess called her granddaughter Moll Congreve and regarded her as another blow to the family prestige and prospects inflicted by Henrietta. The birth also offended Henrietta's son William, marquess of Blandford, and encouraged him to further prolong his residence on the continent, where he had lived since 1719. 
Congreve died on 19 January 1729, leaving most of his estate of over $10,000 to Henrietta on the unwritten understanding that she would bequeath it intact to their daughter, Mary. Henrietta sat by his corpse until it was interred in Westminster Abbey, gave him a handsome funeral, and erected a monument over his grave with an epitaph composed by herself. A report in the 'Daily Post' on 15 July 1732 of damage to a waxwork figure of Congreve, made for Henrietta at a cost of $200 and kept in her house, prompted a coarse verse satire 'Phino-Godol' (1732), reissued as 'The Amorous D--h--ss' (1733). The waxwork story, variously and improbably embellished, has been frequently retold. Henrietta's liaison with Congreve was also the subject of 'The Secret History of Henrada Maria Teresa' in a miscellany, 'The Court Parrot' (November 1733). 
Any aspirations the duchess of Marlborough had to become a dynastic matriarch were frustrated by her mother's uncertain but enduring good health. The death of her son William while attending a tory drinking club at Oxford in 1731 could be seen as another limitation, ensuring that the Marlborough title (limited to the first duke's daughters and the heirs male of their bodies, thus precluding the claims of Henrietta's daughters) would not be held by Henrietta's descendants in the foreseeable future. However, her indifference to her son's career during his life, and her backward-looking statement on his death that 'the Duke of Marlborough was now not in danger of being represented in the next generation by one who must have brought any name he bore into contempt' (Harris, 283), suggest that she had long given up on any hopes of rivalling her mother. 
Henrietta died of dropsy in the limbs on 24 October 1733 at Harrow, Middlesex. She refused to see her mother to the last. She was buried on 9 November, as she directed, in Westminster Abbey in the grave of her father-in-law, Sidney, first earl of Godolphin, very close to Congreve's grave, on 9 November. She instructed that her body should never be taken to Blenheim, where she had never lived. The Marlborough titles passed to her nephew Charles Spencer, fifth earl of Sunderland. Under her will, dated 11 July 1732, and proved on 19 May 1736, her daughter Mary received intact the Congreve inheritance ($7000 of which had been invested in a diamond necklace and earrings) together with most of Henrietta's estate. Maria Catherina, 'nee' de Jonge, marchioness of Blandford, widow of Henrietta's son William, was specifically excluded from any benefit; her origins as the daughter of a Dutch burgomaster had been a scandal in themselves. Lord Godolphin was executor of both Congreve's and Henrietta's wills. 
Lady Mary Godolphin, apparently unaware of her true paternity, was cherished by the earl of Godolphin and her half-sister Harriet and was accepted by her grandmother Sarah. She married Thomas Osborne, fourth duke of Leeds, on 26 June 1740 and died on 3 August 1764. Lord Godolphin, a man of exemplary patience and domestic affection, died on 17 January 1766. 
It has been argued that Henrietta was satirized as the unnamed peeress who 'sins with Poets thro' pure Love of Wit' in Pope's 'Epistle to a Lady' (1744 edition), lines 69-76. Her career was that of a daughter of domineering parents and a frustrated heiress; her cultural interests and her affair with Congreve were the only positive means available of emphasizing her independence from her politically conscious mother, who prevented her from assuming the role of guardian of the Marlborough legacy which she might have been expected to inherit with the dukedom. 


@@@@@


doc= 92332


Hawtrey, Charles (1914-1988), actor, was born at 217 Cromwell Road, Hounslow, Middlesex, on 30 November 1914, the second son of William John Hartree (1885-1952), motor car mechanic, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Crow (1880-1965). He showed an interest in entertainment from an early age, organizing plays with local children in the family garden. As a child he appeared in two silent films, 'Tell Your Children' (1922) and 'This Freedom' (1923), now both lost. By all accounts he was already an accomplished self-taught pianist and dancer, and was able to display these talents in local amateur dramatics. His first venture onto the professional stage was a small part in 'The Windmill Man' at the Hippodrome, Boscombe, in 1925. 
Aged fourteen Hartree enrolled in the Italia Conti Academy of Dramatic Arts, and it was Conti's idea to change his name to Charles Hawtrey. The inspiration was the actor and theatre manager Sir Charles Hawtrey (1858-1923). Hartree happily perpetuated the myth that Sir Charles was indeed his true father. His fees for his three-year course were met by working on the stage. He also achieved some fame as a boy soprano, making a number of records for the Regal Label with the eleven-year-old Evelyn Griffiths. 
On leaving Conti's, Hawtrey resumed his film career, taking small parts in around twenty films before the outbreak of the Second World War. Those which survive from this period indicate how little he changed over his long career. His waif-like frame is instantly recognizable: his trademark glasses almost always in place, and his curious use of eyeline -- his eyes darting birdlike from place to place in an unexpected manner -- already characterize his performance. Many of these appearances are fleeting, but this does not make them unmemorable, especially his turn for Alfred Hitchcock in 'Sabotage' (1936), where he is seen and heard declaiming on the sex lives of oysters to his girlfriend at London Zoo. More important, however, were the films he made that were star vehicles for some of the great comics of the period: Max Miller, Stanley Lupino, Will Fyffe, Will Hay, and, during the war, George Formby. Of these it was the four films he appeared in with Will Hay -- playing scholarly schoolboys -- that would prove to be the most significant, starting with 'Good Morning, Boys' in 1937. Hay was something of a mentor for Hawtrey; he admired him greatly both as a performer and as a man, for his brilliant timing and for his intellectualism. 
Hawtrey remained prolific in the theatre, receiving acclaim as a bogus Countess in 'Counterfeit' (1939) at the Duke of York's theatre, where it was only revealed at the end that his character was not a woman, the fidelity of this subterfuge confirmed to a wider audience in his 1940 film outing, 'Jailbirds'. Hawtrey's status as a conscientious objector meant that his career was not interrupted by the war, and continued on stage, screen, and radio. The last medium includes his Norman in 'Norman and Henry Bones, the Boy Detectives' from 1943; being part of the team for 'The Will Hay Programme' (1944-5); and recurring roles in 'Just William' (1945-6), 'Ray's a Laugh' (1952-7), and 'Life with the Lyons' (1955-7). The end of the war saw Hawtrey break new ground when he tried his hand at direction. In 1945 he completed two films, 'What Do We Do Now?' with George Moon and Burton Brown, and 'Dumb Dora Discovers Tobacco' with Henry Kendall -- both now lost; and between 1945 and 1953 he directed a number of well-received stage productions, initially at the Q Theatre. 
The stardom which Hawtrey craved as an actor, however, remained elusive. The occasional good part came his way -- the bar-working pianist in 'Passport to Pimlico' (1949), and the turncoat temperance student in 'You're Only Young Twice' (1952). But all too often he was buried down the cast list. Television broke the mould when the newly fledged Independent Television channel hired him for their comedy series 'The Army Game' in 1957. He played one of the national service recruits, the Professor -- an aloof, knitting-obsessed weakling -- and appeared in the first two seasons. The series was an immense success, and it led directly to Hawtrey being offered a role in the first 'Carry On' film, 'Carry On Sergeant' (1958). 
The popularity of 'Carry On Sergeant' ensured that sequels would follow, and Hawtrey was a key member of the acting ensemble which underscored their success. He appeared in all but one of the first twenty-four entries, as well as two Christmas television spin-offs, usually with an entrance incorporating his catch phrase 'Oh, Hello'. In the films, his character was generally a sexually ambiguous, optimistic, otherworldly loner, which nevertheless suited him to a wide variety of roles. 
Sadly, Hawtrey seems to have had a lonely life enhanced by bitterness that his early achievements were largely overlooked. He lived with and cared for his mother until her death in 1965. His drinking, already heavy at this point, dramatically increased and began to interfere with his work. When he got into an argument with the 'Carry On' producers about billing -- a damaging recurring issue for Hawtrey, contributing to his dismissal from both 'Henry Bones' and 'The Army Game' -- it gave them the excuse they wanted to drop him from the series. His last 'Carry On' appearance was the 1972 'Carry On Abroad', in which he plays an habitual drinker, providing cover for his real-life addiction. 
During the 'Carry On' years Hawtrey worked on two television series -- 'Our House' (1960-62), scripted by 'Carry On' films Norman Hudis, and 'Best of Friends' (1963) with Hylda Baker. Little other work came his way, and with the end of his participation in the 'Carry On' films his career ground to a virtual halt. He isolated himself from his old colleagues, taking up residence in the seaside town of Deal, where he spent much of his time drunk and incapable. 
Hawtrey had always happily accepted his own homosexuality, and was unquestionably brave in the early years in portraying effeminate camp characters and making little attempt to distinguish them from his own personality at a time when being gay could have landed him in gaol. While he was relatively discreet before legalization, in later years drink clouded his judgement, and he became increasingly reckless in his sexual encounters, culminating in a rent boy setting fire to his house in 1984 in retaliation for Hawtrey's prevarication over payment. 
A lifeline was provided by the impresario Aubrey Phillips with touring shows, but Hawtrey became too unpredictable even for these. In the end his excesses caught up with him and he died at Winthorpe Lodge Rest Home, Kingsdown Road, Walmer, Kent, on 27 October 1988, after refusing a potentially life-saving operation which would have meant losing both his legs. He was cremated at Mortlake crematorium on 3 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 92333


Dunlop, John, of Gairbraid (1789-1868), temperance campaigner, was born in the Dellingburn district of Greenock, Renfrewshire, on 2 August 1789, the eldest of the four children of Alexander Dunlop (1766-1840), of Keppoch, Dunbartonshire, merchant and banker, and his first wife, Janet, 'nee' Graham (1769-1795). His youngest brother was William Dunlop, writer, surgeon, and Canadian pioneer, while his half-brother was Alexander Colquhoun-Stirling-Murray-Dunlop, lawyer and Liberal politician. Both sides of his family had roots in the west of Scotland gentry, with the landed estate of Gairbraid, Lanarkshire, to the north of Glasgow, becoming Dunlop's inheritance through his mother's line. 
Dunlop's formative years were spent in Greenock, a seaport where his father had shipping interests and in 1802 co-founded the Renfrewshire Banking Company. Alexander Dunlop remarried a year after his wife's death in 1795 and the dislocation to the family may have affected his son's health, as John suffered a prolonged bout of rheumatic fever at the age of seven. He claimed that the illness had initiated him into 'the regions of anguish & dolour', even turning his hair prematurely grey ('Dunlop Papers', 1.2). Yet although depression dogged Dunlop throughout adult life, his childhood was relatively happy and secure. His father had become respected in Greenock's civic and commercial circles. Holidays were spent at Gairbraid with his well-connected grandparents, who introduced him to local elite society. Conversely, up to the age of twelve Dunlop was educated at Greenock day schools, where a range of social backgrounds was represented. This experience, he suggested, fostered the ease that later allowed him to cross class barriers in furthering the temperance cause. 
In 1801 Dunlop commenced what was effectively a secondary education by attending classes at Glasgow University. During eight years in the city he lodged at the home of Stevenson Macgill, a Church of Scotland minister and later professor of divinity at the university. Dunlop learned from Macgill's commitment to social outreach, although the scope for activism remained limited while he pursued his studies, ultimately with the aim of practising as a solicitor. After serving a legal apprenticeship in Glasgow, in 1809 he moved briefly to Edinburgh, where he entered a law firm and attended additional university classes. In Edinburgh he met, and married in March 1813, Janet (1791-1861), daughter of Robert Dunmore, of Ballindalloch, merchant and cotton spinner, and his wife, Janet ('nee' Napier). They had nine children, four of whom survived adolescence. 
Greenock remained Dunlop's home until 1838. He followed his father's example in local affairs, playing a leading role in founding the town's chamber of commerce in 1813. As his religiosity intensified he also became active in sabbath education, taking a keen interest in the development of Greenock free school. Indeed, from 1815 he kept a private journal that recorded his 'spiritual condition and progress (if any) in the divine life' and expressed profound dissatisfaction with his existing lifestyle ('Dunlop Papers', 1.50). Dunlop's restlessness and introspection were partly triggered by his father's bankruptcy; injudicious investment in the Rothesay Spinning Company had drained Alexander's resources and threatened John's inheritance. The family crisis had been overcome by 1815 and Alexander was eventually restored to solvency by a legacy of $18,000 from a rich uncle. However, the episode made John's outlook more austere, and he was set in the direction that led him to advocate sobriety as the key to moral regeneration. 
By the 1820s alcohol consumption was booming in Scotland's industrial centres and the press and philanthropic agencies were emphasizing its corrosive impact on national well-being. As Dunlop told a House of Commons select committee in 1834, his personal epiphany came during a European visit in 1828: 'I became satisfied that the superiority of our religious and civil institutions [over the French] was evaded and neutralized by the intemperance of our inhabitants' ('Select committee on drunkenness', 511). Already aware of the consciousness-raising work of the American temperance movement, in 1829 Dunlop inaugurated pioneering Scottish societies in Greenock and Maryhill, a developing community near Gairbraid. He began to publish and lecture on the benefits of associational activism, contributing much of his own money to the fledgeling campaign. His energy attracted influential supporters, notably the self-made Glasgow publisher William Collins senior. In 1829 the two men established the Glasgow and West of Scotland Temperance Society, which was soon renamed the Scottish Temperance Society to reflect its expanding sphere of operations. 
Buoyed by the movement's success, from 1833 Dunlop devoted himself to working full-time as a temperance propagandist. His financial position was secured in 1836 when the Gairbraid estate and its revenues finally came into his possession. Two years later he left Greenock and settled in London, a more central base for making Britain-wide connections and alliances. He had earlier broken with Collins over conflicting views about the precise definition of 'temperance', although the clash of determined personalities was also a factor in their incompatibility. Dunlop was increasingly attracted to the movement's total-abstention wing, strongly influenced by English nonconformists and altogether more radical than the 'moderation' message of the Scots. In the meantime his writing had achieved some recognition, especially his critique of Britain's ingrained drinking customs, 'The Philosophy of Artificial and Compulsory Drink Usage', first published in 1833. A mixture of anthropological inquiry, moral homily, and self-help exhortation, the book ran to several editions. 
As early as 1830 Dunlop was described as 'the Father of Temperance Societies in Scotland' ('Temperance Reformation', 20). His white-bearded, patriarchal appearance helped to consolidate the image, and after leaving Scotland he was known generally as the father of societies across the British Isles. His educated, gentrified background added gravitas to a movement with a large working-class following, and individual organizations often asked him to act as their president or chairman. As Dunlop aged he was regarded as a venerable link with the pioneering days; however, his reluctance to support the instant solution of prohibition marginalized him among the new generation of activists. Dunlop believed that the vital first step was to eradicate bad habits through education, social improvement, and positive example; this would in turn foster a climate favourable to legislative change. His diffidence as a public speaker further muted his impact on a movement noted for charismatic platform performers. Following a family visit his distant cousin, Jane Carlyle, acknowledged his awkwardness: 'Pity with so many genuine things to articulate, he should have so defective a gift of articulation!' (Fielding and Sorensen, 129). 
A Liberal in politics, at one point Dunlop was approached by his half-brother, Alexander, to stand for parliament. Nothing came of the suggestion, but from the 1840s Dunlop took up a range of progressive causes, including housing for the poor, sanitary improvement, the shorter working week, and electoral reform. Such interests tied in with his broader aim of creating the appropriate environment for achieving the temperance reformation. He also welcomed women as activists, seeing their involvement in temperance work as evidence of the movement's inclusiveness. Although he returned regularly to Scotland, Dunlop was criticized for being an absentee landlord at Gairbraid, where he apparently did not fulfil promises to improve the estate. However, money was in short supply during his later years and he lived fairly frugally. 
From 1859 Dunlop's health started to fail and he withdrew from public life. He died at 17 Priory Road, Kilburn, London, on 12 December 1868, and was buried at Paddington old cemetery. During the nineteenth century his memory was kept alive by temperance campaigners, keen to contrast the British movement's modest beginnings with the phenomenon it later became, and in 1905 a memorial to him was unveiled at Paddington cemetery. The past also legitimized the present, and Dunlop was lauded as the first in a pantheon of enlightened, altruistic heroes. Whatever the complex reality behind his reputation, there can be no doubt that Dunlop's mission to disseminate the advantages of an alternative, alcohol-free culture made him a pivotal figure in the temperance take-off from 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 92335


Maguire, Samuel (1877-1927), Irish republican and promoter of Gaelic sports, was born on 11 March 1877 at Malabracca, Dunmanway, co. Cork, the third son and fourth of the eight children of John Maguire (1840-1908), farmer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Kingston (1851-1917). His parents were both from the Dunmanway area of west Cork and members of the Church of Ireland. Maguire was educated at the model school in Dunmanway and attended Church of Ireland services in the town every Sunday. After his senior year at the model school he was sent to the school of Michael Madden, Ollscoil an tSleibhte, in Ardfield, near Clonakilty, which was renowned for preparing boys for the civil service entrance examinations. Maguire was successful, and moved from Cork to London in 1897 to take up a position as a sorter with the Post Office in Mount Pleasant. He was subsequently joined in London by his two younger brothers, Jack and Dick, who had undergone the same education with Madden. As well as preparing boys for the civil service, Madden was a nationalist with extensive links throughout the republican movement. Madden's influence was critical in the creation of Maguire's nationalist awareness; Madden also introduced him to a series of men who would, like Maguire himself, rise to prominence in the secret nationalist organization the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) and the sporting movement the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA). 
Once in London, Maguire threw himself into the life of the GAA. Founded in 1884, the GAA was concerned with the promotion of traditional Irish sports, such as Gaelic football and hurling, as a way of arresting the Anglicization of Irish life. Although having never played the games of the GAA in Ireland, and despite being a protestant, Maguire became a cornerstone of the association in London. He began playing for the Hibernian football club in 1898, and between 1901 and 1904 captained them to four consecutive London championships. In an attempt to bolster the appeal of the GAA in London, the annual end of season championship match, the All-Ireland, was reconfigured so that London automatically qualified and played the winning team that emerged from the Irish-based competition. In 1900, 1901, and 1903 Maguire was able to lead the senior London county panel to the All-Ireland finals in the Dublin sportsground later named Croke Park, though his team was defeated on each occasion. As a result of his strenuous efforts to promote the GAA in London, Maguire was elected chairman of the London county board in 1907, and remained actively engaged in GAA affairs until leaving London in 1923. 
As a supporter of the nationalist revival Maguire became a member of the Gaelic League in London. He came to the attention of the IRB who recruited him to the movement in 1902. Maguire quickly rose to be head of the IRB in the London district and began recruiting new members himself. In a secret ceremony at Islington in November 1909, he swore into the IRB another young Post Office worker from Clonakilty, who was also an ex-pupil of Madden's school, Michael Collins. 
Maguire rose to become the IRB's chief intelligence officer in London. Unlike Collins and many other London IRB activists, he did not return to Dublin to take part in the 1916 rising, believing that remaining in his civil service post was the best way of promoting the struggle against Britain. His main function, through to the period of the Anglo-Irish War (1919-21), was to intercept official state documents relevant to British military and political intentions in Ireland. During the war he also used his position in the Post Office to smuggle arms from London to Ireland. 
Maguire continued to work for Collins and the pro-treaty side in the Irish civil war (1922-3), but it appears that British intelligence became increasingly suspicious of him in the period after the assassination of Sir Henry Wilson in 1922. Maguire was tipped off that Scotland Yard was about to close in on him so he left England for Dublin in 1923. He was rewarded with a job in the newly established Irish Free State civil service, once more working in the Post Office, but fell foul of a government cleansing of the IRB from the civic administration. On 29 December 1924 he was dismissed from the Post Office because of his membership of the IRB and the belief that he was working against the government. The charges against Maguire were never formally proved, and despite an appeal and discussion of his dismissal in the Dail, the government held firm and ensured that he never worked for government again. Without an income Maguire, who was unmarried, returned home to Dunmanway in May 1926, dying there from tuberculosis on 6 February 1927. He was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Dunmanway, three days later. 
Maguire was remembered by the GAA for his role in their organization. In 1928 a group of his friends formed a committee in Dublin to raise funds for a permanent commemoration of his name. They decided on a cup to be presented to the GAA. The cup cost $300, was modelled on the Ardagh chalice, and was made by Hopkins and Hopkins of Dublin. First presented in 1928 to All-Ireland final winners Kildare, the Sam Maguire cup is still the premier annual prize in Gaelic football. A statue of him was unveiled in Dunmanway in 2002. 


@@@@@


doc= 92349


Scaglia, Alessandro Cesare (1592-1641), diplomat and art collector, was born in Piedmont, part of the duchy of Savoy, the second son of Filiberto Gherado, count of Verrua (1561/2-1619), and his wife, Bianca. He was probably raised at court in Turin through his father's position as court chamberlain, and in 1603 journeyed with his father and elder brother to the Spanish court with the Savoyard duke's sons and Giovanni Botero, the Jesuit political theorist and tutor to the princes. Through his father Scaglia obtained three commendatory abbeys, Santa Maria di Staffarda (1603), San Pietro di Muleggio (1613), and San Giusto di Susa (1616), but he was never ordained priest. 
In 1614 Scaglia was dispatched as a diplomat to Rome, where, over a decade of service, he also acquired expertise in collecting art. The second phase of his career, from 1624 to 1632, began as he replaced his brother, Augusto Manfredo, as Savoy's ordinary ambassador in Paris. In the context of continuing close contact between the duke of Savoy and England's ambassador to Turin and Venice, Sir Isaac Wake, this initiated another significant Anglo-Savoyard relationship, especially with George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, when he travelled to France to finalize the negotiations for Prince Charles's marriage to Louis XIII's sister Henrietta Maria. With the eye of an astute diplomat and courtier, Scaglia wooed the favourite with a gift of paintings. That Scaglia had won Buckingham's ear was demonstrated when in January 1626 he travelled to London to mediate in the dispute over English support for rebellious French Huguenots, enjoying a remarkably warm welcome from Charles I and Buckingham, as well as another court friend, James Hay, first earl of Carlisle. 
The high point of Scaglia's career came in the years 1626-32, when, against the backdrop of the wider conflict of the Thirty Years' War, England was at war with both Spain and France. Buckingham's control of foreign policy became the key to Scaglia's aim of using England as a lever to extract benefits for Savoy from the leading Catholic powers in north Italy, by playing the wars with France and Spain against each other. While Scaglia had arrived in Paris opposing Spain, French betrayal of Savoy by the treaty of Monzon, signed by the chief minister, Cardinal Richelieu, in March 1626, altered Scaglia's diplomatic strategy. He shifted from pursuing an anti-Habsburg alliance to mediating an Anglo-Spanish peace, at least initially to force Richelieu back to the alliance. Buckingham proved reluctant to support Scaglia's deliberately equivocal strategy, though by the beginning of 1627 his position also changed as his agent, Balthasar Gerbier, opened informal negotiations with the painter-diplomat Peter Paul Rubens, representing the Spanish. There followed a complex three-way diplomatic process involving Scaglia that lasted through 1627 as he left Paris for Brussels, The Hague, and, by November, London. 
By the close of 1627 Scaglia's efforts to sustain the Anglo-French war while settling the Spanish conflict became an end in itself. War broke out in north Italy over the succession to Mantua and Monferrato, where the Savoyard duke, supported by Spain, pushed for his claim to Monferrato. Scaglia reasoned that the continuation of Huguenot unrest in France would ensure that French troops would not intervene against Savoy. This strategy, however, was dramatically undone by Buckingham's murder in 1628, not least as this paved the way to an Anglo-French peace and thus France's entry into north Italy. Scaglia still persevered with a Spanish peace, and his contribution was recorded in the treaty of Madrid, signed in November 1630. A year later he returned to London, for the last time, as Savoy's extraordinary ambassador, and seemingly as an official Spanish representative, though by then his influence over English foreign policies had significantly waned. 
The last phase of Scaglia's career began with his recall to Turin, though ill health apparently prevented him from complying. In March 1632 he left London to take the curative waters at Spa in the Spanish Netherlands and, by disobeying his sovereign, effectively entered self-imposed exile. But Scaglia's exile was as much a reaction to what he regarded as excessive Savoyard concessions to Richelieu. Such was their mutual dislike that the cardinal accused Scaglia of trying to assassinate him, while Scaglia's illness was put down to Richelieu's machinations. As an exile, Scaglia operated informally for the Spanish regimes in Brussels and Madrid, collecting intelligence through an international network of contacts in the hope of removing Richelieu. The presence in Brussels of the French queen mother, Marie de' Medici, and her younger son, Gaston d'Orleans, certainly bolstered this hope, and Scaglia carefully maintained a visible public presence to sustain the momentum of his political career. It was in this context that he commissioned up to ten paintings from Anthony Van Dyck, including two portraits now in the National Gallery, London, emphasizing that his political career was never separated from his artistic interests. However, nothing came of Scaglia's strategies, as the French exiles bickered and duelled among themselves. 
During the later 1630s Scaglia gradually retired from politics. His last significant task appropriately involved both an artistic commission and the English court. Following the completion in 1635 of the queen's house at Greenwich, Balthasar Gerbier approached his old friend Scaglia to mediate the commission for the decoration of Henrietta Maria's apartments. Scaglia then contracted Jacob Jordaens for the task, though without informing him of the royal patron. Unfortunately, the twenty-two projected canvases were never completed, as Charles I faced civil strife, and on 21 May 1641 Scaglia died at Antwerp, where he was buried in the habit of a Franciscan friar in the convent of the Recollects. To the end Jordaens believed that Scaglia was the patron, and even took legal action against the executors of his will for unpaid money. 


@@@@@


doc= 92351


Campbell, Mary, of Mamore (bap. 1685, d. 1736), courtier, was baptized in Edinburgh on 4 May 1685, the third daughter of John Bellenden (formerly Ker), second Lord Bellenden ('c'.1660-1706), and Mary, dowager countess of Dalhousie ('c'.1669-1726), second daughter of Henry Moore, first earl of Drogheda. Although her parents suffered financial difficulties at the start of her life, Mary Bellenden was able to move within high aristocratic circles and win the favour of Mary Ker, 'nee' Finch, duchess of Roxburghe, the wife of Mary's cousin John Ker, first duke of Roxburghe. The duchess recommended Mary Bellenden to Caroline, princess of Wales, as a potential maid of honour, and Mary took up this position at court in 1715. 
She was famed for both her beauty and her high spirits; Horace Walpole recalled Bellenden's charms: 'so agreeable and engaging she was that I never heard her mentioned afterwards by one of her contemporaries who did not prefer her as the most perfect creature they ever knew' ('Reminiscences', 60). During her time in court she became close friends with the poets John Gay and Alexander Pope, and she featured in a number of their works including Gay's 'Damon and Cupid' and 'Mr Pope's Welcome from Greece', and Pope's 'The Court Ballad'. These poems, along with Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's 'Monday or Roxana', described the lively nature of the court of the prince and princess of Wales, which was in stark contrast to the dullness and stiffness of the court of George I, the prince's father. In this environment Bellenden, whom Lord Hervey described as 'the most likable woman of her time, made up of every ingredient likely to engage or attach a lover' (Hervey, 1.40-41), soon found she was the subject of attention from male members of the court. At first the prince of Wales tried to woo her, which she appears to have endured for at least four years. It is unclear whether she was his mistress at any stage; Bellenden did spend time with the prince in the lodgings of the princess's dresser, Henrietta Howard, later countess of Suffolk. However, while most members of the court at the time did not suspect there was an illicit relationship, Lord Hervey clearly believed that she was involved with the prince and suggested that she began to distance herself from him when she realized that she faced 'only having the scandal of being the Prince's mistress without the pleasure' (ibid.). Instead she married another member of the court, Colonel John Campbell of Mamore ('c'.1693-1770), later fourth duke of Argyll, whom she is reported to have secretly loved for some time. Although she promised the prince of Wales that she would gain his permission before she married, in exchange for his protection for her husband, the couple married in secret in 1720. 
John Campbell was able to continue as groom of the bedchamber to the prince, but Mary Campbell vacated her position on 22 October 1720. The couple left London, and moved into Combe Bank, Kent. Although she bemoaned court life in conversation with Alexander Pope, it is clear that Campbell missed her role after she was married, writing to Mrs Howard in 1721 'I wish we were all in the Swiss Cantons again' (Quennell, 59), the name given for Howard's rooms in the palace. However, the couple retained some support from the court, especially from Caroline, queen from 1727, who gave them assistance when they faced financial difficulties after John Campbell's father died in 1729, and arranged for Mary Campbell to be appointed as keeper of the palace of Somerset House. The couple enjoyed a happy marriage and although it had been noted that as a young woman she did not care 'a straw' (ibid., 69) about politics, she was supportive of his political career. She wrote of her frustration when he was not given a safe seat in a forthcoming election, but added, 'nothing can make me unhappy while John lives and is good to me, which hitherto I have no reason to fear, will ever be otherwise' (BL, Add. MS 22627, fols. 94-5). She was mother to one daughter, Caroline (1721-1803), who married first Charles Bruce, third earl of Ailesbury, and second Henry Seymour Conway (1719-1795), and five sons, including John Campbell (1723-1806), later the fifth duke of Argyll, and Lord Frederick Campbell (1729-1816). She died in childbirth on 18 December 1736, and was buried on the 23rd at St Anne's, Soho, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 92355


Jacob, William Beale (1825-1902), biscuit manufacturer, was born at 33 Bridge Street, Waterford, Ireland, on 17 August 1825, the elder son (a daughter had died at birth) of Isaac Thomas Jacob (1790-1839) and his wife, Anne Beale (1795-1854), daughter of a woollen manufacturer. The Jacob family had emigrated to Ireland from south-west England a century and a half earlier to escape government persecution for their Quaker beliefs. Isaac Jacob was reserved and over-scrupulous in his business dealings, after a childhood clouded by the financial embarrassments of his father, a corn merchant. His large bakery in Waterford supplied the thriving port with bread, ship's biscuits, and yeast for sale. In the meeting-house he was a conscientious overseer and elder. He sent William to a Quaker school in Cirencester and then apprenticed him to the trade. 
After Isaac's premature death on 23 March 1839, his widow managed the bakery, but before he was twenty William Jacob had taken over, in due course introducing his younger brother, Robert (1831-1861), as partner in what became W. and R. Jacob & Co. Timid and bookish as a child, William later came to enjoy roaming the countryside, climbing, swimming, and boating. On 1 August 1850 he married Hannah Hill (1819-1906), eldest of the seven daughters of Joshua and Isabella Newsom; they had six sons and two daughters. With the business achieving annual sales of $4650 in that year, Jacob started making fancy (or sweet) biscuits, in competition with imports from Carrs of Carlisle and McVities and other Edinburgh manufacturers. To gain the necessary expertise William Jacob spent some months in England. He then purchased a former coach factory in Peter's Row, Dublin, and began production there. In 1852 he mechanized operations by installing a 5 hp steam engine and a travelling oven, through which the biscuits were transported while being cooked. Seven years later, sales had risen nearly fivefold to more than $21,000. The Waterford bakery was closed in 1858 when Robert, its manager, moved to Dublin and became the firm's traveller. Jacob's brother-in-law, George John Newsom, was already a partner, but in 1861 Robert accidentally drowned and was replaced by a Quaker relative, William Frederick Bewley. The three families of Jacob, Newsom, and Bewley continued to run the business together until the second half of the twentieth century. 
William Jacob's son George became a partner in 1878, when the partnership capital was $27,000, up from $861 in 1850, with William holding the largest share of $11,000. W. and R. Jacob & Co. Ltd was registered in 1883, with William as chairman. Nearing sixty, he handed operational control over to George Jacob and William Bewley as managing directors. To ensure the succession, two of William's younger sons subsequently entered the company. In 1885 a turning-point occurred in the firm's history, when it introduced a biscuit that soon became its most sought-after brand: the Cream Cracker. Pale, relatively plain and crisp, it formed a palatable snack when spread with butter and covered with fragments of cheese or savoury meats. Its recipe came from the United States, where George Jacob had learnt about cracker-making technology. A year later the board took an equally far-reaching decision: to challenge the well-entrenched competition in England and Scotland by setting up a depot in Liverpool. William's son Albert moved there to manage the sales side, and later opened depots in London and Manchester. Jacobs now enjoyed such prosperity that in 1892 it doubled its capital to $100,000. William Jacob, while remaining as chairman, handed over all responsibilities to the younger directors and moved to Ballybrack House, Military Road, Killiney, on the coast south of Dublin. He died there on 5 August 1902, and was interred at the Friends' burial-ground, Temple Hill, Blackrock, Dublin; he was survived by his wife, who died on 29 November 1906. Jacob's wealth can be gauged from the $82,327 he left to his three director sons. His family remembered this full-bearded man as generous, sympathetic, and considerate, but he made such little mark in outside life that the Dublin press and Quaker publications barely noted his passing. 
The company began production at Aintree, Liverpool, in 1912. Ten years later, when the Irish Free State was established, the English and Irish companies became separate legal entities, while sharing a chairman and several directors. In 1960 Jacobs of England joined Huntley and Palmers and Peek Frean in the Associated Biscuit Manufacturers Ltd, which in 1982 became part of the American food giant Nabisco Brands. In the early 1990s BSN Danone of France, Europe's largest producer of biscuits and snack foods, bought Nabisco Brands' European operations and then acquired the Irish company. The Cream Cracker continued to be the staple product of the Jacobs subsidiary at Aintree, its head office from 1998 onwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 92356


Bewley, Joshua (1819-1900), tea and coffee merchant, was born on 19 January 1819, the youngest child in the family of thirteen children of Samuel Bewley (1764-1837), silk merchant, of Rockville, co. Dublin, and his wife, Elizabeth (1771-1848), daughter of Nehemiah Fayle of Limerick. The Bewleys were a leading Irish Quaker family, descended from Mungo Bewley of Woodhall, who left Cumberland in 1700 and settled in Edenderry, co. Offaly, at a time when many Quakers from the Lake District were emigrating to Ireland. By the end of the eighteenth century there were Bewleys in Dublin, several of whom became tea merchants. Samuel Bewley imported silk from the Levant and Italy, and from 1826 had his own ships, involved in trade with Barbados. He was an influential member of the Dublin chamber of commerce, which put pressure on parliament to end the East India Company's monopoly over the China tea trade. The monopoly was removed in 1833, and from the following year the China trade was open to all. In February 1835 Samuel Bewley and his son Charles imported 2099 chests of tea in their ship the 'Hellas', the first to sail directly from China to Ireland. This was followed by another Bewley ship, the 'Mandarin', which arrived in Ireland in August 1835 with 8623 chests of tea. 
In 1840, three years after his father's death, Joshua Bewley opened the China Tea Company, later Charles Bewley & Co., a small business in Sycamore Alley, off Dame Street, in Dublin, dealing in tea. On 18 July 1845 he married Margaret Hanks Fisher, daughter of Joseph John Fisher of Youghal, co. Cork, and she became the driving force behind the business, joined in time by their two sons, Charles and Ernest. Although the main business was importing and blending tea, they also dealt in coffee and sugar, and the Bewleys maintained a fleet of horse-drawn carts and drays to make deliveries to customers outside Dublin. A strict Quaker, Bewley closed the shop on Thursday mornings to enable his staff to attend worship at the Eustace Street Quaker meeting-house. In the mid-1870s he moved the business to South Great George Street. After Charles emigrated to New Zealand, Ernest Bewley (died 1932) took over much of the running of the business, and it was he who developed its reputation as a coffee merchant. In order to increase sales, in 1894 he organized coffee-making demonstrations at the back of the shop, and in 1896 bought 10 Westmoreland Street and opened the first Bewley's cafe, serving coffee and tea with cakes and buns. This became a regular haunt of James Joyce and other literary figures, including Patrick Kavanagh and Brendan Behan. 
Joshua Bewley died on 21 September 1900 and was interred in Dublin's Temple Hill burial-ground. Ernest Bewley then took over the business. In 1900 he bought 19/20 Fleet Street, and opened a second cafe. Because of his fondness for oriental decoration, he began to import Chinese ware, including coffee sets and trays for the cafes, and in 1926 changed the company's name to Bewleys Oriental Cafes Ltd. In 1927 he opened a third cafe at 78/9 Grafton Street, and commissioned the stained-glass artist Harry Clarke to design the windows. The Bewley's cafes on Westmoreland and Grafton streets became a Dublin institution but were closed in November 2004. The company had earlier been bought by Campbell Catering, and the Campbell Bewley Group was established in 1990 specializing in catering and the hotel trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 92362


Cuffe, Ellen Odette, countess of Desart (1857-1933), philanthropist and politician, was born at 18 Cornwall Terrace, Marylebone, London, on 1 September 1857, the eldest of two daughters of Henry Louis Bischoffsheim (1829-1908), banker and philanthropist, and his wife, Clara (or Clarissa) Biedermann (1837-1922) of Vienna. The Bischoffsheim sisters were tutored at home and their education was supplemented by foreign travel. They were also exposed to a lively and stimulating social life at their London home whose soirees attracted many of the prominent political and artistic figures of the day. Well-known benefactors, their parents also instilled in their daughters a dedication to good works and a particular commitment to Jewish charities. 
On 27 April 1881 Ellen Bischoffsheim became the second wife of the divorced William Ulick O'Connor Cuffe, fourth earl of Desart (1845-1898), an Irish peer and novelist. After their fashionable wedding at Christ Church, Mayfair, the couple went to live at Desart Court in co. Kilkenny, a large estate of almost 9000 acres and a considerable tenantry. Lady Desart was warmly welcomed by local citizens; it was rumoured that she had brought with her a dowry of $150,000, with the promise of a similar sum on her father's death. During the first few years of their married life, the couple (who had no children) enjoyed a lively social life in Kilkenny, becoming involved in local sporting and agricultural events. They appeared, however, to spend much of their time in England until the earl's death in September 1898. 
Lady Desart threw herself into philanthropic work, dividing her energies between Jewish and general charities. She lived at the family's country seat in Berkshire, but retained her links with Ireland of which she had become very fond. With her brother-in-law, Captain Otway Cuffe (1853-1912), she worked on a number of civic and cultural projects in Kilkenny. The first was the erection in 1902 of a theatre, the entire cost of which was born by Lady Desart; in 1910 she purchased a site and paid for the furnishings for a new public library. 
Lady Desart also became a patron of the Gaelic League and the Irish revival more generally, funding the teaching of the Irish language locally and supplying prizes for competence in it. Though she herself never mastered the language, she saw a parallel with Hebrew, another almost obsolete language which had been successfully resurrected. She and Otway Cuffe persuaded the novelist and cultural activist Standish O'Grady to assume the editorship of the 'Kilkenny Moderator', a lively publication which supported the Irish language revival. O'Grady became embroiled in what became known as the 'county scandal' during which he publicly defended the reputation of Lady Desart's late husband who had been accused of financial impropriety. The arrival of writs eventually forced him to give up the 'Moderator', but not without strengthening Lady Desart's determination to contribute to the enrichment of local life. Her own literary career was limited to the publication of 'A Guide for Secretaries, Public and Private', co-written in 1924, and articles in various magazines, but she remained a patron of many Kilkenny authors, including Francis Hackett, who dedicated his 'Ireland: a Study in Nationalism' (1918) to her. 
Lady Desart's most important contribution to the Irish revival was her funding of local industries. She promoted the establishment of the Kilkenny Woollen Mills and the Kilkenny Woodworkers. Under her sponsorship and supervision, an estate of 300 thatched houses which became known as the 'garden village' was built to house mill workers. By 1912 she had bought much of the surrounding property, adding a bridge, a road, a water reservoir, and a social club for workers. Her generosity to her local community was recognized in 1911 when the freedom of the city of Kilkenny was conferred on her. Deeply moved by this tribute, she claimed that she was the first woman and the only Jewess to have been so honoured. 
Desart returned permanently to Aut Even, Kilkenny, in 1912, taking up residence at her newly built estate which was situated close to the garden village and about 10 miles from Desart Court. She took on an even more prominent role in local affairs after the death of her brother-in-law, assuming many of his public roles and responsibilities including the chairmanship of the woollen mills and the presidency of the local branch of the Gaelic League. In 1915 she built a hospital near her private residence which was dedicated to the memory of her brother-in-law, visiting it at least once a day until she died. Her interest in dairy farming was recognized by her presidency of the Irish Dairy Shorthorn Breeders' Association. 
Ellen Desart became more widely known as a leading and vocal opponent of the 'Insurance Acts' introduced in 1911 and 1912. She became president of the Insurance Tax Resisters' Defence Association, and refused to collect the tax from the Kilkenny Woodworkers. As a result, one of her horses was seized and sold at the insistence of the insurance commissioners. She was particularly opposed to the taxation of domestic servants, writing to Lloyd George about the issue. Her next public political stand revolved around women's suffrage to which she was firmly opposed. In May 1913 she presided over the annual general meeting of the National League for Opposing Woman Suffrage held in Dublin. She was particularly horrified at the exploits of militant suffragists, lamenting that the age of chivalry was lost. 
A dedicated unionist, Desart was alarmed by the political events which led to Irish independence, but adjusted to the new disposition with little protest. She took less interest in the Gaelic League and other revivalist projects after independence, dedicating more time instead to her garden village and establishing there a private school and a spacious recreation hall. Her former home, Desart Court, was vandalized and torched, one of many homes of prominent Anglo-Irish families to suffer this fate at the hands of republicans during the Irish civil war. It may have been targeted because Lady Desart had in 1922 accepted a position in the senate of the Irish Free State, having been nominated by the president, W. T. Cosgrave, in recognition of her cultural and economic work for Ireland. She was not a frequent speaker in the senate, but she did famously protest against the proposed ban on divorce in 1925. 
Lady Desart remained true to her Jewish upbringing, maintaining her attachment to the West London Synagogue. In 1930 she wrote an impassioned letter to the 'Jewish Guardian', objecting to the implication that she had deserted her faith, and claiming that she remained a 'committed and practising Jew'. She served on the committees of a number of Jewish charities including the Jewish Association for the Protection of Women and Girls and the Jews' Temporary Shelter, as well as serving as vice-president of both the Montefiore Home School for Jewish Girls and the Union of Jewish Women (UK). 
Described by one commentator as 'plump and plain' in her old age, Lady Desart apparently had a guttural voice and poor eyesight, forcing her to wear very strong pince-nez. She nevertheless maintained a high public profile, mainly through her philanthropic work. After suffering from a serious illness for some time, Lady Desart died at 1 Waterloo Road, Dublin, on 29 June 1933. She was buried next to her husband at Falmouth cemetery. The funeral service, at her request, was conducted according to Jewish rites. 


@@@@@


doc= 92363


Monks, Constance Mary (1911-1989), politician, was born at 66 Preston Road, Chorley, Lancashire, on 20 May 1911, the daughter of Ellis Green, an education clerk, and his wife, Bessie Anderton, 'nee' Burwell, daughter of W. W. Burwell JP, first chairman of Chorley rural district council. From Wheelton county school she won a scholarship to Chorley grammar school, where she excelled at sports and became head girl, after which she trained as a schoolteacher at Leeds City Training College, specializing in geography. In 1931 she became an assistant teacher at Coppull Moor Church of England school in Lancashire. On 11 May 1937 she married Jack Monks ('b'. 1911/12), a grocer from Chorley; he was the son of John William Monks, spinner. Their only child, a son, died in youth. During the Second World War her husband joined the RAF and she taught at Coppull Moor School before transferring to Chorley parochial girls' school in 1943. In 1945, after his demobilization, they opened a newsagent and tobacconist shop. 
In 1945 Connie Monks, who had become involved in Conservative politics in her teenage years, co-founded a branch of the Young Conservatives in Chorley and became secretary of the North-West Conservative Association. In November 1947 she was elected to Chorley borough council, and went on to serve on every council committee and almost every public organization in Chorley. She was a governor of ten local schools, and from 1954 was a magistrate. In 1959 she was mayor of Chorley, and from 1961 to 1964 served for one term on Lancashire county council. She chaired the Conservative Women's Advisory Committee for Lancashire, Cheshire, and Westmorland. 
In 1965, at her second attempt, Monks was selected as Conservative Party candidate for the Chorley parliamentary seat. She failed to dislodge her Labour opponent in the general election of 1966 but in 1970 won the seat to become Chorley's first Conservative MP since 1945. She was among fifteen women Conservative MPs to be elected. Her deep constituency roots were unusual for a Conservative MP at that time, and she hoped that her local activities would demonstrate democracy at its best and combat public cynicism about politics. Her visits home every weekend were successfully combined with excellent parliamentary attendance, though her shyness kept her from speaking very often. As a campaigner she preferred door-to-door canvassing to addressing meetings. Among the issues which she did discuss in parliament were the new town in Lancashire (about which she was sceptical), local government reform, and education: she took a cautious view of the move to create comprehensive schools and abolish the eleven-plus examination. 
At the general election held in March 1974, Chorley was a marginal seat and leading figures of both parties campaigned there. Monks was narrowly defeated and, wishing to spend more time with her husband, she declined to contest the election of October 1974, despite the continued support of her party. In the local-government reforms of 1974 Chorley borough council was replaced by a new body, and she stood down after twenty-seven years' membership (seven of which were spent as an alderman). Her husband died not long afterwards and this, combined with the earlier loss of her son, drained much of her spark. As one who felt that changing attitudes was more important than legislation, she made little impact during her brief stint in parliament but she was extremely devoted to her community. Even there, though, her contributions eventually faded from public memory as the market town which she had known was transformed through expansion. After a long illness she died of kidney failure and senile dementia in Chorley and District Hospital, Preston Road, Chorley, on 4 February 1989 and was buried in Chorley cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 92366


Lagden, Sir Godfrey Yeatman (1851-1934), colonial administrator, was born at Sherborne, Dorset, on 1 September 1851, the fourth son in the family of at least five sons and one daughter of Richard Dowse Lagden (1799/1800-1882), a Church of England clergyman who became rector of Stock Gaylard, Dorset, and his wife, Mary Anne, 'nee' Davis. He attended Sherborne School before completing his education at a proprietary school in Salisbury. He then joined the civil service as a clerk in the General Post Office from 1869 to 1877, during which period he also shone as a cricketer and rugby player. 
In 1877 Lagden decided to try his luck in South Africa, where, after the discovery of diamonds, the economy was flourishing. He disembarked at Cape Town, armed with a letter of introduction from his maternal grandfather, named Yeatman, a resident of Sherborne. Sir Bartle Frere, the high commissioner of South Africa and governor of Cape Colony, suggested that he proceed to Pretoria, where Sir Theophilus Shepstone had recently annexed the Transvaal on behalf of Britain, and was setting up his administration. In 1878 Lagden was appointed as a government clerk in the colonial secretary's office in Pretoria, where he met Marshal Clarke, Shepstone's native commissioner for the Lydenburg district, and the novelist Rider Haggard, the registrar of the high court in Transvaal. The three young men, all of a similarly adventurous turn of mind, enjoyed frequent hunting trips together in the Transvaal bushveld to the north of the capital. 
(William) Owen Lanyon, Shepstone's replacement as administrator of the Transvaal in 1879, recognized Lagden's potential, appointing him as his private secretary. Lagden thus gained first-hand experience of colonial administration, and often discussed 'native affairs' with Marshal Clarke and his superior, Henrique Shepstone, the secretary of native affairs for the Transvaal, who applied his more famous father's brainchild, the Natal 'Shepstonian' system, to his administration of the indigenous people of the Transvaal. Influenced by Clarke and the Shepstones, Lagden duly 'became a great proponent of traditional and tried ['native'] policies' (Burton, 34). 
Lanyon and Lagden were among those besieged in Pretoria during the Anglo-Transvaal War of 1880-81. They bemoaned the home government's decision, after the defeat of imperial troops at Majuba Hill (and the death in combat of Sir George Pomeroy Colley) on 27 February 1881, that the Transvaal be returned to the Boers. While Lanyon was recalled to Britain to face censure for mishandling the 'disaffected Boers' crisis, Lagden remained in Pretoria. After a brief spell working with Lanyon's replacement, he became private secretary to Sir Evelyn Wood and was involved in the post-war deliberations of the royal commission for the settlement of the Transvaal, and the subsequent compensation committee. 
In 1882 Lagden returned to London, where the opportunity arose to go to Egypt as war correspondent for the 'Daily Telegraph', to cover the imperial campaign against the nationalist leader 'Urabi. On his return Lagden was offered a temporary appointment in Accra, which he reluctantly took up in 1883, insisting that he would rather return to South Africa. Ambitious and eager for promotion, he soon fell out with the governor of the Gold Coast, Sir Samuel Rowe. The dispute came to a head when Rowe informed Lagden that he was required to proceed immediately to a posting in Sierra Leone. Lagden maintained he was first entitled to take leave, but Rowe refused to sanction this, and Lagden countered by resigning and undertaking an expedition to Kumasi, in flagrant defiance of his superiors. When he returned to London he found that he had been struck off the 'Colonial Office List'. 
Fortuitously, Lagden's friend Marshal Clarke had just been appointed resident commissioner in Basutoland and had stipulated that he wished Lagden to be his secretary and accountant, a request which had already been approved by Sir Hercules Robinson, Frere's replacement as high commissioner of South Africa. Lagden joined up with Clarke, and arrived in Maseru in March 1884. 
Apart from a short period in 1892 in Swaziland, where he served as acting British commissioner, Lagden worked in Basutoland until late 1900. During this seventeen-year period he gained a considerable reputation for implementing imperial policy in the region. He earned particular credit for his even-handed negotiations with Paramount Chief Letsie and other indigenous leaders. Once the co-operation of the Koena chiefs had been secured, Lagden followed the general principles of the Shepstonian system, allowing traditional leaders to retain, and even consolidate, their influence among their people. Another notable achievement was his handling of the rinderpest epizootic. On 2 August 1887 he married Frances Rebekah Bousfield, eldest daughter of Henry Brougham Bousfield, the Anglican bishop of Pretoria; they had three sons (the eldest of whom was killed in action in 1915) and two daughters. 
Appointed permanent resident commissioner of Basutoland in 1893, when Clarke was transferred to Zululand, Lagden acquitted himself well in the protracted struggle between the Basotho rivals Lerotholi and Moiketsi, eventually managing without recourse to the military to persuade Moiketsi to surrender and submit to trial. In 1897 Lagden was created KCMG. 
When the South African War of 1899-1902 broke out Lagden did all he could to uphold the neutrality of Basutoland and promote the imperial war effort. These actions, backed by his growing reputation as a 'native administrator', caught the attention of Alfred Milner, high commissioner of South Africa, who in 1901 appointed Lagden commissioner of native affairs in the Transvaal. In the post-war Transvaal, since 1900 under British control, Lagden made his mark in two crucial spheres closely linked to the well-being of the mining industry -- and thus the British administration of the area -- the regulation of African labour for the mines and the delineation of African locations. Milner saw Lagden as a significant player in his concerted 'reconstruction' initiative in South Africa, which was aimed specifically at establishing 'a self-governing white community supported by well-treated and justly governed black labour' (Milner, quoted in Beinart and Dubow, 46). A common 'native policy' for all four colonies was thus a central issue in Britain's vision for South Africa. In 1903, with this in mind, Milner named Lagden as chairman of the South African Native Affairs Commission (SANAC). 
The commission, composed largely of English-speakers, travelled extensively to gather evidence, and its report appeared in February 1905. Its recommendations included territorial segregation and a system of political separation, with separate voters' rolls and different constituencies for Africans and whites. Commentators judged it mundane and inconclusive, claiming that it reflected Lagden's distaste for innovation. With its emphasis on the need to proletarianize Africans for cheap labour in the mines, it embodied many features of the emerging policy of segregation, the forerunner of apartheid. 
Lagden was never a popular official and became the butt of much criticism. He grew disenchanted with Milner and suffered bouts of debilitating depression, convinced that his endeavours were not appreciated by his superiors. Disillusioned and weary, in 1907 he opted for retirement when crown colony rule ended in the Transvaal. Back in England in 1908, he became the secretary and a member of the council (later vice-president) of the Royal Colonial Institute, serving on this body until 1923. His two-volume history of the Basotho people, 'The Basutos: the Mountaineers and their Country', based largely on parliamentary blue books, appeared in 1909 to a lukewarm reception. He was vice-president of the British and Foreign Bible Society. In 1927 he was created KBE. He died at his home, Selwyn, Oatlands Chase, Weybridge, Surrey, on 26 June 1934 and was buried at St Mary's, Oatlands. 


@@@@@


doc= 92367


Graham, John (1778-1821), army officer, was born in Dundee on 24 April 1778, the second of three sons and nine daughters of Robert Graham (1749-1815), twelfth laird of Fintry, and his wife, Margaret Elizabeth, 'nee' Mylne, of Mylnefield in Perthshire. The eldest son, Robert, entered the service of the East India Company and was murdered with others at Benares in 1799; thus John became thirteenth laird of Fintry in succession to his father in 1815. The title was one in name only because, due to his financial embarrassment, the twelfth laird had disposed of the estate. The driving ambition of John's career was 'to merit and obtain as much money as would enable us to buy a bit of land in Scotland' ('Graham MSS', 126). 
John Graham had no professional military training but the wars with France (1783-1815) gave young men the opportunity of a military career. He was commissioned an ensign in the 85th regiment in 1794 but he transferred almost immediately (with the rank of lieutenant) to the 90th regiment then being raised by his kinsman Thomas Graham. With this regiment John saw active service in an expedition to the Bay of Biscay (which arrived too late to help the French royalists) and spent some months in the futile occupation of the Ile d'Yeu. Subsequently he was attached to the Austrian army in Italy, with which he served in the campaign of 1797. Two years later, raised to the rank of captain, he served as aide-de-camp to Lord Chatham in the duke of York's expedition to North Holland, but, disabled by an accident, he was not present at any of the action. 
In February 1800 Graham undertook to raise 100 men in the 93rd highlanders -- a regiment then being raised by Colonel Wemyss of Wemyss -- which, if successful, would entitle him to receive his majority. This he did, and he joined the regiment in the autumn of 1800 in Guernsey where it remained until ordered home in 1802. Graham had hoped to be promoted lieutenant-colonel by raising 400 additional men for the regiment, but this intention was frustrated by the peace of Amiens in 1803. The regiment was ordered to Ireland and Graham was appointed first to receive the reserve, then to command a battalion of light infantry militia, and finally to be assistant quartermaster-general until 1805 when the regiment was ordered on secret foreign service. 
On the resumption of war with France in 1805 the regiment sailed into the Atlantic on an expedition under Sir David Baird. Only when the ships left San Salvador were the sealed instructions opened and the soldiers discovered they were on their way to the Cape of Good Hope to recover that colony from the Dutch allies of Napoleon. The Dutch militia was overwhelmed by the British forces in the battle of Blaauberg on 8 January 1806 and the Dutch commander-in-chief and governor Jan Willem Janssens signed the articles of capitulation on 18 January 1806. Among the Dutch soldiers who surrendered was a corps of Khoi (then known as Hottentot) soldiers. These soldiers were induced (though not against their inclination) to transfer to British authority. Graham was given command of the regiment and promoted lieutenant-colonel. His task was to make this Cape regiment an effective, disciplined force for the defence of the colony. 
The eastern migration of the Dutch colonists at the Cape and the westward migration of the Xhosa was the cause of friction on the eastern frontier of the colony. The British authorities decided that the boundary line of the Great Fish River agreed upon by the Dutch and minor Xhosa chiefdoms in 1779 and confirmed by the council of policy in 1780 should be made effective, hence Xhosa who had settled on colonial territory were to be asked to return to lands beyond the Fish River. Only if diplomacy failed was force to be used. Efforts to persuade the Xhosa to withdraw were unsuccessful, and in December 1811 the British offensive began. 
Graham was the overall commander in the Cape Frontier War of 1811-12. He was appointed special commissioner for military and civil affairs over the eastern districts and, besides his own Cape regiment, had command of a force of burghers and such soldiers as could be spared from other duties. This war was the first in which the Xhosa encountered a military force supported by a civil authority determined to achieve its objectives. It has been argued that total war was a new and shattering experience for the Xhosa (Peires, 66). The techniques used were brutal and included the burning of kraals and crops. The war was over by early March 1812 and the Xhosa driven from the colony. The Xhosa, however, never accepted that the coastal lands between the Fish and Sundays rivers known as the Zuurveld were not theirs by right of first occupation, and they continued to challenge British occupation of the territory for another half a century. 
Graham was charged with the post-war settlement. He recognized that the peace would be an uneasy one. He recommended, and the governor, Sir John Cradock, concurred, that the Fish River boundary should be supported by a line of military posts. Cradock instructed Graham to select for the military headquarters some suitable spot which would also support a civilian population. The spot chosen was an abandoned loan-place farm, well watered and within easy proximity to the boundary. A government notice dated 14 August 1812 named it Graham's Town in honour of Graham, and the town was designated the seat of the deputy landdrost of the district of Uitenhage. 
Graham was offered the post of civil and military commissioner on the eastern frontier at the then magnificent salary of $1000 per annum. Thinking this appointment to be secure he asked, for personal reasons, that it be temporarily suspended. On 24 July 1812 he married Johanna Catharina Cloete (1790-1843), third daughter of Roedolph Cloete (1762-1816) of Westervoort (Great Westerford), Rondebosch, near Cape Town. A son and three daughters were born of the marriage. 
In September 1812 Graham and his wife sailed for Britain. While there, he proposed to the government that 500 highland crofters should be settled on the eastern frontier of Cape Colony. Nothing came of the suggestion, which anticipated subsequent schemes for emigration to the colony. He was again offered the opportunity to serve with the British forces in the Netherlands. Having obtained the government's permission, and its promise that his going to Europe would not affect his interests at the Cape, he was appointed military secretary and first aide-de-camp to Sir Thomas Graham. He took part at the battle of Mersem, the attack on Bergen-op-Zoom, and other minor skirmishes. In June 1814 he was gazetted full colonel. 
On his return to the Cape in 1815 Graham was disappointed to find that the post he had been promised on the eastern frontier had been abolished and that plans were well advanced for the reorganization of the Cape regiment. He accepted the post of commandant of Simonstown which he held until his death. In 1820 the acting governor of Cape Colony (Sir Rufane Donkin) asked him to go to the frontier to supervise Lord Charles Somerset's ambitious project for the immigration of British settlers, but he declined on grounds of ill health. He died in Wynberg on 17 March 1821 and was buried in the Somerset Road cemetery, Cape Town. Not a wealthy man, he had failed to achieve his ambition of ensuring that his family could reacquire a landed estate in Scotland, but was a highly respected military officer. His memorials are a marble cenotaph at the entrance to the cathedral of St Michael and St George in Grahamstown -- and the city of Grahamstown itself. 


@@@@@


doc= 92369


Seme, Pixley ka Isaka (1882-1951), political leader in South Africa, was born on 2 October 1882 at the Inanda mission of the American Board outside Durban, Natal, the fourth son of Sinono Isaka Seme and Sarah, 'nee' Mseleku. His parents died when he was young and he took as his first name the surname of S. C. Pixley, minister at Inanda, who brought him up. From Inanda he moved at the age of fourteen to the Adams Training School for Boys at Amanzimtoti, south of Durban, and in 1897 he left for further education in the United States. When he arrived in New York he stayed with John Dube (1871-1946), with whom he had grown up, and Dube helped get him admitted to Mount Hermon School for Boys in Massachusetts in 1898. In 1902, having failed the Yale admission examination, he became the first black South African to study at Columbia University. In 1906, shortly before he graduated BA, he won first prize in a speaking competition for a stirring 'Regeneration of Africa' oration, in which he told his audience that 'the [African] giant is awakening'. A basic factor in the regeneration of Africa, he maintained, was an 'awakened race consciousness' (Karis and Carter, 1.69-71). 
After delivering a series of lectures in New York entitled 'Life in Zululand', Seme travelled to Atlanta, where he met Booker T. Washington, and then to Britain, to prepare for the bar examinations. He entered Oxford University as a non-collegiate student in October 1906 to read for a bachelor of civil law degree, and on 22 January 1907 was formally admitted as a member of Jesus College. At his lodgings in Beaumont Street, where he resumed his friendship with the African-American Alain Locke (1886-1955), he hired a piano and took up pipe-smoking. He joined the Oxford Union and became treasurer of the Cosmopolitan Club for students from abroad. He ate dinners at the Middle Temple and from early 1908 spent more time in London than in Oxford, often listening to debates in the House of Commons. Not being able to find vacation work, he fell into financial difficulties from which he was not able to extricate himself until after his return to South Africa. 
On 8 June 1909 Seme was called to the London bar. That month he and Alfred Mangena ('c'.1879-1924) were asked by the Transvaal Native Congress to act in the matter of the 'South Africa Bill', and Seme had meetings with members of the black delegation sent to oppose it. It was then that the idea arose of founding an organization to unite Africans throughout South Africa. Seme's exposure to pan-Africanist ideas in America and England helped persuade him that Africans should unite in a common political organization. 
Soon after the advent of the Union of South Africa, Seme returned there and set up a law office in Johannesburg. He was admitted to the Transvaal side-bar on 22 December 1910. But his law partnership with Mangena did not last long, for he drew a loaded revolver on a group of whites who wanted him to vacate a first-class railway carriage. His defence -- 'like all solicitors, I of course travel first class' -- did not save him from a conviction. In the second half of 1911 he was the prime mover behind the establishment of a permanent nationwide congress. He drafted a constitution and sent out an appeal for a 'native union' in which he denounced the 'demon of racialism' that divided Africans (Odendaal). 
Seme's great moment came in Bloemfontein on 8 January 1912 when, in the keynote address, he formally moved that the South African Native National Congress (later renamed the African National Congress) be formed. He became the new body's general treasurer (despite his history of financial problems) and oversaw the launch of 'Abantu Batho' ('The people'), which it was hoped would become the mouthpiece of the congress. Having become legal adviser to the queen regent of Swaziland, he persuaded her to buy a printing press for the new venture. He left others to carry it on, later launching another paper in Eshowe, Zululand, called 'Ikwezi' ('Morning star'). He also founded Native Farmers' Association Limited to buy farms for Africans, but his own attempt to farm collapsed when in 1916 the registrar of deeds refused to cede transfer to him because of the 'Natives Land Act' of 1913. This was a severe blow to his pocket and his reputation, and while he continued to believe in the importance of creating a class of prosperous African farmers, he had to direct his attention instead towards Zululand and Swaziland. 
Though very westernized, Seme developed close ties with the Zulu and Swazi royal families. While rejecting 'tribalism', he retained a strong sense of his own Zulu identity. In 1913 he met Phikisele Harriet Dinizulu, daughter of the Zulu monarch Dinizulu and half-sister of Dinizulu's successor Solomon, and they were married in May 1920. Seme remained Solomon's adviser until the latter's death in 1933. He was even closer to the Swazi royal house, and spent more time in Swaziland than anywhere other than Johannesburg. Seme was not only kept busy with the land claim cases brought by the Swazi royal house; he took as his third wife Lozinja, a daughter of the Swazi king Mbandzeni. (His full marital history remains obscure.) In December 1922 Seme accompanied Sobhuza II and a Swazi delegation to London, where they met the king and British officials. In 1923 Locke put forward Seme for an honorary doctorate of laws at Columbia, and Seme soon added LLD to his name. In December 1924 Seme left again for England as attorney to Sobhuza II, only to hear the privy council reject the Swazi appeal. 
At the African National Congress (ANC) meeting in 1930 Seme was elected president-general in place of the radical Josiah Gumede (1870-1947). Those who voted for Seme hoped that he would provide moderate leadership and reunite the organization, but his election increased divisions within the congress, and during his presidency the ANC became moribund. He wanted to see chiefs playing a larger role, and preached economic self-help, but in July 1932 he was accused of 'culpable inertia', at a time when the ANC was said to be 'in a state of chaos and confusion' (Karis and Carter, 4.138). Three months later he failed to appear to defend himself before the Transvaal supreme court when the Law Society charged that he had neglected the interests of some clients and charged them excessive fees, and he was struck off the roll of attorneys. 
Between 1932 and 1936 Seme spent considerable time trying to get the claims of various Swazi chiefs to land in the eastern Transvaal recognized. In 1935 he joined D. D. T. Jabavu (1885-1959) in calling for a meeting of the All-African Convention, only to see the ANC sidelined by the new body. After being replaced as president-general in 1937 Seme continued to sit on the ANC's national executive, and he served on the committee which in 1943 produced 'Africans' claims', which demanded that the freedoms of the Atlantic charter be applied in South Africa. 
In April 1942 Seme was reinstated as an attorney, and the following year the brilliant Anton Lembede (1914-1947) began to serve articles with him. Lembede held ANC youth league meetings in Seme's offices. Seme made him a partner and was preparing to sell his law firm to him when Lembede suddenly died. Seme himself died in early June 1951 in Johannesburg. At his funeral on 17 June the service was taken by Ambrose Reeves, the Anglican bishop of Johannesburg. Tributes were paid to him by Albert Luthuli, A. B. Xuma, Z. K. Matthews, and D. D. T. Jabavu, among others, as well as by a representative of the Swazi monarch and the secretary of native affairs. When a tombstone was unveiled at his grave in 1984 it was Mangosotho Buthelezi, whose mother was Seme's first wife's half-sister, who spoke. As a young man Buthelezi had taken down letters dictated by Seme when he was unable to write after losing an eye in an operation. Seme was survived by four sons and a daughter. 
The high point of Seme's life came in 1912, with the founding of the Native National Congress. That his later career was so anticlimactic was in part due to his character, for he could be arrogant and authoritarian in manner. A drinking problem did not help, and his deep-rooted conservatism alienated him from much of the politics of the inter-war years. Today he is remembered for his 1906 speech as much as for founding the ANC. 


@@@@@


doc= 92373


Foster, Audrey Pellew Hylton-, Baroness Hylton-Foster (1908-2002), politician, was born on 19 May 1908 in Simla, India, the only child of Douglas Clifton Brown, later Viscount Ruffside (1879-1958), politician, and his wife, Violet Cicely Kathleen (died 1969), only daughter of Frederick Eustace Arbuthnott Wollaston, of Shenton Hall, Leicestershire. At the time of her birth her father was an officer in the 1st King's dragoon guards. He became Conservative MP for Hexham in 1918, and served as speaker of the House of Commons from 1943 to 1951. Audrey Clifton Brown was educated at St George's, Ascot, but was expelled from there during the First World War after being found in a cupboard spying on one of her teachers, whom she suspected of being a German agent. She completed her education at Ivy House, Wimbledon. On 22 December 1931 she married Harry Braustyn Hylton Hylton-Foster (1905-1965). At the time of their marriage he was working as a barrister. He was later Conservative MP for York (1950-59) and the Cities of London and Westminster (1959-65), was knighted in 1954, and served as speaker of the House of Commons from 1959 until his death in 1965. There were no children of the marriage. 
During the Second World War, Audrey Hylton-Foster worked as a nurse at St Luke's Hospital, Chelsea. She stayed with her parents at Speaker's House after the war while convalescing from measles. During this time she began working for the British Red Cross and found a lifetime vocation. She became director of the Chelsea division in 1950, then president and chairman of the London branch from 1960 to 1983 (and patron thereafter). By the time she retired as chairman she had cycled thousands of miles around London on her Red Cross duties. 
Audrey Hylton-Foster was a loyal political wife and frequently listened to debates in the House of Commons while her husband was in the chair, but she showed no signs of political ambition while he was alive. Indeed in 1960 she was quoted as saying that she could not understand why women became MPs. 'I cannot think why they do it', she was reported as saying. 'Women don't have enough education to become politicians' ('Daily Express', 11 April 1960). The Labour MP Emrys Hughes raised the matter in the Commons as a breach of parliamentary privilege, and an embarrassed Speaker Hylton-Foster had to rule on his wife's conduct. He decided no breach had occurred, and she subsequently claimed that she had been misquoted. 
On retirement speakers of the House of Commons are traditionally granted a peerage, and it was to Harold Wilson's credit that Audrey Hylton-Foster was sent to the Lords (as Baroness Hylton-Foster of the City of Westminster) in place of her husband, who died unexpectedly while still in office. She sat as a cross-bencher, and spoke occasionally on matters relating to healthcare and voluntary organizations. In 1974 she became convenor of the cross-bench peers, succeeding Lord Strang, who had acted as 'co-ordinator' of the cross-bench peers. She held this post until 1995, during which time the cross-bench peers grew enormously in number and influence. Baroness Hylton-Foster was extremely effective in welding them into a formidable force, in winning time and facilities for them, and in mastering the rules of the House of Lords in order to defend their interests. As a result the cross-benchers were courted both by the established parties and by pressure groups, and at times held the balance in the second chamber. She was immensely proud of the traditions of the House of Lords and its role in the democratic process, and would refer to members of the House of Commons as 'rowdy people'. She expected high standards of parliamentary behaviour from her own flock, and those who offended (for example by whispering in the chamber, or other forms of petty rule-breaking) would be upbraided for what she called 'naughtiness'. Her fellow cross-benchers often referred to her (behind her back) as their 'headmistress', but like all good headmistresses she was held in respect and affection. 
Small, increasingly deaf in old age, and apparently meek, Audrey Hylton-Foster nevertheless possessed a steely resolve and abundant energy. She continued to climb the forty-six stairs to her office into her late eighties, and even after her retirement as convenor of the cross-bench peers she continued to attend debates. She was an avid stamp collector (as was her husband), but her two greatest passions were for fishing (usually in Scotland) and gardening; she and her husband created a beautiful garden at their home, the Coach House, Tanhurst Lane, Leith Hill, Holmbury St Mary, Dorking, Surrey, and it was typical that when she took leave of absence from the House of Lords at the age of ninety-two she chose shrubs and trees for this garden as a gift from her cross-bench friends. She died at home on 31 October 2002, of heart failure. A memorial service was held in the chapel of St Mary Undercroft in the Palace of Westminster on 3 April 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 92375


Stedman, Phyllis, Baroness Stedman (1916-1996), politician, was born at 49 St Paul's Road, Peterborough, on 14 July 1916, the daughter of Percy Adams (1893-1977), an iron moulder in a firm of naval engineers, and his wife, Emmie 'nee' Cooke. She was educated at Lincoln Road junior school and Peterborough county grammar school, where she became head girl and excelled at oratory and debate. Her neighbourhood and family were steeped in socialism, and in 1929 she joined her first political campaign, having been introduced to politics by her trade unionist father who was a Labour/Co-operative county councillor. After leaving school she worked as a librarian for Peterborough city council from 1932 until 1941, when she went to Derbyshire with the national fire service as part of the war effort. As a group officer until 1944 she was responsible for almost one thousand full- and part-time firefighters and made lifelong friends. 
On 2 September 1941, at Park Road Baptist Church, Peterborough, she married Henry William (Harry) Stedman (1910-1988), who was also serving as an auxiliary fireman; he was the son of Edmund Walter Stedman, nurseryman. They had met three years earlier on an election campaign for Stedman's father. The couple, who had no children, shared their political and gardening careers: after the war, they restored the Stedman family's horticultural and landscaping business, which her husband owned until 1963; he exhibited regularly at the Chelsea flower show. 
In 1946 Stedman followed her husband onto the soke of Peterborough (the county council), winning by ten votes. She spent the next thirty years on the soke and its successor bodies (Huntingdon and Peterborough from 1965, and Cambridgeshire from 1974). In the early 1970s she chaired Huntingdon and Peterborough council's fire service committee and was vice-chairman of Cambridgeshire council, but was better at political campaigning than administration or developing policy ideas. With a keen sense of humour and a warm-hearted, genial nature, she was popular with both parties, but she defended tenaciously what she felt was right. While not ideological, she disliked compromise. As election agent for Peterborough at the general election of 1966, she requested a record seven recounts before the Labour candidate lost by three votes. (In 1951 she had been Labour's parliamentary candidate for Hampstead but withdrew due to illness.) 
Deeply devoted to her home town, Stedman served on the Peterborough New Town Development Corporation from 1972 -- four years after Peterborough had been designated one of the last four new towns -- to 1975. Her awareness of local people and their interests helped the corporation to gauge local sensitivities. Another great interest was the disabled, and for twenty-nine years the Stedmans managed and financed the Peterborough branch of PHAB (Physically Handicapped and Able Bodied), which organized activities bringing together young people with and without disabilities; in 1979 she became national vice-chairman. 
When the Labour Party returned to power nationally and found itself inadequately represented in the House of Lords, Stedman received a life peerage in June 1974. Appointed a Labour whip in the House of Lords, in 1975, she was an eloquent spokesman on new towns, local government, transport, and the environment. In 1978 she chaired a Lords committee on pop festivals, which decided against introducing licensing; she made some headlines by declaring her preference for the music of Mantovani and George Melachrino. Finally, in January 1979, she became the Department of the Environment's parliamentary under-secretary for sport and water resources, though Labour's election defeat in May ended her ministerial career. 
Stedman remained a frontbencher as environmental spokesman (conservation was another of her interests) but questioned Labour's increasingly leftward direction. A former Gaitskellite, she had stopped attending party conferences in disgust at left-wingers' treatment of Hugh Gaitskell in 1960. She joined the new Social Democratic Party (SDP) in 1981 and became a whip. The SDP appealed particularly to women, and Stedman's lengthy political experience made her an asset to the fledgling party; for a time, however, her Labour former colleagues shunned her. As the SDP's local-government spokesman she successfully amended the 1985 'Local Government Bill' -- in the face of ministerial opposition -- to ensure stronger assurances from the authorities replacing the Greater London council that the greenbelt would be protected. 
In 1986 Stedman became the SDP's chief whip and finally party leader in the Lords after the mainly elderly SDP peers rejected the party's merger with the Liberals in 1988. Again, her skill at dealing with people proved useful as for two years she managed a diverse and distinguished group. Once the SDP folded in 1990, the Conservative and Labour whips had to persuade Stedman, who insisted that the seventeen peers were still functioning as a party, to vacate her office suite. Rather than return to Labour, she chose to become a crossbencher. In 1995 she received 'The Spectator''s peer of the year award. Despite reaching the rank of minister and party leader in the Lords, she was essentially a local politician as much as a national one. She died of heart problems at her home, 1 Grovelands, Thorpe Road, Peterborough, on 8 June 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 92376


Robson, Inga-Stina, Baroness Robson of Kiddington (1919-1999), politician, was born in Stockholm, Sweden, on 20 August 1919, the elder of the two daughters of Erik Robert Arvidsson, timber exporter, and his wife, Lilly Augusta Danielson, formerly an optician. She excelled at the private Olinska Girls' School in Stockholm, followed by a year-long secretarial course; skiing and sailing became lifelong pursuits. Early in 1939 she went to work for the Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs and was posted to Sweden's embassy in London. She decided to settle in Britain after meeting Lawrence William Robson (1904-1982), chartered accountant, son of Michael William Robson, civil engineer. They married on 13 March 1940 at the Swedish protestant church, Harcourt Street, London. Fluent in four languages, she translated German documents for the Ministry of Information in 1942 and 1943. 
Robson assisted her husband, a partner in the accounting firm of Robson, Rhodes & Co. and a farmer in Oxfordshire, in his parliamentary campaign for the Liberals in the Banbury division of Oxfordshire at the general election of 1950. The Robsons lived at Kiddington Hall, a Charles Barry house with a Capability Brown garden, situated near Woodstock, Oxfordshire. Before they became too numerous, Liberal MPs held regular meetings and retreats at Kiddington Hall's conference centre. At these events she was a charming hostess, fashionably but not flamboyantly dressed; one commentator later contrasted her designer clothes with her political anorak tendency. In 1955 her husband joined a government committee inquiring into the nationalized electrical supply industry, and she replaced him as Liberal candidate for the Eye division of Suffolk, and stood again in 1959. In neither this seat nor Gloucester, which she contested in 1964 and 1966, were the Liberals strong contenders and she was unsuccessful on all four occasions. She was a rural district councillor at Chipping Norton during the 1960s and an Oxfordshire magistrate from 1955; by the time of her retirement from the bench, in 1989, she was England's longest-serving magistrate. 
From 1968 until 1970 Robson was president of the Women's Liberal Federation and on her second attempt was elected party president for 1970-71. During this time the Liberal leadership was under pressure from the 'red guard' of its youth wing, which sought radically to alter the party's structure and focus, supported 'direct action' on issues like apartheid, and urged a more pro-Arab position on the Middle Eastern question. As president she repudiated suggestions that party members should join street demonstrations and took a firmer line against the militant youth than had her predecessor. 
Stina Robson's party services were recognized with her elevation to a life peerage in May 1974, which she regarded as an illustration of Britain's acceptance of outsiders. In the House of Lords she was party spokesman on issues of longstanding interest, such as agriculture and the environment. In addition to these portfolios she belonged to the influential select committee on the European Community and chaired a committee investigating European Union budget fraud in 1988-9. She participated frequently in European debates and maintained her contacts in Sweden, where she sometimes commented on politics for the media. In addition to its slightly foreign intonation, her voice had a husky quality resulting from chain-smoking -- a somewhat surprising habit, given her longstanding involvement with health care. From 1966 she was a governor of University College Hospital until most hospital governors were abolished in 1974, when she became chairman of the new South-West Thames regional health authority, a position which she held for eight years. She also served on the board of the Midwife Teachers' Training College, and as chairman of both the Queen Charlotte's and Chelsea Hospital board (1970-84); in 1990 she revived the fund-raising Queen Charlotte's Ball which until 1977 had been a longstanding highlight of the social season. In 1993 she became the Liberal Democrats' spokesman on health. 
After her husband's death in 1982 Robson succeeded him as chairman of the National Liberal Club's management committee, and continued his effort to reverse the damage of years of serious mismanagement, and to ensure the club's long-term survival. She also succeeded her husband as chairman of the Anglo-Swedish Society. She died from heart failure at Chilton House, Chilton, Aylesbury, on 9 February 1999, and was buried at St Nicholas's Church, Kiddington. 


@@@@@


doc= 92377


Stewart, Mary Elizabeth Henderson, Baroness Stewart of Alvechurch (1903-1984), lecturer and politician, was born at 72 St Mary's Road, Manningham, Bradford, on 8 May 1903, the daughter of Herbert Birkinshaw (died 1941), commercial traveller, and his wife, Isabella Henderson, 'nee' Garbutt. Her earliest memory of Bradford was of soot on her pillow each morning. When she was four their family (including her brother and sister) moved to Alvechurch, Worcestershire. From 1913 she attended King Edward's High School for Girls, Birmingham, and in 1923 enrolled at Bedford College, London. After failing her intermediate exams she spent a year helping Southwark's poor through the Women's University Settlement and read for a social studies certificate. She then returned to study philosophy and graduated BA (honours, second class) in 1928, after which she taught sociology and psychology for the Workers' Educational Association (WEA). On 24 December 1931 she married Robert Godfrey Goodyear ('b'. 1905/6), advertisement clerk, of Luton; he was the son of Robert Norman Goodyear, textile stocktaker. 
At a WEA summer school in 1934 she met (Robert) Michael Maitland Stewart (1906-1990), a schoolmaster and a WEA tutor in economics and international relations. Their relationship flourished as her marriage disintegrated; at the outbreak of the war they took part in the WEA summer school at Frome, Wiltshire, where she began her involvement with the Fabian Society. On 26 July 1941, two months after her divorce was granted, she married Michael. The war separated them for much of their early married life: she was stationed around Britain, first as an air-raid shelter warden in London, then from the end of 1941 she held various postings in the Women's Auxiliary Air Force, in which she was commissioned; he went overseas with the army intelligence corps. 
After the war Mary Stewart resumed teaching WEA classes at the University of London, while Michael became Labour MP for Fulham East. Although she had no children from either marriage, she devoted much of her career to young people. As a psychologist she specialized in crime and education, and with the encouragement of a WEA colleague and mentor Barbara Wootton, she became a juvenile court magistrate in 1949. Seven years later she became joint chairman of the East London juvenile court, having sought a jurisdiction outside her husband's constituency. She drew on this experience in numerous publications, co-writing the Fabians' submission to the Ingleby committee on children and young people in 1958 and also the Fabians' response to the committee's report four years later. Her recommendations included raising the age of criminal responsibility from eight to fifteen and clearing criminal records when offenders reached the age of majority. Overall, Stewart urged a less punitive approach towards young offenders, an unpopular view but one which gained currency with the next government elected in 1964. 
Between 1950 and 1979 Stewart was on the Fabian executive and served as chairman in 1962-3. Her pamphlet 'Unpaid Public Service' (1964) analysed the profile of local councillors and regional hospital board members, and recommended changes to their practices, such as evening meetings and improved travel expenses, in order to attract younger volunteers. Many of these recommendations were later implemented. In 1964 she retired from lecturing, and two years later she stood down from magistrates' bench because of her husband's position as foreign secretary, an office he held between 1965 and 1966 and from 1968 to 1970. Small, neat, and bespectacled with a regular smile, she (like Michael) was very shy and avoided the limelight; his unexpected appointment placed them in an unfamiliar situation. As honorary president of the Diplomatic Service Wives' Association she hosted social events for ambassadors' wives, but while devoted to her husband's career she preferred her own work to the role of grand spouse. In 1966 the health minister appointed her chairman of the governors of the Charing Cross Hospital and Medical School, which was moving to Fulham. As chairman she oversaw the opening of the new facility and ensured that its focus on training would not eclipse the needs of local patients. She held the position until 1974, when hospital governors were abolished by the reorganization of the NHS. 
In January 1975 Stewart received a life peerage as Baroness Stewart of Alvechurch. Too old to give her best, she spoke only occasionally, on such issues as crime and education. She voted regularly but enjoyed an interlude in Luxembourg, where Michael was a member of the European parliament from 1975 to 1976. After retiring at the 1979 election he too was ennobled, making them the second husband-and-wife life peers after Barbara and Henry Brooke. The Stewarts were extremely close both personally and in their political views, and friends joked that they also grew more alike in appearance. After a short illness Mary died of respiratory failure and pneumonia at Chelmsford and Essex Hospital on 28 December 1984 and was buried in St Andrew's churchyard in Sandon, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 92385


Farewell, Francis George (1793-1829), naval officer and settler in Natal, was born in Wincanton, Somerset, the second son of Samuel Farewell (died 1801), rector of Wincanton. After his father's death the family moved to Tiverton, where he was educated at Blundell's School from 1802 until 1807. He joined the frigate 'Amphion' as a midshipman, commanded by Sir William Hoste, and was promoted lieutenant in February 1815. Following the end of the war with France he was put on half pay and travelled to India from where he intended to trade with the newly established British Cape Colony and other British East India Company ports. He became manager and owner of the 'Frances Charlotte', registered in Bengal. On 17 August 1822 he married Elizabeth Catherina Schmidt, a resident of Algoa Bay. 
Through his wife and other contacts at the Cape, Farewell gained the idea of an expedition to the Natal coast and interior to obtain ivory for trading. In early 1823 an official British expedition under the command of William Fitzwilliam Owen travelled to Delagoa Bay with instructions to survey the coastal region of Natal; Owen's vessels the 'Leven', the 'Barracouta', and the 'Cockburn' were joined in this by the 'Jane', owned by the Cape trader Henry Nourse. However, the British government was not prepared to sponsor any further official survey trips and on his own account Farewell, with the backing of the merchant John R. Thomson, hired the sloop 'Julia' from James Gosling, a trader in the Stellenbosch district. 
In 1823 Farewell decided to investigate the ivory trading possibilities at Port Natal rather than Delagoa Bay, and it was with this project in mind that he included in his party as supercargo, Henry Francis Fynn, who had formerly been employed by Nourse. Fynn together with a small party of five people left Cape Town in May 1824 in the 'Julia'. Farewell's main trading party included John Cane, a former sailor who had come to the Cape in 1813 in the hope of finding employment, as well as Farewell's father-in-law, Schmidt: this party left Cape Town in the 'Antelope' in July 1824. 
Having arrived at Port Natal, Farewell was quick to portray himself as negotiating with the person whom he perceived as the main indigenous authority, Shaka ka Senzangakhona, and wrote back to the Cape authorities in August 1824 pointing out that Shaka had given him a land grant at Port Natal for 35 miles along the coast, as well as hunting rights which extended 100 miles into the interior. Farewell's dispatches, which reached the Cape in September 1824, can be seen as the earliest settler writing on Port Natal. Farewell attempted to send the 'Julia' with a cargo of ivory back to Cape Town in December 1824, but the vessel was lost at sea and Farewell's trading party was then isolated at Port Natal. A rival trading party arrived in October 1825 under the command of the former naval officer James Saunders King and including Nathaniel Isaacs and Charles Rawden Maclean, also known as John Ross. The two European groups did not live peacefully at Port Natal and by the time of King's death in 1828 had split up into rival parties with separate small settlements. 
In October 1826 Farewell brought his wife to Port Natal and she was the first white woman to reside at the settlement, before returning to Algoa Bay the following year. Farewell made several trips back to the Cape to obtain goods for trade at Port Natal. In 1828 the British admiralty warned Farewell that his alliance with Shaka was unofficial and that European participation as mercenaries against Shaka's rivals was discouraged. It is likely however that both Fynn and Farewell fought for Shaka against the Ndwandwe in 1826 and against Faku's Mpondo in 1828. Farewell was not present at the assassination of Shaka in September 1828 since he was away in the Cape at that time. From 1824 the overland route to the Cape from Port Natal was controlled by Fynn but Farewell decided to use this route while returning from Uitenhage. Farewell, an unknown European, and five mixed-race employees were killed in September 1829 when their party was attacked at Pondoland, near the Umzimvubu River, by the Qwabe under the leadership of Nqetho. Farewell was later commemorated as one of the founders of the permanent European settlement at Durban (as Port Natal was renamed in 1835). 


@@@@@


doc= 92386


Barillon d'Amoncourt, Paul, marquis de Branges in the French nobility (1630x38-1691), diplomat, was the eldest of the four sons (one of whom was born in 1639) of Jean-Jacques Barillon (1601-1645) and his wife, Bonne Fayet (died 1682). His father, president of the 'chambre des requetes' of the Paris 'parlement', died in the fortress of Pinerolo, where he had been imprisoned for opposing the government of Cardinal Mazarin. Barillon was looked after by his rich and childless uncle Antoine Barillon de Morangis (1599-1672), who became 'directeur des finances royales' in 1648. His uncle had married the heiress of Rene d'Amoncourt, baron de Branges, and when she died in 1669 Barillon inherited her estate at Montigny, added her name to his own, and was created marquis de Branges. 
Protected by his influential uncle, Barillon pursued a successful administrative career. Having become a 'conseiller' at the Paris 'parlement' in 1650, he was made a 'maitre des requetes' in 1657 and appointed 'intendant' of Paris. From there he was transferred to Amiens. After the death of his uncle in 1672 he was appointed 'conseiller d'etat' and sent as 'intendant' with the army of Marshal Turenne during the first two campaigns of the Franco-Dutch War. Barillon had obtained the patronage of the marquis de Louvois, and had influential friends at court, including Louis XIV's favourite, the marquise de Maintenon. 
Barillon's official duties had meanwhile brought him into contact with Honore Courtin. The two men had worked on the delimitation of the new Franco-Spanish frontier in Flanders following the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1668) and were the French plenipotentiaries at the unsuccessful peace conference at Cologne in 1673. When Courtin was recalled from a short embassy to London (1676-7) Barillon, a rich man since the death of his uncle, seemed an appropriate successor. He was nominated ambassador at London in May 1677. 
Barillon remained French ambassador in London until 1689. His long embassy falls into two separate periods. In the first, from 1677 until the end of 1680, he established close links with the parliamentary opposition in order to frustrate the policies of Charles II and weaken England's international position. His initial instructions were to impede the efforts of Thomas Osborne, first earl of Danby, to achieve co-operation between Charles II and the Cavalier Parliament based on a pro-Dutch policy and involving the possibility of war against France. He did this by distributing bribes, most notably to George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, and Algernon Sidney, to encourage the opposition in parliament to believe that any money voted for an army would be used not against France but on the contrary to strengthen royal power in alliance with Louis XIV. Barillon's policy achieved spectacular success when Ralph Montagu, recently returned from his embassy to Paris, revealed Danby's secret negotiations for a French alliance. Barillon took the credit for this at the French court, but actually he merely encouraged Montagu by giving him money. 
During the exclusion crisis that followed Barillon maintained his close links with the whig opposition. This changed, however, when Charles II agreed to accept a French subsidy in November 1680. In the succeeding months Barillon gradually severed his contacts with the opposition leaders and instead built up close relations with the court circles surrounding Charles II and the duke of York, in co-operation with the king's mistress Louise de Keroualle, duchess of Portsmouth. In a series of secret nocturnal meetings he transferred from his coach to that of York's brother-in-law Laurence Hyde, first earl of Rochester, each French subsidy of 100,000 livres. 
Barillon was much less effective during the reign of James II. His task of maintaining close Anglo-French relations was undermined by the general hostility felt in England towards the revocation of the edict of Nantes and the consequent removal of remaining elements of toleration for French protestants. Moreover the new king favoured a foreign policy of neutrality towards Louis XIV and the new anti-French League of Augsburg. Barillon relied on Robert Spencer, second earl of Sunderland, whose conversion to Catholicism was made public in April 1687, and as a result became increasingly out of touch with English opinion. Having severed his links with the whigs, he now narrowed his contacts even within the court itself. He thus failed to perceive the extent of the opposition that was provoked by James II's policies. 
Barillon's embassy was terminated by the revolution of 1688-9, of which he was no more than a witness. He was ordered by Louis XIV to warn James II of the imminent invasion of England by William of Orange, but his warning was dismissed as an attempt to obtain an alliance. He accompanied James II to join the royal army on Salisbury Plain, and returned with him to Whitehall. But a few days after James had fled to France, Barillon was ordered by William to leave England with only twenty-four hours' notice. He reached the French court at Versailles on 4 January 1689 NS. By then he was prematurely aged and badly overweight, and was relieved not to be asked to accompany James II to Ireland. He settled in Paris, and died there on 23 July 1691. With his wife, Marie-Madeleine Mangot de Villarceaux, he had one son, Antoine (died 1741), who succeeded him as marquis de Branges. 
Barillon's links with the parliamentary opposition during the exclusion crisis and the evidence contained in his dispatches about the opinions of James II and the court in the period leading to the revolution of 1688-9 underlie his continuing significance. The originals are in the Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres in Paris, but the Baschet transcriptions in the National Archives have been widely used by British historians. 


@@@@@


doc= 92407


Sinclair, Elizabeth Margaret (1910-1981), trade unionist and communist, was born on 3 December 1910 into a protestant working-class family at 44 Hooker Street in the Ardoyne district of north Belfast. Her father, Joseph Sinclair, a sawyer, worked in the Harland and Wolff shipyard while her mother, Margaret, 'nee' Turney, was a reeler in Ewart's linen mill. She and her two elder brothers and one younger sister were brought up as members of the Church of Ireland and she attended St Mary's Church of Ireland School on the Crumlin Road from the ages of four to thirteen. She stayed with an aunt in Leeds for a period from 1923 to 1925 where she finished her formal education and worked for a while in the printing trade. She returned to Belfast in 1925 and entered Ewart's mill to be trained as a reeler by her mother. Both her brothers were active trade unionists and the atmosphere in her home had reflected the cautious liberalism of her father, who discouraged his children's participation in popular Orange culture. 
In 1931 Sinclair's brother Billy introduced her to the politics of the newly formed Revolutionary Workers' Groups (RWG) which were established in November 1930 to replace the Workers' Revolutionary Party as the Irish affiliate of the Communist International. Against the background of the great depression and the extremely high rates of unemployment in the city, she and other members of the Belfast RWG played a leading role in the outdoor relief protests in October 1932 when unemployed workers agitated for improvement in the payments provided by the local council for those employed in public work schemes. A large demonstration which was banned under the 'Special Powers Act' led to confrontations with the police and serious violence during which two workers were killed by police gunfire. Sinclair spoke at meetings all over Belfast in support of the protests, an unprecedented development in a male-dominated movement where, even within the RWG, there was considerable hostility to female activism. It was at this time that she was briefly married, the marriage ending because of her husband's expectation that she would give up her political involvement. One sad result of her marriage was the death at birth of twins (private information, Lynda Walker). 
Sinclair was one of the founding members of the Communist Party of Ireland (CPI) when it was reconstituted in June 1933. Later that year she received an invitation to be a student at the International Lenin School in Moscow. She arrived in Moscow in January 1934 and remained there for eighteen months. The school judged that she possessed a 'correct political line on all questions' (McLoughlin, 78). There, during the period of high Stalinism, she internalized orthodox Marxism-Leninism and her loyalty to the Soviet Union would remain unshaken to the end. She returned to Belfast in July 1935 where she took up employment in the linen mills and was one of the linen trade unions' representatives on the Belfast Trades Council. She also witnessed the intense sectarian violence that wracked parts of the city in the summer of 1935 and she became acutely aware of how precarious even the most limited forms of working-class unity across the sectarian divide could be. 
As world war approached, Irish communism was as unprepared for the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact in 1939 as any national communist party. It faced peculiar problems in implementing the new policy of opposition to the 'imperialist war' given the fact that it operated in the neutral Irish Free State as well as part of the United Kingdom. In 1940 Sinclair and Billy McCullough were sentenced to one and two years' imprisonment respectively for publishing an article in the CPI's paper, 'Red Hand', which was written by a republican at a time when the IRA was opposing the war and had entered into contacts with the Nazis. The sentences were reduced on appeal and Sinclair served two months in Armagh gaol. With the German attack on the Soviet Union, the CPI liquidated its organization in the neutral free state, while the new Communist Party of Northern Ireland (CPNI) put its militants in the forefront of the 'struggle against Fascism on the domestic front'. The IRA was denounced for its pro-Nazi sympathies, leading to death threats against Sinclair and Billy McCullough, another leading Belfast communist. Strikes were opposed and the CPNI's stature rose dramatically on the back of the central role played by the USSR in the allied war effort. During the war Sinclair became a full-time party worker, as district organizer and also treasurer. She also worked in the party's bookshop in Church Lane in Belfast. The marked shift to the left in popular opinion throughout the UK was reflected in Belfast, where in the 1945 elections for the Stormont parliament, Sinclair polled 4100 votes in the Cromac constituency to the 8000 of her unionist opponents. Billy McCullough, the party secretary, got over 5000 votes in another east Belfast constituency, Bloomfield (Morrissey, 126). The party itself had over 1000 members in Belfast. However, the arrival of the cold war, and the return of the 'national question' to the forefront of Irish politics with the all-party anti-partition campaign launched in Dublin in 1949, saw much of this support and membership disappear. 
In 1947, after a period working in the Communist Party bookshop in Bristol, Sinclair became secretary of the Belfast Trades Council, a position she held until her retirement in 1975. She played a role in a number of campaigns promoted by the CPNI ranging from opposition to atomic weapons and apartheid to the campaign to get an American passport for Paul Robeson. When the singer came to Belfast in the late 1950s he singled out the trades council and Betty Sinclair for thanks (private information, Edwina Stewart). The trades council had taken an early lead in raising the issue of civil rights in Northern Ireland by establishing a link with the National Council of Civil Liberties in the late 1940s. Issues of discrimination in the allocation of houses by local authorities, the maintenance by the unionist regime of a ratepayers' franchise in local government elections, and the 'Special Powers Act', had long been raised by nationalist and republican opponents of the state. However, these issues were always subordinate to the traditional objective of the abolition of the Northern Ireland state. The subversive potential of the civil rights issue was that it side-stepped the 'national question' and demanded instead simply that the citizens of Northern Ireland enjoy the same rights as those in the rest of the UK. 
The first conference dealing with the civil rights issue was organized by the Belfast Trades Council in May 1965. When the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA) was established in April 1967 the main impetus came from the Wolfe Tone Society, a republican 'think-tank' which was in the forefront of the attempt to develop a new strategy after the failure of the IRA's attempt to use 'armed struggle' against the northern state between 1956 and 1962. Sinclair was on relatively good terms with the republican left and initially played a central role in NICRA, being elected chairman of its executive in 1968. However, she had reservations about the decision to take the campaign on to the streets of Northern Ireland. She opposed the decision to organize the first civil rights march from Coalisland to Dungannon in August 1968. The predominant view in the NICRA's leadership reflected a facile use of the US civil rights model, ignoring the very different sectarian significance that marches had in Northern Ireland. Sinclair wanted to maintain the support of 'progressive' sections of protestant opinion for the civil rights agenda. Unlike many of the ultra-left student elements of the burgeoning protest movement, she knew from her personal experience during the 1930s of the terrible danger of exacerbating traditional animosities. However, it was those who criticized her for 'reformism' and 'Stalinism' who had their way, with disastrous results. In 1969 she and three other of the moderates on the NICRA executive resigned in protest at its increasingly confrontational tactics. 
The final decade of Sinclair's life coincided with Northern Ireland's descent into the frenzied violence of the 'troubles'. She condemned the Provisional IRA's bombing campaign because of the damage it did to the twin causes to which she had dedicated her political life: working-class unity and a united Ireland. After her retirement from the trades council she went to Prague in 1976 as Irish representative on the editorial board of 'World Marxist Review'. In 1979 she returned to Northern Ireland where she died on Christmas day 1981, suffocating from a fire in the bedroom of her pensioner's flat at 4A Willowbrook House, in the Cregagh district of east Belfast. At her funeral service on 30 December 1981, in the Belfast Co-operative Society funeral home on the Ravenhill Road, the obituary in the communist paper 'Unity' noted, there were representatives of all Northern Irish political organizations with the exception of unionists, 'her life-long enemies'. In fact her failure to engage sympathetically with unionism and loyalism was perhaps the major weakness of the Irish Marxist tradition she represented. She was buried with her parents in Carnmoney cemetery, Newtownabbey, co. Antrim. In his graveside oration, Michael O'Riordan, general secretary of the CPI, pointed to her time in Moscow at the International Lenin School as the key source of her qualities of resolution and resilience: 'Each visit since then made her often declare her agreement with the American, Lincoln Steffens, who exclaimed, 'I have seen the future and it works'' (Stewart). 


@@@@@


doc= 92410


Lucas, Charles Davis (1834-1914), naval officer, was born on 19 February 1834, probably at Druminargal House, near Poyntz Pass, co. Armagh, Ulster. He was the youngest son in the family of four sons and three daughters of Davis Lucas (1802-1886), a member of the Lucas-Scudamore landowning family, of Clontibret, co. Monaghan (where some accounts have suggested that Charles Davis Lucas was born), and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Hill (died 1837). He joined the Royal Navy in 1848 serving on board HMS 'Vanguard' as a cadet. As an acting mate on board HMS 'Fox' during the Burmese campaigns of 1852-3, he was present at the attack on Pegu, the capture of Prome, and a severe and gallant action near Donabew. His bravery and presence of mind under fire were noted by his superior officers. On 1 July 1853 he was promoted to the rank of mate. 
In May 1854 Lucas was appointed mate of HMS 'Hecla', a small paddle-wheel steam warship, under the command of Captain William Hutcheon Hall, an officer noted for his prominent role during the First Opium War in 1841. On the night of 21-2 June 1854 the 'Hecla', with two other ships, was engaging the Russian fortress at Bomarsund, on the Baltic Aland Islands. While the action was of no consequence, neither the fort nor the ships suffering any significant damage, Lucas's actions earned him immortality. At the height of the action a Russian shell landed on the deck of the 'Hecla', the fuse still burning, and the men were ordered to lie flat on deck. Lucas, as Hall observed, showed 'a remarkable instance of coolness and presence of mind in action, he having taken up and thrown overboard a live shell... whilst the fuse was still burning' (Hall to Admiral Napier, 22 June 1854, quoted in Bonner-Smith and Dewar, 81-4). The shell exploded as it hit the water, slightly damaging the ship and wounding two men. Lucas was immediately promoted acting lieutenant, and on the recommendation of his commander-in-chief, Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Napier, who cited his 'great courage' the Admiralty gazetted him lieutenant with seniority from the day of the action (Napier to Admiralty, 28 June 1854, ibid.). Sufficiently impressed to promote Lucas, Napier returned to the incident when the Victoria Cross was instituted (in 1856), recommending that Lucas receive the medal. This was the first action for which the Victoria Cross was awarded. Lucas was gazetted with the award on 24 February 1857, and attended the first investiture in Hyde Park on 26 June, when Queen Victoria presented the medals. Unusually, Lucas was also awarded the Royal Humane Society medal for lifesaving, despite being engaged in warlike activity. 
After his heroics Lucas was transferred to the 'Dauntless', and paid off at the end of the year. In 1855 he joined HMS 'Calcutta', moving to HMS 'Powerful' at the end of the year. Between 1858 and 1865 he served on board HMS 'Liffey', being promoted commander on 19 February 1862, and ending his service with promotion to captain on 25 October 1867. In 1873 he retired from active service, and became a retired rear-admiral in 1885. Between 1873 and 1883 he commanded the 13th Argyll rifle volunteers (the Ballachulish corps) with rank of brigadier-general. On 22 April 1879 he married Frances Russell Hall, the only child of his old captain. They had three daughters. Lucas served as a justice of the peace for Kent and, while resident in Scotland, for Argyll. He died at his home, Great Culverden, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 7 August 1914 and was buried in St Lawrence's churchyard, Great Mereworth, Kent. 
Lucas was a typical mid-nineteenth-century naval officer in many respects. He saw service in two significant conflicts, reached the captains' list, and in retirement carried out a number of useful social and military functions. Aside from his presence of mind and courage under fire, his career was unremarkable. Yet, as a result of performing the first act of bravery to be recognized by the award of the Victoria Cross, he has become widely remembered. His medal is on display at the National Maritime Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 92418


Williams, John Henry (bap. 1747, d. 1829), Church of England clergyman and peace advocate, was baptized in Gloucester Cathedral on 10 April 1747, the son of John Williams and his wife, Mary (died 1800); his armigerous family was descended from the distinguished judge Sir David Williams (1550-1613). Williams attended the College School, Gloucester, from 1755 and matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1763. He graduated LLB in 1769, was ordained (deacon, 1768; priest, 1769), and in 1774 was briefly vicar of Winchcombe in Gloucestershire. In 1776 and 1777 he was curate of Cherington, Warwickshire, where the rector was John Warner. In 1778, at Waterstock, Oxfordshire, Williams married Warner's daughter, Sarah (1747/8-1820). The couple had three children: Henry (Harry, who became a clergyman), Grace, and Sarah, baptized respectively in 1780, 1781, and 1785. 
Besides Cherington, John Warner was rector of Fleet Marston in Buckinghamshire, and in 1776, following Warner's resignation, Williams succeeded him there. Two years later Williams became vicar of Wellesbourne, Warwickshire, residing in the parsonage, and also serving the nearby chapel of Walton Deyville; he retained the Fleet Marston living until his death, employing curates. Judging by Bishop Richard Hurd's 1782 survey of the Worcester diocese, and the neat parish registers, Williams discharged his duties at Wellesbourne and Walton most conscientiously. He seems to have been a cultured man who enjoyed drama and music and was well read -- for a time he was president of Wellesbourne's book club, comprising 'the principal clergy and gentry of the place and its neighbourhood' (W. Field, 'Memoirs of... Samuel Parr', vol. 1, 1828, 207). His social acquaintance included local whigs -- notably the Dormer family, Bertie Greatheed of Guy's Cliffe, and Dr Samuel Parr of Hatton; the last apparently 'often spoke of [Williams] in terms of fervent admiration and esteem' (ibid., 206). Williams also appears financially adroit. He exchanged lands which he owned in Wales for land at Fleet Marston, and greatly improved the parsonage at Wellesbourne and its outbuildings. 
In 1793, following the outbreak of war between Britain and France, the government proclaimed a general fast day for 19 April, to be marked by Church of England services. The forms of services implored God's blessing on the nation's arms and vilified the French revolutionaries; in sermons, parsons were to justify the war. Williams was troubled: should he promote 'the thirst of bloodshed' or 'by the sullenness of his doubts [incur] the imputation of disloyalty?' ('Two Sermons', viii). He resolved to denounce the war from the pulpit, and publish the sermon. The 1793 sermon, 'Piety, Charity, and Loyalty', was published by a radical Birmingham printer, John Thompson. It was reprinted and issued with another which Williams preached on the 1794 fast day, by George Robinson, the great London publisher. Robinson's firm also published Williams's 'War the Stumbling-Block of a Christian, or, The Absurdity of Defending Religion by the Sword' (1795) and 'A Thanksgiving Sermon for the Peace' (1802). 
Williams was not a pacifist, always opposed to war. In 1795 he stated 'we can perceive no grounds for the assertion that a Christian 'must not fight'' ('War the Stumbling-Block', 23). But he maintained that self-protection was the sole Christian justification for armed conflict: '[a] Christian may not fight, either individually or collectively, except in the unavoidable and unequivocal necessity of self-defence' ('Thanksgiving Sermon', 9). Furthermore, for Williams, war was 'the most horrid and unnatural state of man' ('Two Sermons', 19). Its physical horrors were appalling, and it was 'pregnant with moral anarchy, religious corruption, and political distress' ('Thanksgiving Sermon', 9). He feared for the souls of the military, and thought that war bred malice, intolerance, and suspicion at home. He scorned the notion that the defence of religion was one of the conflict's chief objects: '[t]he SWORD of Christianity is the WORD OF GOD, and it will not admit of carnal warfare, either for its propagation or its defence' ('War the Stumbling-Block', 6). Peace nurtured religion and national well-being: '[w]ithout the dew of peace, the seeds of the Gospel will neither spring nor grow' ('Two Sermons', 62); '[w]ith Peace dwell piety, charity, science, literature, industry, security and liberty' ('Thanksgiving Sermon', 8). Williams deplored, moreover, the government's presumption in expecting the clergy's 'pious assent to the justice and necessity' of the conflict ('Two Sermons', vii). The secular arm, now enjoying, he maintained, 'a complete ascendancy', had converted the church 'into a mere engine of the state' (ibid., v-vi). He despised those clergymen who followed the arguments of Samuel Horsley and other supporters of a damaging church-state alliance and meekly submitted to the government's commands. 
Williams plainly crafted the printed versions of the sermons very carefully. The style is polished, some of the imagery memorable. He chose his texts sensibly and naturally took care to buttress his arguments with references to, or quotations from, the scriptures. His sermons were reviewed in a range of periodicals and, when criticized, Williams defended his opinions in the newspaper press. The 'Monthly Review' noted in 1795 that his reasoning, 'aided by the resistless weight of the sacred writings, has made a greater impression on our minds, than has always been the case when we have risen from the perusal of discourses of the same kind' ('Monthly Review', 475). 
From 1796 to 1801 Williams probably continued to preach against the war, though the sermons were not published. In 1797 the Warwickshire whigs produced a requisition for a county meeting, which Williams signed, and at the meeting at Warwick he read a petition -- which was adopted -- asking George III to dismiss the younger Pitt's ministry and stop the war. The incident demonstrated Williams's high standing in Warwickshire opposition politics, although the petition emphasized political and economic arguments against the war, rather than the Christian ethics of his published sermons. Williams's political stance had long antagonized local tories; and in response to the meeting they commissioned a medal showing the high sheriff, Parr (who had composed the address), and Williams in a cart with hangman's nooses above. For his part, Williams disliked the loyalists' fervour; in 1793 for instance he deplored their 'self-constituted dictatorial and inquisitorial associations' ('Two Sermons', 30). 
Williams published no sermons during the Napoleonic wars: perhaps Napoleon's aggression convinced him that the renewed conflict was one of legitimate self-defence. None the less, in 1815 the Unitarian minister and writer William Field recalled Williams's 'admirable discourses' in his 'Historical and Descriptive Account... of Warwick and... Leamington' (p. 360); and in his 'Memoirs of... Samuel Parr' he declared that Williams might 'justly claim a distinguished place among the most enlightened and liberal clergymen of his time' (p. 206). In his seventies Williams continued to undertake his duties at Wellesbourne and Walton (though he also arranged a curacy): he conducted his wife's funeral in 1820, and performed his last christening, marriage, and burial services in 1826. He died on 12 May 1829 at Leamington, and was buried at St Peter's Church, Wellesbourne, on 18 May. He left his house at Leamington and his other property to his children Henry and Grace. 
Williams's portrait was painted by William Artaud; in 1815 it hung with several Greatheed family portraits at Guy's Cliffe. William Say engraved a mezzotint of it. It shows a man with a high brow, dark, searching, thoughtful eyes, a long nose, and short chin; the expression is earnest and slightly anxious. 


@@@@@


doc= 92425


Villiers, Mary, 'suo jure' countess of Buckingham (c.1570-1632), courtier, was the daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenfield, Leicestershire, and Elizabeth Armstrong. She came from an old but not especially affluent gentry family, and the fact that in her early life she acted as a companion and waiting gentlewoman to her wealthier relative Lady Beaumont of Coleorton led some hostile contemporaries such as Sir Anthony Weldon and Roger Coke to exaggerate her humble social background. About 1590 she married Sir George Villiers ['see under 'Villiers, Sir Edward] of Brooksby, Leicestershire, with whom she had four children: John Villiers (1591?-1658), Susan (1591?-1655), George Villiers (1592-1628), and Christopher Villiers (d. 1630). Following her husband's death on 4 January 1606, Mary moved with her children into the dower house at Goadby Marwood: in addition to a life interest in the house, with its estate of 360 acres, she had a jointure of $200 a year. On 19 June 1606 she married Sir William Rayner: he was said to be aged eighty and died the following November. 
Mary was by all accounts a beautiful woman, and her third and favourite child George, later duke of Buckingham, inherited her looks. Mary encouraged him to develop courtly skills such as fencing and dancing, and he always remained grateful for the 'more then ordinarie naturall love of a mother which you have ever borne me even from that infancie when I did nothinge els but unresonablie and frowardlie rangle' ('Fourth Report', HMC, 256). Possibly in part to further her ambitions for herself and her son, she befriended and later married the wealthy Sir Thomas Compton (died 1626), brother of Sir William Compton, later created earl of Northampton, who entertained the king and queen at his home on several occasions. Although her attempts to secure a marriage alliance between her son and Frances Coke, daughter of judge and privy councillor Sir Edward Coke, were thwarted by Coke's wife, Lady Elizabeth Hatton, by 1616 George was firmly established in the favour of James I. On 1 July 1618 Mary was created countess of Buckingham in her own right for life, an honour she pointedly refused to share with her husband, and it was rumoured that her elevation was made conditional on her withdrawal from court. 
By this time, the countess was strongly inclining towards Roman Catholicism and fell under the influence of a Jesuit called John Percy, more generally known by his assumed name of Fisher. In January 1622 one of the royal chaplains, Dr Francis White, held a conference with the Jesuit in an attempt to rebut his opinions. William Laud, then bishop of St David's, participated in a similar conference in May, but to no avail: by September, Mary had converted to Rome, and as a result was ordered not to attend court. She apparently continued to do so, however: she was with the king constantly after Buckingham and Prince Charles returned from Spain in October 1623, and on James's fifty-eighth birthday on 19 June 1624 she and her daughter Susan, now countess of Denbigh, went hunting with him at Wanstead. It was later claimed in 1626 that she helped to persuade her daughter to convert to Roman Catholicism. 
Although the countess of Buckingham undoubtedly exercised some influence, it is possible that this was not quite as great as some suitors hoped or as some enemies feared. For example, John Chamberlain claimed in February 1621 that Sir James Ley owed his appointment as lord chief justice to his being engaged to one of Mary's relatives, but in fact Ley's fiancee was not related to her at all. Sometimes those who requested her to intercede with Buckingham, for instance in seeking the release of a detained ship in February 1625, found that she was not able to persuade her son. The following month Mary was with James VI and I during his final illness, and suggested the application of a plaster to his wrists and stomach. Some later alleged that this -- together with the duke's gift of a posset drink -- contributed to the king's death. In the parliament of 1626 the impeachment articles against Buckingham accused him of procuring honours for his kindred, and specifically mentioned his mother's ennoblement as countess of Buckingham. The duke denied this charge and insisted that 'the title of Countess of Buckingham bestowed upon the mother was not without precedent, and she has nothing from the crown but a title of honour which dies with her' (Bidwell and Jansson, 1.577). A further indication that the influence of Buckingham and his mother was not always as great as their enemies claimed was the fact that when, shortly after Charles I's accession, Buckingham asked for his mother and wife to be appointed ladies of the bedchamber, Henrietta Maria refused. It was only on 11 August 1626, after the expulsion of the queen's French attendants, that the countess and the duchess of Buckingham were admitted to this office. 
Buckingham's meteoric rise helped him to maintain his mother in some comfort. In July 1620 he contracted to pay her $1300 a year, and in 1624 this allowance was raised to $2000. Buckingham continued to support her after her third husband, Sir Thomas Compton, died in April 1626, and that same year he obtained for her use the large house at Chelsea (formerly Sir Thomas More's residence) that had belonged to the earl of Middlesex. The latter ceded this house to Buckingham in return for a reduction of his fine following his impeachment. At about this time, with her son's full approval, Mary also acquired another large property, and this purchase apparently placed her finances under some strain. In August 1627, during the Ile de Re expedition, Buckingham asked his mother 'if it be possible for you to lend me some monie doe it' ('Fourth Report', HMC, 256). She replied that she was 'very sorie you have entered into so great busines and so little care to supply your wants... As for monyis, the kindom will not supply your expences, and every man grones under the burden of the tymes.' She remained devoted to him -- 'If I had a world you should command it' -- but reminded him that all her available capital had been spent on buying her new property, and added: 'I never dremed you should have needed any of my helpe, for if I had, ther should have wanted all, and my selfe, before you' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/75/22, countess of Buckingham to duke of Buckingham, 26? Aug 1627). 
In the parliament of 1628 Mary was strongly attacked for her religion and for encouraging her co-religionists. John Pym allegedly called her 'a great papist': he complained that there was 'more resort [to her] than to any church' and that 'by her the most active papists in England are brought to Court' (Johnson and others, 4.143, 151, 163). Walter Long was reported as saying that she was 'a fosterer of recusants' and that he was sorry she remained at court given that there was 'no necessity she should be there' (ibid., 4.259, 265). The remonstrance that the Commons presented to Charles on 17 June lamented that: 'those of that religion do find extraordinary favours and respect in Court from persons of great quality and power there, unto whom they continually resort, and in particular to the Countess of Buckingham, who, herself openly professing that religion, is a known favourer and supporter of them that do the same. (ibid., 4.312)' Just as Mary had expressed unhappiness over the Ile de Re expedition, so she seems to have had reservations about Buckingham's plans for another campaign in 1628. According to Edward Hyde, in his later recollections written as earl of Clarendon, 'about six months' before the duke's assassination on 23 August 1628, she had a stormy interview with her son lasting 'two or three hours': their voices were raised and after 'the Duke's leaving' she was 'overwhelmed in tears, and in the highest agony imaginable'. Clarendon later recorded that: 'it is a notorious truth that when the news of the Duke's murder (which happened within few months after) was brought to his mother, she seemed not in the least degree surprised, but received it as if she had foreseen it; nor did afterwards express such a degree of sorrow as was expected from such a mother for the loss of such a son. (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.54-5)' Mary died at the Gate House, Whitehall, on 19 April 1632, and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 21 April. She shares a fine altar-tomb, by Nicholas Stone, with her first husband, Sir George Villiers, in St Nicholas's chapel, and her effigy depicts her wearing an ermine-lined cloak, veil, and coronet. In her will, she had requested to be buried 'as neare as conveniently may bee unto my beloved sonne the Duke of Buckingham', and St Nicholas's chapel stood not far from Buckingham's splendid tomb in the north chapel of Henry VII's chapel. In that will, which was dated 12 April 1631 and had a codicil dated 4 April 1632, Mary made a series of bequests of jewels and money to her children and grandchildren, and to members of her household. The 'residue and surplusage' of her estate she left to her grandson Basil Feilding, Lord Feilding. She estimated that her entire estate was not worth more than $15,000. The will was proved on 7 May 1632. Thomas Lermy wrote that her estate was 'not so great as was in her lyfe believed to bee they say not above one 1000'l'. by year' (Thomas Lermy to Sir Henry Vane, 1 May 1632, TNA: PRO, SP 16/216/5). 


@@@@@


doc= 92426


Sackville, Mary, countess of Dorset (bap. 1586, d. 1645), royal governess, was baptized at Trentham, Staffordshire, on 11 December 1586, the daughter and heir of Sir George Curzon of Croxhall, Derbyshire, and Mary Leveson. On 20 May 1606 her father transacted a marriage agreement with Thomas Sackville, first earl of Dorset, by which she was betrothed to his grandson Edward Sackville, from 1624 fourth earl of Dorset (1590-1652). The marriage had taken place by 2 March 1612. 
The fourth earl was lord chamberlain of Queen Henrietta Maria's household from July 1628, and in July 1630 the countess of Dorset was appointed governess to the prince of Wales, replacing Jane Ker, countess of Roxburghe, whose Catholicism had disqualified her for the office. On 10 July 1630 John Flower reported to Viscount Scudamore that the countess of Dorset had 'seldome beene a courtier before, but allwaies soe much honoured for her virtues, as everie one is glad that she is in her place' (TNA: PRO, C 115/M31/8126). The countess quickly 'settled into hir charge' (17 July 1630, ibid.), yet the king reverted to Lady Roxburgh as governess to Princess Mary in November 1631. It seems that the appointment of a Catholic governess was thought acceptable for royal daughters, but not for sons. Thus in October 1633 the infant duke of York was also entrusted to the countess of Dorset, and she and her husband led the guests at his baptism in November. Provisions delivered to the countess for the two boys included 'a cradle of crimson damasque with gold and silver fringe', and 'six payre of fine Holland sheets each payre containing twenty-four elles and six payre of pillowbeeres' (TNA: PRO, LC 5/134, pp. 152, 246). 
Much of the countess's daily business throughout the 1630s stemmed from her role as governess. For example, on 1 August 1637 she wrote to Sir Thomas Wentworth in Ireland, requesting that one of the duke of York's servants be excused 'from coming over into Ireland untill' the following spring, on the grounds that the duke had so few servants that 'he cannot well be spared' (countess of Dorset to Wentworth, 1 August 1637, Strafford papers, 17/146). The countess was also able to exercise some degree of patronage: in April 1638, for instance, she procured a letter missive under the signet granting George Worley 'a scholar's place' at Sutton's Hospital (TNA: PRO, SO 3/11, April 1638). She apparently enjoyed a high personal reputation, and a manuscript libel of 1636, while alleging that the earl of Dorset 'gives his soule for a whore', claimed that the countess 'of gravity hath store' (BL, Harley MS 6383, fol. 49'v'). 
Although in 1642 the earl of Dorset joined the king at York and then at Oxford, along with the prince of Wales and the duke of York, the countess remained in London, and in July 1643 the houses of parliament confirmed her appointment as governess to the younger royal children, Henry, duke of Gloucester, and Princess Elizabeth. This position secured her a maintenance well above the fifth part automatically granted to the wives and children of royalist 'delinquents'. On 17 May 1644 the House of Lords heard a petition from the countess 'desiring that the sequestration of [the earl of Dorset's] lands in Sussex may be taken off, out of which she is to have maintenance' ('JHL', 6.556). The Lords sent the petition to the Commons, who in turn referred it to the committee for the king's revenue and then, on 18 March 1645, to the committee for the king's children. On 14 April the latter committee reported to the Lords, conceiving it 'fitting that the Countesse of Dorsett in consideracon of hir service to his Ma[jes]t[ie]s children the Duke of Gloucester and Princesse Elizabeth, and for hir future maintenance, shall enjoy the Earle of Dorsetts estate in the Countie of Sussex... provided that if it appeare the profitts of the said lands doe exceed the summe of six hundred pounds per ann[um] then the overplus thereof shall bee paid to the use of the Parliament.' The countess was also to enjoy Dorset House in London and Knole in Kent, and the goods in them (ibid., 7.317). Since the total income from Dorset's Sussex estates was about $2000 per annum, this was a discretionary grant, well above the mandatory fifth. Such an arrangement, whereby a royalist's estates were safeguarded during the period of his wife's employment under parliament's aegis, appears to have been unique. 
The countess died shortly afterwards, on 16 May 1645. The Commons ordered that $600 'be paid out of the arrears of the Earl of Dorset's estate in Sussex' for her funeral ('JHC', 4.211, 227). This took place with great pomp in Westminster Abbey on 3 September 1645, and the countess was afterwards buried in the Sackville family crypt in the Dorset chapel at Withyam in Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 92434


Charles, duke of Orleans (1394-1465), prince and poet, was born on 24 November 1394 at the royal Hotel St Pol in Paris, the fourth but first surviving son of Louis (1372-1407), second son of the French king Charles V and duke of Orleans, and his wife, Valentina Visconti ('c'.1366-1408), daughter of Giangaleazzo Visconti, duke of Milan, and Isabelle of France. 
In 1396 Duchess Valentina was banished from court because of jealousy over her ability to soothe the spirits of her intermittently mad brother-in-law, Charles VI. As a result her children were brought up in various of their father's chateaux along the Loire; Charles, who as heir to the duchy bore the title count of Angouleme during his father's lifetime, had two younger brothers, Philippe and Jean, two sisters, Marie and Marguerite, and a half-brother, Jean, who became count of Dunois and was known as the Bastard of Orleans. Both Charles's parents were lettered book-owners -- Duke Louis was a significant collector -- and he himself became an excellent Latinist and a serious reader and writer, having been tutored from an early age by Nicolas Garbet, his father's learned secretary. In 1402 he and Philippe received their first illuminated books. 
On 23 November 1407 John the Fearless, duke of Burgundy, having long been at odds with his cousin the duke of Orleans, had the latter assassinated in Paris and then denounced before the king and court for a variety of imagined sins and crimes. John's own misdeed soon led to civil war in France. Supported by her children Valentina worked tirelessly to obtain justice from the king for the murder of her husband, and when she died in 1408 it fell to Charles, now head of the house of Orleans, to seek justice and avenge his father's death. To that end he forged alliances against Burgundy with a large group of noblemen led by Bernard (VII), count of Armagnac and constable of France. On 29 June 1406, aged eleven, Charles had married Isabella (1389-1409), widow of Richard II of England and daughter of Charles VI. But on 14 September 1409 Isabella died in childbed, giving birth to a daughter, Jeanne, and a year later, on 15 August 1410, the young duke married Bonne ('b'. 1399), daughter of Bernard d'Armagnac and Bonne de Berry. The marriage proved childless. 
The ensuing manoeuvres of the Orleanist (or Armagnac) and Burgundian factions and their shifting alliances with the English are part of the history of the Hundred Years' War. In November 1411 an English force helped the Burgundians to defeat the Armagnacs at St Cloud, but in the following year a change of sides brought an army led by Thomas, duke of Clarence, Henry IV's second son, to France in support of the Armagnacs. To reinforce their alliance Clarence and Duke Charles became brothers-in-arms, but this did not prevent a further volte-face, with the French nobility uniting to buy off the invaders. As part of the arrangements Charles was obliged to send his brother Jean, count of Angouleme, as a hostage to England, where he remained for thirty-three years. Internal dissension continued, however, until in the following year, at enormous cost to himself, Charles succeeded in joining forces with the queen and the dauphin against Burgundy, and in having the accusations of 1407 against his father repudiated. On 23 September 1414 Charles VI celebrated the obsequies of his dead brother Louis in Notre Dame de Paris; the learned theologian Jean Gerson presided. 
The peace that followed was soon shattered by a further English invasion, culminating in the catastrophic defeat suffered by the French at Agincourt on 25 October 1415. Knighted on the eve of the battle, Charles was discovered afterwards beneath a pile of corpses, his armour having probably saved him from being suffocated or crushed to death. Taken back to England to be paraded with other noble prisoners in Henry V's triumphant entry into London a month later, Charles was at first housed in the Tower, where he was treated like a royal guest and received frequent visits from members of his 'hotel'. For the next two years he was shuttled between London and Windsor, but in June 1417, when Henry V was preparing to return to France, he had Charles sent north, presumably to discourage any attempts at rescue or escape, after which he was moved from one noble warder to another. The first of these was Robert Waterton at Pontefract in the West Riding of Yorkshire, where the duke was allowed to go hunting, until King Henry, hearing reports that Charles had been in touch with the duke of Albany, the governor of Scotland, and fearing 'that ther schold be founden weys to the havyng awey specialy of the Duc of Orlians', ordered that he be confined to the castle, 'for it is bettr he lak his disport then we were disceyved' (Ellis, 1.1-2). In 1419 Charles was transferred to the keeping of Sir Nicholas Montgomery at Tutbury, Staffordshire, and in the following year to that of Sir Thomas Burton at Fotheringhay, Northamptonshire. In 1422 he passed into the custody of Sir Thomas Comberworth, mostly at Bolingbroke Castle in Lincolnshire, where he remained until 1429, when he became the responsibility of Sir John Cornewall, Baron Fanhope, at Ampthill in Bedfordshire. In August 1432 he was entrusted to William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk, and his wife Alice Chaucer, until in 1436 he was transferred to Sir Reynold Cobham at Starborough in Surrey. His final keeper, from 1438, was John, first Baron Stourton, at Stourton in Wiltshire. 
In the course of his captivity Charles travelled repeatedly to London with his keepers, several of whom had town houses in the city. This circumstance, together with the fact that most of his warders were book-owners, gave him ample opportunity to acquire or commission books, and he collected a large library in England, which he had inventoried in 1440, the year of his release. It included devotional and theological writings (he owned several copies of Boethius's 'Consolation of Philosophy'), scientific and medical works, chronicles in both Latin and French, and books of poetry. He became friendly with the Franciscan Thomas Wynchelsey, and spent some time in the library of the London Greyfriars, which Wynchelsey had effectively refounded. Charles's own library (which included his father's books) formed the kernel of the French royal library after its earlier collections were largely removed by the duke of Bedford following the death of Charles VI in 1422. The duke also composed a large body of lyric poetry in the years of his captivity, in both French and English; the latter was to some extent influenced by Chaucer and other English poets of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. His French poetry survives in many texts, one of them demonstrably his own, written partly in his hand, to which he added lyrics throughout his life (Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, MS fr. 25458). His English collection, which contains many 'ballades' and roundels, some of them corresponding to individual French lyrics, and also some narrative verse, survives in a single manuscript (BL, Harley MS 682). 
Charles's English captivity was long because as a prince of the French blood royal he was seen as a very valuable asset, both financially and diplomatically. Henry V recognized this in his will of 1421, in which he laid down that whereas other prisoners could be ransomed after his death, the duke of Orleans and the count of Eu were to remain in custody for as long as this was advantageous to the realms of England and France, that is, until the terms of the treaty of Troyes of 1420 were unreservedly accepted in France. It was later claimed that, as he lay dying, Henry also forbade the release of Orleans until his son and heir, then a nine-month-old infant, came of age. As the fighting continued, the prospect of deliverance was for several years remote. Charles's brother Philippe had died in November 1420, leaving only the Bastard Dunois to defend his half-brother's lands and interests in France against the English forces. He did so heroically, but as the war spread to the Loire, the devastation of the duke's estates (contrary to the law of arms) inevitably reduced their lord's ability to meet the demand for what was certain to be a very large ransom. But as the fortunes of war began to turn against the English during the 1430s, Charles's hopes of freedom began to improve. 
Starting in 1433 -- when he secretly undertook to uphold Henry VI's right as sole king of France -- Orleans was increasingly involved in Anglo-French diplomacy, both as a negotiator and as a subject for negotiation. In October that year he accompanied the earl of Suffolk, his former warder, to peace talks at Calais; in 1434 he was licensed to enter into negotiations with other French princes; in 1435 he was at Calais again. He did not go on from there to the congress of Arras (where his release was debated), but he did hold discussions with Isabella, duchess of Burgundy, which produced proposals for a truce. Plans for Charles to go to Vannes in 1438 for a peace conference arranged by the duke of Brittany came to nothing, but a year later he returned to Calais, again to play a supporting role in abortive negotiations. By this time, however, with the French ever more successful militarily, the duke was being seen increasingly as an important agent for peace. Accordingly a willingness to release him for a ransom of 100,000 marks was one of the explicit concessions offered by the English in 1439, while secret instructions from Henry VI to Cardinal Beaufort even raised the possibility of his being freed without any ransom at all. 
The failure of the negotiations of 1439 -- in which both Charles and the duchess of Burgundy had again been involved -- made it seem all the more important that Orleans should act as a peacemaker afterwards. His release, which had already given rise to much debate in England, was strenuously opposed by Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, upholding Henry V's will and last wishes, but Humphrey was overruled by Cardinal Beaufort and by Henry VI himself -- it was subsequently made clear that the ultimate responsibility for the decision to free Orleans was the king's own. On 2 July 1440 it was agreed that the price of Charles's release should be 100,000 nobles, of which 40,000 were to be paid at once, and that the duke should exert all his influence to secure peace between England and France. The money was raised by contributions levied throughout France, and on 5 November Charles crossed to Calais. He was finally freed at Gravelines on the 12th, having solemnly sworn to observe the terms of his release. 
Once delivered from captivity Duke Charles immediately took steps to strengthen his alliance with the house of Burgundy by marrying on 27 November 1440 Marie de Cleves (1426-1487), Duchess Isabella's fourteen-year-old niece. Duke Philip the Good inducted him into his order of the Golden Fleece, while Charles in turn presented Burgundy with the collar of his own order of the Porcupine. The French king, by contrast, was initially unwelcoming, perhaps because Charles seems to have taken seriously his mission as a peacemaker -- in 1441-2 he and the other French princes tried to exert pressure on Charles VII to negotiate with England. In 1443, however, Orleans supported his monarch in the latter's own peace proposals, while a year later he took part in the ceremonies and negotiations that culminated in the marriage of Henry VI to Margaret of Anjou. He needed the support of his king as he endeavoured to raise both his own ransom and that of his brother Jean, at last released in 1445. In 1447 he was reportedly one of several French nobles anxious to avoid a renewal of hostilities. 
Once re-established in France, Charles made his seat at Blois, where he drew around him a coterie of poets who included members of his household, his officers, and his friends and visitors; many of them, including his wife Marie, Duke Rene of Anjou, and Francois Villon, copied their own lyrics into his personal manuscript. He had three more children -- Marie, Louis (later Louis XII), and Anne. Though very active as a diplomat, and also in the administration of his estates, Charles never again played a major role in French politics, though efforts were made to promote his claim to Milan after the death of its last Visconti duke in 1447, and he himself led an army to Italy in an unsuccessful attempt to reclaim his lands around Asti. Taken ill as he returned from an assembly at Tours, he died at Amboise on 4 January 1465, and was buried in the church of Saint Saveur in Blois. In 1504 Louis XII had his father's body removed to the Orleans chapel in the church of the Celestines in Paris (all the tombs were destroyed during the French Revolution). 
Described by Henry VI as 'a grete and a felle-witted man' (Stevenson, 2.459), Charles of Orleans was intelligent, learned, and shrewd. His library shows him to have been devout, bordering at times on the monastic. When only ten he composed a 'Livre contre tout peche', a short devotional work, and during his captivity he wrote a longer religious work, in the Franciscan mould, entitled 'Canticum amoris'. In his later years he shared with members of his entourage a close interest in the Observant Franciscan movement. But his poetry reveals Charles as a very sociable, playful man, and a witty companion. In France his lyric verses have always been highly regarded. His English poetry, which combines elements of lyric and narrative, circulated in England into the sixteenth century, but thereafter largely fell from sight until an edition by Robert Steele and Mabel Day was published by the Early English Text Society in 1941-6. Since then it has risen steadily in regard and is now widely considered as among the finest English vernacular poetry of the first half of the fifteenth century. A modern critical edition appeared in 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 92435


Ashby, David of (fl. 1260-1275), Dominican friar, is of uncertain origins. His Englishness is well attested, but the suggestion that he was related to a namesake who held Castle Ashby, Northamptonshire, in 1242-3, though plausible, cannot be substantiated. Having joined the Dominican order, he was at Acre by January 1260, when the Mongols invaded northern Syria and took Aleppo. Tommaso Agni di Lentino, bishop of Bethlehem and papal legate to the Latin kingdom of Jerusalem, sent Ashby on a mission to their commander, Hulegu, the founder of the Mongol power in Iran and Iraq (the ilkhanate). When Hulegu withdrew to Azerbaijan with the bulk of his forces in March, Ashby must have accompanied him, since envoys from Hulegu's son and successor, the ilkhan Abagha, to the Second Council of Lyons in 1274, who arrived under Ashby's escort, alleged that he had spent many years in ilkhanid territory and witnessed several Mongol campaigns. But he is known in 1271 to have brought the Lord Edward, then on crusade in the Holy Land, news of the condition of his uncle, Richard of Cornwall, and other family business. He is also described at Lyons as currently the ambassador of both Agni (by now patriarch of Jerusalem) and Hugues III, king of Cyprus and Jerusalem, and in 1275 Edward referred to him as the patriarch's 'capellanus et familiaris'. In all probability, therefore, Ashby had rejoined Agni before 1271, and was attached to the Mongol embassy as it passed through Palestine 'en route' for the West. 
Abagha hoped to gain western European co-operation against the Muslim mameluke sultanate of Egypt, and the public baptism of at least one of his ambassadors at the council caused a sensation in western Europe. In their report the envoys called on Ashby to witness that following his victories Hulegu had ordered the liberation of Christians who had been enslaved by the Muslims, and had returned the Holy Land to Christian rule, presumably during the brief Mongol occupation in 1260. They also claimed that Hulegu had opened his heart to Ashby concerning his sympathy for the Christian faith. This last assertion may reflect misapprehensions about the Mongols' eclectic and pluralistic approach to religious matters, but much of the rest is highly tendentious and seems to have represented an attempt to convince the West that the ilkhan was a trustworthy ally. 
Ashby himself produced a treatise on the Mongols, entitled 'Les fais des Tartares'; the only known text, contained in a manuscript in the royal library at Turin, was destroyed by fire in 1904. A description of the manuscript, published in 1867 and including a transcription of one chapter, shows that the text comprised in all twenty-five chapters, occupied eight folios in double columns, and was accompanied by fine miniatures. The fact that the language clearly approximated more closely to the 'langue d'oc' than to Anglo-French is not necessarily problematic: the text in the Turin manuscript may have represented a translation from Ashby's original Latin version. The rubrics of the chapters are concerned with the Mongols' lifestyle, their livestock, their judicial processes, their tents and method of striking camp, and their reception of visitors. A number of the chapters are devoted, predictably, to military matters: how they fought, how they besieged fortified places, how they captured Aleppo, and how they entered Egypt (a reference, presumably, to their advance as far as Gaza in the early months of 1260). For all the excitement occasioned by the Mongol embassy's appearance at the council, Ashby's long sojourn in the ilkhanate had clearly not fostered any illusions about the Mongols' aims. At the beginning of 'Les fais' he refers to 'ceste malite gent' and stresses their ideology of world domination; and he concludes with a prayer that the Lord will bring peace to the Christians, an allusion, no doubt, to the further damage that the Mongols might inflict on a disunited Christendom. 
After the council ended in mid-July 1274, Ashby went on to England, where he presented a letter from Abagha to Edward I, which again expressed sympathy for Christianity, apologized for the ilkhan's failure to co-ordinate military operations with Edward's crusade in 1271-2, and proposed a joint attack on Egypt. But in his reply, dated 26 January 1275, Edward was non-committal about the prospects for collaboration, though he undertook to inform Abagha if circumstances became more favourable. Nothing further is recorded of Ashby, who presumably returned to the East bearing the king's letter to the ilkhan. 


@@@@@


doc= 92436


Freney, William (fl. 1263-1286), Dominican friar and archbishop of Edessa, is of unknown origins. He is first recorded on 1 August 1263, when Pope Urban IV, describing Freney as an Englishman who was going to the East, reported that he had been raised to episcopal rank and instructed the Latin patriarch of Antioch, Opizo di Fieschi, to consecrate him to a suitable bishopric or archbishopric 'in Arabia or Media or Armenia' (Guiraud, no. 338): if he became an archbishop, his province should be one not subjected to Antioch, but only to the see of Rome. Freney was duly made archbishop of Edessa (Rages or Rohes, present-day Urfa), by this time in Muslim hands for well over a century; he was the only thirteenth-century incumbent to bear the archiepiscopal title. In the following year Urban entrusted him with an embassy to Lesser (or Cilician) Armenia, which appears to have been instrumental in restoring good relations between its king, Het'um I, and the Roman church: Het'um's attested desire to found a Dominican convent appears to be linked with this episode. Urban, who before his election as pope had been patriarch of Jerusalem and subsequently retained a close interest in the Christian East, later made particular mention of Freney's knowledge of languages; but it is uncertain whether the appointment to Edessa was intended to equip him to preside over a large-scale missionary endeavour 'in partibus infidelium' or merely to facilitate his diplomatic efforts. 
Freney was in England by 12 February 1265, when Henry III assigned Wimborne deanery to him for his maintenance until he could return to his province or obtain an alternative dignity. In September, however, it was granted elsewhere, and Freney was assigned first 50 marks per annum from the manor of Havering and then, in October, the manor itself for life. In February 1266 he was further given the manor of Silverstone, Northamptonshire, during pleasure. He had come to England at a time of civil war. On 21 July 1266 he was deputed to escort rebels to court to treat for peace, having earlier been involved in negotiations between the royal army and the Montfortian garrison in Kenilworth Castle; he is recorded as 'a man of discretion and praiseworthy eloquence' ('Chronicle of William de Rishanger', 54), but suspicion on both sides doomed his mission to failure, and he was unable even to enter the castle. At about the same time his procurations -- levies for his maintenance -- reportedly gave rise to complaint. Freney may have left England by May 1267, when the manors of Havering and Silverstone were bestowed elsewhere. 
Freney does not resurface until August 1273, when he was again in England, having possibly encountered the Lord Edward on crusade in the Holy Land in 1271-2 and returned with him; the new king granted him a tun of good wine on this occasion, and a further two tuns in 1277. In 1275 he consecrated the prior's chapel at Bury St Edmunds. He wrote to the bishop of Worcester, as a papal nuncio, on the subject of procurations and Peter's pence in November 1277. Freney was presumably the 'archiepiscopus Ragn.' who assisted in the consecration of Norwich Cathedral in November 1278. This marked the beginning of a close association with Norfolk. In 1282 he held the manor of Cringleford and he was acting as the bishop of Norwich's suffragan by 1276, when he consecrated the site of the Carmelite friars and the high altar at Bishop's Lynn (TNA: PRO, E 135/2/50, fols. 17 'r'- 'v'). In 1280 he was present at the translation of the remains of St Hugh of Lincoln. 
There is no further record of Freney, who does not appear to have returned to the East, and the date of his death is unknown. The inscription on his tomb in Norman French ('Pray for the soul of Friar William Freney, archbishop of Rages'), accompanied by the effigy of a bishop with mitre and crozier, suggests that he had retained his mendicant connections; Anian, bishop of St Asaph from 1268 to 1293, was a fellow Dominican. Now in St Mary's Church, Rhuddlan, the stone slab was probably at one time in the Dominican friary and was removed after its dissolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 92443


Stanegrave, Sir Roger (fl. 1280s-1331), soldier and writer, probably took his name from Stonegrave in the North Riding of Yorkshire, but the details of his early life are obscure. Perhaps he was related to the John of Stonegrave whose inquisition post mortem of 1295 shows him to have been a landowner in Lincolnshire as well as Yorkshire, with tenurial links to the families of Paynel, Ros, and Percy. During the 1280s Roger Stanegrave was stationed at a hospitaller garrison in the embattled kingdom of Jerusalem during the reign of Hugh III of Cyprus and Jerusalem ('r'. 1267-84), and suffered capture and imprisonment by the mamelukes some time before the end of the decade. By his own account, he remained a prisoner for over thirty years, obtaining release only in the summer of 1318 when he was given leave to raise his ransom in England. On 12 December 1318 an unusual royal safe conduct was issued to Stanegrave (who is described as a knight) and his travelling companion, Isaac the Jew. Under its terms Isaac, the financier of Stanegrave's release and presumably a native of the Levant, was permitted to journey to Yorkshire, where the old hospitaller planned to repay his debt with money raised from relatives and friends. These special measures notwithstanding, twelve months later Stanegrave was still in arrears and Isaac was awarded a second licence to stay in the realm for a further year. 
Stanegrave's plight came to the attention of the king's circle at the York parliament of January 1320. In an audience with Edward II he moved the court with stories of his long captivity in squalid mameluke prisons. He told of his steadfast refusal to apostatize despite the cruellest beating, gave news of other hospitaller knights still held captive, and spoke of his huge ransom of 10,000 gold florins. Thirty years after the fall of Acre in 1291 talk of an expedition to recover the Holy Land continued to feature in Edward II's diplomacy, and the elderly hospitaller must have cut a sensational figure at a court eager to assert its crusading credentials throughout western Europe. Indeed, so pitiful was his testimony that on 10 January 1320 Edward II sent separate letters on Stanegrave's behalf to Pope John XXII, the cardinals, and the master of the Hospital of St John. From the pope Edward asked for an indulgence for all who should contribute to Stanegrave's ransom, and that of other Christians languishing in Egyptian prisons. He also requested that Stanegrave be provided for life to the custody of a house of the hospitallers in the bishopric of Lincoln, thereby enabling him both to recover from his afflictions and to pay his ransom. Thus maintained, it can be guessed, Stanegrave spent his final years reflecting on his experiences in the East and composing the impressive crusading treatise 'Li charboclois d'armes du conquest precious de la terre sainte de promission', which he presented to Edward III shortly after plans for an Anglo-French crusade were announced in late 1331. 
Crammed with practical advice, the 'Charboclois' follows the lead of better-known crusade proposals, like Marino Sanudo Torsello's 'Liber secretorum fidelium crucis' (1321) or Pierre Dubois's 'De recuperatione terre sancte' (1306), thereby contributing to the debate over how best to tackle the Muslim threat and recover the Holy Land. Made up of seventy short chapters featuring stories from medieval romance, the classics, and crusading history, as well as the usual calls to action, the bulk of the text is given over to a detailed plan for a campaign aimed at the Egyptian city-port of Alexandria. From here, Stanegrave argues, a fleet could sail up the Nile to attack Cairo before assailing the northern city of Damietta, thus breaking the mameluke grip over the region. Having spent seven years of his captivity in Alexandria, Stanegrave's knowledge of the local defences was probably quite accurate. Amid the detail there is much of associated interest, including a survey of the region's climate and topography. Stanegrave also provides an analysis of mameluke military strength, warning that the sultan housed in his palace 20,000 youths aged between eight and eighteen, each training with weapons three days a week and being schooled in Koranic law the rest of the time. Here, however, the aged hospitaller's account is probably based as much upon rumour as upon intelligence gathered through an Egyptian prison window. But whatever its appeal, there is no evidence that Stanegrave's book made a lasting impression upon its intended audience. Few theoretical crusading proposals had any discernible influence, and this treatise is likely to have been valued as much for its encyclopaedic, geographical, and historical material as for its specialist crusade information. At any rate, with the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War in 1337 Edward III's plans for a crusade were permanently shelved. The 'Charboclois', on the other hand, may have been consulted from time to time: the text, collected with other writings on Islam and the Orient, survives in one late fourteenth-century manuscript (BL, Cotton MS Otho D.v, badly damaged by the fire of 1731). 


@@@@@


doc= 92444


Benet, John (d. 1474), priest and chronicler, is differentiated from contemporaries of the same name by being vicar of Harlington, Bedfordshire, from 17 March 1443 to 1471 and then rector of Broughton, Huntingdonshire, from 4 October 1471 to his death some time before November 1474. He may have been one of two John Benets who were ordained deacon and priest between March and September 1435 in the diocese of Lincoln, but he has not been traced among the 'magistri' of either Oxford or Cambridge. These are the only ascertainable biographical facts about the John Benet who wrote Trinity College Dublin manuscript 516; the rest has to be inferred from this book. This is a typical commonplace book of the period, being a collection of political ballads, religious poems, prophecies, portents and wonders, rhyming memorabilia, historical notes, and secular and ecclesiastical documents. As these indicate, Benet was an assiduous and inquisitive collector of information. He signs the text 'quod Benet' in a dozen places, three of which he dates at Harlington in 1461, 1468, and 1471. At the end he writes an anathema against anyone borrowing the book without permission. 
The central item in the book is a longish Latin chronicle of English history from Adam to 1462, and the book was bound some time after 1468, with space left for a continuation of the chronicle that was never filled. This chronicle, which was first printed in 1972, is an important primary source for political history in the period 1440-62. Was John Benet the author? His only explicit personal insertion is a note of his presence attached to an eyewitness account of riots between northern and southern students in Oxford in 1441. Thereafter most of the events recorded occur in London or are national in character, often with new and significant details. The meetings of parliament, great councils, and convocation are precisely dated; the actions of the rebels under Jack Cade in 1450 are vividly described; public spectacles like executions, the burning of heretics, the abjuration of his heresies by Reginald Pecock, bishop of Chichester, in 1457, and chivalric duels are commented on; and particular attention is given to the inns and courts of law. Politically the chronicle's bias is in favour of Richard, duke of York, and hostile to the dukes of Suffolk and Somerset and the royal court. In many of these respects the chronicle has close affinities with the various London chronicles, but it is not arranged under mayoral years as they are and is more clerical in tone. Nevertheless the material must derive from someone resident in London in these years, and this rules out Benet as the primary author. Indeed Benet's own misreadings show that he was copying rather than composing the chronicle. 
The question of whether Benet was copying the already consecutive text of another author, or compiling his own text from material written in London and sent to Harlington, is not easily answered. The argument for the latter is supported both by the miscellaneous matter collected by Benet in the rest of the volume and by the likelihood of his having lines of communication to London. His cure at Harlington was in the patronage of Dunstable Priory, while in the adjoining village of Toddington lived John Broughton, a wealthy landowner who had established a hospital and college of priests there. Broughton, who is intermittently and inconsistently referred to as a knight, was a book collector, who had contacts with the London book trade and who befriended and patronized Benet, presenting him to his living at Broughton in 1471. It seems probable, therefore, that Benet sought and received from London newsletters, documents, and reports, from which he wove his own account of the turbulent years of the mid-fifteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 92445


Sais, Sir Gregory (d. 1390), soldier, was a native of Flintshire and probably a son of Cynwrig Sais ab Ithel Fychan (died 1348?); his father and his brother Ithel had both earned a reputation for oppressive behaviour in the county as leading servants of Edward the Black Prince. In 1360 he was captain of Beaumont-le-Vicomte in Maine and in the following year he sought the pope's permission to visit the holy sepulchre 'and other sacred places on either side of the sea' with a retinue of fifty persons (Bliss, no. 375). About this time he appears to have commanded a free company; a pilgrimage would have been good cover for a company moving through France. Froissart suggests that Sais had been knighted by 1367, when he joined the Black Prince's expedition to Castile in support of Pedro the Cruel. He was taken prisoner after a skirmish at Arinez near Vitoria, but was probably released after the prince's victory at Najera on 3 April. 
Anglo-French hostilities resumed in 1369, but for the English the war was now a long drawn-out rearguard action as the French gradually recovered the south-west. Sir Gregory's service between 1369 and 1374 was here; he served with Sir Simon Burley in Poitou and Saintonge, with Sir Robert Knolles in the Agenais and Quercy, and with Sir John Chandos in Anjou and Touraine. In 1370 he was one of the captains with the ailing Black Prince at the siege and sack of Limoges, one of the worst atrocities in medieval European warfare. 
The next two years saw the expulsion of the English from Poitou and Saintonge. Poitiers surrendered to the French on 7 July 1372 and Sais, with several other knights, retreated to Niort. Early in 1373 the nearby town of Chize was being besieged by Bertrand du Guesclin; a relief column was defeated by the French on 21 March and Sir Gregory was again taken prisoner. He must have been freed soon afterwards, since he appears to have defended the castle of Gencay in Poitou for another two years. He had been granted Gencay and Montmorillon by the Black Prince and he had also acquired Mortemer by his marriage to a Poitevin heiress, Ragonde Bechet, the widow of its lord, Gui Senechal. The siege of Gencay ended when du Guesclin offered Sir Gregory terms that included the protection of the rights and property of his wife and his stepdaughter, but in 1376 Gencay and Mortemer were granted by Charles V to the duc de Berry. 
Sir Gregory and Ragonde returned to England at some time between 1375 and 1377. They received compensation for their losses in France; in 1378 he was granted $200 a year for life, while she would have 200 marks a year during her widowhood should she survive him. On 26 April 1377 he was ordered to survey, repair, fortify, and garrison the castles of Tenby, Pembroke, Cilgerran, Manorbier, Carew, Picton, and Newport, since an invasion of Wales, particularly of the county and lordship of Pembroke, was being planned. This was probably connected with the activities of Owen of Wales; in 1377 an English deserter called John Minsterworth was executed for conspiring with the Welsh pretender, who was himself murdered a year later. 
Between 1378 and 1381 Sais was lieutenant of Brest under the captaincy of Sir Hugh Calveley and Sir Thomas Percy; this was followed in December 1383 by his appointment as captain of the town of Berwick. Among the men-at-arms serving under him were Owain Glyn Dwr and his brother Tudur, along with several other Welshmen. His final command was the keepership of Queenborough Castle in the Isle of Sheppey in December 1387. By then he had renewed his connection with his native county, having been given licence to acquire lands worth up to $40 in north Wales, Cheshire, and Flintshire in June 1386. He brought an action of trespass against a neighbour in the same year, and he leased the court pleas and perquisites and the market and fair tolls of the town of Caerwys in 1388 and 1390; with his cousin Hywel ap Tudur ab Ithel Fychan he also leased the manor of Mostyn. The manor of Frodsham in Cheshire had been granted to Ragonde for life in 1385; when Sais died in 1390 he left lands in thirteen townships in that county. Ragonde was dead by 1409; there is no record that she and Sir Gregory had any children, although she had a daughter by an earlier marriage. 
Sir Gregory Sais was a member of the circle of distinguished knights around the Black Prince, and earned a mention in Froissart's romance 'Meliador', in which the names of notable contemporary knights were used for the characters. He did not attain the fame of some of his brother knights, perhaps because so much of his service was in one of the less glamorous and successful theatres of the war. The way in which his name was so often mangled also meant that he was not always identified correctly; the fact that he was sometimes described as Dangouses led Sir Arthur Conan Doyle to describe him as the earl of Angus in his novel 'The White Company' (1890). But Sais was the most distinguished Welsh soldier of his time and the poets knew of his exploits; Iolo Goch referred to Owain Glyn Dwr's service with him at Berwick, while Gruffudd Llwyd bemoaned the fact that he was one of only three Welshmen who had been knighted, the implication being that the same honour should have been bestowed on Owain. 


@@@@@


doc= 92446


Aubrey, Andrew (d. 1356), merchant and mayor of London, was the son of Roger and Denise Aubrey. It is likely that he was born in London since he did not mention a provincial parish in his will. He became the factor of Thomas Enfield, a successful London pepperer, who exported wool and imported spices, and in 1321 himself sued another London pepperer for refusing to pay for goods worth over $212 which Aubrey had agreed to deliver to him at the fair at Lynn. It seems likely that by this date he was at least in his mid-twenties. Enfield died in 1328, and Aubrey soon afterwards married his widow, Joan. She brought a substantial dower of London property, which, added to Aubrey's profits from the wool and spice trades, made him one of the top London taxpayers in 1332. 
Inevitably wealth propelled Aubrey into London's governing elite, first as sheriff in 1331, then successively as alderman in 1334, auditor of the city's accounts in 1337, and MP for London in 1337 and 1340. His wool exports also involved him in Edward III's schemes for financing his war against France. In 1338 the king seized wool worth over $156 from him in Antwerp. Such interruptions of the wool trade, and the export of coin to support the war, as well as the burden of heavy taxation, were imposing great strains on London's economy and fragile social cohesion when Aubrey was elected mayor in 1339. Tough but intelligent leadership was needed to quell the increasing disorders and affrays in the city and to avoid the king taking over its government. The mayor was expected to suppress riots in person, assisted only by his fellow aldermen, and by the few serjeants they commanded. In 1340 street fighting between fishmongers and skinners culminated in a young fishmonger seizing the mayor by the throat, while another dealt a life-threatening blow to one of the serjeants. Aubrey's assailant proved to be Thomas Hansard, the son of a wealthy fishmonger of an established family. Although a severe sentence on Hansard threatened to provoke city-wide disorders, Aubrey knew that the mayor's person had to be treated as sacrosanct if his authority was to be upheld and London's liberties preserved. The city's government had no power to inflict capital punishment, and for a month Aubrey waited in vain to hear from the king, who was overseas. He then ordered the wards to elect a large assembly to debate the punishment of the guilty pair. They were declared worthy of immediate beheading, and the sentence was carried out the same day. However there was no civil commotion, and the king later ratified the mayor's action, while Aubrey was rewarded by re-election as mayor. 
The economic difficulties of London were increased in 1344 by the introduction of a gold coinage. This particularly affected the retailers and distributive merchants among the London pepperers, and they responded in 1345 by forming their own fraternity which was attached to the church of St Antonin in the pepperers' trading quarter in Sopers Lane. Andrew Aubrey was too rich to share the particular economic worries of the founders, but he joined the fraternity in 1347 with his son John and his kinsman Thomas, and as alderman of the ward he increased its influence. The fraternity developed later into the powerful London Grocers' Company. Aubrey's wealth is underlined by his investment in a cargo of spices and alum worth $2000 from Bruges in 1348, and by his building in the same year his own chantry chapel, and a house for its chaplains, next to St Antonin's Church. Within a year the catastrophe of the black death made his foresight apposite. But although he made his will in 1349, Aubrey and his son survived the pestilence and in thanksgiving went on pilgrimage to Rome. 
Aubrey served again as mayor in 1351, in a further crisis arising from London's loss of its commercial privileges. These had protected its retail and distributive trade against competition from aliens and non-citizens. As in 1340, Aubrey showed his belief in consultation by summoning a large common council to give advice, and possibly to raise money to buy a reversal of royal policy. But although he himself had lent considerable amounts of money to the king, he could not change royal policy in 1351, while in 1353 London merchants suffered another blow when the king forbade English merchants to export wool. Aubrey then bought property in Boston, Lincolnshire, possibly so that he could export through aliens, and he began to sell his London property. And to his holdings in Middlesex and Essex he added a country estate in Hertfordshire, which his widow subsequently inherited. In 1355 he retired as alderman and he died in 1356. A monument commemorating him in the church of St Nicholas Cole Abbey was recorded by Stow in 1603. His son John continued his business but did not emulate his father's significant political services to the mid-fourteenth-century city. 


@@@@@


doc= 92447


Greenlaw, Gilbert (c.1354-1421/2), administrator and bishop of Aberdeen, is of unknown origins. He is probably first recorded in March 1374 under the name of Gilbertus Scotus, taking the degree of BA at Paris University by subdetermination, even though he was not a poor scholar; then on 27 April 1374, and this time without any doubt, since he is named as Gilbertus Greenlaw, he was a licentiate in arts. On the strength of these entries, he may be reckoned to have then been at least twenty years old. A few years later he was at least three times recorded with the title of master, but this designation appears to have been erroneous; indeed, he himself sought a papal grace of rehabilitation in October 1379 for having two years earlier misled the previous pope as to his degree. 
From September 1377 at the latest Greenlaw held a canonry and prebend (that of Botary) of the diocese of Moray. In that month he was provided to the church of Liston, in the diocese of St Andrews, on the death of the previous incumbent, while by July 1386 he was a canon of Aberdeen, with an unknown prebend. Each of these benefices he retained until he was promoted to a bishopric. It seems that after leaving Paris he stayed for some years at the papal court, first at Avignon and then in Italy, for his first benefices were secured following the deaths of their incumbents at the curia. But he was certainly in Scotland in March 1378. When his rehabilitation was secured in October 1379 he seems to have been once more at Avignon. But he was clearly in Aberdeen no later than 1382, and in the following years occurs several times as a witness to land transactions in the diocese. 
Following the death of Bishop Adam Tyningham, on 18 September 1389, Greenlaw was elected to succeed him; he obtained papal provision on 19 January 1390. He was apparently consecrated bishop in the following month, and held the see for the rest of his life. After his elevation, he is frequently recorded as working on diocesan business, securing his see's rights and witnessing further land transactions. It is also possible that about this time he was a papal collector in Scotland. But he also began to be active outside his diocese. From about the time of his elevation he started to appear at the king's court, where he witnessed a number of crown charters, although not at first so often as to suggest that he was a member of the king's daily council. This changed in May 1397, however, when he succeeded Duncan Petit as the royal chancellor, an office that he retained until his death. 
As chancellor Greenlaw provided a significant degree of stability at the centre of government. Although he seems at first to have had links with the earls of Douglas, shortly before he entered upon high office he is found associating with Robert III's eldest son, David, earl of Carrick and later duke of Rothesay, in his efforts to preserve his marriage to the daughter of the earl of March, which the king opposed. But he also forged ties with the king's brother Robert, duke of Albany (a charter of whose he witnessed in November 1398), and worked with him to make Rothesay lieutenant of the realm in January 1399. Then, when Rothesay was overthrown by Albany about the end of 1401, Greenlaw continued to serve in the government of which Duke Robert had become head. He assisted Albany to resolve an awkward trading dispute between the burghs of Perth and Dundee in May 1402, and witnessed another of the duke's private charters in July 1404. 
Following the death of Walter Danielston as bishop-elect of St Andrews in December 1402 Greenlaw was postulated by the cathedral chapter for translation there, certainly with the support of Albany, who in May 1403 secured for him a grant of the personal goods of the previous bishop, Walter Trail -- they included a silver crucifix containing part of the cross of St Andrew. However, the transfer was thwarted by the king, who in September 1403, as part of a reassertion of his authority, secured the see instead for Henry Wardlaw, who became temporarily a significant figure at court. But after the death of Robert III on 4 April 1406, when his son and heir Prince James was in captivity in England, Albany became governor of Scotland, and Greenlaw consolidated his position in the administration of the realm. The contemporary chronicler Walter Bower, abbot of Inchcolm, wrote that he was 'tenacious for justice, firm and calm in all his conduct' (Bower, 3. 411). And Hector Boece, in his early sixteenth-century lives of the bishops of Aberdeen, states that 'On account of his rare sagacity he possessed much influence amongst the nobles' (Moir, 28). 
Greenlaw was for several years a regular witness of charters issued by Albany as governor, and was at least once appointed to a diplomatic mission, when in December 1406 he received a safe conduct to travel to England for peace negotiations; it is uncertain, however, if this embassy actually took place. He was not otherwise involved in the active diplomacy of the governorship, and it may be presumed that his absence on such business could not be tolerated. But, as a senior bishop, he must have been involved in the discussions from 1408 onwards of policy regarding the great schism within the church, and whether Scotland should continue to adhere to Pope Benedict XIII at Avignon, rather than to the Roman pope or to the third pope elected by the Council of Pisa in 1409. Ultimately Scotland remained loyal to Benedict until 1418, long after other countries had withdrawn from their allegiance to him. 
It is indicative of Greenlaw's importance in government that until about 1415 it is difficult to find evidence for his undertaking business within his diocese. His rewards included the annual payment of a customs allowance of 20 sacks of wool or 40 merks (confirming a grant first made about 1404 by Robert III), and from 'c'.1414 an annual gift from the customs receipts of Montrose. But after that date the evidence suggests that he was less often with Albany. By this time the latter was issuing fewer charters as governor, which creates uncertainty, but Greenlaw's name does not always appear in the surviving witness lists. He continued to act as an exchequer auditor to July 1421, but he also reappears undertaking business within his diocese. Boece suggests that Greenlaw went on an embassy to France, but no evidence survives to support this. 
A fellow bishop, Walter Forrester of Brechin, seems to have been a good friend of Greenlaw. They were contemporaries as students in Paris, and their service to Robert III and to Albany more or less coincided, Forrester becoming secretary and later clerk register. In March 1422 Forrester mortified an annual rent secured on land in Aberdeenshire for celebrating masses to commemorate Robert II, Greenlaw, and Sir Adam Forrester of Corstorphine: a neat trilogy of master, friend, and family. 
The exact date of Greenlaw's death is uncertain. The likeliest day is 20 September, when his anniversary was celebrated at Aberdeen. The tradition there was that he died in 1422, but as his successor was translated to Aberdeen in April that year, 1421 is the most probable year. Boece records his cause of death as an 'ethical fever', perhaps phthsis, and states that he was buried in the cathedral choir. He had given the treasures presented to him by Robert III to Aberdeen Cathedral, and they were still preserved there as late as 1549. A manuscript volume of miscellaneous tractates once possessed by Greenlaw is now held by the Herzog August Bibliothek, Wolfenbuttel, Germany. 


@@@@@


doc= 92451


Lannoy, Ghillebert de (1386-1462), soldier and diplomat, was the second son of Ghillebert de Lannoy, seigneur of Beaumont (died 1406), and his wife, Catherine de Molembaix (died 1433). Until he was thirty the younger Ghillebert, who became seigneur of Willerval, led the life of a hyperactive devotee of the chivalric ethos, pursuing connections which linked his own native milieu of Walloon Flanders and Hainault with the wider political world in which the 'noblesse' of the Scheldt valley had become involved during the Hundred Years' War. After dabbling in the local feuds of his relatives he joined the expedition which Waleran de Luxembourg, count of St Pol, led against the Isle of Wight in 1403. In 1404 he enlisted in the force raised by Jacques de Bourbon, count of La Marche, in aid of Owain Glyn Dwr, which sacked Falmouth but was then thwarted by the channel winds. While he waited in frustrated inactivity at Brest, Lannoy and his mentor Jean de Werchin, 'senechal' of Hainault, engaged in an exercise in erotic therapy by composing forty-six 'ballades'. The next ten years were predominantly given to travelling and fighting. In 1405-6 he went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, in 1407 and 1410 he jousted and crusaded respectively in Spain, and in 1413 he campaigned with the Teutonic order. Dubbed a knight in the Baltic, he went to Narna and Novgorod disguised as a merchant before returning home in summer 1414 with letters from the king of Poland to the king of France. With scarcely a pause he then set off westwards for Ireland, on 'le voyage de saint Patrice', but instead had to be extricated from capture by persons unknown by a grant of 3000 francs from the duke of Burgundy. In 1415 his luck was no better: fighting on the French side at the battle of Agincourt, he was wounded and taken prisoner to England. His release this time involved the payment of 1200 'ecus d'or' to Sir John Cornewall, later Baron Fanhope. 
Lannoy emerged from this eventful apprenticeship as a prominent servant of the dukes of Burgundy, who since the 1380s had by inheritance and assertion become the paramount territorial princes in the area where the Lannoy family interests lay: by 1406 Ghillebert's elder brother Hue was a 'chambellan' (the highest ranking household servant) to Duke John the Fearless, and Ghillebert himself entered the ducal household as 'echanson' (cupbearer) in 1411-12, becoming 'chambellan' and 'conseiller' in 1416 to the duke's heir, Philip (the future Duke Philip the Good), who was then acting as his father's representative in Flanders and Artois. As well as holding these positions until his death, Lannoy was also captain of the key port of Sluys from 1416 to 1446, while in 1421 he acted as interim head of the ducal household. Initially he had particular responsibility concerning 'divines provisions' for Philip; more generally, he and his family network were active in formulating and implementing ducal policy, not least in fashioning the Anglo-Burgundian alliance as the nucleus of the Lancastrian 'dual monarchy' of England and France. In 1419-20, as well as fighting in the French war, Lannoy acted as one of the Burgundian envoys negotiating the treaty of Troyes. 
In the years which followed, although it was Hue de Lannoy who was most active as a cross-channel go-between, Ghillebert's experience as a traveller was exploited for the furtherance of Anglo-Burgundian policy. Between 1421 and 1423 he went on behalf of Duke Philip and Henry V on his most elaborately extended journey, overland across Germany to the courts of Prussia, Poland, Lithuania, and Wallachia, and then by sea from Kaffa in the Crimea to Constantinople, as their accredited envoy to these fellow Christian princes. Prevented by the death of the Ottoman sultan Mahmoud I from presenting him with Henry V's gift of a golden clock, Lannoy proceeded in more discreet style, with just two companions, via Rhodes and Crete to mameluk Egypt and Syria, on a tour of military reconnaissance which gave special attention to the ports usable for crusading purposes. Having returned to Europe via Rhodes and Venice, he presented his report (together with the undelivered clock) to the English council in London; he also took the opportunity to confess to Cardinal Henry Beaufort that at the outset he had fraudulently secured double payment of his $200 travel allowance (twenty years later he was still sufficiently burdened by remorse to secure Henry VI's personal forgiveness for the lapse, formally recorded in letters patent under the great seal). 
Lannoy's next mission took him in 1428 to the courts of Hungary and Germany to discuss the planned Anglo-Burgundian intervention (to be led by Cardinal Beaufort) in the crusade against the Bohemian Hussites. In January 1430, with his brothers Hue and Baudouin, he was listed among the original twenty-four members of the order of the Golden Fleece, while later that year he was sent as an envoy to Scotland, for purposes which remain obscure. His often cryptic reminiscences of his travels suggest -- as one might perhaps expect -- that military and chivalric considerations were uppermost in his mind, and ethnographers may regret that his impulse was not directed by a less restricted curiosity. He noted that the towns of northern England, like Newcastle, Berwick, and Carlisle, were all fortified, whereas those of southern Scotland had been left without walls; Dunbar, he remarked, had been wasted by war. He also commented on the Arthurian associations of some of the places he passed: on Bamburgh, where the castle was said to be Sir Lancelot's 'Joyeuse Garde'; and on Stirling, where the very fine castle had been built by King Arthur himself. On his way south Lannoy could not resist the urge to cross from Lancashire to Drogheda, and from there achieve his long-delayed visit to St Patrick's Purgatory on Lough Derg, Donegal. The poverty of the island impressed him, especially once he had crossed the boundary between the lands under the English king's allegiance and those of the native 'Escos sauvaiges' (Potvin, 169). He returned through the English midlands to the channel coast, passing through Lichfield, where he was struck by the beauty of the cathedral. Two years later, in 1433, Lannoy went as Burgundian envoy to the general council of Basel. And in the intervals between these diplomatic missions he fulfilled the other duties of a ducal 'chambellan', serving in arms in 1425-7 to secure possession of Hainault and Holland, in the duke's expedition to meet the duke of Bedford in Paris in 1429, and in the force raised to suppress insurgency in Cassel in 1431. 
After Duke Philip's decision to end his Lancastrian alliance and allegiance in 1435, Lannoy's diplomatic activity lessened, possibly due to family preoccupations. His first marriage, in 1418, to Eleonore d'Esquennes, widow of Jean, seigneur of Montigny-en-Ostrevent, proved childless; his second, in 1428, to Jeanne de Ghistelles, produced his son and heir Philippe (died 1495). In 1436, after Jeanne's death, Lannoy fulfilled a vow of pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. By 1445, when he bought a house in Lille, he had married Isabel van Drinckam (died 1453), with whom he had three surviving children: Jean (died 1453), Pierre (died 1510), and Marguerite (died 1479). Besides domesticity, the captaincy of Sluys -- no sinecure, given the febrile condition of Flanders in these years -- continued to require his attention, until, aged sixty, he resigned the office on appointment to his final diplomatic mission, when he was sent in 1446 to present the Fleece to Alfonso the Magnanimous of Aragon, newly triumphant in Naples and vying with Duke Philip for primacy among crusade protagonists. The embassy was extended into Ghillebert's farewell performance as 'Foliant de Yonnal' ('Lannoy the wanderer', in his anagrammatic self-designation), a leisurely, nostalgic pilgrimage with his eldest son to Jerusalem via Sicily, Crete, Cyprus, and Rhodes, rounded off in 1450 by a visit to Rome for the papal jubilee. 
Lannoy died on 22 April 1462, and was buried in the church of St Maurice in Lille. It was probably in the 1430s and 1440s, if not in the twelve years preceding his death (for which there is no record of other activity), that he produced much of his considerable literary output; but writing had been a constant accompaniment to his whole career. Verse he seems to have abandoned after the age of eighteen, and if in his juvenile 'ballades' his syntax proved inadequate for the expression of his feelings, his prose composition developed a trenchant effectiveness, and some of it for a time commanded a widespread readership in courtly circles. The two most polished treatises for which his authorship is generally accepted are the 'Enseignements paternels' and 'Instruction d'un jeune prince' (printed at Paris, 1517); a third, interdependent treatment of the same themes of the moral issues and governing necessities confronting chivalric careerists and their princely employers, the 'Enseignement de vraie noblesse', has been ascribed on stylistic grounds sometimes to him, sometimes to his brother Hue (the closeness of their relations making it difficult to discriminate between their respective claims to authorship). A number of Ghillebert's 'advis' also survive in a family manuscript Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, MS fr. 1278 containing 'memoires' by his brother Hue. A second family manuscript preserves, along with his 'report' on his 1421-3 reconnaissance mission, his reminiscences of his travels jotted down at different dates in his own hand, and assembled after his death by his chaplain. It is emblematic of Lannoy's international outlook, in both his career and his writings, that in his 'Enseignements paternels' he should have chosen as an example of knightly valour the death of Sir Lewis Robsart, a Hainaulter by birth but also a household servant and banner-bearer of Henry V and a knight of the order of the Garter, who was killed at the head of an English force in northern France in 1430 when he could have retreated, but preferred to die 'to safeguard the honour of that order and also his own' (Potvin, 458). All in all, if Lannoy's life testifies to the enterprising drive of the late medieval lay nobility, his 'oeuvre' conveys much of its vigorous political and chivalric culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 92452


Sabraham, Nicholas (b. c.1325, d. in or after 1399), soldier, is of unknown origins, but it seems likely that he was a native of Northumberland, where by 1363 he had married Alice, 'nee' Graper, widow of Robert Orde and granddaughter of the merchant-administrator Richard Embleton (d. 1333). His marriage brought Sabraham property in Jesmond, Burradon, and Newcastle. In 1375 he was a feoffee for Gilbert Umfraville, lord of Redesdale and nominally ninth earl of Angus, while in 1376 and 1380 he was one of two burgesses returned to parliament for Newcastle. However, Sabraham's life is known chiefly through his testimony given in the court of chivalry during the famous 'Scrope v. Grosvenor' armorial dispute. Appearing at a hearing in the chapter house of York Minster on 17 September 1386, Sabraham defended the contested right of Richard Scrope, first Baron Scrope of Bolton, to bear the arms 'azure a bend or'. His deposition reads like a potted history of fourteenth-century English military adventure. Aged over sixty in 1386, Sabraham told the court that he had been soldiering for thirty-nine years, and that he remembered members of the Scrope family wearing 'azure a bend or' in a number of different wars. He first beheld the Scrope banner when serving under Edward Balliol in Scotland, probably in 1339; and for a second time in 1343 when he joined a night-time ('by torchlight') raid through Peeblesshire in the company of William de Bohun, first earl of Northampton. He was again with Northampton in August 1346 when, massed in the second battle corps at Crecy, he saw the arms of Sir Henry Scrope (died 1392). A year later Sabraham saw Sir William Scrope (died 1367) at the siege of Calais; and he witnessed other Scropes armed 'azure a bend or' in several further theatres of the Anglo-French war, in Normandy, Brittany, Gascony, and Spain. 
Sabraham's lengthy resume, as well as fortifying Richard Scrope's lawsuit, illustrates the breadth of war service common within the ranks of the professional soldiery, and is firsthand evidence of the so-called remilitarization of the wider English squirearchy. It has been argued that a longer-term shift in the demographics of military service to incorporate ever greater numbers of the lower-ranking nobility contributed much to the martial successes of the period, and helped to stimulate the emergence of the gentry class as a distinct social grouping. Of still greater interest, however, are the perspectives that Sabraham's account opens up on the mores prevailing in chivalric circles. Indeed, though never himself a knight, Sabraham's personal experience of that most knightly vocation of crusade bears testimony to the sharp appetite that persisted in all ranks of armigerous society for the honour of battle with the infidel, as well as attesting the wide range of crusading possibilities open to the determined fourteenth-century soldier. 
Thus in his matter-of-fact deposition Sabraham informed the court that he had been a participant on King Peter of Cyprus's crusading expedition to Alexandria in October 1365, where he remembered seeing Sir Stephen Scrope being knighted by the Cypriot king 'immediately on landing'. He went on to describe how he had been armed 'in Prussia, in Hungary, at Constantinople, at the Bras de St Jorge [Gallipoli], and at Messembria [Nessebar in Bulgaria]' (Nicholas, 1.124-5). At Messembria, where he is likely to have joined the crusade of 1366-7 led by Count Amadeus of Savoy, Sabraham visited a church containing the tomb of a fellow crusader, Sir Henry Scrope (died 1361). Sabraham's dizzying tour of the battlefields of Christendom's frontiers constitutes a remarkable parallel with the literary adventures of that paragon of fourteenth-century English chivalry, the knight in Geoffrey Chaucer's 'Canterbury Tales'; therefore it may not be surprising to learn that Chaucer, like Sabraham, gave evidence in the 'Scrope v. Grosvenor' dispute. It is doubtful whether Chaucer knew Sabraham personally, but the contours of the latter's military career were certainly familiar ones; other deponents in the Scrope case also referred to their experiences on crusade. 
The last years of Sabraham's life are no better documented than the first. From his marriage to Alice he had a daughter, also Alice, who by 1387 had married Walter Lewyn of Newcastle, grandson of the great military architect John Lewyn of Durham. Alice Sabraham died on 24 November 1398, and her inquisition post mortem in the following year referred to her husband in terms suggesting that he was then still alive and living in Northumberland. It is not known when or where he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 92453


Ryvere, Sir John (b. 1313, d. after 1364), landowner and soldier, was born on 24 January 1313, the eldest son of Sir John Ryvere (died 1314) and his wife, Denise (died 1347). The younger John, who was less than two when his father was killed at Bannockburn, inherited estates in Somerset, Buckinghamshire, and, above all, Gloucestershire, where he was lord of the manors of Tormarton and Acton Turville. After attaining his majority in 1333 Ryvere was several times a commissioner to enforce royal statutes in the localities, and was named a keeper of the peace in 1343. He also served the crown as a soldier, his early career taking a course familiar to the coterie of young knights who made up Edward III's circle in the years immediately before the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War. In particular he followed his father in campaigning in Scotland. In 1333 he took part in the long campaign that culminated in the battle of Halidon Hill on 19 July. Two years later he was stationed in the vanguard of the royal host mustered at Carlisle. And in the early months of 1338, by now a knight, he served in Scotland again, probably taking part in the earl of Salisbury's siege of Dunbar Castle. 
Later accounts of his conduct during these wars chronicle Ryvere's reluctance to kill the enemy, or even to inflict the slightest injury. Perhaps it was the brutal nature of war on the Anglo-Scottish borders that subsequently made Sir John resolve to direct his arms to the crusades in the East and the war against the Turks instead of against his fellow Christians. In the meantime he demonstrated his religious devotion closer to home, by founding a chantry at St Mary's Church, Tormarton. An initial foundation, in a chapel built next to the church, was confirmed by Bishop Simon Montagu of Worcester on 11 March 1337, who noted that Sir John intended to endow it more abundantly. This he did, first with lands in Tormarton and then with the advowson of Acton Turville church. Tormarton church, too, became part of the endowment, which in 1346 was valued at 100 marks ($66 13's'. 4died). Ryvere also drew up detailed regulations for his chantry, which was to be manned by a warden, four chaplains, two clerks, and three choristers, and gave particular attention to their vestments. For their further maintenance he gave them oxen, horses, and sheep worth $20. Probably it was to meet these expenses that Sir John resorted to borrowing -- he is recorded as owing $420 in 1337 (duly repaid) and $152 in 1343 -- while in 1344 he sold 1500 wethers to Sir Thomas Berkeley. 
In 1346 Ryvere took up arms again, but not on behalf of the English crown. On 20 June, barely a week before Edward III and his army embarked for France, he was licensed to go to the Holy Land, while on 16 August he received a papal safe conduct 'in fulfilment of a vow for the saving of his soul', to go 'in aid of the faithful against the Turks' ('CEPR letters', 3.128). Probably his intention was to join the Christian naval league then operating out of Smyrna (present-day Izmir, on the west coast of Turkey). Accompanying him were John Noble, priest, and John Wayfor, 'donsel' (a page or squire), two long-serving members of his household. It is not clear whether the party reached Smyrna, but over the next year or so Sir John, at considerable personal risk, began to criss-cross the lands round the eastern Mediterranean in a series of intelligence-gathering missions, travelling deep into the hinterland of Egypt and along the shores of Palestine. Newsletter reports tell how Ryvere spent many months completing a reconnaissance of mameluke palaces, 'inside and out', investigating the material strength of the Egyptian army, and recording the disposition of enemy seaports, towns, villages, and other fortifications. 
Ryvere was one of a clutch of men, usually missionaries or traders, upon whom the papacy relied for up-to-date intelligence concerning the Muslim enemy. He reported his findings in person to the papal court in March 1348. Encouraged by news of economic and political crisis within the Egyptian sultanate, Pope Clement VI recommended that Ryvere's account be published throughout Christendom for use in the next expedition to the Holy Land. The papal letters also report that Ryvere had fought valiantly on the front lines, on land and sea, against both mameluke and Turk, repeatedly raising his war banner in enemy territory. He had also reached Jerusalem, for as a patron of the increasingly popular, though thinly documented, chivalric order of the knights of the Holy Sepulchre, Ryvere had knighted several noble pilgrims at a ceremony in the church for which the order was named. 
Ryvere returned to England in the spring of 1348. Perhaps the cost of his expedition to the East led to financial embarrassment, since he seems to have lost possession of the manor of Tormarton, which is at various times reported in the hands of the Wilingtons and of the bishop of Winchester. The details are obscure, but as the manor eventually reverted to the Ryveres, it may have been used as a surety for Sir John's debts. He was appointed to commissions in 1348 and 1351, but thereafter played little part in public life, and eventually he left it for good. In 1341 he was recorded as married to a woman named Margaret (her surname is unknown). On 15 October 1364, perhaps following Margaret's death, he was licensed to become a Dominican friar in the order's London convent. However, he is not recorded among the house's inmates who took orders, and though it is not known when or where he died, it is possible that Ryvere never left Tormarton, for what is purportedly his tomb lies in the chancel of the church there, with the matrix of a monumental brass upon it. It depicts a man supporting a church or chapel, a device taken to indicate a founder. Probably Sir John had secured the future of his estates before he retired from the world, for although his marriage appears to have been without male issue, it is almost certain that the Sir Henry Ryvere who served as sheriff of Gloucestershire in 1391-2 and 1399-1400, and was a knight of the shire for the county in 1394, was his nephew from a cadet line. 


@@@@@


doc= 92458


Perlin, Etienne (fl. 1553-1558), writer and traveller, is known largely through his observations of Britain in 'Description des royaulmes d'Angleterre et d'Escosse', a brief journal of his travels in those two countries, which he visited in 1553. He claimed to have prominent acquaintances at the French court, stating that he was presented to Henri II by Anne de Montmorency, constable of France, at the Tournelles, and received from the king the promise of a benefice; this encouraged him to continue his studies, though he still appeared to be waiting for his benefice at the time of the 'Description'. He is styled 'Maitre' in its preface, and the 'extrait du privilege' from the original 1558 Paris edition of the book describes him as studying in the medical faculty at the University of Paris. The 'Description' is dedicated to Marguerite de France, then duchesse de Berry, the daughter of Francois I and sister of Henri II, and Perlin explains he wished to honour her thus in acknowledgement of her reputation as a 'lover of letters' ('Description', 4). 
The 'Description' was in fact Perlin's second major work to be dedicated to a member of the French royal family; in its preface he mentions another publication, also produced in 1558, a Latin work of his entitled 'De variis morborum generibus opusculum'. This book, which Perlin describes as 'treating of the human body and of many sorts of maladies' was presented to Henri II by Perlin, and approved for printing by the king himself, to whom Perlin then dedicated it, describing himself as partly moved to write it by the ravages of disease in England. A well-organized but essentially conventional treatise, intended for the instruction of students and beginners, 'De variis' depends very heavily on standard authorities, especially Galen and Hippocrates, though it also cites three times a mysterious 'Tuxiganus', described as Henry VIII's doctor. At the end of the 'Description', Perlin announces his plans for a future work on 'cosmography, and short description of all the world and the divisions thereof' as an aid to the understanding of geometry and future needs for military fortification, but there is no evidence that the volume ever appeared ('Antiquarian Repertory', 520). 
Despite his social aspirations, Perlin remains a shadowy figure, and what little can be said of his personality emerges primarily through the pungent and sometimes amusing commentary contained in his 'Description'. It was published in an English translation in 1775, and a review in the 'Monthly Review' of January-June 1776 observed that the work provided interesting observations, from a fresh perspective, on events during the transition from the reign of Edward VI to that of Mary, when Perlin was in Britain, including descriptions of Edward's death and the attempted usurpation by Jane Grey, Mary's entry into London, and the duke of Northumberland's execution -- the last two he described as an eyewitness. He may have shown his cosmographical interests in the way he places England geographically, setting it among its surrounding seas and estimating its size. In many ways he admired the country, praising its beauty, riches, and abundant resources; he pronounces London 'one of the most beautiful, largest and richest places in the whole world' after Paris, praises the women as great beauties, and records the conditions as generally prosperous. Fish he notes as especially cheap. But though he comments on their love of music, Perlin also condemns the English, as 'neither valiant in war, nor faithful in peace', and the 'common people' as seditious and fickle (Beeverell, 'Pleasures', 58, 60, 61). He expresses outrage that Edward VI should style himself king of France, and continually compares England with France to the former's detriment, deriding the English fondness for drink, condemning their intolerance of the French, and despising them as vain, ambitious, and neglectful of learning in favour of making money. 
Perlin's text alternates between potentially useful social observation, for instance in comparisons of the coinage and of the prices of goods in England and France, and lectures on the superiority of French political and social systems over English ones. The frequency with which noblemen were executed in England, he observes, has no parallel in France. His perceptions of Scotland focus particularly on that country's usefulness as a means of attacking the English, and he claims that France could conquer England easily by using Scotland for access. Perlin's 'Description' is not only valuable as a source for the minor details of mid-sixteenth-century life in England and Scotland; it also adds another, and a different, voice to those describing the great events taking place in Britain at that time. 


@@@@@


doc= 92459


Browne, Felicia Mary (1904-1936), artist and political activist, was born at The Elms, Weston Green, Thames Ditton, Surrey, on 18 February 1904, the third daughter and the fourth of five children of Harold Browne (1875-1924), company director, who worked in his family's advertising agency, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Johnston (1875-1931), an actress. After attending the Kingsley School and the St John's Wood School of Art, she took courses at the Slade School of Fine Art in London between the sessions of 1920-21 and 1927-8, and was awarded the certificate in drawing. She travelled to Berlin in 1928 where she learnt to work in stone and metal and witnessed the rise of Nazism. In 1933, following her return to Britain, she joined the Holborn branch of the Communist Party of Great Britain. She also became involved with the Artists International Association, an influential organization of anti-fascist British artists of which her close friend Elizabeth Watson was the secretary. Until 1936 Browne worked quietly in her studios in Billericay and Bloomsbury and travelled extensively in central Europe (having already visited the USSR in 1931). 
In July 1936 Browne embarked on a driving holiday to France and Spain, accompanied by her friend Dr Edith Bone, a left-wing photographer. Their objective was to reach Barcelona in time for the People's Olympiad (the socialist riposte to the Olympic games in Hitler's Berlin). However, they arrived shortly before the military rebellion against the Spanish republic that heralded the start of the Spanish Civil War (1936-9), and were immediately caught up in the violence that engulfed Barcelona on 19 July 1936. Browne was then left to her own devices by Bone, who began to collaborate closely with the 'Daily Worker' correspondent Claud Cockburn. Determined to stay in Spain, Browne dabbled in journalism and applied unsuccessfully to join both the republican militia and Socorro Rojo (Red Aid). Eventually, on 3 August, she was allowed to join the militia and was sent to Tardienta on the Aragon front. The date of her death in a minor skirmish is uncertain: hardly surprising given the remoteness of the location and the difficulty of communications. The most widely cited date is 25 August 1936, although the only eye-witness account (by her fellow volunteer Georges Brinkman) states 22 August. According to Brinkman, Browne had joined a small raiding party that was intending to blow up a rebel munitions train. The party was itself ambushed and Browne was shot dead while assisting an injured Italian comrade. The exact location of the skirmish, and what happened to her body, are currently unknown. 
Although her work was little known in her lifetime, Felicia Browne gained posthumous fame as the only British woman to play a combatant role, and one of the first of more than 500 British volunteers to die, in the Spanish Civil War. In October 1936 an exhibition of her drawings was organized by the Artists International Association in London. Although primarily intended to raise funds for the republican cause, the exhibition also provided the opportunity for an assessment of her talent and ability as an artist. Among many appreciative comments was one by the artist Duncan Grant, who wrote that she had been 'gradually extracting from her drawing a wonderfully flexible and personal language' (Buchanan, 196). Her sketches of the doomed men and women of the Spanish militia made a profound impression on her contemporaries, and have since been regularly reproduced to illustrate books on the Spanish Civil War. Owing to the nature of her death, Browne has come to epitomize the difficult choices facing all politically conscious artists in responding to the depression and the rise of fascism. In this vein, part of a letter that she wrote to a friend before her departure for Spain has often been quoted as evidence that she sacrificed her artistic career to politics: 'If painting and sculpture were more valid and urgent to me than the earthquake which is happening in the revolution... I should paint and make sculpture' (ibid., 187). However, for all the earnestness of her political beliefs, it should be noted that her service in the militia was something that became possible only when other options closed. Moreover, while in Spain she continued to sketch, producing some of her most striking work, and her final letter from the militia suggests that she was gaining fresh artistic inspiration from the Spanish landscape (ibid., 198). 
A male contemporary at the Slade described Felicia Browne as 'a great talker' and as 'a rather plain dumpy young woman in horn-rimmed spectacles and a black hat' (Buchanan, 182). She was an intense and private person, with a lively sense of humour, and was described by a friend as 'painfully truthful and honest... socially much too gracious to belong credibly to the twentieth century' ('An appreciation'). Like many middle-class radicals of her generation she sought to identify herself with the lives of ordinary working people in both Britain and Europe. (Indeed, shortly before her death she worked in a tea-room and attempted to unionize the staff.) Her political views were outspoken and deeply felt, if at times rather naive. Felicia Browne's artistic career was sadly unfulfilled as, apart from the collection of her sketches published after her death, none of her work has survived in the public domain. 


@@@@@


doc= 92460


Hentzner, Paul (1558-1623), writer and traveller, was born on 29 January 1558 in Krossen, Silesia, now part of southern Poland. His personal life is obscure, but he is said to have trained as a lawyer, and this is in keeping with the title page of his 'Itinerarium Germaniae, Galliae, Angliae, Italiae', which styles him jurisconsult, and a counsellor to Duke Karl of Munsterberg-Ols. This book constitutes his principal claim to fame. A journal of his travels in Germany, France, England, and Italy between 1596 and 1600, it was first published at Nuremberg in 1612; at least two more Latin editions followed, one printed at WrocLaw in 1617 and the other at Nuremberg in 1629. The English portion of his travels was first translated into English by the younger Richard Bentley and published by Horace Walpole from his Strawberry Hill press in October 1757 as 'A Journey into England by Paul Hentzner, in the Year M.D.XC.VIII'. Walpole printed only 220 copies, but the 'London Magazine' and 'Monthly Review' published extracts from it in November and December of the same year, to Walpole's displeasure. It was also reprinted at least four times between 1761 and 1771 in the volume 'Fugitive Pieces on Various Subjects', edited by Robert Dodsley, issued in a combined edition with Robert Naunton's 'Fragmenta regalia' in 1797, and enjoyed several nineteenth- and twentieth-century editions and reprints. 
Hentzner's tour of Europe has been described as his 'journeyman's travels' following the completion of his legal training, and his book as a 'scholarly report'; he is also said to have been the first writer to publish a book detailing a European tour. In his own epistle dedicatory to the 'Itinerarium' Hentzner recommends travel as an excellent way of expanding one's knowledge through personal observation of the world. He set out on his journeys from WrocLaw on 5 May 1596, apparently as a 'travelling tutor' to Christopher Rehdiger, the son of a noble family of Striesa. In 1596 and 1597 they travelled in parts of Germany and Switzerland, wintering first at Strasbourg and then at Geneva, while at the end of 1598 they stayed in Basel. Their choice of these three cities strongly suggests that like many of his compatriots Hentzner was protestant in religion, though he makes no declaration on the point in his book. In May 1598 he and his pupil left Geneva for France. Their companions during the journeys that followed included David Stzrela, described by Hentzner as 'the noble Bohemian', and his tutor, Tobias Salander, a 'doctor of physic' (Hentzner, 'Journey', 36, 97). At the end of their stay in England Stzrela fell ill at Gravesend, and subsequently died 'of a violent fever in London', as Salander informed Hentzner (ibid., 97). 
Hentzner and his company made an extended tour through France that lasted for over three months, and it was only on 28 August that they crossed the channel from Dieppe to Rye; Hentzner was seasick during the voyage. At some point after their landing they met up with Vilem Slavata, a member of an ancient Bohemian family, who later made a more lasting mark on the historical record as one of the imperial ministers thrown from a window in the 'defenestration of Prague' of 1618. He was carrying letters for Queen Elizabeth which he presented to her at Greenwich, and Hentzner noted that she removed her glove and gave Slavata her bejewelled right hand to kiss, 'a mark of particular favour' (Hentzner, 'Journey', 50). Hentzner's description of the ageing Elizabeth has become famous: 'very majestic; her face oblong, fair, but wrinkled; her eyes small, yet black and pleasant; her nose a little hooked; her lips narrow, and her teeth black;... her hands were small, her fingers long, and her stature neither tall nor low; her air was stately, her manner of speaking mild and obliging. (ibid., 48-9)' He also details the ceremony surrounding the queen, for instance the retinue accompanying her to prayers, the ritual preparation of her table, and the obeisance given to her chair by her attendants even when it was empty. Like other foreign visitors to England, he was struck by the reverence shown to Elizabeth, observing that 'wherever she turned her face, as she was going along, every body fell down on their knees', and says that people spoke to her from their knees, unless she raised them with her hand (ibid., 50). Horace Walpole was enchanted by Hentzner's account of the queen, declaring that 'her best portraits scarcely exhibit a more lively image' (ibid., i). 
Hentzner's account of his English travels during August and September 1598 combines several features, being in part a history lesson, in part a geographical and topographical sketch, and in part a guidebook. His section on London includes information about the founding and naming of the city, the course and tidal nature of the Thames, and descriptions of sights like London Bridge, where he and his companions counted the heads displayed on iron spikes -- there were more than thirty -- and the wooden theatres just outside the city walls. He devotes considerable space to the tombs in St Paul's Cathedral and Westminster Abbey, though his faulty transcriptions of their inscriptions make him in this respect an unreliable source. He carefully catalogues the items of interest in the royal residences of Whitehall, Hampton Court, Windsor, and the Tower, but also comments on social customs, like the ceremonies associated with the lord mayor's office, and the revels that accompanied the bringing in of the harvest near Windsor. Hentzner names each city through which his party travelled, adding commentary for notable towns like Oxford and Cambridge, where he recorded the founders and dates of foundation of each college, and the style of student life -- almost monastic, he thought. He commented that they could not see the private apartments at Theobalds, Lord Burghley's great mansion, 'as the family was in town attending the funeral of their lord' (he had died on 4 August), but they were given a tour of the elegant gardens, which included a summer house containing statues of 'the twelve Roman emperors in white marble' (Hentzner, 'Journey', 54-5). Hentzner was also interested in the smaller details of English life: it was in the Hertfordshire town of Puckeridge that he and his companions first 'observed that the beds at inns were made by the waiters' (ibid., 55), while at Ampthill he was impressed by the enormous number of rabbits to be seen. Overall Hentzner's descriptions of the English are idiosynscratic, but intriguing: 'they are good sailors and better pirates... more polite in eating than the French, devouring less bread, but more meat, which they roast in perfection... powerful in the field, successful against their enemies, impatient of anything like slavery; vastly fond of great noises that fill the ear. (ibid., 88-9)'.Hentzner consulted, and borrowed from, several sources to compose his travelogue, sometimes without acknowledgement. Clearly well read in classical authors, both Latin and Greek, he also makes direct reference to the writings of Paulus Jovius, Polydore Vergil, and Abraham Ortelius, and regularly directs the reader to Camden's 'Britannia', first published in 1586. Some later commentators have made fun of his renderings of English place names, Puckeridge as 'Bockritsch' for instance, or Ampthill as 'Amtheil', and have drawn attention to his factual errors, like his dating the death of Lady Margaret Beaufort to 1463 instead of 1509. But despite these failings, Hentzner's simple commentary on the manners, pastimes, and rituals he observed at first hand remains a popular source for commentary on everything from the trumpets and kettledrums used to accompany the setting of Queen Elizabeth's table, to the smoking habits of Londoners, the strength of English beer, and even the hairstyles of late sixteenth-century Englishmen. 
Hentzner's evident enjoyment of his experiences abroad gives charm and colour to his writing, and makes his travel book an interesting counterbalance to the more acerbic commentary provided by some other writers. Horace Walpole, who did so much to draw attention to the interest and value of Hentzner's 'Itinerarium', engagingly described him as a man with a 'laborious, and indiscriminate passion for SEEING', as well as one who 'enjoyed as much the doubtful head, of a more doubtful saint in pickle, as any upon the shoulders of the best Grecian statue' (Hentzner, 'Journey', iii-iv). 
Hentzner died on 1 January 1623. 


@@@@@


doc= 92462


Brooke, Frances, Lady Cobham (b. after 1530, d. 1592), courtier, was the daughter of Sir John Newton (died 1568) of Hanham, Gloucestershire, and his first wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir Anthony Poyntz. She was appointed a chamberer of the privy chamber in the initial warrant of 3 January 1559, but how her connection with Elizabeth I was formed is unknown, unless it was through her cousin Anne Poyntz, who was a member of Elizabeth's household in the 1550s. On 25 February 1560 Frances married the recently widowed William Brooke, tenth Baron Cobham (1527-1597). She, her husband, her sister Joanna, and her six children feature in one of the best-known Elizabethan group portraits, 'The Cobham Family' (1567), now at Longleat House. A later version adds her son George Brooke (the Bye plot conspirator), who was born in 1568. In July 1565 she was described as mistress of the robes and by 1589 she was a lady of the bedchamber, though still at her original chamberer's salary of $20. She appears to have been one of the most politically active of the gentlewomen and temporarily lost her place, a rare occurrence in the reign. This occurred in 1572, and was undoubtedly related to her husband's temporary disgrace over the Ridolfi plot. In 1574 she was restored and her back pay credited. The earl of Leicester reported on 9 June, 'My La. Cobham I thank God ys growen into very good favour and lyking ageyn & I think very shortly shall be in her old place as her majestie hath of late fully promysed' (Paget papers, X, art. 10). 
Frances Brooke was variously described as a supporter of the queen's marriage to the Archduke Charles in 1565 and an opponent of the Anjou marriage in 1571. In March 1586, after her husband became a privy councillor, Thomas Morgan, the agent of Mary, queen of Scots, advised contacting her, as she 'beareth a great stroke over her husband' ('Salisbury MSS', 3.137), but he also advised wariness in view of her old friendship with Bess of Hardwick, countess of Shrewsbury, the wife of Mary's former guardian who had become a notorious enemy of hers several years previously. That friendship is confirmed in a letter dated only 21 October that Frances wrote to the countess ('her i love dearlye and most desyr to see') while doing some needlework for the queen during one of her pregnancies during the late 1560s (Folger, Talbot MS X.d. 428[16], quoted in Arnold, 96). The epithet 'whom never woman loved nor would love besides herself' (Strong, 1.131), may be unkind, but her portrait reveals a sharp-featured woman. Frances's closeness to the queen certainly did her family no harm. The marriage in 1579 of her nephew Sir Henry Newton ('c'.1531-1599) to Katherine Paston, a waged gentlewoman of the privy chamber, from 27 July 1577, probably reflected her influence. In January 1569, thanks to her intercession, Elizabeth recommended her brother Francis Newton (dean of Winchester, 1565-72) for the prebend at Canterbury left vacant by the death of their brother Theodore Newton ['see under 'Newton, Francis] in 1569, but the benefice had already been granted elsewhere. Her daughter Elizabeth entered the privy chamber (though without wages) in the 1580s and married Robert Cecil, the only son of Lord Treasurer Burghley, on 31 August 1589. This was the high point of a close relationship with the Cecils; Frances had earlier been chief mourner at the funeral of Burghley's daughter Anne, countess of Oxford, in 1588, and a principal mourner in that of Lady Burghley in 1589. On the other hand her relations with Leicester were no less warm, and her adolescent son 'lame George' was a member of the earl's household between 1584 and 1588. Frances died on 17 October 1592, predeceasing her husband, and was buried at Cobham. 


@@@@@


doc= 92463


Wedel, Lupold von (1544-1615), traveller and writer, was the son of Kurt von Wedel (died 1552), a Pomeranian knight, and his wife, Anna Borcke (died 'c'.1573). He was born on 25 January 1544 on the manor of Kremzow (now in Poland), and had at least one brother, Busso, and a sister, Benigna; the sources differ as to whether Lupold or Busso was the elder son. Their father died in 1552, and upon attaining his majority in 1565 Wedel received as his inheritance the Kremzow estate, which remained his chief residence for the rest of his life. He is said to have been sent to school at the age of eight, but efforts to interest him in scholarship appear to have proved fruitless, as he remained in the school for only one year. It may be hindsight that attributes his abortive educational career to restlessness, but certainly between the ages of seventeen and fifty-one his life alternated between periods spent at Kremzow and journeyings as a courtier, soldier, pilgrim, or invalid. As a young man he attended the wedding of William of Orange in Dresden, travelled in Germany in the train of Count Volrad von Mannsfeld, and joined the army which Duke Johann Friedrich of Pomerania-Stettin led against the Turks; his brother Busso is said to have died on this campaign, 'c'.1566. After his return home, Lupold remained there until his mother's death 'c'.1573, and then resumed his travels. During more than twenty years he fought in the French wars of religion, went as a pilgrim to Jerusalem and from there wandered to Cairo, and journeyed in Prussia, Spain, Portugal, England, and Scotland. His last journal entry chronicles his stay at the spa town of Kissingen, where he took the healing waters, perhaps a necessity after his rugged life. 
Wedel made copious observations of the people, towns, and sights of the various countries in which he travelled, and also of the military expeditions in which he served; these survive in the form of a journal of more than 700 folio pages. Comments in the journal reveal that he also produced an illustrated book of manners, which has been lost. On 17 August 1584 he came to England, and his journal of his visit, which also took in Scotland, provides a compelling view of late sixteenth-century Britain, combining topographical, geographical, and historical observations with detailed descriptions of cities, people, great events, and wondrous sights. Wedel twice refers to himself as accompanied by an interpreter, and this, combined with his garblings of place names and his laboured attempts at reporting direct speech -- as when he describes Queen Elizabeth calling out 'Gott seve mi pippel' to bystanders ('Journey', 256) -- suggests that he had difficulties with the language. But this did not hinder his curiosity, and he comments on everything, from the varieties of Southwark entertainments to the glories of the procession which accompanied the lord mayor of London at his inauguration, along with such oddities as a cow with six legs, and the embalmed corpse of Queen Catherine of Valois, lying in melancholy state in Westminster Abbey (where he sat on the coronation chair) -- she reminded him of the embalmed corpses he saw in Egypt. While in London he also attended a bear-baiting, examined two Native Americans brought to England by Sir Walter Ralegh, and observed the workings of the Royal Mint. 
Wedel was greatly interested in courts and rulers. He visited the royal palaces of Whitehall, Hampton Court, and Greenwich, and watched Queen Elizabeth admiringly at all three of them: 'sitting all alone in her coach [she] appeared like a goddess such as painters are wont to depict' (Klarwill, 329). He was particularly struck by the magnificence of the post-Christmas revels at Greenwich, with their music and dancing. Overall he thought England was wealthy and fertile, so much so that 'Many a yeoman here keeps greater state and a more opulent table than the nobles in Germany' (ibid., 342). Scotland, however, he seems to have found comparatively drab. As he passed through Northumberland early in September he noted that the crops were still standing in the fields, though near London they were already harvested. Having crossed the border at Berwick, he made his way to Edinburgh, and was able to observe James VI at Sunday worship, without being greatly impressed by either the king or his entourage -- 'The court does not show much royal splendour' ('Journey', 245). The Scots were less impoverished than they looked, he thought, but he was clearly disappointed that they 'show no splendour in garments, but are clothed in a very plain way' (ibid., 248). The 'maiden', the guillotine used to decapitate the earl of Morton, seems to have interested him as much as anything he saw in Scotland. 
Wedel left Scotland on 2 October 1584, and returned to London via York -- where he admired the minster -- and Cambridge. He finally left England on 30 April 1585. About 1595 he married Anna, daughter of Valentin von Eickstedt, chancellor of Pomerania from 1558. The marriage is said to have produced five sons and four daughters; he also had illegitimate children from earlier relationships. Wedel died in June 1615 at Kremzow, and was buried there on either 13 or 15 July. The character given him by his biographers depicts a man thoughtless and quarrelsome but not vicious, one whose wanderlust had overcome his familial feelings. Wedel's accounts of circumstances are not always perfectly accurate; he claims that in 1584 Elizabeth had ruled for twenty-six years without convening parliament, his account of William Parry's conspiracy to assassinate Queen Elizabeth early in 1585 contains several errors, and he freely retails court gossip along with detailed observation. But his eye alike for the rich panorama and for small but telling details have provided social and cultural historians with intriguing insights into English and Scottish life in the 1580s. His journal was published in 1895 as 'Lupold von Wedels Beschreibung seiner Reisen und Kriegserlebnisse, 1561-1606'. English translations of the portions describing his visit to Britain appeared in 1895 and 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 92465


Blanc, (Jean Joseph) Louis (1811-1882), political thinker and exile, was born on 29 October 1811 in Madrid, where his father, Jean Charles Blanc, was a financial official in the Bonapartist government of Spain. His mother, Estella Pozzo di Borgo, was Corsican. Owing to his father's financial and psychological difficulties he was mostly brought up by his maternal grandmother in Corsica. Along with his younger brother Charles (later to become a successful art critic) he attended the royal College de Rodez from 1821 until 1830, where the teachers, who were clergymen, inculcated in students Catholic and legitimist values. The two inseparable brothers finished school and headed for Paris on the eve of the July revolution of 1830, and arrived in its immediate aftermath. 
During the July monarchy Louis Blanc became a journalist, a historian, and a major spokesman for French socialism. His 'Organisation du travail' (1840) contributed a powerful critique of the poverty and degradation that he saw as the results of individualism and economic competition. The book's proposed remedy was the creation of 'social workshops' sponsored by the state to replace capitalist competition and extinguish poverty. His 'Histoire de dix ans, 1830-40' (1841-4) was a scathing polemic attacking every aspect of the bourgeoisie-oriented Orleanist regime. After that regime had been overthrown by the revolution of February 1848, Blanc became a member of the provisional government of the second republic, between February and May 1848. Because of his socialist ideas and his insistence that the 'right to work' be proclaimed by the provisional government, Blanc came to be held responsible for the 'national workshops' created by the provisional government and which were dissolved when they had proved to be an open-ended drain on public finances. Blanc was (clearly unfairly) indicted by the moderates in the assembly who accused him of having instigated the invasion of the city hall by a mob on 15 May 1848. When, in August 1848, his parliamentary immunity was lifted, and he faced imprisonment, he escaped via Belgium to England. 
Blanc remained an exile in England from August 1848 until September 1870, living until 1866 in London (mainly in St John's Wood). In England he found -- and appreciated -- a country that offered him a safe refuge and freedom of speech. However, he had to defend his record against articles in the British press (not least in 'The Times') which misrepresented his role in 1848. At the same time, he was extremely popular with British labour circles, not least the Chartists. Like other exiles, he had to support himself by writing and he had to turn to public speaking on politically innocuous subjects under the sponsorship of the likes of the Marylebone Literary and Scientific Institute as a source of livelihood. It was in Britain that Blanc wrote the bulk of his major historical work, the twelve-volume 'Histoire de la revolution francaise', for which he gathered material in the library of the British Museum. 
Blanc belonged to the wider community of French and other continental political exiles in Britain. As well as the French intellectuals and political activists such as Ledru-Rollin, Victor Hugo, and Blanc himself, London attracted the leading figures of revolutionary Europe, Joseph Mazzini, Karl Marx, Alexander Herzen, and Louis Kossuth among them. Blanc had contacts and dealings with most of them (except the 'difficult' Marx) in various phases. Within the French emigre community he found himself in opposition to Ledru-Rollin in a confrontation between socialist and radical positions represented by each of them respectively. He was on hostile terms with Mazzini but had a warm friendship with the Russian exile Alexander Herzen, his favourite chess rival for many years, despite political disagreements (Herzen, 453-5, 475, n. 10). Held in high personal regard by several British thinkers and men of letters who did not necessarily share his views, Blanc was admitted to the social world of the Victorian intelligentsia and of London society. Even Carlyle had great affection for him, while John Stuart Mill always liked and supported Blanc, despite his reservations about some of Blanc's practical views (Mill, 13.740). 
Blanc developed a fruitful relationship with the country that hosted him. His articles as London correspondent for 'Le Temps' from 1861 represent an interesting record of his views on his adopted home. Before his exile, in the 1840s, he had displayed a strong Anglophobia. Characteristically, one of the chapters of his 'Organisation du travail' (1840) was entitled 'Competition leads necessarily to a war to the death between France and England'. No less characteristically, once in England he omitted this chapter from the 1850 edition of the book. Many of his articles on British foreign policy retained a critical tone, written from a French patriot's perspective, and he continued to distrust commercial, philistine, and perfidious Albion. But he would now preface any criticism in articles sent for publication in France with statements like: 'I have already had occasion to tell you how keen are my sympathies for England, where the reign of freedom of thought wears such an imposing aspect' (Blanc, 'Letters on England', 1.53). The combination of his unpleasant experiences at the hands of the majority of the assembly in the summer of 1848 and the experience of living in England deeply affected his outlook. He demonstrated a profound appreciation of the importance of freedom of speech. Formerly a supporter of absolute sovereignty, he became a vociferous champion of the rights of minorities. When Mill introduced him to the merits of proportional representation and Thomas Hare's plan for implementing proportional representation in practice, Blanc became one of the staunchest supporters of both (see, for example, 'Letters on England', 2.217-23). 
On 23 October 1865 Blanc married at Brighton register office his landlady's niece, Christina Groh (1824/5-1876), daughter of Simon Groh. His German wife reportedly 'could not speak French well enough to satisfy Louis's academic purism, and he did not speak German. So at home they conversed in English' (Harrison, 2.44-5). John Morley adds that Louis spoke English 'with as much ease as myself' (Morley, 1.82-3). In 1866 his wife's health problems forced them to move to Brighton, where they lived until 1870. 
When, in the summer of 1870, the Franco-Prussian War broke out, Blanc's patriotism reached a peak of intensity. On hearing of the emperor's defeat at Sedan on 4 September 1870 he immediately embarked for France, and arrived in Paris late next day. He enlisted in the national guard and, despite his age, participated in military drills. He became a deputy on the extreme left in the national assembly between 1871 and 1876. He died in Cannes on 6 December 1882, and was buried on the 10th in Pere Lachaise cemetery in Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 92468


Anstey, Richard of (c.1137-1194/5), litigant, was the son of Hubert The squire ('armiger'), the chamberlain of Matilda, countess of Boulogne (King Stephen's queen), and of his wife, Agnes, daughter of Richard de Sackville. Hubert held lands of the honour of Boulogne at Bendish (in Radwinter) and at Tey in Essex, and at Berkesden (in Aspenden) in Hertfordshire. He acquired the Essex manors of Ridgwell and Little Yeldham, which belonged to the same honour, from William son of Ingram de Mustroil, and may also have acquired the manors of Great Anstey in Hertfordshire and Nutfield in Surrey, which were later in his son's possession, and which also belonged to the honour of Boulogne. Richard and his younger brother John are both mentioned as consenting with their mother to a grant made by their father, Hubert, of part of the land at Braughing in Hertfordshire that had been given to Hubert in exchange for land at Bendish. That grant cannot be later than 1147, and establishes that by then both were alive. Richard was probably of age when he began the celebrated 'Anstey case' late in 1158. That suggests that he was probably then aged over twenty-one. If so, he must have been born no later than 1137, and possibly a little earlier than that. But he is not mentioned in a grant made by Hubert as the queen's chamberlain (and thus after 1135) that is witnessed by Agnes, but by none of their children. This indicates that he may not yet have been born when it was made. Richard also had a sister Maud, who is mentioned as consenting with her brothers and Agnes to a grant of tithes and other property to Aldgate Priory by Hubert. 
Richard of Anstey has become well known to historians from being the claimant in the 'Anstey case', perhaps the best documented piece of English litigation for any period before 1200. Richard was claiming the whole of the inheritance of his maternal uncle, William de Sackville, against William's daughter Mabel, who by the time the case was brought had become the wife of Richard de Francheville. William had died about 1149, and Richard was later to allege that before his death William had 'instituted' Richard as his heir. This may mean that he had formally acknowledged him as his lawful heir. William evidently possessed lands in France as well as in England, and initially Mabel succeeded in asserting her right to her father's French lands in the court of Thibaud, count of Blois (died 1152). She may then also have taken possession of his lands in England. These included seven Essex demesne manors, the Hertfordshire manor of Little Anstey, the Suffolk manor of Wenham, and the overlordship over ten and a half knights' fees, mainly in Essex but also in Hertfordshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk. Richard initiated his litigation against his cousin claiming the Sackville inheritance in England in late November 1158. The basis of his claim was that Mabel was illegitimate since she was the daughter of a marriage that had been annulled by the papal legate Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester, on the grounds of William's pre-contract with Albreda de Tregoze ('c'.1139), and that in the absence of legitimate issue he was William's closest heir. The case started in the court of Richard de Lucy (of whom part of the land was held, but probably here acting as royal justiciar), and when the question of Mabel's legitimacy was raised it was removed into the court of the archbishop of Canterbury. From there in 1161 it went on appeal to Pope Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81), who appointed judges delegate to determine the matter in England. However, an appeal was made from them back to the pope, and the question of Mabel's legitimacy was eventually determined in Richard's favour in Rome. With this question settled, the suit resumed in the secular courts, and judgment was eventually given at Westminster in the presence of Henry II in the summer of 1163, awarding the inheritance to Richard. 
Our knowledge of what happened in the case and just how much Richard had paid out over the course of the five years to secure his uncle's legacy comes from a detailed account (now TNA: PRO, E 101/505/1) drawn up some four years later. It records a total outlay of $344 7's'. 4died, a substantial figure inflated both by the costs of numerous journeys, abroad as well as in England -- Anstey himself went to south-west France in pursuit of King Henry, while his agents travelled to Normandy, Tours, and Rome -- and by the interest, amounting to over $53, that he was obliged to pay on necessary loans. Modern understanding of the case is also aided by a helpful summary of what had been alleged by the parties in the litigation in the archbishop's court in a letter drawn up by John of Salisbury in the name of Archbishop Theobald for transmission to the pope. It survives in the collection of John's letters. But our knowledge of what was at stake in the litigation comes only from a case brought almost a century later (in 1244-6), which cites a final concord made during the reign of Richard I between Richard's son Hubert and Ralph Gernun and which settled Ralph's claim to a rightful share in the Sackville inheritance. This reveals what nothing in the earlier documentation even hints at: that Richard's mother, Agnes, was not the only daughter of Richard de Sackville, but the elder of two daughters. Ralph's mother, Hodierna, was the younger daughter. It was only in Richard's reign, and after the death of Richard of Anstey, that her descendant succeeded in asserting a claim to a half share in that inheritance. 
Richard of Anstey probably lived in the castle at Great Anstey, which is thought to have been erected before his time and continued in the thirteenth century to form the centre of the family's landholdings. He was still alive in the autumn of 1194, but had been dead for at least half a year by the following autumn. His eldest son, William, had died before him, childless. He was therefore succeeded by his second son, Hubert, who himself lived only to 1210. Hubert's long-lived granddaughter Denise was the wife of Warin de Munchensi. Richard also had one unnamed daughter, whom Henry II gave in marriage to Adam of Sanford in 1174-5. 


@@@@@


doc= 92469


Bernard, Simon Francis (1817-1862), revolutionary, was born in rue des Etudes, carre des Penitents Blancs, in Carcassonne, Aude, France, on 28 January 1817, the third son of Pierre Bernard ('b'. 1770/71), language teacher, and his wife, Gabrielle Rousseau. After some medical training he became a navy surgeon and in 1838 he took part in the expedition to Veracruz, Mexico. Back in France he was, from 1842, a journalist with such democratic newspapers as 'L'Independant des Pyrenees-Orientales' in Perpignan (1847-8), and was also a socialist lecturer, promoting Fourierist views. Soon after the February 1848 revolution, he was appointed 'inspecteur general de l'economie'. In April 1848 he organized a republican demonstration in Barcelona, was arrested and gaoled in Montjuich prison, and it seems was then released (and expelled to France) with the intervention of the French consul. He then arrived in Paris. Nicknamed Bernard le Clubiste, he founded the Club Bonne-Nouvelle, where his remarkable oratorical skills enabled him to 'fanaticise the masses', a hostile observer noted (Lucas, 53). He was increasingly at odds with the political regime and, when he left France in May 1849, eight prosecutions had supposedly been instituted against him, including two gaol sentences in January 1849 for 'political misdemeanour' (Cordillot). He first went to Belgium, where he was tried, acquitted, and expelled, and then to Cologne, where he was expelled again; in December 1853, a brief visit to Germany also led to his expulsion, from Dresden. 
For most of the period from 1851 to 1862 Bernard lived in London, which had become the European centre of political exile. Styled Dr Bernard, he used his medical knowledge to practise as a physician at 40 Regent Circus, Piccadilly, where he lived until 1853. His medical training proved too limited so, like many French refugees, he became a teacher of languages, living for several years at 10 Park Street, Bayswater. But his main occupation was that of a 'conspirer', as he described himself. Unmarried and with no known children, he was active among the political refugees of the capital. With his 'large massive face', 'bright, black eyes' (Lancet, 2), and moustache, he impressed those who met him by his determination, his boldness, and his fearlessness of prison and death. Politically a revolutionary 'democrate socialiste', he did not belong to a particular tendency, though he was close to the Commune Revolutionnaire. Other French 'red republicans', Felix Pyat, Alfred Talandier, and Francois Desire Le Blanc, were among his friends, as well as the British radicals George Jacob Holyoake and Charles Bradlaugh, and the Italian refugee Felice Orsini. 
On 14 January 1858 Orsini and three other Italians tried to assassinate Napoleon III in Paris by throwing grenades at the emperor's carriage. The 'attentat' failed to injure the imperial couple, but killed and wounded others. The four Italians were sentenced on 25 February and Orsini and Pieri were guillotined in Paris on 13 March. The French regime had long complained to the British government about the latter's lenient policy to the refugees. When it became clear that the attack had been planned in England, the grenades having been manufactured in Birmingham, French pressure on Palmerston's government mounted -- threatening addresses from the French colonels were published in the official paper 'Le Moniteur'. The cabinet's first response was to introduce a 'Conspiracy to Murder Bill'. Designed to clarify the law rather than extend it, the bill aimed to respond to French discontent, but was vulnerable to the charge that the government was altering English law to appease a foreign power. After a wave of radical protests, the bill failed in the House of Commons on 19 February 1858, and Palmerston resigned the next day. 
The second response from the British authorities to the Orsini plot was to arrest Simon Bernard on 14 February. Lord Derby's government decided to bring an indictment against him as an accessory to the murder of the guards who died in Paris, for which punishment was death. Over $5000 was spent to procure seventy-three witnesses to testify against Bernard, another of the accomplices, the writer Thomas Allsop, having fled to America. The trial began at the central criminal court on 12 April 1858, before the lord chief justice, Lord Campbell, the prosecution being led by Sir Fitzroy Kelly, the attorney-general. Although he refused to plead, Bernard appealed to English national sentiment, choosing to be judged by an all-English jury, whereas as a non-national he enjoyed the option of a jury half-composed of foreigners. His counsel, Edwin James, based his defence on the patriotic argument that the jury should throw out a political prosecution brought at the behest of a foreign despot: 'Tell [the French emperor] that the Jury-box is the sanctuary of liberty... Tell him that, though 600,000 French bayonets glittered before you, though the roar of French cannon thundered in your ears, you will return a verdict which your own breasts and consciences will sanctify and approve. ('Annual Register', 326-7)' The jury were evidently swayed by these sentiments: in the face of the evidence (the only doubt being whether Bernard could be proved to have been aware that the grenades he handed to Orsini were intended for the 'attentat'), and despite a summing-up by Lord Campbell in favour of a conviction, Bernard was acquitted, amid tumultuous scenes, on 17 April 1858. Further charges against him were dropped, and he was released. Although Bernard's exact part in the 14 January 'attentat' cannot easily be assessed, it is clear that he had been one of the organizers. As well as supplying Orsini with the grenades that were used, he had also sent pistols and money. He acknowledged, 'I have conspired... and I will ever conspire, against those who have destroyed liberty. It is the sacred duty of every man; but never -- never would I be a murderer!' ('Reynolds's Newspaper', 25 April 1858). 
Bernard's acquittal had far-reaching consequences. Its immediate effect was to cause another prosecution intended as a gesture to the French authorities, against two publishers of pamphlets justifying tyrannicide, to be dropped. For nearly a generation, the memory of the failed prosecution inhibited the British authorities from attempting to strengthen, or even to enforce, English law against political refugees at the request of foreign governments (Porter, 199). 
Following his release Bernard continued to be involved in politics. In common with other French refugees he was a freemason, a member of the 'loge des Philadelphes', which was not admitted to the official English lodge because of its atheism. In 1862 he became mentally disturbed. By one account, a renegade was sent to beguile him and, not realizing that she was a spy, he spoke to her of his friends, causing them to be captured and shot by the foreign authorities. When he realized the consequence of his unguarded talk, he was said to have 'lost his reason' (Holyoake, 2.34). He had 'hallucinations', according to Marx, who knew him, and was confined at Brooke House lunatic asylum, Upper Clapton, London, where he died on 25 November 1862. He was buried at Kilburn cemetery. His funeral on 30 November was attended by some 800 people, including a significant part of London's political refugee population. Talandier, Bradlaugh, Pyat, Holyoake, and the freemason Gustave Jourdain were among the speakers; those who attended included Michael Bakunin and Alexander Herzen. 


@@@@@


doc= 92472


Marie-Amelie Therese (1782-1866), queen of the French and exile, was born at Caserta, near Naples, on 26 April 1782, the daughter of Ferdinand IV (1751-1825), king of Naples and Sicily, and his wife, Maria Carolina (1752-1814), daughter of Maria Theresa, Holy Roman empress. A pious Catholic, she was in temperament more of a dour Habsburg than a passionate Sicilian. 
Marie-Amelie's family lived through difficult times in Napoleonic Italy. In June 1808 the duke of Orleans, Louis-Philippe (1773-1850), whose father as Philippe-Egalite had voted for the death of his cousin, Louis XVI, visited Palermo. He was attracted to Marie-Amelie, but, himself an exile from France since 1792 and a pensioner of the British government, at first did not think he had anything to offer her. They married in Naples on 25 November 1809. The couple returned to France in April 1814, to retreat again into exile a year later during Napoleon's hundred days. 
At the second restoration in 1815 the Orleans re-established themselves in the family home, the Palais Royal, and restored it to its former glory. It was an unusual royal palace, being a highly commercial establishment. Louis-Philippe's father had originally turned a large section of the buildings into fashionable shops, theatres, and cafes. Louis-Philippe continued the tradition. He quickly resurrected the family fortunes, aided by his wife's careful management, to become the richest man in France, before he became the biggest recipient of compensation paid to emigres in 1825. The duke and duchess of Orleans were ostentatiously the most loyal supporters of the restored monarchy, always at Charles X's side on public occasions, as befitted a couple who, until the birth of the duke of Bordeaux, six months after the assassination of the duke of Berry in 1820, stood to inherit the throne. The Orleans effectively held a rival court, egged on by liberal opponents of the Bourbons, and towards 1830 a substantial 'reversionary' interest developed in the press. 
In August 1830 Marie-Amelie became a very reluctant queen of the French people, having initially tried to encourage her husband to serve as regent for the duke of Bordeaux, regarded by legitimists as Henri V following the abdication of his grandfather Charles X. She was appalled by the revolution of that year, describing the bench in the gardens at Neuilly (their country house) where Thiers persuaded her husband to accept the throne as 'the tomb of my happiness'. She devoted herself to her five sons and three daughters. Louis-Philippe worked hard to marry them into other royal families, while Marie-Amelie, a puritanical spirit, concentrated on hushing up her sons' sexual exploits. She organized her daughters and daughters-in-law in nightly sewing sessions at a round table, with a special drawer for each lady. At least one chafed at this communal domesticity. 
Marie-Amelie was devoted to charitable endeavours. She had no sense of politics, and Louis-Philippe turned to his sister, Madame Adelaide, for advice on public matters. It was she who urged him to accept the throne. Marie-Amelie was always very dignified and calm in public, but had to endure several assassination attempts on her husband. The royal couple launched modern monarchy, living a very accessible 'bourgeois' existence. Unnecessary formality and uniforms at court were abandoned. Their sons went to the Lycee Henri IV. They took a genuine interest in modernity. Marie-Amelie opened the first railway in France in 1837, from Paris to St Germain-en-Laye. To encourage people to meet them, they travelled around the country with their family, first in a large carriage, later by rail. They took advantage of rail and steam ships to inaugurate royal visits with Queen Victoria. All this must have been achieved by Marie-Amelie out of devotion to her husband and with considerable effort. She was naturally withdrawn and also more comfortable with traditional monarchical distance and formality than her husband. 
When political upheaval hit Paris again on 23 February 1848, Marie-Amelie urged her husband to resist. Along with their youngest son, Montpensier, she advised him to dismiss the Guizot government, and next day she pressed them to appear in public and review the national guard, units of which were in revolt. She kept her courage, but Louis-Philippe had lost his and agreed, to his wife's anger, to abdicate. 'You are ungrateful, you do not deserve such a good king', she flung at Thiers, as they left for St Cloud (Mansel, 403). Without the time to take money, papers, or outdoor clothes they raced for the channel, sailing from Dieppe to Newhaven as Mr and Mrs Smith, where they arrived on 3 March 1848. 
Most of their family joined them, including Montpensier and his pregnant wife. Louis-Philippe spoke fluent English. He had lived at Highshot House, Twickenham, between 1800 and 1807, and the family settled at Claremont House, near Esher, Surrey, which Queen Victoria had made available to their daughter Louise-Marie (1812-1850) and her husband, Leopold I, king of the Belgians, and which the latter couple rarely used. The Orleans were transformed into the count and countess of Neuilly. 'The Times' commented on 'the plain and unostentatious manner in which the household of the illustrious exiles is ordered, the most rigid economy being observed in all its arrangements' (3 April 1848, 3). The family, including the duke of Nemours, the duke of Aumale, and the prince and princess of Joinville, visited Queen Victoria on 2 April 1848, shortly after their arrival, but otherwise they lived quietly within the family circle. Louis-Philippe's health failed rapidly. When their grandson and heir, Louis Philippe Albert d'Orleans, count of Paris, received his first communion, Louis-Philippe decided to join the Roman Catholic church, which must have been some consolation to his wife. 
After her husband's death at Claremont on 26 August 1850 Marie-Amelie tried to reconcile the Bourbon and Orleans families. She also resumed active charitable work, helping convents, orphanages, and Roman Catholic schools. She also helped individual poor Catholics, usually Irish. She travelled in Europe, but made Claremont the focus for frequent family reunions. The duchess of Orleans, despite her dislike of England, settled near her. On the death in 1865 of her son-in-law, Leopold, king of the Belgians, widower of her daughter, Claremont House reverted to the crown but Victoria reassured Marie-Amelie that she could remain there. She died at Claremont on 24 March 1866; Victoria visited Claremont on the following day, 'pour embrasser un dernier fois mon amie' (Trognon, 472). Clothed in the black gown which she wore when fleeing France in 1848, Marie-Amelie was buried in the vaults of the Roman Catholic chapel at Weybridge, Surrey, in a tomb next to her husband. In June 1876 their remains were reinterred in the family burial ground at Dreux (Eure-et-Loir). 
Both in France and England, Marie-Amelie was a shadow. Her granddaughter commented, 'De quelle femme, fut-elle reine, a-t-on autant vante les qualites d'epouse et de mere, tous les jugements des historiographes de la monarchie de juillet concordent parfaitement sur ce point' ('Journal de Marie-Amelie', preface). Very little has been written about her and, in contrast to the other exiled French consort, Eugenie Bonaparte, who arrived in Britain in 1870, the British press barely noticed her presence. Another mystery is why the Orleans lived so frugally in exile in borrowed property, a sharp contrast to the opulent life-style of Eugenie. The second republic did not confiscate their lands, but did it block access to the income from them? What is certain is that thanks to Louis-Philippe and Marie-Amelie's careful stewardship the Orleans remained the biggest landowners in France until the 1960s. 
Alexander Bryulov's portrait of Marie-Amelie, probably executed shortly after Louis-Philippe's death (she is depicted in mourning) shows her stripped of all the trappings of royalty and wealth with which she was decked in the 1842 painting by Franz Winterhalter, and with no pretence of youth, but showing an agreeable, direct old lady, with a calm inner strength. 


@@@@@


doc= 92473


Orleans, Louis Philippe Albert d', count of Paris in the Orleanist French nobility (1838-1894), pretender to the French throne and exile, was born at the Palace of the Tuileries in Paris on 24 August 1838, the elder son of Ferdinand Philippe Louis, duke of Orleans (1810-1842), heir to his father, Louis Philippe (died 1850), styled king of the French under the July monarchy (1830-48), and his wife, Helene Luise Elisabeth, princess of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (1814-1858). As a child, the count of Paris was present with his mother in the chamber of deputies on 24 February 1848 when the mob ended an attempt to constitute a regency during his minority after his grandfather had fled before the popular uprising in the capital. The exiled duchess of Orleans settled in England, where her son was to spend the greater part of his life. Educated mainly by tutors, and widely travelled, his upbringing after 1848 was that of a pretender, resident for a while with his small court at Claremont House, near Esher in Surrey, an English royal residence made available to King Louis Philippe and his family by a sympathetic Queen Victoria. A serious-minded youth, he always remained something of a political innocent, although intellectual tastes as well as his inherited role directed him to the study of evolving democracy on both sides of the Atlantic. A formative experience was his service in 1861-2 with the federal armies in the American Civil War on the staff of General George B. McClellan. For Paris as for others, the conflict proved that Christianity could not indefinitely tolerate the institution of slavery. Moreover, the victory of the north inflicted an ideological reverse on the 'Caesarism' of the contemporary ruler of France, Napoleon III, who backed the confederacy (Paris, 'Histoire de la Guerre Civile', 4.667; 1.398). 
An Orleanist pretender did not present a real threat to the Second Empire, which had confiscated his French estates; the legitimists, partisans of the elder branch of Bourbons, overshadowed their dynastic rivals. The acceptance of Paris and other members of his family in English, and more especially whig, society had no political implications, but it confirmed the Anglophile tendency of his line. The patronage of Lady Waldegrave brought him into contact with leading politicians on the Liberal side, Gladstone among them. Yet he was well aware that the cautiously progressive liberalism of the English political class, Liberal and tory alike, was not a plant easily transferable to his native country with her history of enmities that did not admit of compromise. Irish disestablishment prompted the reflection, unusual in a devout Catholic then, that in France too the union of church and state had been 'equally prejudicial to both' (Paris to Reeve, 26 July 1868, 'Memoirs... of Henry Reeve', 2.143-4). The convictions of French monarchists precluded such radicalism on his part when the fall of Napoleon III in 1870 and the childlessness of the last of the elder branch established Paris as the count of Chambord's designated successor at the head of an outwardly, at least, unified movement. An unashamed reactionary, Chambord held out few concessions to his kinsman, whose submission in 1873 attracted some telling criticisms in England. The Orleanists were badly compromised, wrote the fifteenth earl of Derby, by the sacrifice of their liberal strain of monarchism (2 Nov 1873, 'Selection from the Diaries', 148). The prince of Wales, the future Edward VII, had earlier taken it upon himself to advocate replacing Paris as the bearer of the Orleanist tradition by his formidable uncle, the duc d'Aumale, who was close to being a republican (Granville to Gladstone, 18 Nov 1870, 'Political Correspondence', 1.160). A friendly majority in the national assembly permitted Paris to return to France and restored the unsold portion of his estates (1871-2), where he spent a decade in semi-retirement, working on his still useful narrative of the American Civil War in seven volumes, which, though primarily a military history, ascribed the federals' success to the vitality of their free institutions. The prince of Wales appeared to have been justified in dismissing Paris's potential for leadership: 'as to the Comte... people must look out for themselves these days' (ibid.). 
On Chambord's death in 1883, however, Paris showed himself capable of organizing a monarchist revival on a scale that provoked a government of the left to send 'Philippe VII' into exile again three years later. At the outset the British foreign secretary, Lord Granville, thought the pretender had 'a difficult game to play', but one that he might conceivably win if he could appeal to moderate supporters of the republic frightened by the temper of the left (Granville to Reeve, 29 Sept 1883, 'Memoirs', 2.317). This Paris felt unable to do: like some of his whig friends in England he came to believe that the restraint of the liberalism he and they embodied was out of date, on either side of the channel. There was no option but to side with the 'big battalions', he told Henry Reeve of the 'Edinburgh Review', and to employ those methods of animating a mass electorate which he nevertheless deplored in the later Gladstone (Paris to Reeve, 18, 21 Sept 1885, ibid. 331-4). Banished to England for a second time, in 1886, he lent his authority to collaboration between the monarchists and General Boulanger in 1888-9, meeting the general in London to further their common aim of overthrowing the Third Republic. The ignominious collapse of Boulangism was fatal to Paris's cause, discredited by his uncharacteristic readiness to set aside the constitutionalism of a lifetime. 'The nemesis of lost opportunities and deserted ideals' claimed him ('The Times', 10 Sept 1894). 
Yet Paris remained true to his ideals in important respects. He used his influence on the right to contain the dangerous colonial rivalry between France and England. Alarmed by his country's isolation in the 1870s and 1880s, he welcomed the efforts of Salisbury and Gladstone to preserve 'the equilibrium of the Continent' amid the rising tensions of the period, as he did England's refusal to 'become the accomplice or the dupe' of Bismarck. He regretted the Anglo-French antagonism in Egypt where, in his view, the situation might have provided the basis for an entente, if properly handled, but it was one that 'we have made such a mess of' (Paris to Reeve, 12 April 1880, 18 July 1883, 'Memoirs', 2.276, 315-16). When they saw each other at Cannes in 1883, Gladstone rewarded Paris with information that had come to hand about the republicans' intentions towards him (Gladstone to Paris, 10 Feb 1883, Gladstone, 'Diaries', 10.405-6; Paris to Gladstone, 10 Feb 1883, BL, Add. MS 44479). The count's was not an outlook that sat easily with the chauvinism and cynicism of General Boulanger. 
The last of Paris's failures, if that is what it was, followed the debacle of Boulangism. One of his daughters with his cousin (Marie) Isabelle Francoise d'Assise d'Orleans-Montpensier (1848-1919), whom he had married on 30 May 1864, was the wife of Carlos I of Portugal; another, and splendid, dynastic alliance encountered the inflexible opposition of Lord Salisbury, then prime minister. The countess of Paris, a strong-willed woman, unafraid to smoke a pipe or cigars in company, took advantage of the English royal family's anxiety to find an intelligent bride for the prince of Wales's unpromising elder son, Albert Victor, duke of Clarence. Her daughter Helene, well known at the English court, was an admirable candidate but for her Catholicism. This obstacle the countess and Helene, who shared her mother's ambitions for their family, proposed to remove by the latter's reception into the established church, and an informal engagement ensued. Salisbury's personal distaste for such a calculated switch of religious allegiance, his belief that the match would be unpopular, and the reaction of the French government might not have been enough to stop the marriage ('Salisbury-Balfour Correspondence', 317-31, 'passim'). As it was, the count of Paris asserted himself and ruled out conversion. 
The shock of the 'June days' of 1848 made the French right open to ideas of social reform suspect to their bourgeois opponents. The youthful count of Paris looked to the land of his exile for a lasting solution to a fundamental conflict which in England had very largely died out with the passing of Chartism (Paris to Gladstone, 30 May 1869, BL, Add. MS 44420). He was deeply impressed by what he found on a visit to Lancashire in the cotton famine of the 1860s: nothing less, it seemed to him, than a triumph of class collaboration in the face of adversity. The rich lived up to their social responsibilities and organized relief across the region for workers whose self-discipline and unshaken loyalty to the political order was emphasized by a propensity to sing 'God Save the Queen' at their demonstrations. Where the English had led, the French must follow (Forcade, 703-4, 675-6). His book 'The Trades' Unions of England' (1869) was an effective contribution to the debate on the labour laws that produced and accompanied the royal commission of 1867-9. Within months of its publication in France it had gone through six editions there and was to be translated into German and Spanish. The significance of the English version that appeared in the same year for friends of the unions is clear from the introduction provided by its editor, Thomas Hughes MP. The Webbs wrongly dismissed this short study as little better than a summary of evidence to the commission (Webb and Webb, 227 n. 1). Hughes singled out the way in which the count had put the problem of labour and its rights in the wider context of 'public meeting, free discussion, and an unshackled press', none of which were features of Napoleon III's France ('Trades' Unions of England', xiii). Paris himself observed that the evidence amassed by the commission did not adequately reflect the underlying cause and condition of trade union advance, 'political liberty, and the various rights secured by it' (ibid., 230). For this insight he was praised by, among others, George Rickards, a lawyer and economist without Hughes's radical sympathies: it was really the central point in the debate ('Edinburgh Review', 130, October 1869, 399). 
Paris deserves to be remembered in England for his rationale of trade unions in a free society such as he hoped France would become. He was altogether too English for his countrymen. The life of this prince, the last Bourbon to offer a credible alternative to the French republic, testified to the attractions of Victorian England's political culture for a thoughtful descendant of Louis XIV. Lacking the talent, or at any rate the luck, to exploit the chances he was given, he yet belonged to his time, and not to the past in which French monarchists tended to dwell. Someone with few intimates, he possessed a saving sense of the ridiculous and collected caricatures of himself. He had a good head for business, dying one of the richest men in Europe with a fortune approaching $4 million spread over several countries. 
After his marriage in 1864 Paris purchased York House, Twickenham, where he lived until his return to France in 1871. During his second period of exile, he resided for four years (1886-90) at Sheen House, Richmond, and spent his last years, from November 1890, amid the splendours of Stowe House, Buckinghamshire, leased from its owner since the death of the third duke of Buckingham. He died at Stowe on 8 September 1894 after a long illness, survived by his widow and five of his eight children. His remains, interred at the Catholic church in Weybridge, Surrey, were moved in 1958 to the mausoleum of his family at Dreux, Eure-et-Loir. 


@@@@@


doc= 92475


Rimmel, Eugene (1820-1887), perfumer, was born in France, the son of a scent manufacturer. With his father, under whom he served as an apprentice, he established a shop and laboratory in London in 1834. There is a record of its existence at 39 Gerrard Street, Soho, from 1847 to 1857, when it moved to 96 Strand, taking over premises that once belonged to Charles Lillie, one of the first perfumers in London and author of 'The British Perfumer' (1822). There were branches of Rimmel's shop at 24 Cornhill from 1859 to his death, and at 128 Regent Street from 1864 to 1886, as well as in Paris. He married in the early 1840s and was naturalized as a British subject in September 1857. 
In his laboratory Rimmel developed some of the earliest commercially manufactured beauty products, which by the middle of the nineteenth century were beginning to replace home-made cosmetics. He was most famous for the introduction of the first factory-made, non-toxic mascara, previously made at home from the oily residual soot from oil-burning lamps, or from powdered charcoal, both of which were often polluted and irritated the skin. From 1854 Rimmel employed women as well as men in his factory because of their superior dexterity: he claimed to be the first perfumer in England to use female labour. As the business became established he began to export his products, which included perfume, toilet soap, and ointments, and by the 1850s he was selling them in Europe, the Americas, and throughout the British empire. By 1862 he could describe himself as 'perfumer to their majesties the Queen of Spain and King of Portugal'; he eventually collected ten royal warrants. Adept at marketing, he labelled his products with designs by the French lithographer Jules Cheret, of whom he was a patron. 
Rimmel was constantly experimenting, and one of his inventions was the 'perfume vaporiser', which he exhibited at the 1862 International Exhibition in South Kensington: a piece of apparatus for diffusing the fragrance of flowers and purifying the atmosphere, it was used on Queen Victoria's yacht as well as at public banquets and in ballrooms, theatres, and sickrooms. At the exhibition the water in the great fountain was perfumed with an essence provided by Rimmel, and his stand included 'magic vines, bouquets, flowers and rings for the holding of delicious scents, with perfumed sachets, almanacks, etc., standing beside rows and piles of soaps, pomades, creams, pastes, elixirs, dentifrices, washes, powders, cosmetiques, and other essentials of the fashionable toilet' ('Cassell's Illustrated Exhibitor', 186). His other inventions included scented books and cards, and perfumed cushions. Rimmel served on the jury of the 1862 International Exhibition, where he drew up the official report on the perfumery class, and he wrote about the Paris Exhibition of 1867 for 'Le Courrier de l'Europe' and 'La Patrie', publishing these articles as 'Souvenirs de l'exposition', with the English version, 'Recollections of the Paris Exhibition of 1867', published in 1868. 
In 1865 Rimmel published 'The Book of Perfumes', an illustrated history of the making of perfumes and cosmetics from Egyptian times onwards. While acknowledging that London and Paris were the centres for the manufacture of perfumes, he argued that perfumes are best produced in warm countries where the climate gives the flowers an intensity of colour and odour, and that the best perfumery materials come from the south of France: Rimmel owned flower gardens and distilleries in Nice. He ridiculed the idea that flowers should be cultivated in England for perfumery purposes: England excels in the cultivation only of lavender and peppermint, because its moist and mild climate gives a mildness of fragrance, whereas in warmer countries these are too strong. But he thought that English toilet soaps were the best in the world. While he refused to give away the secrets of his recipes, he did describe the twelve series of materials used in the manufacture of perfumes, including the floral series, with the eight flowers used for perfume; the herbal series; the seminal series, including aniseed, fennel, and caraway; the citrine series, such as orange, lemon, and bergamot; and the artificial series, containing all the artificial flavours produced by chemical compounds. The most useful series from the perfumer's point of view was the animal series, because animal secretions resist evaporation the longest: these include musk, civet, and ambergris (found floating on the sea after being thrown up by the diseased sperm whale). These animal materials, though unpleasant on their own, when combined with other perfumes produce fragrances unobtainable in any other way. 
At the 1862 International Exhibition Rimmel was struck by the pungent smell of essential oils, including eucalyptus, derived from the Australian forests, which were intended for mixing with paint instead of turpentine, and he experimented with using these in toilet soaps: this was so successful that he included eucalyptus among his perfumery materials. Agreeing with Rousseau that the sense of smell is the sense of imagination, he claimed that pleasant perfumes exercise a cheering influence on the mind, and refresh the memory, recalling scenes from past life. He offered ladies a few words of advice on the choice of perfumes and cosmetics, recommending perfumes that use the simple extracts of flowers, and he did not advise using paints for the face: 'cold water, fresh air, and exercise, are the best recipe for health and beauty; for no borrowed charms can equal those of 'A woman's face, with nature's own hand painted''. 
As he built up his fortune, Rimmel became an important benefactor among the French community in London. In 1878 he founded the French hospital and dispensary in Leicester Place, and he also founded the Bureau de Bienfaisance (later the Societe Francaise de Bienfaisance) in Poland Street. He set up a fund to support the Society of the Professors of French. He also had literary interests, visiting Victor Hugo in Guernsey, and in 1886 he translated the first act of 'Romeo and Juliet' into French. He died of heart disease and dropsy on 25 February 1887 at 96 Strand, London, leaving two sons. The firm of Rimmel survived through the twentieth century, becoming the leading brand of colour cosmetics in Britain, and was acquired by Coty Inc. in 1996. 


@@@@@


doc= 92476


Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880), writer and political thinker, was born at Bergen, the main town on the Baltic island of Rugen, on 13 September 1802. His father was estate manager to Count Brahe. His studies at Halle, Jena, and Heidelberg came to an abrupt end when, charged with complicity in a treasonable conspiracy in 1824 as a result of his involvement in the nationalist student association the Burschenschaft, he was sentenced to fourteen years' imprisonment. However, he was released after six, spent mainly at the fortress of Kolberg where he made good use of his time, studying Plato and the Greek poets. Freed in 1830, he published a translation of Sophocles' 'Oedipus at Colonus', as well as a tragedy of his own, 'Schill und die Seinen', and soon obtained a teaching post at the Francke'sches Padagogium at Halle. From 1832 until 1836 he lectured in philosophy at the University of Halle, having established his credentials with his book 'Platonische Asthetik' (1832). His first wife, Charlotte Duffer, a wealthy young woman, died in 1833 after little more than a year of marriage; in 1834 he married Agnes Wilhelmina Nietzsche. The death of his first wife left him so comfortably provided for that he was able to give up university teaching and devote himself to writing and to the study of Hegelian philosophy. 
Ruge became a leading figure in what came to be known as the 'Young Hegelian' school. In politics he hoped for the demise of the old feudal regime and the emergence of a bourgeois democratic republic, views which found expression in the 'Hallesche Jahrbucher fur Deutsche Kunst und Wissenschaft', the journal he founded with E. T. Echtermeyer in 1837. This journal soon fell victim to Prussian censorship, so Ruge moved to Dresden in 1841 and refounded it as 'Deutsche Jahrbucher', but this venture was similarly suppressed, by the Saxon authorities, in 1843. Ruge then moved to Paris where, together with Karl Marx, he founded the 'Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbucher'. His accounts of the politically charged salons and squabbling sects in the French capital, retold also in 'Zwei Jahre in Paris' (1846), still make interesting reading. His collaboration with Marx was short-lived, for he had little sympathy with Marx's socialistic theories -- in 1852 Marx mercilessly satirized him in 'Die grossen Manner des Exils'. In 1847 Ruge set himself up as bookseller and publisher at Leipzig. In the revolutionary movement of 1848 he organized the extreme left in the Frankfurt parliament in which he represented Breslau, and for some time he lived in Berlin where he planned to edit a radical democratic newspaper, 'Die Reform', which, however, he eventually published from Leipzig. With the collapse of the 1848 revolution he lost his publishing business and his money and was forced into exile. 
Through his friend Alexandre-Auguste Ledru-Rollin in Paris, Ruge hoped to establish relations between German and French republicans, but in 1849 both men were forced to flee to London, where they closely associated with other political refugees. Ruge collaborated with Ledru-Rollin, Giuseppe Mazzini, and others in forming a European Democratic Committee, the aim of which was to co-ordinate the work of the bourgeois democratic opposition. However, he soon withdrew and in 1850 went to live in Brighton (he always longed to be near the sea). Here he supported himself by teaching and writing, while his wife, Agnes, ran a daguerreotype business at 180 Western Road, which, however, soon failed in the face of technological advances. From Brighton Ruge maintained regular contact with the coteries of politicking emigres in London. With a few supporters he founded the Agitation Club in 1851, a rival to Gottfried Kinkel's Emigration Club; Marx, who founded his own group, considered it had as much to do with 'agitation' as 'a stagnant swamp' (Ashton, 143). Through a series of lectures to English as well as emigre audiences in London, Brighton, and Birmingham in 1853, published as 'New Germany' in 1854, Ruge propounded his conviction that, just as German philosophy had revolutionized thought, so too Germany held the key to the future of democracy throughout Europe. He was disappointed to find few converts. Not without reason, it seems, did Marx punningly call him the 'Confusius' of German emigration. Yet critical though Ruge was of Britain and bitter at being ignored, he settled happily enough, taking up gardening and enjoying seaside walks. He became a naturalized British subject on 16 July 1855. However, his sense of his own importance led him to believe that, even from a distance, he could still play a role in German politics. Through the columns of the German press, in his manifesto 'An die deutsche Nation' (1866) he vigorously supported Prussia against Austria and, in 1870, Prussia against France, and proved a strong advocate of Bismarck's plans for a unified Germany. He approached Bismarck with a request for 120,000 marks in compensation for his publishing business, lost in 1848, but, with the support of his friends, received only 20,000 marks. In 1877 the German government granted him an annual pension (variously reported to be 1000 and 3000 marks) in recognition of his support for German unity. Such recognition meant more to him than the financial reward. When he died, at his home, 7 Park Crescent, Brighton (a house originally rented but purchased in 1867), on 31 December 1880, he left less than $100. He was survived by his second wife, their son, Hermann Arnold Ruge, and their two daughters. 
Though in his day a leader in political liberalism, Ruge's work is largely forgotten. In 1846-8 he published ten volumes of his 'Gesammelte Schriften' at Mannheim. After this time he wrote, among other books, 'Unser System' (1850), 'Revolutionsnovellen' (1850), 'Die Loge des Humanismus' (1851), his memoirs 'Aus fruherer Zeit' (1863-7), and 'Die drei Volker und die Legitimitat' (1860). He also wrote many poems (published in his 'Wanderbuch', 1874), stories (including 'Bianca della Rocca' under the anagrammatic pseudonym R. Durangelo, 1869), several dramas (including 'Die neue Welt', 1856) and romances, and translated various English works into German, including H. L. Bulwer's 'Lord Palmerston' in 1871, G. H. Lewes's 'The History of Philosophy from Thales to Comte' (based on the 1867 edition) in 1871-6, and H. T. Buckle's 'History of Civilization'. His correspondence and diary were published by Paul Nerrlich as 'Arnold Ruges Briefwechsel und Tagebuchblatter aus den Jahren 1825-1880' (1886). 


@@@@@


doc= 92479


Piatkoff, Peter (fl. 1910), revolutionary, is the most celebrated, but not necessarily the most important, of a group of eastern European revolutionary immigrants who briefly startled Britain and the world with a series of violent crimes in London in 1909-11, culminating in the 'siege of Sidney Street', where two of them met their deaths in a house fire after a gun battle with police. His notoriety arose from his mysterious escape during these events, and the alliteration of his popular nickname, Peter the Painter. To this day, however, no one can be certain who he was (he used numerous aliases, including Schtern, Straume, Makharov, Dudkin, and various alternative spellings of these), how long he lived in Britain -- it may have been only a couple of months -- and what he was doing among the other refugees: whether he was their leader, just a follower, a genuine revolutionary, a mere criminal, or a tsarist police spy. Doubts have even been expressed as to whether he existed at all. None of the following biographical 'facts' about him, therefore, is altogether reliable. 
One version has him born in the northern Russian city of Pskov on 20 June 1883, but not under that name (which is originally Polish). The contemporary Russian authorities claimed he was really Evan Evanovitch Jakle. Another version claims he was born on 19 July 1883 in the district of Goldingen (Kuldiga), in the province of Courland in (Russian) Latvia, where both accounts agree he was raised on a farm. In 1905 he was accused of complicity in the Russian revolution of that year, and arrested by the tsarist police, but escaped. After living in several European countries, including a short period studying medicine and then painting doors in Marseilles, he arrived in England in October 1910, immediately settling among the Latvian emigre community in London's East End. He was also an amateur artist. 
Two months later, on 16 December 1910, came the event that brought his fame. A group of his Latvian comrades attempted a raid on a jeweller's shop in Houndsditch, supposedly for political motives ('appropriation'). They were surprised by the police, and in the course of their getaway shot and killed three of them. This followed a similar incident in Tottenham in January 1909, when a policeman and a boy had been murdered by two other Latvian desperadoes, Jacob Lepidus and Paul Hefeld. It was the use of guns that made these incidents particularly shocking; decent English burglars apparently never used them. These events also came at a time of almost unrestricted immigration of Jewish refugees into Britain (though neither Peter nor any of his male associates was Jewish), stirring up a nativist backlash in the East End in particular; and of uneasiness about foreign socialism and anarchism (the two ideologies were often confused) more generally. After the Houndsditch fiasco the robbers went on the run. One of them, George Gardstein ['see below'], accidentally shot by one of his own colleagues, died shortly afterwards. Some others barricaded themselves in no. 100 Sidney Street, off the Commercial Road in Stepney, in the East End of London, where they were besieged by armed police and a detachment of Scots Guards. After a long and dramatic exchange of fire between them on 3-4 January, attended at one point by the home secretary, Winston Churchill, the house caught fire. When the flames were quenched the charred bodies of two of the gang, Sokolow and Svaars ['see below'], were found in the ruins. 
Peter's part in these events is unclear. He was probably not present at the Houndsditch robbery. Some authorities have him masterminding the plot none the less, partly because his room was used as a meeting place for the gang, and partly because he looked a higher class of foreigner than the others, and so more capable of plotting. His landlady described him as 'quite a gentleman'. This comes over in the 'wanted' notice that was issued for him later, which makes him look like Napoleon III; those of the others make them look like thugs. There is no firm evidence for this, however, and other accounts have him playing a very minor role, such as the contact with the 'fence' -- possibly Leon Beron, who two weeks later (31 December) was found murdered on Clapham Common with the letter 'S' cut into each of his cheeks. Another refugee called Stinie Morrison was convicted of that, but there are doubts over his guilt. 
A third possibility is that Peter was a tsarist agent, planted in London in order to provoke the Latvians into an atrocity that would force the British government to rethink its policy of toleration for refugees. There is no evidence for this hypothesis either, but it was given credence by his utter disappearance after these events, aided, some suspected, by the British police. Stories proliferated about his fate. Some have him fleeing abroad a couple of days after the Houndsditch affair. (There was no firm sighting of him after 18 December 1910.) Others place him in 100 Sidney Street until the very last moment, when he tunnelled through a wall into an adjoining house, whence he melted into the crowd of onlookers and then got away. For years afterwards people reported spotting him as far apart as Winnipeg in Canada, Perth in Australia, and back in Russia -- working for the post-1917 Cheka (or secret police). None of these is reliable. 
There is no doubt, however, about either the involvement or the ultimate fate of the three men who died. 


We know a little more about 


A number of women were involved in these events, and have become part of the legend. 


If the object of all this was to provoke Britain into toughening her asylum laws, it did not work. The political backlash -- 'Oo let 'em in?', words apparently shouted at Churchill -- soon subsided, ineffective against the much more powerful British sense of pride in a policy of toleration that had a long tradition, and had only been slightly dented by a new ''Alien Act'' in 1905: the first for fifty-five years that enabled governments to ban or expel immigrants at all. The legislation was used very sparingly by the Liberal government of the day, and never against political refugees, who were expressly exempted from it. An immigrant only had to claim political persecution to be allowed in automatically. Extradition treaties similarly exempted political offenders, even proven assassins and terrorists. This was one reason why the police of the time were keen to paint the Houndsditch gang as 'ordinary' criminals, and not genuine ideologues: it meant that they had a better chance of getting rid of them if they wanted to. It was also designed to undermine any public sympathy that might be created for them by their image as torture victims of the hated Russian secret police. For many people that went a long way to excusing them. As a result, Churchill was able to resist calls for tougher laws quite easily. 'I must say', wrote Rodolf Rocker, another anarchist refugee, 'that in any other country the consequences would have been more serious' (Fishman, 293). 
In the end the main legacy of these people was the myth they created: one of a number of violent ones that the East End has always delighted in (such as Jack the Ripper and the Kray brothers), spiced up in this instance by anti-tsarism, and the success of Peter the Painter -- something of a Scarlet Pimpernel figure -- in making fools of the despised British police. The episode became the subject of a number of novels, and of at least two feature films: Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1934; re-made 1956), and Robert S. Baker and Monty Berman's 'The Siege of Sidney Street' (1960). These all perpetuated the main features of the myth. Most of the facts of the case, however, are still disputed. 


@@@@@


doc= 92481


Iles, Horace (1900-1916), boy soldier, was born at 11 Cemetery Street, Leeds, Yorkshire, on 22 January 1900, the eldest of three sons of William Iles (1853-1912), a journeyman joiner, and his wife, Elizabeth Heworth, 'nee' Beeton (1865/6-1963). His father was a veteran of the British army, having served in the Second Afghan War under Lord Roberts. On his death in 1912 his wife was left to bring up Horace and his two younger brothers, Wilfred and Sidney. Horace also had a half-brother, Arthur Heworth, from his mother's previous marriage, and a half-sister, Florence (Florrie) Bews, 'nee' Iles, from his father's previous marriage. He attended St Mark's School, Woodhouse, Leeds, and was a choirboy in the Sunday school of Emmanuel Church, Woodhouse Lane. He left school aged thirteen to become an apprentice blacksmith's striker at a company called Pawson's near the family's home in the Woodhouse area of Leeds. He then tried his hand at painting and decorating for a different Leeds firm, Dennis & Co. His physically demanding jobs as a young teenager help perhaps to explain why he was later believed by the recruiting officer when he claimed to be eighteen. 
There is only anecdotal evidence for the family tradition, recounted in interviews by descendants of the Iles family, that he was given a white feather which encouraged him to volunteer for military service. What is known is that early in 1915, aged fifteen but having lied about his age, he joined the 15th (service) battalion (1st Leeds), the Prince of Wales's Own (West Yorkshire regiment), better known as the Leeds Pals. After he completed training with the Pals at Colsterdale in north Yorkshire, his first destination was not France but Egypt, where the Pals stayed from December 1915 until 1 March 1916. They sailed for France, where they were billeted near Bus-les-Artois in the Somme region. Iles was wounded on 22 May 1916, and was hospitalized in France before being given seven days' home leave. This was the last time his family saw him. After returning to the front he was killed on 1 July 1916 along with other members of his battalion shortly after 7.30 a.m. on the first day of the battle of the Somme. The Leeds Pals were decimated in the offensive: thirteen officers and 209 other ranks were killed, and a further twenty-six died of wounds. Iles was buried in Serre Road cemetery no. 1, 11 kilometres north east of the town of Albert. 
Like many young men of his generation Horace Iles is remembered for the manner of his death rather than for his short life. His story has had particular resonance in its continuing retellings owing to the survival of a poignant letter written to him by his half-sister, Florrie, on 9 July 1916, before news of his death had reached the family. Married with a small child of her own, Florrie was fifteen years older than Horace. She wrote to him from Leeds: 'You have no need to feel ashamed that you joined the Pals now, for by all accounts they have rendered a good account of themselves. No one can call them 'Feather bed soldiers' now... We did hear that they were fetching all back from France under 19. For goodness sake Horace tell them how old you are. I am sure they will send you back if they know you are only 16. You have seen quite enough now just chuck it up and try to get back. You won't fare no worse for it. If you don't do it now you will come back in bits and we want the whole of you. (Van Emden, 240-41)' It was returned to her with the words 'Killed in Action' written on the envelope. 
In 2003 Iles's story was selected by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission to be used in an educational video, 'One Boy', and in 2014 he featured in a number of BBC broadcasts produced to commemorate the centenary of the First World War. His story has come to symbolize not only the heavy losses suffered by the British army in July 1916, but equally the estimated 250,000 underage soldiers who volunteered in 1914 and 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 92482


Clarke, (Charles) Allen (1863-1935), journalist and dialect writer, was born at 58 Parrot Street, Bolton, Lancashire, on 26 February 1863, the eldest of nine children of Joseph Clarke, a cotton mule spinner, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Marsh, also a factory worker. The journalist Thomas Clarke (1884-1957) was his youngest brother. 
Clarke's early upbringing exerted a lasting influence on his public career. He was born into the cotton famine of the early 1860s, and with his father in only occasional work, his mother had been obliged to continue working until shortly before his birth. She returned to the mill soon afterwards, leaving him in the care of his maternal grandmother. In his later writings, Clarke showed a particular sympathy for the women and children of the factory districts. His father's radical and republican allegiances coloured an intellectual training that, in formal terms at least, was wholly conventional, commencing with attendance at a local dame-school from the age of four, followed by elementary schools. In addition to Shakespeare and Byron, Joseph Clarke's library included works by Burns, Chartist pamphlets, and the dialect writings of the Bolton journalist James Taylor Staton. Allen Clarke's later socialism drew heavily on earlier radical models, while his principal comic creation, Bill Spriggs, owed much -- including his location in the Bolton district of Tonge Fold ('Tum Fowt') -- to Staton's Billy Bobbin. 
Initially at least, Clarke's career followed the pattern mapped out by most of his contemporaries. A succession of half-time jobs, including a brief period at Mirfield in Yorkshire, culminated in his entry into factory work at Crosses' cotton mill at Gilnow, Bolton. His time at the mule gate was brief. Within months, prompted by the suggestion of his former headmaster, his parents allowed him to take up the post of pupil-teacher. He became disenchanted with grooming children for half-time work, and increasingly saw writing as his true vocation, a belief confirmed by the reception accorded pieces he submitted to local and national newspapers. After a brief period of unemployment, he was taken on by the local newspaper publishers, Tillotsons. His work for them included the transcribing of parish registers, which encouraged a keen interest in the history and topography of the Bolton area. The regular income also enabled Clarke to marry, on 1 June 1887, Lavinia (1859/1860-1889), daughter of Thomas Pilling, a pork butcher, of Bolton. 
At the same time, Clarke joined the local branch of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), established to exploit, through the presence as organizer of Tom Mann, the militancy unleashed by the lock-out in Bolton's engineering trade in 1887. Having broken with Tillotsons in a dispute over pay, Clarke sought to galvanize further this first wave of socialist enthusiasm by producing his own paper. 'Labour Light', first published in March 1890, was also designated the 'official voice of the Shop Assistants' Union' and reflected Clarke's enthusiasm for extending collective organization among the unskilled, a project which also led him to work with J. R. Clynes and fellow writer James Haslam to promote a union for the young assistants of adult mule spinners, the piecers. The failure of the piecers' union in the face of opposition from the spinners, combined with poor sales of 'Labour Light', heralded Clarke's retreat from conventional industrial politics. In later works, Clarke denounced the 'collective selfishness' of trade unions (C. A. Clarke, 'The Effects of the Factory System', 1899; repr. 1988, 147). Finding that readers had turned to 'Labour Light' not for the illumination it offered on current industrial controversies, but for the comic dialect sketches included at the suggestion of the paper's printer, he also became convinced that workers preferred amusement to enlightenment in their literature. Amusement was the declared intent behind the 'Bolton Trotter', launched in January 1891. Its popularity boosted by the regular inclusion of 'Tum Fowt' sketches, the 'Trotter' claimed, at its peak, a readership of some 20,000. By September 1893, however, declining sales and financial difficulty had forced the paper's closure. Clarke now sought work with the cotton union's own publication, the 'Cotton Factory Times'. 
Two years later, Clarke produced his most extended commentary on contemporary social problems. Serialized in 'The Clarion' before appearing in book form in 1899, 'The Effects of the Factory System' depicted a workforce entirely lacking in radical potential, seeking escape from the dulling monotony of modern forms of work through the pursuit of short-term sensory and material gratification. As an alternative to lives which amounted to little more than 'aw bed, aw work' ('Bolton and District ILP Pioneer', June 1895), the book advanced an Owenite vision of small-scale, self-sufficient rural communities, uniting all classes in a common productive endeavour. Informing this was a socialism that eschewed models of conflict in favour of an idea of evolutionary progress towards a co-operative future and which drew less on the tenets of Marxian political economy than the poetry of Walt Whitman. 
Such ideas were propounded in much of Clarke's fiction, in particular a series of novels and short stories which addressed the problems of contemporary industrial life. In many the standard of reform was raised not by workers themselves, but by figures from outside the working class. Many appeared in Clarke's most enduring periodical publication, 'Teddy Ashton's Journal'. Produced between 1896 and 1908, and appearing under a variety of titles, this weekly publication became the principal outlet for Clarke's vision of moral and spiritual enlightenment to be attained through a lifestyle embracing rambling, cycling, temperance, and vegetarianism. An opportunity to promote such ideas came with the invitation to stand as the joint Independent Labour Party/SDF parliamentary candidate in Rochdale at the general election of 1900. Clarke's claim to speak for the working man in part through the dialect language of his 'alter ego' Teddy Ashton attracted few converts; he came bottom of the poll with a modest 8 per cent of the vote. The campaign marked the beginning and the end of Clarke's parliamentary ambitions. 
Nevertheless, Clarke's drive to reconnect the toiling masses with the natural world around them had attracted the attention of Tolstoy, who was sufficiently impressed with 'The Effects of the Factory System' to recommend its translation into Russian. In 1904 Clarke wrote to Tolstoy outlining plans for a self-supporting rural colony-cum-holiday resort, to be located close to the Lancashire coast. Named after the daisy for the flower's association with fields and fresh air, the colony was inspired by an article in Clarke's 'Northern Weekly' and attracted support from across the industrial north of England. However, Bispham, the chosen site just north of Blackpool, proved unfavourable ground for ideas of rural regeneration. Divisions among those running the colony meant that the site was quickly abandoned, leaving Clarke for neither the first nor the last time in his life with the task of managing outstanding debts. The colony's failure represented the latest in a series of setbacks affecting circulation of the 'Northern Weekly', which had sold an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 copies a week at its peak. Falling advertising revenue forced its closure in 1908. From that point, although Clarke's most consistent source of journalistic income was provided by work for the 'Liverpool Daily Post', the name Teddy Ashton and Clarke's brand of dialect humour would live on in the series of annuals published regularly from 1890. 
By the time that the 'Northern Weekly' ceased publication, Clarke and his family had settled for the second and final time in Blackpool, bustling centre of the largely rural Fylde district of Lancashire. Here, free of the 'blighted and dreary' life of the factory towns (Clarke, 'Effects', 23), he could develop that closer communion with nature deemed essential for the moral and spiritual reclamation of the individual and of society more generally. Such ideas, given practical shape in the promotion of cycling and rambling organizations, were also articulated in writings brought together in two volumes celebrating the beauties of 'Windmill Land'. 
In this later phase of Clarke's career, spiritual themes, which had first emerged following the death of his first wife a matter of months after their marriage, assumed increasing prominence in his output. A conviction that the living were capable of communing with the dead had been fostered when the woman who was to be Clarke's second wife, Eliza (died 1927), the daughter of John Taylor, a weaving overlooker from Chorley, claimed during their courtship to have had contact with the late Lavinia. In subsequent years, the deaths of three of the Clarkes' children confirmed Clarke in the conviction that death constituted the continuation of life 'in other spheres' (Salveson, 'Teddy Ashton's Lancashire Scrapbook', 53). The most extended statement of these spiritualist beliefs came in 'The Eternal Question: Shall We Live Again?', first published in 1902, but which appeared in a new edition in 1919, with a foreword by Conan Doyle. 
Despite his growing preoccupation with the spirit world, Clarke never broke completely with labour politics. Shortly before his death, the fissile tendencies so apparent in the world of early socialism re-emerged in the unlikely setting of Blackpool Rambling Club. Following criticism of a fellow official, Clarke left to form the Blackpool Speedwell Fellowship Ramblers, taking part of their name from the blue flower which adorned the lanes and hedgerows of Windmill Land. After attending a meeting of the fellowship Clarke died suddenly, of angina, at his home, 17 St Ives Avenue, Blackpool, on 12 December 1935. He was buried in Marton cemetery, Blackpool. Three sons and a daughter survived him. Dogged by financial difficulties to the end, he had received help from his former employer, Tillotsons, in 1930. 
Attempts by the Lancashire Authors' Association to provide a permanent memorial to Clarke at Marton Mill on the Fylde were frustrated by financial constraints and the exigencies of war. In the absence of a physical monument, his memory endured through his writings. Although neither particularly profound nor original, by their very breadth they touched on many aspects of life in the industrial north at a time when its political, economic, and cultural weight was at its height. The few works to have been reprinted since Clarke's death reflect his importance as a poet of Lancashire's moorland and coastal plain, and as a lively critic of contemporary industrial civilization. He also has a secure place in the tradition of northern humour, celebrating the wit and wisdom of common folk. In 1935, shortly before Clarke's death, sketches featuring his most enduring creation, Bill Spriggs, conceived in the late nineteenth-century efflorescence of popular dialect writing, were broadcast on the Northern Programme of the BBC. By spanning print and broadcast media, Clarke played a full part in sustaining a vital and still vibrant regional culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 92483


Anders, WLadysLaw (1892-1970), army officer and politician, was born on 11 August 1892 in BLonie, in the county of Kutno, in Russian Poland. The eldest of four sons of Catholic parents, he attended secondary school in Warsaw, and moved with the family to Latvia, then part of the Russian empire, when his father, Albert Anders, was appointed administrator of one of the tsar's estates. Anders spent the years 1910-14 as an undergraduate at the Riga polytechnic and as an officer cadet at a Russian military college. From the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 until the Bolshevik revolution in 1917 he served in a cavalry division in the Russian army, whereupon, as a squadron commander, he helped form the 1st lancers regiment of the 1st Polish corps, 1917-18. In 1918 he married Irena Jordan-Krakowska, 'nee' Pruszynski, with whom he had a son and a daughter. 
When Poland regained her independence (as the second republic) in November 1918 after more than a century of partition, Anders joined the Wielkopolski branch of the nascent Polish army as a staff officer in early 1919. As Poland fought to consolidate her independence and establish her borders in those tumultuous early post-war years, he led the 15th lancers regiment with great distinction, particularly in the Polish-Soviet War in 1919-21, for which he and also his regiment were awarded the silver cross Virtuti Militari, Poland's highest military decoration. He attended the Ecole Superieure de Guerre in France, Poland's formal ally since 1921, and graduated in 1923. Two years later he captained the Polish equestrian team at the international competition in Nice, where it won the coveted nations' cup. In May 1926, when chief of staff to General Tadeusz Rozwadowski, Colonel Anders remained loyal to the legally elected government in the face of the successful coup against it by the former head of state, Marshal Jozef PiLsudski. However, unlike some others who had acted similarly, his career did not suffer under the new 'Sanacja' regime, for he was subsequently appointed to a number of senior posts, including chief of staff of the general inspectorate of cavalry (1926-8), commander of the second independent cavalry brigade (1928-37), and commander of the Nowogrodzka cavalry brigade (1937-9). His reputation as a brave, energetic, and decisive leader firmly consolidated, and much admired by Marshal PiLsudski, Anders was promoted major-general in 1934. 
In the September campaign of 1939 Anders led the Nowogrodzka cavalry brigade against the Wehrmacht, and was twice wounded. After being ordered to the east to engage the Red Army, he was captured, imprisoned, and tortured by the NKVD (Soviet secret police), latterly in Moscow's notorious Lubyanka gaol (1939-41). Following the agreement in July 1941 between the London-based Polish government of General WLadysLaw Sikorski and the Soviet government, which allowed, 'inter alia', for the creation of a Polish army from Poles interned in the Soviet Union, Anders was released to assume its command. When it transpired that the Soviets were failing to honour fully their commitments under this agreement and were unable to account satisfactorily for the disappearance of thousands of Polish officers whom they had captured in 1939 -- later confirmed as the Katyn massacre -- Anders decided to lead those who had managed to join him out of the Soviet Union to Persia and then on to the Middle East. Despite suffering many appalling hardships, over 100,000 Poles, the so-called Anders's army, eventually reached Palestine in 1943. It was quickly moulded into a formidable fighting unit, the 2nd Polish corps, which proceeded to play a decisive role in the allies' Italian campaign. Above all, its role in the final capture, on 18 May 1944, of the Benedictine monastery of Monte Cassino, the pivotal part of the Germans' defensive Gustav line, confirmed Anders's status as one of the leading Polish and allied army commanders of the war. His troops scored further important successes, most notably at Ancona and Bologna. 
Before the war in Europe ended, however, Anders had clashed with the Polish government and the allies over policy towards the Soviet Union, with particular reference to the fate of Poland's eastern provinces, including the historically Polish cities of Wilno and Lwow. He vehemently opposed any compromise on Poland's eastern border, as defined by the treaty of Riga, which had concluded the Polish-Soviet War in 1921. Consequently, he rejected as a betrayal the decision of the allied powers at the Yalta conference in February 1945 to allow the Soviet Union to annex the eastern provinces. 
Anders received numerous major decorations from Poland and the allies, including an honorary Order of the Bath from Great Britain. Together with most of his 2nd corps, which transferred to Britain from Italy in 1946, and tens of thousands of other Polish former servicemen, he refused to return to a Soviet-dominated communist Poland -- the antithesis of what they had fought for so courageously throughout the war. From exile in London, Anders, as inspector-general (1946-54) and commander-in-chief (1946-70) of the Polish armed forces in exile, emerged as one of the most outspoken critics of the Warsaw regime and, conversely, as one of the staunchest advocates of the cause of a free and independent Poland. For this, and also for encouraging the view that war between the west and the Soviet Union was inevitable in the near future, he was incessantly vilified by the communists, who had also annulled his Polish citizenship as early as September 1946. Divorced from his first wife, Anders married on 6 May 1948 (Irena) Renata, 'nee' Jarosiewicz, the divorced wife of Gwidon Gottlieb. They had a daughter. 
Anders, who lived at Brondesbury Park, in north-west London, played a prominent role in the disputatious, faction-ridden world of Polish emigre politics. Following a bitter and lasting split in the emigre community in 1954, when he was appointed full general, he became a member (1954-70) of the 'council of three' in opposition to another group around August Zaleski, president of the exiled Polish government, and also chaired for a time the prestigious national treasury commission. Besides his conspicuous involvement in many other facets of emigre life, he published his memoirs, 'Bez ostatniego rozdziaLu: wspomniennia z lat 1939-1946' (1949; English version, 'An Army in Exile', 1949) and 'Kleska Hitlera w Rosji, 1941-1945' (1952; English version, 'Hitler's Defeat in Russia, 1941-1945', Chicago, 1953). He won libel cases against the 'Daily Worker' newspaper in 1951 and a Polish-language newspaper in 1960. 
Anders died at the Central Middlesex Hospital, Park Royal, Brent, London, on 12 May 1970, the twenty-sixth anniversary of the beginning of the battle of Monte Cassino, with which his name will always be associated. Fittingly, and according to his own wishes, he was buried that month beside his fallen comrades in the Polish military cemetery there, the scene of an annual commemorative service since 1946. 
An outstanding leader in war and peace, Anders occupies an assured place in the pantheon of modern Polish heroes, a status acknowledged by post-communist Poland in 1995 with the posthumous award of the order of the White Eagle. Many major public amenities in Poland are now named after him, and a special commemorative silver coin was issued in 2002. 


@@@@@


doc= 92540


Brugge, Lodewijk van, earl of Winchester (c.1427-1492), courtier and diplomat, was the only son of Jan van Brugge and Margaretha van Steenhuyse. The name Gruuthuse, by which he is commonly known, refers to his family's property in and around Bruges and its associated wealth, based on the tax levied on 'gruut', a herb essential for the making of beer. Nothing is known of Lodewijk's early years, until in 1445 he was made cupbearer to Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, the start of a long career as an eminent courtier and successful soldier. In the early 1450s he took part in Philip's campaigns against the city of Ghent and was knighted in the field. In 1454 he was present at the famous Feast of the Pheasant, and was among those who swore to accompany the duke on crusade. In the following year he married Margaretha (died 1510), daughter of Hendrik van Borsele, count of Grandpre in France and lord of Veere in Zeeland, and Joanna van Halewyn. Margaretha's brother, Wolfert VI, became earl of Buchan in Scotland through his marriage in 1444 to James II's sister Mary. In December 1460 Gruuthuse was sent via England on an embassy to Scotland. His mission, to persuade the Scots to ally themselves with York rather than Lancaster in England's civil wars, enjoyed only limited success, but this was still sufficient to secure his admission to the order of the Golden Fleece on 2 May 1461. In 1463 he was appointed governor ('stadhouder') of the counties of Holland and Zeeland, a position he held until 1477. 
From 1465 to 1467 Gruuthuse was a member of many delegations and embassies to England and the English territories; these eventually, after the death of Philip the Good in 1467, paved the way for the marriage of Philip's heir, Charles the Bold, to Edward IV's sister, Margaret of York, on 3 July 1468. Only two years later, when Edward was forced to flee England in October 1470 by his own brother George, duke of Clarence, and Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, and landed on the island of Tessel, Gruuthuse was the first to be informed of the fugitive king's arrival. He hastened to meet Edward at Alkmaar, and travelled with him via the monastery of Egmond (where they venerated the relics of the 'English' St Adalbert) and Leiden to The Hague, where Edward was Gruuthuse's guest until Christmas. Early in 1471 Edward had a meeting with Duke Charles, and then went to stay with Gruuthuse in the latter's magnificent town house in Bruges, before he moved to Zeeland on 17 February to join his fleet and eventually return home. 
Gruuthuse's generous hospitality -- he even offered to accompany the king back to England -- earned Edward's gratitude. In the autumn of 1472 he came to England again on embassy, and was magnificently received. Bluemantle pursuivant's account of Gruuthuse's reception constitutes an important source for the splendour of Edward IV's court. Having made his way through Kent to London, the ambassador was entertained by the king at Windsor. He went hunting there with Edward, who gave him a crossbow with silk cords and gilt-headed bolts, while in the evening he attended a banquet given by the queen. He and his retinue watched Princess Elizabeth and the court ladies dancing, before retiring to 'iij chambers of Pleasance' (Madden, 279), where Gruuthuse's bed had a 'counterpoynt cloth of gold furred wt ermyne' (ibid.). He then returned to Westminster, where at the opening of parliament on 13 October Edward created him earl of Winchester, with an annuity of $200, referring specifically to 'the grete humanytie and kyndnes of my lord Gruthuse shewed to his highnes when he was in the counties of Holand and Flaunders' (ibid., 281). The ritual on this occasion was no less elaborate, the king being attended by nobles and prelates, while the new earl earned the gratitude of the heralds for his lavish largess. On 23 November Gruuthuse also received a coat of arms based on that of the thirteenth-century Quincy earls of Winchester, with the addition of a canton with the leopard of England. Following his return to Flanders, in May 1473 Gruuthuse represented Edward at a chapter of the Golden Fleece, of which the king had been a member since 1468. In 1500, however, Gruuthuse's son and heir Jan was effectively forced by Henry VII to resign the arms, the title and the annuity, and even the freedom from customs duties that Edward had granted to the village of Westenschouwen in Zeeland at the request of Jan's father. 
After the death of Duke Charles in January 1477 Gruuthuse became involved in the troubles that this traumatic event created. When Charles's only child and heir, Mary, died, in 1482, civil war broke out and Gruuthuse took the side of the Flemish towns which sought French support against the archduke Maximilian, Mary's husband. A member of the regency council for her son Philip the Fair, Gruuthuse was imprisoned in June 1485, and though unlike some of his colleagues he escaped being condemned to death, he remained in custody for several years. He was accused of high treason at the chapter of the Golden Fleece held in 1491, but died not long afterwards, in the Gruuthuse palace in Bruges on 24 November 1492, aged about sixty-five. Two days later he was buried in the church of Notre Dame in Bruges. 
Gruuthuse is principally remembered as a bibliophile. He patronized the Bruges printer Colard Mansion and formed a splendid collection of beautifully illuminated manuscripts, which by the end of his life contained a copy of almost every book that was popular in his own aristocratic milieu -- among them the only complete set of Jean de Waurin's 'Chronicles of England' -- and work from most of the famous Flemish illuminating workshops of his time. But although it has been claimed that his collection greatly influenced the taste and choice of books of Edward IV, there was in fact intense cultural exchange between England and Flanders throughout this period, and the king's stay in Bruges is unlikely to have had any real impact upon it. The Gruuthuse manuscripts (about 145 in all) are preserved in libraries all over western Europe and the USA -- one of them, a copy of the 'Instruction d'un jeune prince', was relatively recently identified in the British Library, in Cotton MS Vespasian Bi. -- but the bulk of them (some 120) passed to the kings of France and are now in the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. In most of these manuscripts Gruuthuse's arms have been painted over with the royal arms of France, but his motto, 'Plus est en vous', and his emblem of a bombard usually survive. 
Lodewijk van Brugge was one of the few great Flemish-speaking servants of the Valois dukes of Burgundy. His beautifully restored residence in Bruges is now an important museum, while his contemporary portrait can be seen in the nearby Groeningemuseum. 


@@@@@


doc= 92550


Lomax, Alan (1915-2002), musicologist, was born on 31 January 1915 in Austin, Texas, USA, the second son and youngest of three children of John Avery Lomax (1867-1948), folklorist and musicologist, and his first wife, Bess Baumann, 'nee' Brown (1881-1931). His contributions to folk music scholarship were extensive and varied. He followed in the footsteps of his father, a new breed of folklorist and the first to treat cattle-trail songs as worthy of academic research; John Lomax's life was given definitive treatment in Nolan Porterfield's 'Last Cavalier: the Life and Times of John A. Lomax' (1996). Both father and son were committed to an honest portrayal of North America's folkways before it was usual; the folk-singer Pete Seeger called them 'the greatest American folk song collectors'. The father-and-son team captured the changing dynamics of folk music collecting at a time when notebook and fountain pen gave way to portable recording equipment. Alan Lomax never forgot the lessons he learned on the collecting forays for the archive of American folksong at the Library of Congress with his father from the summer of 1933 onwards. 
Lomax attended Choate School in Wallingford, Connecticut, and spent a year at Harvard before enrolling at the University of Texas. He graduated with a degree in philosophy in 1936 and then did graduate work in anthropology at Columbia University. In 1940 he admitted, perhaps curiously, that he 'was never much interested in folk music until my late teens' ('Selected Writings', 49). Nevertheless his field trips accompanying his father instilled in him an appreciation of the essential worth and value of what their informants were supplying. Both accorded their subjects dignity irrespective of colour, class, or creed. Despite living in a society riddled with racist attitudes, Lomax championed 'cultural equity'. He worked with the black American folklorist and writer Zora Neale Hurston, for example. In 1935 he experienced a cultural manumission in the Bahamas, then a British colony: 'It was the greatest summer of my life because there I could live freely and speak freely with blacks in a way I could never do in the South. It was like heaven' (Droussart). In his memoirs, D. G. Bridson reported that Lomax used his fist to silence a 'casual racist' slur against the black singer Josh White during the war years in New York (Bridson, 103). Lomax's writings were often rich in telling anecdote and eidetic detail. Describing the response of the 75-year-old black preacher 'Sin Killer' Griffen, whose sung sermon he had just played back, he quoted Griffen. ''People been tellin' me I was a good preacher for nigh onto sixty years,' he said, 'But I never knew I was that good'' ('Selected Writings', 51). Balancing that, as Vic Gammon choicely observed, was 'his exuberance and hyperbole, his purple prose and sometimes strange ideas' (Gammon, 388). In the foreword to 'The People's Song Book' (1948) Lomax wrote: 'Slowly I began to realize that here was an emerging tradition that represented a new kind of human being, a new folk community composed of progressives and anti-fascists and union members. These folk, heritors of the democratic tradition of folklore, were creating for themselves a folk-culture of high moral and political content. (p. 3)' During the 1948 presidential race, like the writer-broadcaster Studs Terkel, Lomax backed the loser, the Democrat Henry A. Wallace. The increasing influence of McCarthyism and McCarranism convinced him to move to England. He arrived in October 1950, having, as Shirley Collins wrote, 'fled the States to escape the witch-hunt' (Collins, 31). He arrived with a commission to put together volumes for the 'Columbia World Library of Folk and Primitive Music' series. He did not make all the recordings himself, bartering material from the BBC archives in exchange for some of his material, and drawing on specialists such as Diego Carpitella in Italy and Hamish Henderson in Scotland; nevertheless he made many, both in the UK and elsewhere in Europe. 
During his London-based, European domicile, aside from his collecting and editorial roles for the 'Columbia World Library', Lomax worked as a freelance broadcaster and film-maker (directing, for example, the documentary 'Oss Oss Wee Oss' (1953), about the Padstow hobby horse celebrations, with Peter Kennedy). He arrived with credentials, building on his American broadcasting repute, and by 1951 had established himself as the authority on folk music with the BBC. He mainly broadcast for the Home Service and Third Programme. David Attenborough, then a junior television director, wrote that he was 'a large heavy man... with a relaxed easy-going manner, a wide smile and a Texan drawl' (Attenborough, 27). Lomax, however, was used to the more advanced technology and facilities in US broadcasting. This, combined with his sometimes insensitive attitudes and professional unreliability in the studio (such as overrunning or impromptu departures from the schedule) caused friction. These were days of live studio transmissions. 'He wasn't the easiest of contributors -- even then!' Attenborough observed diplomatically (private information). 
It was later erroneously claimed that Lomax persuaded the BBC to start collecting folk music. That work was under way before his arrival in Britain. For example, building on pre-war activities, Brian George, the head of the BBC's central programme operations, had undertaken pilot field recordings in Ireland during 1947 and 1949. What Lomax did was to galvanize the corporation and a coterie of like-minded individuals such as Peter Kennedy and Seamus Ennis. He proved to be a cultural lightning-rod. Lomax and Shirley Collins, twenty years his junior, set up home in Hampstead. Still more unconventionally for the day, Lomax's first wife, Elizabeth Lyttleton Harold (whom he had married in 1937; his second marriage was to Antoinette Marchand in 1962), lived in the same household with her boyfriend. Lomax's daughter, Anna Lyttleton Lomax, also lived there. 
Although Pan did not publish Lomax's oral history-based biography of the New Orleans jazz legend Jelly Roll Morton, 'Mister Jelly Roll', until 1958 in the UK, British jazz, blues, and folk admirers knew about Lomax and the music that he had collected and disseminated, including his part in informing the world about the blues singer Huddie 'Leadbelly' Ledbetter. Leadbelly's songs, for instance 'Bourgeois Blues' and 'Midnight Special', were often published with a co-credit for Lomax -- a common, 'sharpie' practice in the sheet music and record business. In London Lomax forged alliances with a variety of people in broadcasting and the arts. Oddly, he connected the two main architects of the post-war British folk revival, Ewan MacColl and A. L. Lloyd, for the first time. As an American, he was well placed to lead the 'authentic' skiffle group, Alan Lomax and the Ramblers. The group drew on a pool of musicians which included MacColl, Peggy Seeger, Collins, and Bryan Daly, recorded for Decca, and appeared on Granada television -- evidence of disloyalty that did not go unnoticed in BBC circles. 
By his own admission, the pinnacle of Lomax's radio career occurred on Christmas day 1957. 'Sing Christmas and the Turn of the Year', produced by Charles Parker, was a live broadcast, with some gramophone interludes, that gathered together contributors such as Charlie Bate, the Marshfield Paper Boys, the McPeakes of Belfast, the Bryan Newey Skiffle Group, and Cyril Tawney. The following year 'Punch' published a cartoon about him, William Hewison's 'I've got those Alan-Lomax-ain't-been-round-to-record-me blues'. By 1956, however, the BBC had memos about 'potted Marxism' and 'sexual permissiveness', and other unsubstantiated 'theories and generalizations' on file (private information). He returned to the United States in July 1958, though he continued to visit the UK. 
In 1959 Lomax rekindled his relationship with Collins by inviting her to act as his assistant for what became the 'Southern Folk Heritage Series', released in the early 1960s. When the set was reissued as 'Sounds of the South' (1993) he wrote: 'In a two-month tour, which took me from Virginia through the Middle South to the Ozarks, into the Mississippi Delta and back to the Georgia Sea Islands, I found proof that the South still held a rich heritage of musical traditions.' Ungraciously his me-me-me-ism overlooked the woman who had held the microphone, charmed the bashful with her Sussex accent, and taken notes and photographs on the trip. Another significant anthology for Britain in which he had a hand was 'Folk Songs of Britain' (1968-71), issued by Topic in the UK. 
In 1965, a pivotal year for folk music, Lomax showed himself to be a hero with blinkers and blind spots. At that year's Newport folk festival, in the USA, he of all people overlooked the non-segregationist gauntlet that the era's finest mixed-race electric blues band, the Paul Butterfield Blues Band, flung down. For them Lomax's recordings of Memphis Slim, Big Bill Broonzy, Muddy Waters, and Sonny Boy Williamson had been inspirational, but he questioned whether white musicians could sing the blues, prompting a fight with Bob Dylan's manager, Albert Grossman, and a later riposte from Dylan, 'Nobody can sing the blues like Blind Willie McTell'. As an individual, Lomax could be overbearing. He had a habit of dismissing other people's opinions, if contrary to his own. On the other hand, and more importantly, he proved himself exceptionally sensitive and resourceful when it came to documenting the world's music -- even if, at times, he downplayed or skipped the stalwart contributions of Mary Elizabeth Barnicle, Shirley Collins, and Zora Neale Hurston. Moreover, he catalysed developments in popular music. Without 'Rock Island Line', Lonnie Donegan's career would have been different. Without Lomax's recordings of Muddy Waters and Fred McDowell, the Rolling Stones would have lacked bite. 
While his father's focus had been on American demotic music, Lomax made significant contributions to the understanding and preservation of folk music beyond the USA. Rounder Records began a multi-volume archival release programme in 1997 that rejuvenated his reputation. He was fallible, especially in his theorizing, and notably in his reductivist projects, Cantometrics, Choreometrics, and the Global Jukebox, hapless attempts to stitch together world folk music, and dance. Nevertheless his impact on popular culture was massive, and not only through his recordings. His written contributions also changed the course of music, with his and his father's 'American Ballads and Folk Songs' (1934) and his own 'The Folk Songs of North America' (1959), 'The Penguin Book of American Folk Songs' (1964), and 'The Land where the Blues Began' (1993). The world of music would have been a dramatically poorer place without his interventions. He died on 19 July 2002 in Mease Countryside Hospital, Safety Harbor, Pinellas county, Florida. He was survived by his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 92556


Allibone, Thomas Edward (1903-2003), physicist and electrical engineer, was born on 11 November 1903 at 10 Melbourne Road, Nether Hallam, Sheffield, the son of Henry James Allibone, schoolteacher, and his wife, Eliza, 'nee' Kidger, a farmer's daughter. He was educated at the Central School, Sheffield, and Sheffield University, to both of which he won scholarships, and graduated with a first in physics while still only twenty. Such was his promise that the Metropolitan-Vickers engineering company immediately sponsored him to conduct research projects in metallurgy, one of which involved his producing, he believed, the first sample of metallic zirconium in the world. He received his PhD at Sheffield in 1926, by which time, with encouragement from Charles Drummond Ellis, who visited to deliver a lecture, he had secured a place as a Wollaston research scholar at the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, to pursue research under Ernest Rutherford. 
Allibone's interest now was in the use of high voltages in studies of the atom, a field in its earliest infancy; indeed, at the date he began, late 1926, Allibone was perhaps one of three or four physicists in the world ready to tackle it. (In time this field would become known as high-energy particle physics, and would keep thousands of scientists around the world occupied.) His association with Metropolitan-Vickers had prepared him for such work, since the firm was involved in the construction of the national electricity grid and he had become familiar with high-voltage technology there. Though Rutherford was nervous about the dangers, Allibone persuaded him to set aside laboratory space for what was a very large apparatus by the standards of the time. This took shape over the ensuing months, with financial support from Sir Alexander Fleming: a 500,000 volt Tesla transformer, incorporating a custom-made Bakelite tube 7 feet long and 2 feet in diameter, which Allibone escorted from Cambridge station in a taxi. With this he was able to produce fast electrons, whose scattering effects on a variety of materials he then studied. 
The young Allibone was thus one of the pioneers of 'big physics', and his work encouraged Rutherford to make what proved to be a landmark address to the Royal Society in November 1927, calling for even bigger and more powerful machines to accelerate particles, which might enable nuclear research to move into a new phase. (It later rankled with Allibone that Rutherford never gave him the credit he felt he deserved.) Allibone's experience also proved vital to the next project in this field to be undertaken in the Cavendish, the 300,000 volt proton accelerator developed by John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton from early 1928. The three were friends and shared a workroom, and Allibone made many contributions to the design of the first Cockcroft-Walton apparatus, the prototype for the one which in 1932 produced the first artificial disintegration of the atomic nucleus -- the feat popularly known as 'splitting the atom', for which Cockcroft and Walton shared the Nobel prize. 
In 1930 Allibone returned to Metropolitan-Vickers to take charge, at the age of twenty-six, of the firm's new high-voltage research laboratory, the leading facility of its kind in the country. On 14 February 1931 he married Dorothy Margery Ward (1903/4-2001), an accomplished pianist, and daughter of Frederick Boulden, university lecturer. It was a close marriage, and they had two daughters. During the 1930s Allibone continued to produce ground-breaking work, most notably studying the nature of lightning in a partnership with the South African Basil Schonland. His experimental skills were also called upon in the Second World War, when under the aegis of the Tube Alloys directorate, he played a part in the American Manhattan project, which produced the first atomic bombs. In 1944 Allibone was one of thirty-five British, Australian, and New Zealand scientists sent, under the leadership of his old Cavendish friend Mark Oliphant, to Berkeley, California, to help develop an electromagnetic process for the separation of uranium 235. He spent part of his time at the giant factory at Oakridge, Tennessee, where the separation work was done. 
Returning to Britain at the war's end Allibone was eager to work in the civil nuclear field now opening up, and in 1946 took up the post of research director at Associated Electrical Industries (AEI), running a laboratory at Aldermaston Court in Berkshire. (The atomic weapons establishment became a near neighbour in 1951.) There he distinguished himself as a brilliant research leader, recruiting and motivating a first-class staff and fostering a creative atmosphere with a minimum of hierarchy in which good ideas and good experimental craft prospered. He forged a close relationship with the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, run by his old friend Cockcroft, of which the most important fruit was a long-term joint project in nuclear fusion research, to which he himself contributed important original work on the plasma state of matter. It was at Allibone's AEI laboratory too that Dennis Gabor laid the foundations of holography, work for which he later won the Nobel prize. In 1963 Allibone left AEI to become chief scientist at the Central Electricity Generating Board, the state-owned body created in 1957 that operated all public power stations, including nuclear ones, as well as the national grid in England and Wales. He retired from that position in 1970. 
Allibone gave numerous lectures (including the Royal Institution Christmas lectures in 1959) and received many honours and awards. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1948 and appointed CBE in 1960. He served on the councils of many learned societies and remained active as a researcher well into his nineties, holding professorial posts at Leeds and City universities and adding steadily to an already prodigious file of scientific publications -- his final paper appeared in 1999. He also became a historian, writing a biography of Rutherford (1973) and co-writing another of Cockcroft (1983), as well as producing a book on lightning (1977) and an affectionate monograph on the dining clubs of the Royal Society (1975). Among his missions as a historian was to put on record the vital contribution of his old firm, Metropolitan-Vickers, to inter-war physics research in Britain generally and at the Cavendish Laboratory in particular, a story that without his essay 'Metropolitan-Vickers Electrical Co. and the Cavendish Laboratory' (1984) might have been lost. A keen philatelist, he also assembled a substantial collection of postage stamps featuring fellows of the Royal Society, which he presented to the society. 
Known to friends and colleagues as Ted or Bones, Allibone, the Yorkshire scholarship boy who achieved prominence and influence in the borderlands of science, public service, and industry, was in many ways representative of that determined and meritocratic generation characterized by C. P. Snow as the 'new men'. As a boy he caught a love of learning and of science from his schoolteacher father and he devoted his life to both, while his evident abilities carried him easily into senior positions. As with many who passed through the Cavendish, Rutherford was (with some misgivings) his hero, and he had qualities in common with the great man: a straight talker who did not suffer fools gladly, he could be both a physicist of vision and an inspiring leader. His research commanded international respect, though his greatest contribution to physics was probably made as early as the spring of 1926, when at the age of twenty-two he persuaded a hesitant Rutherford that the time had come to welcome big machines into the world of atomic exploration. Allibone's last years were clouded by the death of his wife after seventy years of marriage, and by the onset of prostatic cancer. Having lived in Winkfield, near Windsor, Berkshire, he moved to Holyport Lodge nursing home, The Green, Holyport, Maidenhead, where he died on 9 September 2003 of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 92560


Norris, Sir Christopher Neil Foxley- (1917-2003), air force officer, was born on 16 March 1917 at 44 Tollemache Road, Claughton, Birkenhead, the son of John Percivall Foxley-Norris, a solicitor then serving as a captain and adjutant in the 3rd battalion of the Cheshire regiment, and his wife, Dorothy Kathleen, 'nee' Brabant-Smith. He was educated at Bramcote School, Scarborough (1926-30), Winchester College (1930-35), and Trinity College, Oxford (1935-9), graduating with a second class degree in 'literae humaniores' in 1938. Having won a Harmsworth scholarship to the Middle Temple, he stayed in Oxford for an extra year. He started flying when he joined Oxford University air squadron, being commissioned in the Reserve of Air Force Officers in December 1936. He relinquished this commission on being appointed to one in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve in December 1938. 
Foxley-Norris's RAF pilot training began in September 1939 at 9 flying training school, Hullavington, and he was 'authorised to wear a flying badge' in November 1939. The following March he was posted to 1 school of army co-operation at Andover, and from there, in May, to 13 squadron, which had Lysanders at Douai in France -- a short-lived operational experience ended by the blitzkrieg and evacuation. With fighter pilots desperately needed he was then posted to 5 operational training unit at Aston Down, and during the battle of Britain served with three Hurricane squadrons -- nos. 111, 3, and 615 (county of Surrey), being shot down but baling out successfully. In April 1941 he was posted to the Central Flying School, then in May to 5 service flying training school as an instructor. After a period when 'non-effective, sick' he was sent to Canada -- under the empire air training plan -- as a flying instructor, first with 36 service flying training school at Penhold, Alberta, then with 31 operational training unit at Debert, Nova Scotia. His tour ended when he was posted back to the UK in June 1943. He later described his Canadian experiences vividly in his autobiography. 
Foxley-Norris's subsequent wartime career was on Beaufighter and Mosquito low-level anti-shipping operations. From 132 operational training unit he was posted to 143 squadron at North Coates, then to 131 group training unit, then in July 1943 to 2 operational training unit and from there back to 143 squadron -- now at St Eval in Cornwall, with a detachment at Portreath. There he was involved in a court martial, following a breach of security. He was acquitted, then posted to the Middle East, where he successively commanded two Beaufighter squadrons, no. 252 and then no. 603 (county of London), until January 1945. Repatriated at the beginning of that year, he was given command of his former squadron, no. 143, which operated Mosquitoes in an anti-shipping role and which he led until May. Later the same month he was awarded the DSO, the citation saying: 'This officer has a long and distinguished record of operational flying. He has completed numerous sorties on his third tour of duty, during which he has operated against a wide range of enemy targets... By his brilliant leadership, exceptional skill and determination, Wing Commander Foxley-Norris has contributed in good measure to the successes obtained.' On 1 September 1945 Foxley-Norris was awarded a permanent commission; then after serving briefly with 2 group HQ he took the 1946-7 Staff College course. From June 1947 he was on the air staff of reserve command, before returning to his alma mater, Oxford University air squadron, this time in command (1948-51). On 10 November 1948 he married, in Oxford, the 29-year-old Joan Lovell Scott, the daughter of Major Percy Henry Hughes, army officer, and the divorced wife of John Frederick Turner Scott. There were no children of the marriage. 
From 1951 to 1953 Foxley-Norris was on the directing staff of the RAF Staff College. A tour in the Far East, on the planning staff of Far East headquarters, Singapore, during the Malayan emergency, followed; when he returned to the UK in May 1956 he was made OBE in the birthday honours. He then became officer commanding flying at West Malling and did an all-weather conversion at North Luffenham. From December 1956 he was on the fighter command HQ staff, and in October 1958 converted to Javelins at Leeming. From November that year he commanded successively the fighter stations Stradishall and West Malling, then from September 1960 was on the senior officers' war course at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and in 1961 a student on the Imperial Defence College course. 
A series of senior appointments followed: director of organization at the Air Ministry from 1962; air officer commanding 224 group, Far East air force, during the Indonesian confrontation -- having at his command a 'small air force' of some 300 aircraft; then from July 1968 commander, NATO 2nd Tactical Air Force, and commander-in-chief, RAF Germany -- facing the Warsaw pact forces. Having been appointed CB in the 1966 birthday honours, in the 1969 new year honours Foxley-Norris was appointed KCB and in December 1970 he was promoted air chief marshal. With such a distinguished pedigree, command experience, and personal charisma, he was a front runner for the top RAF post, chief of the air staff. In the event, his last appointment was that of chief of personnel and logistics, a post which enabled him to use his considerable influence to improve service pay and pensions. He was made GCB in the 1973 new year honours and in April 1974 was placed on the retired list. 
In retirement Foxley-Norris worked tirelessly for the Battle of Britain Fighter Association, of which he was chairman, and for -- among other good causes -- the Cheshire Homes, founded by his friend from Oxford University air squadron days, the bomber VC Leonard Cheshire; he served as chairman from 1974 to 1982, and later as president. A pipe-smoker, he was chairman of FOREST (the Freedom Organisation for the Right to Enjoy Smoking Tobacco). He also wrote a very readable autobiography, 'A Lighter Shade of Blue: Lighthearted Memoirs of an Air Marshal' (1978). He died on 28 September 2003 at his home, Tumblewood, Northend Common, Henley-on-Thames, of pneumonia and hypertension, and was survived by his wife, Joan. A memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey on 29 January 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 92562


Garfield, Leon (1921-1996), writer, was born on 14 July 1921 in Brighton, the younger son of David Kalman Garfield (died 1951), businessman, and his wife, Rose, formerly Blaustein (died 1964). He had one brother, David ('c'.1916-1980). Of Jewish origin, the family lived in Brighton and Garfield was educated at Brighton grammar school (1932-8), followed by a brief period of art studies at Regent Street Polytechnic, London, in 1939. His father, who was unable to pay the fees, arranged for him to work in a London office. This was cut short by the Second World War. 
Garfield served as a private in the Royal Army Medical Corps, 1940-46, including time with the war crimes investigation team. He acquired a position with the latter by falsely claiming he was an interpreter to avoid being sent to the Far East. His work included a period at Bergen-Belsen concentration camp retrieving evidence for trial. He married Lena Leah Davies ('b'. 1918/19), a saleswoman and ARP worker, on 27 April 1941 at Golders Green synagogue. They separated after a few months. During wartime service in Belgium he met his second wife, Vivien Dolores Alcock ['see below'], a commercial artist and later an established children's writer herself. Garfield divorced his first wife about 1946 and married Vivien Alcock at Hampstead register office, London, on 23 October 1948. They settled in Highgate in north London. His father disapproved of Garfield divorcing his first, Jewish, wife, to marry a non-Jew, and this led to a family rift. This fracture, in what was already a difficult father-son relationship, affected Leon Garfield deeply, and was to surface in his writing. Garfield had trained in biochemistry and haematology during the war, and worked as a biochemical technician at the Whittington Hospital, Islington, north London, from 1946 to 1966. In 1964 the Garfields adopted a baby daughter, Jane Angela. 
From 1969 Garfield worked as a full-time writer. His first book, 'Jack Holborn' (1964), a story of adventure and piracy, was originally written as an adult novel. However, in the mid-1960s many promising new children's writers were being published, and Grace Hogarth, an editor at Constable, saw its potential as a children's story. This launched a writing career of three decades and more than thirty published works. In 'Devil-in-the-Fog' (1966), which won the first 'Guardian' award for children's fiction in 1967, George Treet, from a family of strolling players, searches for his own identity amid conflicting loyalties and surprise revelations. In 'Smith' (1967), one of Garfield's best books, a London pickpocket's quest to decipher a stolen document leads him from a life of solitary deception to one of companionship and trust. In the macabre 'Black Jack' (1968), in which an apprentice falls under the spell of a survivor of the gallows, Garfield diversified his output. 
Garfield's versatility during this period is clear from his collaboration with Edward Blishen on two retellings of Greek myths, 'The God Beneath the Sea' (1970), a Library Association Carnegie medal winner in 1971, and its sequel 'The Golden Shadow' (1971). Garfield experimented with the ghost story in 'Mr Corbett's Ghost' (1968) and the Faustian chiller 'The Ghost Downstairs' (1972). He also produced shorter works, such as the series 'The Apprentices' (1976-8), a dozen linked stories, beginning with 'The Lamplighter's Funeral', about the sometimes bizarre lives and trades of young Londoners. 
The 'Apprentice' series, which many critics regard as Garfield's crowning achievement, consolidated many of his themes and techniques. Most of Garfield's children's books, atmospherically illustrated by Antony Maitland, are usually categorized as historical fiction. However, his history is more a matter of impressions than of precise dates and details. His characters are rarely linked to actual historical events but are often to be found in the richly realized miasma of an eighteenth- or nineteenth-century London slum. History in these works is used as an environment in which characters and plots can be developed, and Garfield evokes a sense of period through inventive, expressive language but without recourse to hindsight -- this is history as experienced by his characters, with no authorial presence. Themes of relationships, loyalties, and the search for identity recur often. Garfield's own difficult, ambivalent relationship with his father surfaces in various forms. His childhood memories of his father, and his adult revision of that understanding after his father's death, provided a double perspective which influenced the way Garfield wrote about relationships. This can be seen in 'Devil-in-the-Fog', where George's understanding of his father's identity and their relationship shifts and changes in the course of the book. Illusion is also a dominant motif -- fathers are absent, or appear in unexpected, sometimes unwelcome guises; villains and criminals may turn into friends and allies, and it is hard to discern the truth in a world of shifting perceptions. For his young heroes the getting of wisdom sometimes begets disillusion but stories generally end on a note of optimism, if not always of tidy closure. Garfield was a natural story-teller. His narratives, richly textured, entertaining, and inventive, demonstrate his command of language and plot. 
Although the distinction between 'adult' and 'for children' often broke down in Garfield's novels, his later work was infused with a new, allegorical, often religious tone, most notable in 'The Pleasure Garden' (1976) and 'The Confidence Man' (1978). Garfield returned to the themes and successes of his early fiction with the Whitbread prize-winner 'John Diamond' (1980), a story about a young boy dealing with problems inherited from his swindler father (David Kalman Garfield's lack of success in business, and rumours surrounding his financial dealings, possibly inspired this portrait). In 'Blewcoat Boy' (1988) Nick's and Jubilee's fading memories of a real father are exchanged gradually for a new relationship with a substitute father. 
In the latter part of his career, however, Garfield moved further away from children's fiction. In 1980 he produced a successful completed version of Charles Dickens's unfinished novel 'The Mystery of Edwin Drood', compounding critical opinion that in the combination of comedy, eccentricity, and tragedy, Garfield was comparable with Dickens. In 1982 he published his only 'adult' novel, 'The House of Cards'. His love of Shakespeare resulted in the critically acclaimed 'Shakespeare Stories' (1985) and 'Shakespeare Stories II' (1994); in the early 1990s he completed scripts for a television series of animated tales from Shakespeare. Garfield was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1985. 
Known for his erudition, generosity, and talkativeness (particularly on the subject of Shakespeare), Garfield, who often wore bow ties and velvet jackets, is said to have had a dandified appearance. He died of cancer on 2 June 1996, at the Whittington Hospital, Islington, where he had once worked. He had been preparing a dramatization of 'The Odyssey' for BBC radio at the time of his death. 
Leon Garfield was one of the most prominent writers for children in the second half of the twentieth century. His novels, fast-paced and full of incident, owe much to the classic adventure story as epitomized by Robert Louis Stevenson. They have also been read and admired by adults, as he intended: he always said he wanted 'to write that old-fashioned thing, the family novel, accessible to the 12-year-old and readable by his elders' ('The Independent'). Several of his novels were adapted for television; 'Black Jack' was made into a film directed by Ken Loach (it shared the International Jury award at Cannes in 1979) and the director John Huston made his last appearance in film in 'Mr Corbett's Ghost' in 1987. 
Garfield's second wife, Vivien Dolores Alcock (1921-2003), children's writer, was born at Lavender House, Brougham Road, Worthing, Sussex, on 23 September 1921, the youngest of three daughters of John Forster Alcock, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Marian Winifred, 'nee' Pulman. Her mother was frequently ill, and Alcock and her sisters were often farmed out to relatives. She was educated at Devizes high school, Wiltshire, and then at the Oxford School of Art. She left in 1942 to join the Auxiliary Territorial Service. It was while serving as an ambulance driver in Belgium that she met Leon Garfield. She worked as a commercial artist at Gestetner from 1947 to 1953, and then as a secretary at the Whittington Hospital from 1953 to 1958. She had always harboured ambitions to be a writer, but it was not until 1980 that her first novel, 'The Haunting of Cassie Palmer', was published. Her last, 'The Boy Who Swallowed a Ghost', appeared in 2001. In between, she published (under her maiden name) more than twenty books, mostly written for older children, though including, for instance, 'The Dancing Bush' (1991), a story for younger readers about a bush that comes to life at night. A number of her stories were televised, including 'The Cuckoo Sister' (1985), about a girl reunited with her parents fifteen years after being stolen as a baby, and 'The Trial of Anna Cotman' (1989), about a secret club where the penalties for breaking any of the rules are frighteningly severe. Her novels, though sometimes terrifying, were notable for their portrayal of character and their dry humour. Modest and almost painfully shy, she enjoyed painting and keeping large dogs. Following the death of her husband she moved from Highgate Woods to 86A Yerbury Road, Tufnell Park, London, where she died of cancer on 12 October 2003. She was survived by her daughter Jane. 


@@@@@


doc= 92568


Bonarjee, Stephen Wilson (1912-2003), radio editor, was born on 15 May 1912 at Pitcarmick, West Heath Road, Abbeywood, Erith, Kent, the son of Pitt Bonarjee, a minister in the Congregational church, and his wife, Florence Martha, 'nee' Wilson. His father, who had been a civil servant in Simla before turning to the ministry, was Indian, and his mother a Scot. An uncle had helped found the Indian National Congress. Sent to Caterham School, he stood as a Liberal in its mock election in 1929 (and won), an early sign of the political commitment that for most of his life -- working in the BBC where impartiality was expected -- he had to suppress. He went on to St Andrews University to read English before entering journalism on local papers in Leeds and Huddersfield and thence, in 1938, the 'Manchester Guardian'. The outbreak of the Second World War saw Bonarjee volunteer: he served with the Royal Sussex regiment and then the Lancashire fusiliers, reaching the rank of captain. 
Demobilized, Bonarjee returned to journalism in 1946, but this time in radio, then enjoying its golden age at the core of national life. He began as a talks producer, left briefly for Alexandra Palace and the fledgeling television service, but was soon back at Broadcasting House. Over the next two decades he proved himself both popular and influential, invigorating coverage of current affairs. It was he who hired (in 1954) a young and assertive Robin Day, first as a speaker on a current affairs programme called 'Topic for Tonight' and then as a producer on another, also on the Home Service, called 'At Home and Abroad'. This, Day recalled in his memoirs, was his entry into 'the priesthood of broadcasting' (Day, 71). 'Topic for Tonight' and 'At Home and Abroad' were only two of the shows Bonarjee launched, produced, or revived as he rose to become head of current affairs in BBC radio. He began 'From Our Own Correspondent', still running more than fifty years later, for reporters to convey the flavour of life in distant lands; he made 'The Week in Westminster' lively and challenging where previously it had been dull and dusty; and he ran 'Ten O'Clock', which, when it replaced the 9 p.m. news bulletin on the Home Service in 1960, was radio's first daily offering of news analysis. Two of the arguments for 10 p.m. -- that it was better suited for late debates in the Commons and better able to bring news from the USA because of the time difference -- also found favour with ITN when seven years later in 1967 it launched 'News at Ten'. Bonarjee also helped shape general election coverage, by introducing psephologists, dons, and journalists to comment on the results in a way later taken for granted but innovative then. 
It was Robin Day who, in a memorandum of 1955, first proposed the programme that became 'Today'. But Bonarjee made his mark on the programme in a particularly important way. Becoming editor in 1962, when its presenter was still the eccentric Jack de Manio, he was instrumental in transforming it from a frothy cappuccino into the place where decision-makers would queue up to drop a word in the nation's ear. 'Today' was transferred from talks to current affairs in 1963, gradually changing from morning miscellany to agenda-setting controversy. A four-page document Bonarjee wrote for colleagues was one of the earliest BBC memos to call a programme a 'product' and suggest a 'sharper' edge -- words that also later became commonplace but were quite novel then: 'in general the programme will need rather more 'roughage' in the shape of sharper, harder material... we would all agree, I know, that it ['Today'] should invariably be a lively, polished product. To this I would add that it should have a forward-looking feel about it, should concern itself mainly with broad extrovert human interests and talking points, but should not be afraid to be serious when necessary (although hardly ever solemn). (WAC, R51/1,000/11, 3 Sept 1963)' Bonarjee also brought in the popular John Timpson as co-host of 'Today' in 1970 and was there when de Manio left in 1971. 
In 1972, when he attained the BBC's compulsory retirement age of sixty, Bonarjee left the corporation. No longer required to be politically neutral, he became press secretary for the Liberal Party, then led by the scandal-hit Jeremy Thorpe, who was succeeded in 1976 by David Steel. Steel described him as 'a most efficient and congenial press spokesman' (private information). He was later broadcasting adviser to the general synod of the Church of England, in which his father had tried, but failed, to become ordained, and chaired the National Liberal Club from 1994 to 1997. He died of bronchopneumonia on 14 September 2003 at St George's Nursing Home, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 92569


Borthwick, Alastair Charles (1913-2003), journalist and mountaineer, was born on 17 February 1913 at 38 Calderwood Road, Rutherglen, Lanarkshire, the son of Alexander Charles Borthwick, electrical engineer, and his wife, Jessie Scotland, 'nee' Bayne. He was brought up in Troon, Ayrshire, but moved to Glasgow where he attended Glasgow high school until, aged sixteen, he became a copytaker on the 'Evening Times'. The job called for literacy, quick fingers, and patience with the person at the other end of the line. For Borthwick it was the way into journalism. Still in his teens, he moved upwards to the 'Glasgow Weekly Herald' where a minute and overstretched staff gave him the entree to every aspect of the journal and most significantly the open-air page. Through it he discovered the pleasures and skills of rock climbing, an activity hitherto more or less the preserve of the relatively well-off, but which young Scotsmen and women of limited means and none were then making their own. He recounted his experiences for the page and many appeared in his first book, 'Always a Little Further' (1939), the title taken from the song of the ragged pilgrims in James Elroy Flecker's 'The Golden Journey to Samarkand', who aimed to go 'beyond that last blue mountain barred with snow'. 
It was the fun of exploring and climbing in good company that attracted Borthwick to mountaineering, as much as the romanticism of it. His book was packed with tales of 'dossing in howffs' (sleeping in bothies), encounters with the highland underclass of tinkers and poachers, heroic hitch-hiking, and hair-raising climbs by novices. Borthwick was not noted as a pioneer of new routes, but he set down memorably what it was like for the ordinary climber on the rock face. Although he seems not to have frequented the hills after the Second World War, his book became a classic, often reprinted, and more than sixty years later was prayed in aid in the fight to save the small, remote youth hostels which he and his friends had enjoyed from being closed to make the Scottish Youth Hostels Association a commercial success. 
One chapter in 'Always a Little Further', called 'Shilling a night' (the standard charge), described the cheerful internationalism of Scots and Germans carousing after a soaking on the hills at Arrochar hostel, at the head of Loch Long. But Borthwick went to war against the Germans in 1939. He served with the 5th Seaforth Highlanders, mostly as a battalion intelligence officer, from the western desert to Sicily and north-west Europe, having on 24 September 1940 married Ann Falconer Tait Corbett (died 2003), a 26-year-old civil servant in the Ministry of Information (later a radio journalist), and daughter of James Lockhead Corbett, advertising agent. They had one son, Patrick. 
Borthwick came unscathed through the war and achieved his greatest and most terrifying feat almost at the end in the Netherlands, when his sense of direction (the maps were faulty), honed in the very different countryside of the highlands, enabled him to lead 600 men in pitch dark to a position behind the enemy lines, where they dug in. He hated war and the army but, as he told an interviewer in the last years of his life, he regarded his second book, 'Sans Peur' (1946), as his best. Taking its title from the Seaforths' motto, the book was a history of his unit in the years 1942-5, and unlike many regimental histories was written not by a committee or a retired general but by a humble captain who was there. Conveying some of the same sense of adventure which illumines 'Always a Little Further', it was republished as 'Battalion' in 1994, and was widely acclaimed by military historians. 
Before the war Borthwick had spent a short and unhappy spell at the 'Daily Mirror' in London. He returned to Scotland where he had already started a broadcasting career which ran from 1934 to 1995. A BBC producer, James Fergusson, 'saw him in the studio treating the microphone like an old friend, chatting away, waving his arms about, and I knew this was how it was done' ('The Independent', 6 Oct 2003). Fergusson was lured by Borthwick to make what may have been the first live climbing broadcast, from Agag's Groove in Glen Coe. Further commissions followed. 
For seven years after the war Borthwick combined smallholding on Jura with broadcasting. On air he was as prolific as he was catholic in subject matter. He presented such long-running radio series as 'Scottish survey', an assessment of post-war Scotland, and 'Matter of opinion'. He was appointed OBE in 1951 for organizing a heavy engineering event at the Scottish end of the Festival of Britain. Later he wrote and presented scores of programmes on topics ranging from Senator McCarthy to Scottish history for Grampian TV. Although it is the two books for which he is best remembered, Borthwick took modest pride in his ephemeral broadcasting and journalism, claiming only that he was 'fit to turn out a decent job on most subjects as required' ('The Independent', 6 Oct 2003). In retirement Borthwick and his wife lived on a hill farm near Barr, Ayrshire, before moving to a nursing home, Spiers Care Home, Beith. Suffering from cancer of the prostate and oesophagus, he died there of bronchopneumonia on 25 September 2003. His funeral was held at Beith crematorium. He was survived by his son, Patrick, his wife, Ann, having died earlier in the year. 


@@@@@


doc= 92570


Cochran, William (1922-2003), physicist, was born at Driffenbeg Farm, a moorland sheep farm near Newton Mearns, Renfrewshire, on 30 July 1922, the only son (there were three daughters) of James Cochrane, later Cochran (1885-1955), farmer, and his wife, Margaret Watson, 'nee' Baird (died 1937). The family had been farmers since about 1650. The eldest and youngest of his sisters married farmers, while his middle sister became a doctor. His father, James, was reserved and somewhat withdrawn, and in the 1920s and 1930s life as a farmer was hard. After a long illness his mother died when his youngest sister was only four. 
In 1928 the family moved to Hillwood Farm, eight miles west of Edinburgh. The headmaster of the local school suggested to his parents that Cochran should go to Boroughmuir secondary school in Edinburgh. Boroughmuir was not one of the elite Edinburgh schools, and there was no uniform and little pressure to conform, which suited Cochran. In later life he wondered whether a different school would have given him more self-confidence. Nevertheless he was near the top in his academic subjects and in his fifth year at the school he was encouraged to specialize in physics. He became a student at Edinburgh University in 1939. 
The physics course at Edinburgh was inadequate. The head of department, Charles Barkla, had won the Nobel prize in 1917 for his research on X-rays but did not keep up with developments in quantum mechanics, relativity, and nuclear physics. Cochran graduated in 1943 together with one other student, and hoped to leave Edinburgh. Like most of his contemporaries he applied for a commission in the RAF. For reasons that he never understood he was turned down and told that he should teach physics at Edinburgh, which he did reluctantly as well as studying for a PhD. Unfortunately, like other Edinburgh research students in physics, he had to study the non-existent J-rays with Barkla. After a year he met C. Arnold Beevers, who described X-ray crystallography to him. Cochran requested permission to change supervisor but Barkla refused. The problem was only resolved later in 1944 when Barkla died. Cochran then changed his research topic to X-ray crystallography and obtained his PhD in 1946 for a thesis on the structure of sugar. 
After completing his thesis Cochran left Edinburgh and went to Cambridge, where he took a fixed-term research assistant post. In addition to solving the crystal structures of materials he broadened his interests to include the theory of X-ray diffraction measurements. He also met Max Perutz and John Kendrew, but considered their project to solve the structure of proteins impossibly difficult based on his experience of sugar. In 1950 (by now a university demonstrator in physics) he went for six months to work in Ray Pepinsky's laboratory at Pennsylvania State University. It was a very profitable visit because he met David Sayre and together they developed direct methods of crystal structure determination. On the way back from a conference in Sweden he met Ingegerd Elsa Birgitta Wall, who was trying to practise her English. They later became engaged and married in Sweden in April 1953. They had three children, Margaret, Robert, and Jenny. 
When Cochran returned from Stockholm in 1951 he was promoted to a tenured lecturership at Cambridge and soon became a fellow of Trinity Hall. His research went well and his group solved important crystal structures. In 1952 he also became interested in helical structures. After seeing an incorrect derivation of the scattering he developed a correct solution and realized that one of the materials he was studying had a helical structure. He then realized that his earlier pessimism about protein crystallography had been wrong, but he considered it was too late to join the bandwagon. He also became involved in an argument about the twin paradox in relativity with Herbert Dingle. He enjoyed both the argument and the publicity. His research changed again when he attended a conference at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1957. Bertram Brockhouse gave a talk explaining how it was possible to measure the lattice dynamics of solids using neutron scattering. Cochran was stimulated and arranged to spend a sabbatical at Chalk River in Canada in 1958-9 working with Brockhouse. He developed new models for the lattice dynamics of insulators, performed new experiments, and predicted the soft mode that occurs at structural phase transitions. When he returned to Cambridge he had largely changed the topic of his research. 
Cochran's success at both lattice dynamics and crystallography meant that he was offered chairs at Southampton and Sheffield, but he was determined that he would only move from Cambridge to return to Edinburgh. In 1963 a second chair was advertised there. After discussion, and a rewriting of the particulars, Cochran eventually accepted the chair and moved in 1964. He had considerable difficulties initially, as he was housed in a temporary building, the new X-ray diffractometer did not work, and the rest of the department was similar to when he had left. His research was also much more difficult than in Cambridge, especially when the promised funds for a new physics building were not forthcoming. Nevertheless the situation steadily improved, with new students and staff coming from Cambridge and elsewhere, new equipment arriving for Raman scattering and for Mossbauer experiments, and the completion of the new building two miles south of the city centre. Cochran and his family had a six-month sabbatical in 1970 at Brookhaven where he wrote a monograph on lattice dynamics and participated in some neutron scattering experiments. He came back somewhat dispirited because he had found that Gen Shirane and John Axe were faster than he was at solving problems. In 1972 he and Ingegerd spent the summer at IBM Yorktown Heights where he developed an interest in the structure of amorphous materials, and how X-ray and electron microscopy measurements could be reconciled. He continued with this research for a couple of years. 
In 1975 Norman Feather retired from being professor of natural philosophy and head of department at Edinburgh and Cochran was the obvious person to be elected to the post. There was a shortage of money and it was not a particularly happy time. He enjoyed more his term from 1978 to 1981 as dean of the faculty of science, in which post he was widely admired as being fair and constructive. In 1984 he became a vice-principal and was responsible for a new university-wide telephone system. He retired in 1988, but remained attached to the university as emeritus professor. 
Cochran's scientific research was distinguished because in three areas he made advances that contributed substantially to Nobel prizes won by Francis Crick and James Watson, Jerome Karle and Herbert Hauptman, and Bert Brockhouse. His own contributions were recognized by fellowships of the Royal Society of London (in 1962) and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and he particularly enjoyed his honorary fellowship of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. He was awarded the Guthrie medal of the Institute of Physics (1966), the Hughes medal of the Royal Society (1978), and the Potts medal of the Franklin Institute (1985), and honorary degrees from both Edinburgh and Heriot-Watt universities. 
Cochran was a proud Scot; he did not believe in independence, but he did enjoy Scottish culture. He wrote poetry, particularly in the style of Robert Burns, first just after he met Ingegerd and later when his research career was ending in 1973. He was interested in his family's genealogy and managed to trace it back to the early 1600s. He greatly enjoyed going to the Trossachs, where he and Ingegerd had first a caravan and then a log cabin, near Callendar. Besides being quiet and modest he was unfortunate in suffering from depression. He had serious bouts when he first went to Cambridge, just after he returned to Edinburgh, and again when his research career was ending. In his last few years he suffered from motor neurone disease but he bore this affliction with characteristic quietness and was lovingly supported by Ingegerd. He died from this disease at the Fairmile Marie Curie Centre, Edinburgh, on 28 August 2003, and was survived by Ingegerd and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92572


Corrigan, Kathleen (1908-2003), nun, writer, and church musician, was born on 6 March 1908 at 16 Gurnall Street, Everton, Liverpool, the second of eight surviving children of Joseph Corrigan, a 'private coachman' or taxi driver of Irish extraction, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Breze. Though 97 Eversley Street was a humble home her mother was determined her children should receive a good education and somehow money was found to provide piano lessons to nurture Kathleen's talent for music. At fifteen she was able partially to repay her parents when she was appointed, at a salary of $15 a year, as organist of Our Lady of Lourdes and St Bernard's Church in Kingsley Road in Toxteth. Her academic abilities matched her musical accomplishments and in 1926 she was awarded the senior city scholarship to read English at Liverpool University and in 1931 the Cambridge teaching diploma for higher education. 
As a small child Corrigan had felt called by God to be a nun. However, her mother persuaded her to complete her education first. Her university days over, in September 1931 she won the first organ scholarship offered by the Catholic archdiocese of Liverpool. As part of her studies she was tutored in plainsong by Dominic Willson, a monk of Ampleforth Abbey. It was he who sent her to another Benedictine house, Stanbrook Abbey in the Malvern Hills near Worcester, to meet the renowned expert in Gregorian chant Abbess Laurentia McLachlan. Such was the impact of their encounter and of Stanbrook itself on Corrigan that she knew she must make her life there within its enclosure, though she once joked in a newspaper interview that without the abbess's intervention she had planned to abandon all notion of vocation and buy a packet of cigarettes and the 'News of the World'. She entered in September 1933, taking the name Felicitas because her birthday fell on the feast of saints Felicity and Perpetua. Four and a half years later she made her final profession and became -- as has been the custom with English Benedictine nuns since the middle ages -- Dame Felicitas. The community at Stanbrook, founded at Cambrai in 1623 and devoted in the Benedictine tradition to prayer and the regular chanting of the divine office, excelled in music, scholarship, the arts, and offering hospitality. In all fields Dame Felicitas made an outstanding contribution and was one of a number of exceptional women in the community who made a substantial impact in the wider world. 
In 1946 Dame Felicitas published her first book, a collection of correspondence between saints and nuns. There was no author credit line, as was the way until 1966 at the abbey. Its writer was described simply as 'a Benedictine of Stanbrook'. It was her similarly anonymous account of the unexpected friendship between Dame Laurentia, the playwright George Bernard Shaw, and the scholar Sir Sydney Cockerell which generated the most attention. 'In a Great Tradition' (1956) sparked so much interest in this unlikely triangle that in 1985 Dame Felicitas produced an expanded volume on the subject. 'The Nun, the Infidel and the Superman' was the basis of Hugh Whitemore's 1988 play, 'The Best of Friends', which had two successful runs in the West End and was made into a film, starring Wendy Hiller as Dame Laurentia. It was through Cockerell that Dame Felicitas was introduced in 1959 to the poet Siegfried Sassoon, who two years earlier had become a Catholic. In 1960 she produced a compilation of his religious verse, 'The Path to Peace', and in 1973 an anthology marking his spiritual pilgrimage, 'Siegfried Sassoon: Poet's Pilgrimage'. Her biography of the poet and translator of medieval Latin verse Helen Waddell won the James Tait Black memorial prize in 1987. It was through Cockerell too that she began a long friendship with the actor and recent convert to Catholicism Sir Alec Guinness. For forty years they corresponded regularly and Guinness wrote a foreword to 'George Thomas of Soho' (1970), her biography of the writer whose early hardships in life paralleled her own. Another long friendship, this time with Rumer Godden, led to 'In This House of Brede' (1969), the Anglo-Indian writer's best-selling novel set in a Benedictine monastery. 
Dame Felicitas's postbag was large. She often resorted at Christmas and Easter -- after the silences maintained in Advent and Lent -- to sending out circular letters to keep up contact with her many friends and admirers. Despite her decades in the enclosure, her mind was never constrained and her round robins displayed an encyclopaedic knowledge of church writers and English literature. They were also full of her forthright, shrewd, and wry observations. 
Dame Felicitas's musical talents were used to the full from her arrival at Stanbrook, both in organ playing and choir training. She retired as organist only when her eyesight was too poor for her to continue. She counted the role her greatest achievement. Her love of plainchant remained, but in the years after the reforming Second Vatican Council of the Catholic church (1962-5) she played a leading role in adapting liturgical music to the vernacular in plainsong idiom. Her English setting for compline, maintaining its traditional poetry and theology intact, is regarded by many as peerless. 
In 1977 Dame Felicitas took on a new challenge -- to help a new abbey of Benedictine nuns at Enugu in Nigeria -- but it was not for her and she soon returned. She made other occasional forays out of Stanbrook. In 1980 she attended the national pastoral congress of the English and Welsh Catholic church in her native Liverpool, but while she approved of greater use of women's talents in the church -- and advocated the return of deaconesses -- she did not favour their ordination to the priesthood. 
Dame Felicitas's life and its many achievements exemplified the qualities of the monastic tradition in the English setting. The rare combination of spirituality and scholarship at Stanbrook made her an inspiring character. She spent her last months at Nazareth House, London Road, Charlton Kings, Cheltenham, and died there on 7 October 2003. She was buried at Stanbrook. 


@@@@@


doc= 92576


Daniels, Maxine (1930-2003), singer, was born at 3 Raine Street, Stepney, London, on 2 November 1930, the ninth of thirteen children of Oscar Lynch (1882/3-1970), a seaman who served in the merchant navy during the First World War and who was known after 1932 as Oliver Lindsay Lynch, and his wife, Amelia Mary Ann, 'nee' Spring (1895-1979). At the time of her birth her parents lived at 35 Cornwall Street, Stepney. Her father was Barbadian, her mother was English, from a family of mixed-race Londoners whose presence in Britain predated the mid-19th century. Her youngest surviving sibling was the singer and entertainer Kenneth (Kenny) Lynch ('b'. 1939). She grew up in Shadwell in Stepney's dockland, a colourful area of London's East End immortalized by writers drawn to its drama and distress. Here, seamen from across the world were among those who put down roots and developed a community in the shadow of St George-in-the-East, united by mutual need in times of unemployment that disproportionately affected people of colour. Her parents, who had married in 1915, sustained a long-lived relationship in the face of extreme poverty. 
Gladys Lynch started work as a pickle-bottler and peanut-roaster, then graduated to sawing wood in a glass works before getting her first job as a singer in a semi-professional band led by a grocer. She was working as a packer when on 8 July 1950 she married Charles Edward (Charlie) Daniels (1922-1988), a merchant seaman born in nearby Custom House. Their marriage represented a further welding of diasporan connections for his father, Nathaniel Daniels, was Caribbean, a seaman from Union Island in the Grenadines (the family name was correctly spelt Daniel) and his London-born mother, Margaret (Maggie), 'nee' Pye, who, like her own maternal grandmother, was of partial Irish descent. 
As Gladys Daniels she sang with Reg Cavell's band in Romford and performed with other local dance bands while continuing to do daytime work. Her ease with jazz and the popular songs of the day ensured that she became known to London's West End musicians but her professional break came shortly after the birth of her daughter, Hazel Annette ('b'. 1953), when she won second place in a competition organized by the 'Daily Sketch'. The chance to sing with a 'name' band ensued and she joined Denny Boyce, with whom she remained for nearly three years (1954-6). It was he who suggested she change her name and she adopted this from the African-American singer Maxine Sullivan, one of her favourites. Through Boyce's regular Radio Luxembourg broadcasts she attracted a wider audience and the opportunity to record for the Oriole label. She continued to appear with Boyce on radio and television but increasingly performed as a solo artist in variety until 1956 when she did her first cabaret date at the Astor in London's Mayfair. 
As a recording artist Daniels had several successes, but as the emphasis in popular music changed from melodic ballads and harmonic inventiveness to material reliant mainly on rhythmic content and drive, she joined a rock and roll package show headed by the drummer Tony Crombie and his Rockets. However, for someone who had grown up admiring such singers as Maxine Sullivan, Billie Holiday, and Ella Fitzgerald, the music was alien and she repeatedly made it clear that she preferred to sing ballads and jazz. She continued to perform within her chosen field, both on the continent and at American bases, and was always welcome as a cabaret artist in London's West End. She had a regular spot on BBC television's 'Tonight' programme, and in the late 1950s began an association with the trumpeter Humphrey Lyttelton's band. She continued to record and did some acting, but her attempts to combine show business with motherhood led to illness and the need for her to take an enforced rest. She withdrew from show business in 1958 and in 1963 moved to Southend, where she continued to sing occasionally in the surrounding area. She returned to touring and recording in 1966 but further health complications forced her to take a second break from the music business. 
Following heart surgery Daniels began working again with Lyttelton in 1988 and it was the trumpeter who was responsible for helping revive her career. She became a well-known figure in jazz circles, appearing at festivals and working in the Netherlands with the traditionalist Dutch Swing College Band. She sang with such notable Americans as the singer Billy Eckstine and instrumentalists Al Cohn and Wild Bill Davison, and recorded for Lyttelton's Calligraph label. In the 1990s she toured with her fellow singers Rosemary Squires and Barbara Jay in a musical 'Tribute to Ella Fitzgerald', which they recorded for Spotlite (1994), accompanied by the saxophonist Tommy Whittle. Daniels made her first solo CD for Calligraph in 1995, and in 1996 toured with Jay and Tina May in the production 'Ladies of Jazz'. 
Daniels occupied the land between jazz and popular song. She phrased superbly and swung, enunciating her words with great clarity, but it was the warmth in her voice that made her so convincing a singer. Her models were African-American but a distinct accent without any transatlantic allegiance underlined the qualities of a London original. Although not one to suffer fools gladly, she was a soft, gentle person. Tony Williams, who recorded her for his Spotlite label, described her as 'a very modest lady' (private information) and it was undoubtedly because of this lack of flamboyance that the British jazz community, while admiring her voice, seldom gave her more than the routine respect accorded a local artist. Despite the psychological problems that frequently kept her out of the spotlight, she was, as her daughter said, 'a completely free spirit', enabled to follow her chosen path through her husband's support. She retained a faithful following among the general public but, as her daughter noted, 'She wasn't really aware of her talent. Because it came so easily, she didn't realise how good she was' (private information). She died on 20 October 2003 in Oldchurch Hospital, Romford, from bronchopneumonia, and was survived by her daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 92578


Donaldson, Dame (Dorothy) Mary, Lady Donaldson of Lymington (1921-2003), mayor of London, was born on 29 August 1921 at The Square, Wickham, near Fareham, Hampshire, the oldest child and only daughter in the family of four children of Reginald George Gale Warwick (died 1956), who kept an agricultural merchants' shop, and his wife, Dorothy Alice, 'nee' Bennett, a teacher, who was the first woman to be elected to her local council. She was educated at Portsmouth high school before leaving at sixteen to spend a year in France, learning French in Paris and teaching English at a teachers' training college in Chartres. On her return to England in 1939 she began to train as an orthopaedic nurse at the Wingfield Morris Orthopaedic Hospital in Oxford. Her training continued after 1941 at the Middlesex Hospital in London. She qualified as a state registered nurse in 1946. On 6 October 1945 she married John Francis Donaldson (1920-2005), son of Malcolm Donaldson, a gynaecologist. A captain in the Royal Signals at the time of their marriage, he was called to the bar in 1946, and became a High Court judge in 1966. Knighted the same year, and created Baron Donaldson of Lymington in 1988, he was master of the rolls from 1982 to 1992. Settling in Croydon, she devoted the early years of her marriage to bringing up her children, one son and two daughters, but she was already active in the community as founder and chairman of the Upper Norwood Townswomen's Guild, and a member of the management committee of Croydon General Hospital. 
When the Donaldsons moved to the Middle Temple in the City of London in 1959 she became a nursing superintendent in the City branch of the British Red Cross Society, and in 1960, nominated by Lord Denning, became a JP for Inner London, sitting on the south Westminster bench at Bow Street and Marlborough Street magistrates' courts. She was interested in serving in local government, but disliked party politics, and in 1966 decided to stand for election to her local authority, the court of common council of the corporation of London, all of whose members stand as independents. Although there had never been a woman member, there was no rule barring women, and in a by-election in which she campaigned with the slogan 'What is Farringdon Without Mary', she was elected councillor for the ward of Farringdon Without, with the largest vote ever recorded, in a three-cornered contest that included another woman. At the time she had no ambition to become lord mayor but it soon became apparent that she was an excellent committee chairman, good at getting things done, and after serving on eleven council committees, representing the City on the inner London education authority, serving as governor of several London schools, including the City of London School for Girls, and as governor of hospitals such as the London Hospital and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, she was invited to stand for election to the court of aldermen. When she was elected alderman for Coleman Street ward in 1975, she in effect agreed to begin training to be lord mayor. She was elected sheriff in 1981, and with her fellow sheriff took it in turns to be on duty all day at the central criminal court and to accompany the lord mayor in all his official duties. She had expected to become lord mayor in 1989, but following the resignations of several ahead of her in the queue, in 1983 she was elected as the first woman lord mayor. She was made a GBE shortly afterwards. She refused to be called 'lady mayor of London', and certainly not 'lady mayoress', insisting that she had been elected to the office which carried the title of 'lord mayor'. Likewise, she was always 'chairman', and not 'chair'. She maintained she was no feminist, distancing herself from those she referred to as 'women's libbers', but she did believe in equal opportunities. 
As lord mayor, Donaldson took as her theme 'It's people that matter', and threw herself energetically into her year in the Mansion House. The lord mayor was not only the leading citizen of the City of London and spokesman for the City's financial and business community, and as such had to attend daily official lunches, receptions, and dinners, but also acted as host for the nation, welcoming any visiting head of state with a banquet: she entertained President Mitterrand of France and the emir of Bahrain. In addition she travelled abroad promoting the City of London and British exports, including visits to Japan and North America. She respected the ceremonies and traditions of the City, and her only concession was to forgo the traditional knee breeches in favour of black silk dresses and velvet suits. 
As a former nurse and later a cancer sufferer herself -- she was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1974 and underwent two mastectomies -- Donaldson was closely involved with cancer charities. Having already served as chairman of the Women's National Cancer Control Campaign from 1967 to 1969, which set up the first cervical screening caravan, and vice-president of the British Cancer Council in 1970, in 1984 she was invited by Vicky Clement-Jones to join the steering committee that set up the British Association of Cancer United Patients (BACUP), a cancer information service for patients and their families, launched in 1985. She was its president from 1985 to 1993, and during these years was willing to talk publicly about her experience of breast cancer, in order to raise awareness and encourage women to seek early diagnosis. 
Perhaps the most important thing that Donaldson did was to serve as chairman of the voluntary (later interim) licensing authority for human in vitro fertilization and embryology, set up by the Medical Research Council and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists on the lines recommended by the Warnock report in 1984. The birth of the first 'test-tube baby' in 1978 had shown that in vitro fertilization (IVF) could overcome infertility, but this had caused much public concern about where the new techniques might lead. The committee chaired by Dame Mary Warnock recommended that IVF should continue to be available subject to licensing and inspection, and that research on embryos should be allowed up to fourteen days from fertilization. Nevertheless the opponents of IVF were well organized, and although Enoch Powell's 1985 'Protection of the Unborn Child Bill' to ban all research on test tube embryos was talked out at the committee stage, it was felt that there should be a body responsible for licensing and monitoring IVF clinics until government legislation had been passed. Donaldson said the Powell bill showed 'profound ignorance... and a lack of humanity', and called for a bill based on fact (cuttings file, priv. coll.). Although such legislation was expected within two years, the 'Human Fertilization and Embryology Bill' was not passed until 1990, and in 1991 the interim licensing authority was replaced by a statutory body. 
In the 1990s, although still active in London as a member of the Press Complaints Commission from 1991 to 1996 and first chairman of the Banking Ombudsman Council from 1985 to 1994, Donaldson and her husband, who stepped down from being master of the rolls in 1992, spent more time at their home in Lymington, Hampshire. Theirs was a close and very successful marriage, and an equal partnership: when they took up sailing, a passion for many years, they soon decided there would have to be two captains and no crew. A woman of tremendous energy, with a warm personality and good sense of humour, in retirement Donaldson was a member of the committee of the League of Friends of Lymington Hospital and a patron of Oakhaven Hospice, Lymington. She died at the latter on 4 October 2003, of a brain tumour, and was buried five days later. She was survived by her husband and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92585


Henley, Sir Douglas Owen (1919-2003), civil servant, was born on 5 April 1919 at 182 Venner Road, Beckenham, Kent, the elder of the two children (both sons) of Owen Henley (1876-1943), an iron moulder's assistant who had served as a private in the Royal West Kent regiment during the First World War, and his wife, Beatrice Mary, 'nee' Hearn (1887-1980). He was educated at Beckenham and Penge county school, from which he won a state scholarship and a Leverhulme scholarship to the London School of Economics in 1936. He took a first-class honours degree in economics, and won the Gonner prize and two postgraduate scholarships in 1939. 
What might have been a distinguished academic career was stopped in its tracks by the Second World War. Henley did not take up his postgraduate scholarships, but joined the army in 1939, becoming a captain in the Queen's Own Royal West Kent regiment before serving as an intelligence officer with 12th infantry brigade. He saw service in north Africa in 1943 and in Italy and Greece in 1944. He was twice mentioned in dispatches in 1945. He married June Muriel Ibbetson ('b'. 1919), labour manager, and later a family psychotherapist, at St John's Church, Dormansland, Surrey, on 16 September 1942. She was the daughter of Thomas Henry Ibbetson, a chartered surveyor, of Dormansland. They had four daughters. 
Henley joined the civil service in 1946 under the post-war reconstruction entry scheme, and thanks to his record as a student of economics was taken straight into the Treasury, an unusual distinction at a time when the Treasury was accustomed to recruit mainly from people who had shown sufficient promise in another department first. His early postings in the Treasury included two years from 1950 as private secretary to Sir Edwin Plowden, the chief of the economic planning staff, and a period of service as Treasury representative and financial controller in Tokyo and Singapore from 1956 to 1959. He became assistant under-secretary of state at the newly created Department of Economic Affairs in October 1964, and remained there until the department was wound up in 1969, when he returned as a deputy secretary to the Treasury. In 1972 he was promoted to be the second permanent secretary in charge of the public sector group. It was a time of change in that area of the Treasury's responsibilities, with renewed emphasis on the need to control public expenditure, and Henley initiated and supervised the design of a new system of cash limits and a new financial information system. He was made a CB in 1970 and knighted KCB in 1973. 
In 1976 Henley was appointed comptroller and auditor-general, in charge of the Exchequer and Audit Department (later renamed the National Audit Office), the department responsible for advising the House of Commons (in practice the public accounts committee) on the audit of the accounts of government departments and other public-sector bodies, and for ensuring that money voted by parliament was applied to the purposes for which it was intended. He found a department set in its traditional ways, and somewhat inward-looking and departmentalized. With the support of his political masters he took the initiative in encouraging a broader approach than that of merely looking for faults and failures in the control of public expenditure, with the development of more progressive reviews and reports on value for money in public spending. He thus set the pattern for the way in which the National Audit Office was developed by his successors. 
The qualities that stood out in Henley's working life were his total integrity, his quickness of understanding, his sureness of judgement, his directness, his approachability, and his total lack of pomposity or 'side'. These qualities made him a much valued colleague, and enabled him to earn and deserve the confidence both of members of parliament and of government departments when he was comptroller and auditor-general. The warmth of his personality brought him many friends who held him in great affection. He was a man of wide interests: above all his family life with his wife and daughters, but also opera, gardening, walking, and fishing. 
After his retirement from public service in 1981 Henley served until 1989 as chairman of the London Small Business Property Trust, and until 1990 as a consultant to Deloitte, Haskins and Sells. He was a member of council of the Girls' Public Day School Trust (GPDST) from 1981 to 2000, chairman of the governors of Alleyn's School, Dulwich, and a governor of a number of GPDST schools. He was made an honorary fellow of the London School of Economics in 1974, and he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Bath in 1987. He died of cancer of the colon on 1 October 2003 at his home, Walwood House, Park Road, Banstead, Surrey. His wife and four daughters survived him. His body was cremated on 14 October 2003 at Randalls Park crematorium, and his ashes were interred at St Margaret's Church, Chipstead, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 92590


Morgan, Peter Henry Geoffrey (1919-2003), motor manufacturer, was born at Chestnut Villa, Worcester Road, Malvern, Worcestershire, on 3 November 1919, the only son (there were four daughters) of Henry Frederick Stanley Morgan (1881-1959) and his wife, (Hilda) Ruth, 'nee' Day. His father, 'HFS', had been born into a well-to-do ecclesiastical family, but as a child he had developed an interest in engineering, which, with his father's support, led to successful study at Crystal Palace Engineering College, followed by a Great Western Railway engineering apprenticeship. He became an enthusiastic motorist and with a friend set up a 'garage and motor works' in Malvern. With the help of the engineering master at Malvern School, William Stephenson-Peach, and facilities he made available, and with commercial engineering assistance H. F. S. Morgan produced his prototype Morgan three-wheeler Runabout car in 1909. The enthusiasm of his friends and the support of his father led to the establishment of the Morgan Motor Co. and the public appearance of the 'car for one person' at the 1910 Olympia Motor Cycle Show. So in the decade before Peter Morgan's birth the foundations of a specialist motor manufacturer, operating in a niche market, had been laid. The firm continued into the next century under the control of three successive generations of the Morgan family, producing hand-crafted sports cars of classic appearance, which were joined by the distinctive new Aero 8 in 2000. As the son of the founder, Peter's special contribution was to ensure the company's survival through a variety of adverse circumstances, especially those caused by changing markets and the external economic situation. 
Like his father, Peter Morgan had an education that equipped him for a life's work in engineering, at Oundle public school, with its reputation for mechanical subjects, and at Chelsea College of Automobile and Aeronautical Engineering (1937-40). By this time he was already involved with Morgan as a co-driver with his father in trials, and his active participation in motor sport at the wheel of a Morgan resumed in post-war years: given the market to which Morgan appealed, this was a crucial contribution to the company's prosperity. In 1939, while still a student, he married Jane Christie (died 2003); they had two daughters and a son. After college, a brief spell with the British Ermeto Corporation was followed by wartime military service in the Royal Army Service Corps, eventually in charge of workshops in Nairobi, with the rank of captain. After demobilization he spent a brief period with the United Africa Co. before he joined the family firm in 1947, at a time when the model F three-wheeler was declining in market appeal and the future lay with the Morgan 4/4 (four-wheeled, four cylinder) sports car, which HFS had developed in 1934 from the model F. Peter Morgan's initial position was as draughtsman and development engineer and his early years on the staff coincided with the dwindling of three-wheeler production, to end in 1951-2. The 4/4 model underwent development in the late 1940s, on which Peter Morgan worked, to emerge in 1950 as the more powerful Plus-4, with a Standard Vanguard engine, the prototype being driven by him in the 1950 London-Exeter trial. 
Morgan became managing director of the Morgan Motor Co. in 1958 and on the death of his father in 1959 became chairman as well. HFS had left the company to his daughters and to Peter, who was faced with problems with the Inland Revenue on the one hand and some family scepticism about the company's future on the other (Miller, 97). With gentlemanly determination and a strong commitment to the family firm, which was a constant feature of his life, he carried the business into the next generation. Active involvement of Morgan cars in motor sport continued, highlighted by their win in the 2 litre class at Le Mans in 1962. One major move must, however, be counted a failure: the Plus Four Plus, launched in 1963, was a closed, glass-fibre-bodied version of the Plus 4. It had been developed as the result of an enquiry from Greece for a streamlined body (and had been preceded by individual special-bodied Morgans), but the car's departure from the traditional Morgan, and possibly its higher price, deprived it of a strong market, only some 26 being built (Bowden, 94). This was at a time when total annual Morgan sales amounted to 434 (in 1964), of which 374 were exported, some 250 to the United States, although this market was to present future problems in the form of safety and emissions regulations. 
Undeterred by the relative failure of the Plus Four Plus, the company under Peter Morgan's 'steady leadership' ('The Times', 24 Oct 2003) went on to launch in 1968 the Plus 8, which remained in production at the time of his death. He was particularly proud of his part, together with Maurice Owen, a racing engineer, in the development of this more powerful car, the need for which had arisen when the Triumph engine which had powered the Plus 4 had had to be replaced. Morgan had always bought in engines, the company enjoying a positive relationship with their various suppliers, and for the Plus 8 Morgan successfully negotiated with Peter Wilks of Rover for the supply of the Buick-originated but Rover-manufactured V8 engine. 
Morgan came to the attention of a wider public with the BBC television series 'Trouble Shooter' in 1990, in which the management expert Sir John Harvey-Jones visited a number of companies which in different ways might have been considered to be in need of his analytical and prescriptive skills. In the case of Morgan there seems to have been less than a meeting of minds: implicit in Harvey-Jones's approach was the concept of the standard production line and the consequent increasing of production to remove a waiting list of indeterminate but undoubtedly long duration. The company did not wholly ignore the analysis and prescription, however, as production was increased and productivity improved. On a return visit Harvey-Jones praised what he saw, and a radical new model, the all-aluminium Aero 8, for which a new assembly building had been built, was introduced in 2000. 
Morgan's first marriage was dissolved in 1972, and on 23 January 1982 he married Heather Mary Williams, secretary, and daughter of Arthur Williams, shoe repairer. He retired as managing director in 1999 but continued to come into the office until shortly before his death, on 20 October 2003 at Worcestershire Royal Hospital, Worcester, of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and acute renal failure. He was survived by his second wife, Heather, and the three children of his first marriage. His son, Charles ('b'. 1951), had left a career in television in 1985 to join the company. He was made managing director in 1999 and on his father's death succeeded him as chairman. 


@@@@@


doc= 92593


Oman, Julia Trevelyan (1930-2003), designer and gardener, was born on 11 July 1930 at 30 Abingdon Villas, Kensington, London, the elder child and only daughter of Charles Chichele Oman (1901-1982), silver historian and later keeper of the department of metalwork at the Victoria and Albert Museum, and his wife, Joan (1901-1973), youngest daughter of Sir Ernest John Trevelyan, high court judge in Calcutta and reader in Indian law at Oxford. Sir Charles William Chadwick Oman, historian, was her paternal grandfather, and the historian Carola Oman was an aunt; on her mother's side she came from the Trevelyan family of historians. She was educated at a boarding school, which she later described as 'a cruel place' ('The Times'), then at Wimbledon College of Art, and finally at the Royal College of Art, as a royal scholar, where she studied interior design and won the silver medal on graduation in 1955. 
After graduating Oman joined BBC television as a set designer, working on up to six sets a week for productions as diverse as 'Dixon of Dock Green', 'Compact', and 'Six-Five Special'. The turning point came when she won the designer of the year award for her contribution to Jonathan Miller's 1966 television production of 'Alice in Wonderland'. The skewed Victorian world created for this quirky, star-studded version of 'Alice' opened career doors, leading to the worlds of film, theatre, ballet, and opera. Now a freelance, she was suddenly in demand at the highest levels. Tony Richardson asked for her for his new film, 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' (1968); as associate art director she created English domestic scenes, the country wedding and cottage, which were pure Pre-Raphaelite, reminiscent of Burne-Jones and Millais. She went on to design three more films, but her true artistic home was the theatre. In 1967 there was a summons from the Royal Ballet, in response to a portfolio of designs she had left for consideration years earlier, for a ballet based on Elgar's 'Enigma Variations'. Realized in 1968, choreographed by Frederick Ashton, this classic production led to other collaborations with Ashton, notably 'A Month in the Country' (1976), with romantic designs beautifully evoking the Russia of Turgenev and Pushkin. 
Growing up among the collections of the Victoria and Albert, and with her family background, a love of history, art, and documentation were in her blood. As a designer Oman was renowned for her intensive research, quest for authenticity, attention to detail, and visual appreciation. Once the chosen period and 'look' of a production were set, she immersed herself in time, place, character, and atmosphere. Her theatre breakthrough came in 1967 with 'Brief Lives', starring Roy Dotrice as the seventeenth-century antiquary and author John Aubrey. Oman's amazing set -- described by the director Patrick Garland as 'Jacobean kitchen-sink' -- was a mirror of the main character, fascinating audiences with its overwhelming array of clutter, including genuine period books and furniture, complemented by dust, desiccated flowers, and real decaying fruit, all carefully assembled by Oman. She brought the same attention to detail to all her projects, memorably evoking the world of Samuel Pepys for an exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery in 1970; travelling to Leningrad to research designs for a magnificent 'Eugene Onegin' (directed by Peter Hall at the Royal Opera House, 1971); photographing the Venice ghetto in preparation for Jonathan Miller's 'The Merchant of Venice', set in the 1880s, with Olivier's Shylock as a frock-coated banker (National Theatre, 1971); and recreating an authentic period shoemaker's shop for John Dexter's production of Thomas Dekker's 'Shoemaker's Holiday' (National Theatre, 1981). Among her most lasting triumphs were a trio of classic productions for the Royal Opera House: a definitive 'La Boheme' (John Copley, 1974), still in the Covent Garden repertoire over three decades later; a sumptuous 'Die Fledermaus' (Leopold Lindtberg, 1977), with a ball scene evoking Tissot paintings of the 1870s; and a dazzling 'Nutcracker' (Peter Wright, 1984), with a Biedermeier vision of Christmas. She also designed a stunning version of 'Arabella' for Glyndebourne's fiftieth anniversary season, in 1984. 
The year 1967 was also a personal turning point: she first met Roy Colin Strong ('b'. 1935), author and art historian, who was then working as an assistant keeper at the National Portrait Gallery; she had been given an engraving of Elizabeth I by her father and, wanting to know more about it, had been advised by him to 'go and see young Strong at the National Portrait Gallery' ('The Times'). A discreet courtship ensued, and they married -- romantically 'eloping' after the premiere of her 'Othello' at Stratford -- on 10 September 1971 at St Andrew's Church, Wilmcote, Warwickshire (the village of Shakespeare's mother, Mary Arden). Strong was by then director of the National Portrait Gallery, and was later director of the Victoria and Albert Museum, from 1974 to 1987. He was knighted in 1982. Oman (who continued to use her maiden name after her marriage) collaborated with her husband on several books, including 'Elizabeth R' (1971), 'The English Year' (1982), and, appropriately, 'On Happiness' (1998). 
Soon after their marriage, Oman and Strong had bought an early nineteenth-century rectory, The Laskett, in Much Birch, Herefordshire, with one and a half acres of garden, to which they soon added an adjacent two-acre field, which they proceeded to turn into one of the most celebrated of twentieth-century gardens. Perhaps surprisingly it was Strong who did most of the designing, while Oman developed her talent as a plantswoman. In an essay published in the garden periodical 'Hortus' in 1992 Strong movingly described their garden as 'a portrait of a marriage, the family we never had or wanted, a unique mnemonic landscape peopled with the ghosts of nearly everyone we have loved, both living and dead' (Strong, 'The Laskett', 23). 
Oman (named a royal designer for industry in 1978, and made a CBE in 1986) was a forceful, knowledgeable, and self-confident woman, noted in life as in her work as a stickler for accuracy. Nevertheless she was also warm, generous, approachable, and unfailingly helpful to younger designers. Her final years were clouded by the onset of cancer of the pancreas, from which she died at her home, The Laskett, on 10 October 2003. She was survived by her husband, Sir Roy Strong; there were no children of the marriage. Strong donated her archive, spanning almost forty years of her design work, to the University of Bristol Theatre Collection in 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 92595


Perring, Franklyn Hugh (1927-2003), botanist and conservationist, was born on 1 August 1927 at 121 Windsor Road, East Ham, Essex, the son of Frank Arthur Perring, antique dealer, and his wife, Avelyn Millicent, 'nee' Newsum. He spent his formative years in Woodford Green and was educated at Earls Colne grammar school in Essex. After national service in Ireland, India, and Malaya he went to Queens' College, Cambridge, where he read natural sciences and was later awarded a doctorate for research on the ecology and biogeography of chalk grassland plants. He married on 16 June 1951 Yvonne Maud Frances Matthews, a 23-year-old secretary from Debden Green, Essex, daughter of David William Matthews. They had one son, Neil. 
In Cambridge Perring came under the intellectual influence of Max Walters, then director of the university herbarium. In 1953 the reinvigorated Botanical Society of the British Isles (BSBI) opened an office in Cambridge, under the direction of Walters, to produce distribution maps of the British flora, based on dot maps. At Walters's invitation Perring joined the mapping scheme in 1954 and eventually became its head from 1959 to 1964. Although the scheme was initially focused on the United Kingdom, Perring, together with David Webb at Trinity College, Dublin, soon extended it to include the whole of Ireland. The mapping scheme resulted in publication of 'The Atlas of the British Flora' by Perring and Walters in 1962, one of the most monumental and influential books on British botany published in the second half of the twentieth century. The mapping scheme made pioneering use of punch card data storage for editing and producing the 'Atlas', and introduced the use of the 10 kilometre by 10 kilometre national grid as the mapping unit of the British flora. Perring's and Walters's approach was adopted by mapping schemes worldwide, and became standard in recording the British flora and fauna. Indeed 'Flora of Cambridgeshire' (1964), by Perring and others, was the first local British flora to employ dot maps. In collaboration with Peter Sell, Perring also published the 'Critical Supplement to the Atlas of the British Flora' (1968). The 'Atlas' required Perring to inspire and organize both amateur and professional botanists into collecting the extraordinary amount of field data needed for mapping the British flora at such fine resolution. Indeed, much of the data were collected by Perring himself. Perring's guiding spirit also lay behind the 'New Atlas of the British Flora' (2002), and the data whose collection he inspired have been used to address many concerns in the conservation of British plants. 
In 1964 the mapping office was transferred to the Nature Conservancy's Monks Wood experimental station, where Perring established the Biological Records Centre (BRC) and was its head from 1964 until 1979. As interest in the conservation of the British flora and fauna grew, so did the importance of the centre and Perring's vision of the value of accurate mapping of correctly identified specimens. In 1977 he showed the conservation importance of BRC records when he jointly edited the first 'Red Data Book' of endangered plants in Britain. Meanwhile, his first marriage having ended in divorce, Perring married, on 28 June 1972, Margaret Dorothy Barrow, the 39-year-old daughter of Harold Maynard Barrow, health inspector. They had one daughter, Emma. In 1979 Perring left Monks Wood and became general secretary of the Royal Society for Nature Conservation (RSNC), later the Wildlife Trust, where he remained until his retirement in 1987. Perring's skills at networking, persuading people to work together, and fund-raising were crucial for the development of the RSNC's role as an umbrella organization for autonomous local conservation trusts. 
In retirement Perring's commitment to conservation continued through his foundation in 1988 of the travel company, Wildlife Travel Ltd, some of the profits of which were ploughed back into practical conservation programmes, and through running plant identification courses for the Field Studies Council. In 1988 he was appointed OBE, which he claimed stood for 'obsessive enthusiasm' ('The Independent', 18 Oct 2003), for services to nature conservation. Other honours that fell to him included serving as botanical secretary of the Linnean Society (1973-8) and president of the BSBI (1993-5), an honorary doctorate from Leicester University (1989), and honorary fellowship of University College, Northampton (2000). 
Perring saw no distinction between professional and amateur botany, and was equally passionate in the field, the lecture hall, and in the library -- his warmth did not extend to bureaucracies. However, his enthusiasm may sometimes have blinded him to the practicality of a cause. He was interested in a wide range of subjects besides botany, including chamber music, opera, literature, football, rugby, and campanology. He was also a practising member of the Church of England. He died on 11 October 2003 at his home, 18 High Street, Chesterton, Cambridge, of renal failure and cancer. He was survived by his wife and their daughter, and the son of his first marriage. 


