@@@@@


doc= 92598


Pountain, Sir Eric John (1933-2003), industrialist, was born on 5 August 1933 at 10 Chestall Road, Cannock Wood, Staffordshire, the son of Horace Pountain, a waterman at the local waterworks, and later a builder, and his wife, Elsie May, 'nee' Lloyd. He left Queen Mary's Grammar School, Walsall, at the age of sixteen to join the small building business then managed by his father and went on to do national service in the RAF. In 1956 he joined F. Maitland Selwyn, a local estate agency specializing in new housing developments, and became joint principal partner three years later. His major customer was John Mclean & Sons Ltd, a publicly quoted midland house builder. On 21 June 1960 he married Joan Patricia Sutton, a thirty-year-old hairdresser and daughter of Frederick Sutton, publican. They had a son and daughter. 
With his partners, in 1964 Pountain established Midland and General Developments Ltd to build houses largely for the private sector at a time when rising living standards enabled more and more Britons to own their own homes. His business did well and in 1969 was bought for $250,000 by Mclean, which had suffered from poor profits. It was immediately reorganized and 'forged ahead' ('The Times', 21 Sept 1972). It is hard not to see the hand of Pountain in this reorganization, and he was soon appointed chief executive. In these early years he was credited with pioneering the fully furnished show house, but in fact it seems to predate him. A business trip to the USA in the early 1960s had left him deeply impressed by American methods of selling, which he employed at home. 
In 1973 Tarmac, a publicly quoted construction business based in Wolverhampton, acquired Mclean in order to diversify further into the growth area of house building. Pountain's expertise was especially attractive to Tarmac and he became chief executive of its new housing and property divisions. A quarter of Tarmac's profits were soon generated by Pountain; they came as much from tight financial control as from organic growth. His influence within Tarmac grew steadily so that in 1979, when huge losses were sustained through a poorly handled acquisition, and notwithstanding his limited knowledge of the mainstream business, he was appointed chief executive after a purge of senior management. In 1983 he combined this role with the chairmanship. 
Tarmac had grown sleepy after many years of rapid growth through acquisition. Pountain put in hand a drastic reorganization to cut costs, to instil strict financial discipline, and to devolve decision making and break loose from Tarmac's stultifying centralism; its head office had become known as the Kremlin. Cost controls, wide margins, generous operating ratios, empowerment of divisional management, and its accountability for target shortfalls were hallmarks of what Pountain told outsiders was 'Tarmac Style'. In an industry renowned for strong characters, it was his charisma and ruthlessness, coupled with old-fashioned charm, that made it work. 'Tarmac Style' was widely copied. 
In the boom years of the mid-1980s Tarmac appeared to prosper as never before, in six years transforming itself from the 'near bust' business of 1978 into Britain's largest construction company ('The Times', 1 Sept 1985). On the tenth anniversary of Pountain's appointment as chief executive profits of almost $400 million were recorded, up from $26 million in 1978, on a turnover that had quadrupled to almost $3 billion. Headline contracts included the channel tunnel and the Falkland Islands' airbase, but most money came from the mundane activities of quarrying and house building; Tarmac emerged as the largest house builder in the UK. By any standards it was an impressive achievement and Pountain, far more than anyone else, was responsible for it. He was much lauded, being, 'inter alia', businessman of the year in 1987. 
Both ideologically and for sound business reasons Pountain strongly supported Margaret Thatcher's government. Tarmac contributed generously to tory party funds and found room on its board for Thatcher's ally Cecil Parkinson after his resignation from the cabinet in 1983. Thatcher recognized in Pountain the type of thrusting, no-nonsense businessman needed to sort out British industry and turn the country around. He was knighted for services to exports in 1985. 
In 1991, as the worst recession since the inter-war years engulfed British industry, Tarmac (which in 1988 had made a profit of $400 million) recorded losses of $350 million. Pountain had completely misjudged the severity of the economic downturn and Tarmac suffered very much more than its competitors, especially in house building and investment in the USA. Pountain's devolved management structure had proved unresponsive when urgent retrenchment was needed, and analysis was to show that in the decade before 1991 the business had suffered a severe net cash outflow averaging $20 million a year. With such losses, heads had to roll in order to satisfy disillusioned investors who reckoned that Tarmac under Pountain had lost its way; he resigned as chief executive in 1992 and as chairman a year later. In 2000 a still weakened Tarmac was acquired by Anglo American plc. 
Pountain was much sought after as a non-executive director of public companies even after his ejection from Tarmac. The success of his chairmanship of the engineering business IMI plc (1989-2001) and the James Beattie department store group (1987-2002) was widely acknowledged, although they had distracted him from Tarmac's affairs; he also held directorships of, among others, Midland Bank (1986-92) and United Newspapers (1992-8). He had links with many charities and good causes. As with his business connections, invariably these were based in the west midlands, the region from which he originated and of which he was a passionate champion. He died at Queen's Hospital, Burton upon Trent, on 19 October 2003, of heart disease and cancer. He was survived by his wife, Joan, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92600


Rayne, Max, Baron Rayne (1918-2003), property developer and philanthropist, was born Max Rubenstein on 8 February 1918, at 102 City Road, St Lukes, Holborn, London, the son of Phillip Rubenstein (1894-1979), who later took the surname of Rayne, a mantle manufacturer in Half Moon Passage, Aldgate, afterwards of St John's Wood, and his wife, Deborah, 'nee' Rack (1893-1985). At the time of his birth his parents, who were Jewish, were living at 13 Bromehead Street, Stepney. He was educated at the Central Foundation School, Bow. While working for his father he took evening classes in law at University College, London. After the outbreak of the Second World War he joined the RAF, in which he rose to the rank of corporal. On 30 November 1941 he married Margaret Marco ('b'. 1920), twin daughter of Louis Marco, of Hendon, property developer. They had one son and two daughters. 
In 1947 Rayne and his father leased a dress showroom in Wigmore Street at $500 a year. Rayne soon discovered that he could sub-let the premises at a profit of over $3000, and began dealing in property. He carried out some small deals involving Mayfair properties in Mount Street, Bruton Street, and Foley Street, which provided him with increasing capital. Next he bought the lease of the last private house in Berkeley Square for $16,000 and resold it with planning permission for conversion for twice as much. He formed the British Commercial Property Investment Trust, which controlled such subsidiaries as Kensington Commercial Property Investments and West London Commercial Property Investments, and took a leading part in providing central London with modern office blocks. Bomb-sites left by the blitz were developed; and dismal, neglected buildings with peeling stucco or grimy bricks were demolished. Rayne's developments (often designed by the architect Cecil Elsom) helped to change the appearance of the capital. 
A crucial phase of Rayne's career began in 1957. In that year he merged his property interests into London Merchant Securities, of which he became chairman and chief executive (1960-2000), and subsequently life president. It was also in 1957 that he began developing a large site in Wigmore Street, behind Selfridge's, with a ten-storey office block which was subsequently occupied by IBM. This project required great determination and acumen to bring to fruition. In this period, too, Rayne became the first developer to work in partnership with the church commissioners. Their earliest collaboration was in the demolition of the Victorian houses in Eastbourne Terrace, opposite Paddington Station, which were notoriously occupied by prostitutes, and the erection of a fourteen-storey tower between several six-storey office blocks (1958-62). 
Rayne did good business with the Portman estate, which owned valuable streets and squares north of Oxford Street, and formed a joint development company with Lord Portman. He acquired the interests of the New York developer William Zeckendorf in the Savoy Plaza Hotel, which developed into the General Motors Building. He was also interested in British Lion Films (of which he was deputy chairman, 1967-72), the British Printing Corporation, and (until 1977) the creation of Invergordon whisky distilleries. He backed Lord Delfont in the formation of the entertainment group First Leisure in 1984, and served as its chairman in 1992-5. 
With the fortune acquired from London Merchant Securities, Rayne in 1962 established the Max Rayne Foundation, which soon became a major force in charitable donations to the arts, education, and medicine. After the Darwin family vacated Newnham Grange in Cambridge, the Max Rayne Foundation provided a large endowment to establish a graduate college on the site, and Rayne himself made a large personal donation (1963-4). The college was named Darwin, but its coat of arms -- granted in 1966 -- joined the coats of Darwin and Rayne by impalement. In 1966 Rayne was elected as an honorary fellow both of Darwin and of University College, London, where his foundation had provided student accommodation and a new law faculty. Other major benefactions went to St Thomas's Hospital, of which Rayne became a governor in 1962 and a special trustee of the endowment funds in 1974. He sat on the council of King Edward VII's Hospital Fund for London, supported the burns unit at Queen Victoria Hospital, East Grinstead, and funded the Rayne Laboratory in Edinburgh and a new department of immunology at the Institut Pasteur, Paris. He was vice-president of Jewish Care from 1966. 
Rayne had an undying commitment to the arts, and proved shrewd, painstaking, and beneficent in solving the organizational and financial problems of many good causes. As chairman of the London Festival Ballet from 1967 to 1975 he put that organization on a sound footing. He was an assiduous governor (1966-87) and president from 1987 of the Yehudi Menuhin School, and a trustee of the Henry Moore Foundation. His foundation was the lead donor in the London Library appeal of 1971-2 (Rayne was a vice-president of the library until his death), supported the Royal Ballet School and the National Gallery, and provided $250,000 to establish the Theatre Museum in Covent Garden in 1983. But Rayne's most patient and constructive work was for the National Theatre. In 1971 Lord Goodman induced him to succeed Lord Chandos as chairman of the National Theatre board. Remaining in this post until 1988, he oversaw the long-delayed move to the South Bank in 1976, and survived many exasperating incidents and tedious imbroglios. He impressed Lawrence Olivier as 'nice, quiet, simple and reasonable' (Olivier, 240); struck Peter Hall as a 'driven' man, 'anxious and suspicious', but with 'brilliant foresight' (Hall, 269); and to Richard Eyre he was 'a very engaging (and generous) man who seems... vulnerable and almost childlike' (Eyre, 21). 
Rayne's first marriage having been dissolved in 1960, he married, on 2 June 1965, Lady Jane Antonia Frances Vane-Tempest-Stewart ('b'. 1932), daughter of Edward Charles Stewart Robert Vane-Tempest-Stewart, eighth marquess of Londonderry. They had two sons and two daughters. Rayne was knighted in 1969, and received a life peerage, as Baron Rayne, of Prince's Meadow, in 1976. 
A tactful but firm negotiator, Rayne seized on the essentials when taking a decision and always took the long view. He disliked diffuse thinking or unnecessary detail at meetings. A discriminating art-collector, he combined an impeccably neat appearance with modest, direct manners. Soft-voiced and courteous, he shunned publicity and prized his integrity: accordingly he was distressed when his much deserved peerage was gazetted in the Wilson resignation honours list, which included the names of less salubrious capitalists. He died of pneumonia and chronic aspiration on 10 October 2003, at 27 Circus Road, St John's Wood, and was cremated at Golders Green. He left an estate valued for probate purposes at just under $120 million. He was survived by his wife, Jane, and his seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92603


Sachs, Sir Michael Alexander Geddes (1932-2003), solicitor and judge, was born at 7 Park Circus Place, Glasgow, on 8 April 1932, the son of Joseph Sachs, medical practitioner, and his wife, Ruby Mary, 'nee' Ross (died 1957), nurse. At the time of his birth registration the family lived in Penrith, Cumberland, where he was brought up. He was educated at Sedbergh School and then at the University of Manchester, from where in 1954 he graduated in law. He was then articled to the Manchester firm of solicitors Slater Heelis & Co., returning to them after he had completed his national service. He was admitted a solicitor in 1957, and on 13 July the same year he married Patricia Mary Conroy, daughter of James Conroy, a primary school headmaster, of Thrybergh, Yorkshire. They had two daughters and three sons. 
On his return to Slater Heelis after national service, Sachs had hoped to rejoin the firm's commercial department but, told there was no room for him, as with many young solicitors he handled the firm's criminal practice, becoming known as a formidable advocate. Among his clients were several of the men charged with offences relating to the IRA bombings of the 1970s. Late he changed disciplines, turning to family law. He became a partner of the firm in 1962. 
During the 1970s appointments to the bench, which had been almost exclusively the province of the bar, were becoming more open to solicitors and in 1977 Sachs became a deputy recorder. In 1980 he became a recorder and in 1984 a circuit judge, sitting first in Liverpool and then in Manchester. On his appointment he retired from his law practice. He had served on the council of the Law Society from 1979 to 1984, and from 1982 until 1984 was chairman of its standing committee on criminal law; in this latter position he was involved in setting up the duty solicitor scheme which ensured that defendants in magistrates' courts were represented. He was president of the Manchester Law Society in 1978-9. 
Perhaps Sachs's most important and troubling case as a circuit judge was the sixteen-week long trial of the Mancunian property developer Kevin Taylor, accused of conspiracy. Taylor maintained that the prosecution had been a political one, designed to injure his friend, the former deputy chief constable of Manchester, John Stalker. (Stalker had been appointed, but in 1986 removed as, chairman of an inquiry into the Royal Ulster Constabulary's alleged shoot-to-kill policy; his removal was the subject of much speculation and allegation.) After Sachs ruled against the admissibility of certain police evidence, the case collapsed. In his book 'The Poisoned Tree' (1990), Taylor wrote that 'A formidable figure from the point of discipline, nevertheless [Sachs] was no shirk when it came to grasping the nail firmly'. 
For centuries it was thought that a solicitor would never be appointed to the high court bench unless he had had himself first struck off the rolls and admitted as a barrister. However, in 1993 the lord chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, appointed Sachs a judge of the High Court of Justice, assigning him to the Queen's Bench Division. It was hoped that his appointment would herald more appointments of members of the 'junior' branch of the profession to the high court bench. Hopes were dashed, however; there were no further elevations of solicitors for another seven years, until the appointment to the Chancery Division of Lawrence Collins. Immediately on his appointment in 1993 Sachs dealt with eleven men involved in the riot at Strangeways Prison in Manchester, handing out sentences totalling eighty-eight years' imprisonment. At the other end of the judicial spectrum, in December 1995 he jailed a Totnes farmer for three months for contempt of court. The man, involved in a dispute with his local council, instead of demolishing his illegally built house as ordered, had simply removed a floor and then covered the property in earth and grassed it over. The next year Sachs awarded damages to the half-brother of a man killed in the 1989 Hillsborough tragedy, in which Liverpool supporters died before an FA cup semi-final at the Sheffield stadium. The South Yorkshire police had argued that while he had undoubtedly suffered stress he was not a sufficiently close relative to benefit. Sachs ruled otherwise. 
Regarded as sharp but fair and a great judge of character, Sachs was made an honorary member of the Law Society and an honorary bencher of the Middle Temple (both in 1993) and was awarded an honorary doctorate of law from Manchester University (in 1994). He was knighted in 1993. In 1980 he had converted to Roman Catholicism. Asked what he liked to do in his leisure time he replied, 'as little as possible' (personal knowledge); but he had been a single figure handicap golfer. Throughout his life he was a passionate supporter of Manchester United. In his early days he had been a heavy smoker, with full-strength Capstans as his cigarette of choice. He died of liver failure at his home in Moss Lane, Timperley, Altrincham, Cheshire, on 25 September 2003, shortly before he was due to retire. His wife survived him, as did two sons and two daughters, another son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 92607


Venables, Clare Rosamund (1943-2003), theatre director, was born on 17 March 1943 at 33 Lindisfarne Avenue, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, the younger daughter and third of the four children of Sir Percy Frederick Ronald (Peter) Venables (1904-1979), educationist, and first pro-chancellor of the Open University, and his wife, Ethel Craig, 'nee' Howell ('b'. 1906), educational psychologist, and first chair of the Marriage Guidance Council. She was educated at Manchester high school and King Edward VI School, Camp Hill, Birmingham, before going to Manchester University. She initially read English but changed to drama after a year, was awarded a first, and was immediately employed as an assistant lecturer in the department. She worked there alongside Stephen Joseph for three years before leaving to begin a career in theatre in 1968, first working in repertory at the Leicester Phoenix, then getting her first directing job at the Theatre Royal, Lincoln, under Philip Hedley. Her success in the theatre every bit as swift as her success in academia, she took over from Hedley as artistic director in the early 1970s before moving on to the Library Theatre, Manchester, in 1973. On 27 May 1971 she married Robert Norman Whelan, a 24-year-old actor, and son of Ronald Whelan, civil servant. They had one son, Joe ('b'. 1978). 
Venables became artistic director of the Theatre Royal, Stratford East, in 1977. Inevitably her appointment drew comparisons with Joan Littlewood. Indeed, Venables shared her predecessor's indomitable spirit and her determination to engage with the community. As well as being an inspired director, Venables was an astute manager, administrator, and committee member, and during her brief tenure at Stratford East she negotiated a huge rise in local authority subsidy (from $3000 to $30,000) and supervised the sale of the theatre building from Joan Littlewood to the theatre board. 
On leaving Stratford East in 1979, Venables pursued a freelance career, before becoming artistic director of the Crucible Theatre in Sheffield in 1981. On her appointment she told 'The Guardian': 'I'll be working with the community and for young people, which is what I like doing. I'll also be doing big shows' ('The Guardian', 14 Dec 1981). At the Crucible she was able to put into practice her passion for establishing performance at the heart of community life without being constantly compared to Littlewood. She engineered collaborations with the local art gallery and trade unions, as well as continuing the tradition of welcoming amateur dramatics groups and incorporating amateur operatics and youth theatre. The Crucible's repertoire included little-known European plays, American musicals, and new writing. With Steven Pimlott she directed the British premiere of 'Carmen Jones', and Botho Strauss's 'The Park', and brought 'Lennon' from Liverpool, adapted it for Sheffield, then took it into the West End. She also found space for a range of touring companies: Paines Plough, Shared Experience, Hull Truck, and the feminist theatre group Monstrous Regiment (the start of an association with the latter that saw Venables translate the Finnish play 'The Love Story of the Century' for the company and ended with her becoming artistic director in 1991 when she left the Crucible). The range of writers and companies for whom she provided a platform was matched only by the new generation of theatre workers she encouraged, among them Michael Boyd, Stephen Daldry, Martin Duncan, Tom Cairns, and Steven Pimlott. During her time at Sheffield she also served on the Arts Council drama panel with fellow regional theatre mavericks Peter Cheeseman, Alan Ayckbourn, and Philip Hedley, constantly pushing for more investment in, and recognition of, the work done by the regions. 
Venables was involved in the 1986 Arts Council's inquiry into professional theatre in England which led to the report 'Theatre is for all', a sentiment that sums up Venables's belief in the inclusive and enriching properties of participation in the performing arts. After she left Sheffield she continued to act on this belief, as founding director of the Actors Training Centre, and as principal of the BRIT School of Performing Arts (1995-9). At the same time she adapted and translated classical plays and embarked on a career directing opera: 'The Magic Flute' for Opera Northern Ireland (where the chorus consisted of forty protestant and forty Catholic children), 'Cosi fan tutte' for English Touring Opera in 1995, 'The Marriage of Figaro' in Sweden, and an operatic adaptation of Steven Berkoff's 'Greek' at the Barbican in 2003. In 1999 she became director of education at the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC). As well as implementing the digitization of the company's archives and introducing online resources for teachers and students, she brokered the creation of groundbreaking partnerships with the universities of Michigan and Columbia and the Kennedy Centre in Washington, running summer schools with RSC staff and American students. She also engineered the RSC's collaboration with the homeless people's theatre company Cardboard Citizens on a production of 'Pericles' in 2003 which she described as 'a wonderful way for us to put together the artist at the centre of British culture with those who are most marginalised by that culture' ('Arts Hub'). 
Venables died of breast cancer at Myton Hamlet Hospice, Myton Lane, Warwick, on 17 October 2003. A month before she died she was the first recipient of the Young Vic award, honouring theatre professionals who had inspired a generation of young theatre practitioners. David Lan, artistic director of the Young Vic, paid tribute to Venables's dedication and passion for theatre and education: 'A whole generation of theatre makers are the children of Clare's wit, compassion and adventurousness, her strength of purpose and her tremendous, unquenchable sense of fun' (Young Vic press release). She was survived by her son, Joe. 


@@@@@


doc= 92612


Krishnavarma, Shyamji (1857-1930), Sanskrit scholar and Indian nationalist, was born on 30 October 1857 in the town of Mandvi in the Kutch district of western Gujarat, the son of a cotton press labourer, Karsan Nakhua, and his wife, Gomatibai, of the Bhanushali community. After his mother's death in 1868 he was brought up by his grandmother, and was educated to high school level in Bhuj, where his brilliance quickly became apparent. A scholarship provided by a rich Bhatia merchant enabled him to attend Wilson High School, Bombay, where he also started learning Sanskrit at a 'pathashala' or seminary; another scholarship secured him a place at Elphinstone High School. In 1875 he married Bhanumati Lallubhai (died 1933), the sister of a classmate and the daughter of the wealthy Bhatia textile magnate Sheth Chhabildas Lallubhai. 
The young Krishnavarma soon distinguished himself as a Sanskrit scholar, and his talents acquired a political focus in his support for the Hindu reformer and Arya Samaj founder, Dayananda Saraswati. In 1877 he embarked on a lecture tour which gained him recognition as an authority on Vedic philosophical and religious texts, and resulted in his being awarded the prestigious title of Pandit by the Hindu Pandits of Varanasi. He also came to the notice of Monier Monier-Williams, the Boden professor of Sanskrit at Oxford, and in 1879 he travelled to Britain to become Monier-Williams's assistant. He was admitted to Balliol College, Oxford, in April 1879 and graduated BA in 1882. As a student he presented a paper on Sanskrit at the Berlin Congress of Orientalists in 1881, and was made an honorary member of the Empire Club and the Royal Asiatic Society the following year. Intent on becoming a lawyer, he was called to the bar in 1884 (but was struck off the register of barristers in 1909). 
Krishnavarma returned to India in 1885 and practised briefly as a lawyer before being employed as 'dewan' (chief minister) of Ratlam state, in central India, a post he resigned owing to ill health in 1888. He then moved to Ajmer, in Rajasthan, where he pursued his legal career, and became independently wealthy through his investments in three local cotton presses. He acted as a member of the state council of Udaipur (1893-5) before becoming the 'dewan' of Junagadh, in Gujarat (1895-7), but following bitter disagreements with an old Oxford acquaintance (now a member of the Indian Civil Service), A. F. Maconochie, he resigned his office at Junagadh in mid-1897. The repressive anti-plague measures implemented by the colonial authorities later that year disillusioned Krishnavarma further and, radicalized by B. G. Tilak's nationalism, he determined to support the Indian nationalist cause internationally, and moved back to Britain. 
In London, Krishnavarma lived first at 9 Queenswood Avenue (later 60 Muswell Hill Road). An admirer of Herbert Spencer, he spoke at Spencer's funeral in 1903, endowed a Herbert Spencer memorial lectureship at Oxford (1904), and funded five travelling fellowships to enable Indian students to study in Britain. (These stipulated that the recipient should not subsequently seek employment by the British government in India.) On 18 February 1905 he founded the India Home Rule Society, dedicated to securing home rule for India, promoting nationalist propaganda, and mobilizing Indians against colonialism, objectives which were disseminated in his radical monthly pamphlet, the 'Indian Sociologist'. That year he also purchased a mansion at 65 Cromwell Avenue, Highgate, which he named India House, or Bharat Bhavan, and opened as a hostel for Indian students. The hostel soon became a focus of nationalist activism and its residents included revolutionaries such as Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, Virendranath Chattopadhyaya, and Har Dayal. Under increased police surveillance, Krishnavarma was forced to move to Paris in June 1907 (to 10 avenue Ingres, Passy, Bois de Boulogne), leaving Savarkar in charge of India House. However, after the assassination of Sir William Curzon Wyllie in July 1909 by Madan Lal Dhingra, an Indian student who had connections with India House, the hostel was closed. 
In 1914 Krishnavarma moved to Geneva, but his political activities were restricted by the Swiss government throughout the war. His political influence declined noticeably in the last decade of his life: after a lapse in publication between 1914 and 1920, the 'Indian Sociologist' was revived briefly until 1922, but his bequests to the League of Nations and the Press Association of Geneva were turned down. Krishnavarma died in Geneva on 30 March 1930 following an operation for an acute intestinal illness. He was survived by his wife and was cremated and his ashes interred at the cimetiere de Saint-Georges, Geneva. He left instructions that his ashes should be moved to India at independence, but it was not until 2003 that his and his wife's remains were eventually repatriated. In December 2010 a Krishnavarma memorial complex, including a full-size replica of India House, was opened near Mandvi in Kachchh (Kutch), Gujarat. 


@@@@@


doc= 92613


Fremantle, Elizabeth, Lady Fremantle (1778-1857), diarist, was born at Falkingham, Lincolnshire, on 19 April 1778, the second of five daughters of Riccardo Gulielmo Casparo Melchior Balthazaro [Richard] Wynne (1744-1798) of Falkingham, and his wife, Agathe Camille, 'nee' de Royer (died 1799). She was known as Betsey from childhood. Little is known about her mother's family, save that her maternal grandparents had a country house near Lyons and survived torture by revolutionaries during the French Revolution. Her father was descended from the Wynnes of Gwydir, but although he was formally a member of the Church of England in order to secure his English inheritance, and had been educated in England, he and his brother and his three Catholic sisters had been brought up predominantly in Venice by their widowed mother, the formidable Anna Gazzini (died 1751), a Venetian of Greek descent. Both Anna and her eldest daughter, Giustiniana (1737-1791), became figures of scandal. Betsey's elder sister, Mary ('b'. 'c'.1770, died after 1815), also challenged moral convention by leaving her husband, Count Francesco Montalbaro, and taking a lover in 1793. In 1798 she became the subject of Peter von Winter's opera 'Marie von Montalban'. The unconventional lives led by Betsey's grandmother, aunt, and sister convinced her, while still an adolescent, of the need to 'keep an irreproachable conduct' ('Wynne Diaries', 1952, 173-4). Nevertheless, she may have owed to Giustiniana the habit of diary keeping, as Bartolomeo Benincasa (died 1815), Giustiniana's last lover, gave Betsey and her next sister, Eugenia ('b'. 1780), their first diaries in 1789. 
Richard Wynne sold his English estates in 1786 and moved with his family to the continent. Betsey spent the formative years of nine to nineteen criss-crossing Germany, Switzerland, and Italy with her family, learning how to move a large retinue at short notice over poor roads, how to deal with the ever present problem of drunk, thieving, or pregnant servants, and how to mix effortlessly in cosmopolitan, multilingual, European elite society. 
Betsey and Eugenia appear to have been introduced to diary-keeping as a teaching tool. Their earliest diaries were written in French or awkwardly direct translations into English, but they quickly became fluent linguists. In addition to a series of tutors who travelled with the family, specialized masters included the musician and composer Cimador 
(Giovanni Baptista Cimadoro; 1761-1805)
, and the artist and engraver Francesco Bartolozzi, both of whom Betsey patronized again in London as a young married woman. The sisters developed into competent artists and skilled musicians. 
By 1789 Betsey and Eugenia were already taking a more active part in adult society than usual for girls their age in England. Accompanying their parents shopping or visiting, or to church and cultural events, was not unusual, but they also regularly attended adult balls and parties, and numerous late-night masquerades and impromptu revels involving servants as well as family. For the precocious and self-contained Betsey this upbringing bred polished manners and a clear-sighted understanding of human foibles. It also gave her the self-confidence to express her own opinions. As an adolescent she came to despise both hypocrisy and what she saw as unseemly romping: 'young people should amuse themselves honestly and at the same time heartily but not romp about and show so much love for pleasure as to be justly ridiculed by everybody' ('Wynne Diaries', 1952, 177). While she never eschewed pleasure and, especially as a young woman, was happy to play practical jokes on her sisters, don fancy dress, or dance all night, she retained a lifelong aversion to anything that could be interpreted as noisy, hoydenish behaviour. 
Betsey's appearance, diminuitive, dark-haired and dark-eyed, could have led her to identify with her maternal French heritage, but she self-consciously defined herself as English as a teenager, siding ardently with the British against the French revolutionaries and identifying with all things English. Growing up surrounded by French emigres made her a confirmed monarchist and a believer in 'natural' hierarchies, but it also left her with a confirmed dislike of the French and a belief in the superiority of the English character. This stemmed predominantly from her father's befriending of the French diplomat and royalist secret agent Marc-Marie de Bombelles, marquis de Bombelles (1744-1822), and his family. Between 1792 and 1796 the Bombelles lived for extended periods with the Wynnes at Wartegg, Switzerland, and Ratisbon, Bavaria, apparently at the Wynnes' expense. Their presence placed the Wynnes at the heart of royalist circles, and the resulting atmosphere was febrile. The latest rumours from France caused frequent emotional upsets in a household plagued by personality conflicts. Betsey soon disliked the hot-tempered marquis and his ill-disciplined children intensely. When the two families finally decided to part company, after a particularly heated fracas with the marquis in 1796, she rejoiced, glad to be done with 'a 'right' Frenchman... that hippocrite, that unthankful man, proud and vile' ('Wynne Diaries', 1952, 185). 
News of the progress of 'the duced French' ('Wynne Diaries', 1952, 190) across Europe in 1796 alarmed Betsey's father enough to prompt him to flee Ratisbon. Arriving in Leghorn on 23 June 1796, the family was swiftly evacuated onto the English frigate 'Inconstant', captained by Thomas Francis Fremantle (1765-1819). Betsey was immediately captivated by his 'fiery black eyes' ('Wynne Diaries', 1952, 196), and equally impressed with his character: 'He is good natured, kind, and amiable, gay and lively in short he seems to possess all the good and amiable qualities that are required to win everybodies heart the first moment one sees him' (ibid.). Almost at once Betsey was introduced to courtship, the British navy and the naval war that would dominate her married life. 
After a brief period of separation, which the Wynnes spent in Toulon, where Betsey and her sisters became favourites of Admiral Sir John Jervis, the family accompanied Fremantle in the 'Inconstant' to Elba, where Fremantle joined Commodore Horatio Nelson's attempt to secure British possession of the island. Meanwhile, less than a month after they met, Betsey and Fremantle were already discussing marriage. They had two obstacles to overcome: her father had to be persuaded that Fremantle's future prospects outweighed his immediate lack of fortune; and Fremantle himself had to be persuaded that his future prospects would not be harmed by marriage at this stage of his career. The fact that the older and more affluent Captain Thomas Foley (1757-1833) of the 'Britannia' was clearly enamoured of her as well, and that her father was very fond of him, added significantly to her anxieties. After spending the autumn in Porto Ferrajo, Elba, the Wynnes left for Naples at the end of December 1796 with Betsey's future still undecided, arriving in the 'Inconstant' on 7 January 1797. 
On 10 January 1797 Fremantle, his reputation and prospects enhanced by his role at Elba, finally secured Betsey's hand in marriage. The wedding, on the morning of 13 January, was organized by Emma, Lady Hamilton, and took place from the Hamiltons' home. Betsey was given away by Prince Augustus Frederick, a family friend dating from their time in Venice. Out of respect for Betsey's Catholicism, the couple confirmed their marriage with a blessing from a Catholic priest later that evening. 
The next day Betsey bade farewell to her family and set sail in the 'Inconstant' for Elba, along with the British viceroy of Corsica, Sir Gilbert Elliot, the Corsican politician and diplomat Pozzo di Borgo (1764-1842), and the officer and military historian Colonel John Francis Drinkwater. She was to remain on board for much of the next eight months. In April they sailed for Gibraltar, and, from there, on to Lisbon. Not yet nineteen at the time of her marriage, Betsey adapted readily to life at sea and managed to be popular but not too familiar with the officers. Her unflappability also extended to her first pregnancy, which began within months of marrying. Even with the 'Inconstant' on convoy duty, or cruising and periodically chasing prizes, there was time for visiting and dinners and entertainments, with Betsey performing on her pianoforte, at times accompanied by an officer who was a flautist. She spent her spare time reading, sewing, drawing, and being taught how to paint in watercolours. When Fremantle transferred to the 'Seahorse' at Lisbon, she sailed with him to join Nelson and the advance squadron in the blockade of Cadiz. The very real dangers that this posed, both to Fremantle, who accompanied Nelson in the risky venture of bombarding the town, and to other officers and men, led her to decry the strategy, which she believed was being driven primarily by economic motives, and to cheer the lifting of the blockade. 
On 25 July 1797 Betsey was on board the 'Seahorse' at the second attack on Santa Cruz de Tenerife, where Nelson acted on faulty intelligence with disastrous results and a high loss of life. Betsey was present at the council of war and had been as convinced as the rest that 'the taking of this place seemed an easy and almost sure thing' ('Wynne Diaries', 2.185). She had, for once, gone to bed rather than wait up for Fremantle, and woke to the news that many of the landing force had lost their lives and that Nelson, whose injuries that night cost him his right arm, had been rowed to the 'Theseus' rather than to the closer 'Seahorse', in the hope of sparing her additional shock. Fremantle had himself been wounded and, while he was luckier than Nelson in keeping his arm, he was to suffer intensely from the wound for longer thereafter. Nelson's note to Betsey on 26 July -- 'God bless you and Fremantle' -- is assumed to be his first left-handed writing. Jervis, now earl of St Vincent, who had decided at the beginning of July that Fremantle would take Betsey back to England in the 'Seahorse' in the autumn, kept his word, and sent both Fremantle and Nelson home in August. For Betsey, who nursed them, the trip cannot have been easy. Nelson was recovering physically, but was sorely depressed about his future prospects, whereas Fremantle was in constant pain. 
Betsey's life entered a new phase when she returned to England in September 1797. Once Fremantle's wound had healed sufficiently for them to travel, they went first to London, where they slipped immediately into the social life of the capital, and then to Stowe, Buckinghamshire, so that Fremantle could pay his respects to his patron, George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, first marquess of Buckingham. Betsey appreciated the importance of making 'le gentil' to those who could forward her husband's career ('Wynne Diaries', 3.168). After the Fremantles settled at nearby Swanbourne, where they purchased a small estate in the summer of 1798, Betsey, her sisters, and later her children frequently spent extended visits at Stowe over family birthdays and the Christmas holidays. She seems to have been genuinely fond of the Buckinghams, especially the marchioness. The fact that the marchioness was a practising Catholic with a strong sense of duty may have helped to create an immediate link between them. Betsey's social and musical skills, her impeccable French, and her family's royal connections made her a valuable addition to the guest list when the Buckinghams were hosts to the prince of Wales and the duke of Clarence in 1805 and the exiled court of Louis XVIII of France in 1807. 
On 11 March 1798 Betsey's first child, Thomas Francis Fremantle, was born. Blessed with good health and unproblematic pregnancies, she went on to have another eight children: Emma Eugenia Elizabeth ('b'. 1799), Charles Howe (1800-1869), Henry Hyde (1802-1820), Augusta Henrietta 
(Harriet; 1803-1863)
, Louisa ('c'.1806-1810), William Robert (1807-1895), Cecilia Mary (1809-1871), and Stephen (1810-1860). Unlike some aristocratic women, she enjoyed maternity and her domestic role, breastfeeding her children as babies and taking delight in them as they grew. Fremantle, as well, proved to be a loving husband and a proud and caring, if often absentee, parent. Between 1800, when he went back to sea in the 'Ganges', and his death in 1819, he spent the majority of his time at sea and his sorrow at being apart from his wife and children forms a leitmotif in his letters. Following Betsey's family practice, they brought the boys up as Anglicans and the girls as Catholics. 
For a brief period in 1798 Betsey's entire family was reunited in England. Unfortunately, both her mother and father were already seriously ill and died within months of each other. The sisters were left as coheirs to their father's estate and, after seeing off a spurious claim by their uncle William, took equal shares, including $23,000 in Bank of England stock ('Wynne Diaries', 3.6-7). Although Betsey's younger sisters were nominally placed under the guardianship of the politician and diarist Henry Bankes, a distant Wynne connection, the task of chaperoning them and vetting potential husbands fell substantially on Betsey's shoulders. As spirited young women with fortunes of their own, Eugenia, Harriet ('b'. 1784), and Justina (1785-1814) proved frustratingly immune to Betsey's and Fremantle's attempts to persuade them to use their fortunes to social advantage; each in turn married into the Scottish gentry for love not position. This caused some friction in the short term but, by the time that Betsey paid an extended visit to their various new homes in Scotland in 1811, it had vanished. 
With Fremantle away at sea, Betsey managed the expansion of their estate, took growing interest in the farm, and continued her charitable attentions to the local sick and the poor, as well as attending to the needs of her family. She regularly shuttled her household between Swanbourne and London for the social season, and socialized astutely to forward Fremantle's and her family's interest. When Fremantle stood (unsuccessfully) for Aylesbury in the general election of 1802, she took on the duties of a political wife, making favours, entertaining agents and local gentlemen, and co-hosting a breakfast for the freeholders. Fremantle's brief tenure as MP for Sandwich in 1806-7 required no additional effort, but the energy that she put into fitting up their accommodation at the Admiralty in 1806-7 suggests that, had Fremantle's appointment as a lord commissioner of the Admiralty not been terminated by the fall of the 'ministry of all the talents', she would have put her social skills to political advantage. 
Fremantle was appointed KCB on 2 January 1815, and Betsey thus became Lady Fremantle. Within a few weeks of Waterloo she and the children joined Fremantle for a tour of France, after which they proceeded to Italy, where Betsey met her sister Mary for the first time in two decades. She went back to sea with her husband, now commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean, in 1818, but he died very suddenly in December 1819. For the first time since she had started keeping her diary in 1789, she was unable to write. 
The independence that Betsey had learned during the Napoleonic wars stood her in good stead as a widow. She remained close to her children, safeguarding and forwarding their interests. She continued to divide her time between Swanbourne and London, but also travelled frequently, including visits in 1839 to Baden Baden, and in 1847 to Scotland to see her sister Eugenia. As she aged she became more conservative, but she did not become more insular. She continued to keep her diary until a few days before her death at Cimiez, near Nice, or Nice itself, on 2 November 1857. She was buried at Notre Dame de Cimiez. Her will apportioned shares in her personal estate to all of her surviving children but Augusta and William. 
All but one volume of Betsey's diaries survive. They provide a unique personal insight into important historical actors and the changes that occurred in Britain and Europe between 1789 and the 1850s. More important, they present an intimate and detailed view of the rich life experiences of an elite woman of the time. Extracts from Betsey's diaries, supplemented with material from the diaries of Eugenia and Harriet, were published by Anne Fremantle as 'The Wynne Diaries' in three volumes between 1935 and 1940. A single-volume, abridged version was published in 1952. In Swanbourne her concern for the well-being of the local people was commemorated in 2006 in the name of a new pub, the Betsey Wynne. 


@@@@@


doc= 92614


Alderson, Thomas Hopper (1903-1965), wartime rescue party leader, was born at Ashburne Stables, Sunderland, on 15 September 1903, the fifth of six children and first son of Thomas Alderson (1864-1945), domestic coachman, and his wife, Sarah Annie, 'nee' Hopper (1872-1942). He was educated at a village school; then at Elwick Road senior boys' school, West Hartlepool, where he became head boy. On 16 December 1914 he witnessed the bombardment of West Hartlepool by the German high seas fleet. After leaving school aged fifteen, he began work as an office boy in the local ironworks but soon became a draughtsman and then completed a five-year engineering apprenticeship, attending night school for tuition. He then went to sea as an assistant engineer, passing successive Board of Trade examinations and eventually qualifying as a first engineer. 
On 23 December 1932 Alderson married Irene Doris (1899-1991), daughter of Frederick R. A. Johnson, an agent, of West Hartlepool, and his wife, M. Louisa, 'nee' Gray. Alderson returned to sea until 1935 when the only child, a daughter, was born. He came ashore as an outdoor engineer in the borough engineer's department of West Hartlepool council, and supplemented his lower salary by teaching engineering drawing at the local night school. In 1938 he moved to Bridlington corporation as works supervisor. Under the 'Air Raid Precautions Act' (1937), local authorities were responsible for raising local volunteer air raid precaution (ARP) services, and trained their own workforces as rescue teams. Alderson attended the Home Office central anti-gas school at Easingwold, York, and gained a first-class pass qualifying him as a local instructor. 
As a part-time warden (detachment leader) of rescue and demolition parties in Bridlington, Alderson led teams equipped and trained to rescue people trapped under buildings demolished by enemy action. They were soon called upon, as the port of Bridlington was hard hit by German bombers: inevitably many bombs fell on neighbouring residential areas. On 15 August 1940 Alderson tunnelled under the debris of a collapsed pair of houses and rescued a woman. Five days later he tunnelled under two five-storey buildings on the Bridlington dockside where eleven people were trapped in a cellar. The wreckage was unsafe, further falls were anticipated, coal gas leaks created a serious hazard, and there was a danger of flooding from fractured water pipes. Refusing to allow other members of his team to risk themselves under the unstable building, and with enemy aircraft overhead, the badly bruised Alderson managed to bring all eleven people to safety. Three days later he tunnelled 14 feet under the foundations and wreckage of demolished buildings into a cellar and, below a three-storey wall swaying in the wind, he rescued two persons (one of whom subsequently died) from beneath a massive refrigerator which was in danger of further collapse. The rescue operation took five hours. 
On 30 September 1940 Alderson's 'sustained gallantry, enterprise and devotion to duty during enemy air raids without the slightest regard for his own safety' (supplement to the 'London Gazette', 30 Sept 1940) was recognized by the award of the George Cross. He was the first recipient of the new award instituted by George VI for outstanding acts of bravery performed away from the field of battle, often (but not exclusively) by civilians. The medal was equivalent in status to the Victoria Cross. In a contemporary radio broadcast Alderson insisted that he had received the award as the representative of Bridlington's rescue parties, who worked as a team. 
In 1946 Alderson became an assistant highways surveyor with the East Riding of Yorkshire county council and later joined the new Civil Defence Corps, now preparing to protect the civilian population against nuclear weapons. He again attended courses at Easingwold College. Always a modest man, he never sought further recognition for his wartime services. He died of lung cancer on 28 October 1965 at Northfield Hospital, Driffield, Yorkshire, and was cremated in Scarborough. His George Cross is on permanent loan to the Imperial War Museum, where it is displayed with the medal he was awarded by the RSPCA in 1941 for rescuing two horses from a burning stable. 


@@@@@


doc= 92615


Murray, James, Jacobite first earl of Dunbar (1690-1770), politician and governor of the exiled Stuart princes, was the second of the fourteen children of David Murray, fifth Viscount Stormont (died 1731), and his wife, Marjory (died 1746), daughter and heiress of David Scott of Scotstarvet, Fife. He was admitted as an advocate at the Scots bar in 1710, when still only twenty years old, but apparently never practised, preferring to pursue a political career. 
Murray was unsuccessful when he stood as a candidate for Dumfriesshire in the general election of October 1710, but irregularities during the voting meant that he was returned to parliament on petition the following February. As a young MP at Westminster he gave support to the tory ministry of Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, but was primarily concerned with Scottish affairs, and worked to advance episcopalian interests. 
In the general election of November 1713 Murray was returned to parliament as the member for Elgin Burghs. He was then appointed one of the commissaries to carry out further negotiations with France following the recent rejection by parliament of the Anglo-French commercial treaty. This brought him into regular contact with the responsible secretary of state, Henry St John, Viscount Bolingbroke, to whom he now transferred his political allegiance. On Scottish affairs Murray also worked closely with John Erskine, sixth or twenty-second earl of Mar, one of the other secretaries of state. 
It is probable that Murray, whose father was a Jacobite, supported Bolingbroke's wish that the death of Queen Anne should be followed by the accession of her exiled half-brother James Francis Edward, already regarded by Jacobites as James III and VIII. In the event these hopes were dashed. The peaceful accession of George I in August was followed by the dismissal of both Bolingbroke and Mar. Murray returned to Edinburgh, where he failed in January 1715 to persuade the Faculty of Advocates to include in a loyal address sent to George I a clause for the dissolution of the union between England and Scotland. 
Although Murray stood again successfully for Elgin Burghs in the general election of March 1715, his election was declared invalid on a petition from the rival candidate, John Campbell (later fourth duke of Argyll), and he was unseated on 7 April. He then crossed to France and joined Lord Bolingbroke, who had recently fled to the Jacobite court in exile at St Germain-en-Laye. Murray became Bolingbroke's secretary, and soon after Bolingbroke was appointed by James III to be the Jacobite secretary of state. 
During 1715 Murray was involved with Bolingbroke in planning the Jacobite rising due to take place that summer. The Scottish part would be commanded by the earl of Mar, and at the end of May Murray's sister Marjorie married Mar's brother-in-law and close political associate John Hay (son of the seventh earl of Kinnoull). This marriage not only brought Murray and Mar closer together, but also resulted in a firm friendship and alliance between Murray and Hay. 
In September 1715 Murray travelled secretly, via England, to join Mar in Scotland, but was sent back to France in November with the news of the battle of Sherrifmuir. Travelling to Scotland a second time he was captured in Flanders, and imprisoned in Newgate from 16 April to 16 July 1716. It was in March, during his captivity, that Bolingbroke was dismissed as the Jacobite secretary of state and replaced by Mar, who was also given a Jacobite dukedom. Murray now dropped his support for Bolingbroke, and visited the Jacobite court at Avignon, where he aligned himself with Mar. As a result he was appointed to serve as the Jacobite agent in London, where he was to co-ordinate the correspondence between the Stuart court and the Jacobites in England and Scotland. 
Murray remained in England for the next year and a half. He earned the high opinion of both James III and Mar, but the Jacobites who had to deal with him found him both rude and arrogant. His airs of self-importance were deeply resented, and it was noted that he even treated Lord Oxford with disrespect. In March 1718 he was summoned by James III to join the exiled court, which by then had moved to Urbino. He arrived in June, and was immediately sent to Ohlau in Silesia to negotiate the details of the king's proposed marriage to Princess (Maria) Clementina, the youngest daughter of Prince James Sobieski. The very favourable marriage contract that he negotiated was signed at Ohlau on 22 July, after which he returned to Urbino. 
Murray was very well received by James III and Mar, and his success seems to have encouraged his ambition as well as his sense of self-importance. He set about trying to replace Mar as the king's chief political confidant, helped by the fact that his brother-in-law Hay had become the king's favourite. The king had decided that no women should be allowed to join the exiled Jacobite court until after his marriage, but Hay had persuaded him to make an exception and allow his wife, Marjorie, to travel out from England, escorted by her brother James. This triumvirate of Murray, Hay, and Marjorie Hay quickly established an ascendancy over the king that began to undermine Mar's position as chief minister. 
It was arranged that Clementina would travel to meet and marry the king at Ferrara, and that Murray should return to Ohlau to escort her. But he fell ill, and Hay had to be sent instead. Murray was given the task of going to Ferrara to make everything ready. The plan was that, once the princess and Hay had arrived, and the marriage taken place, the Jacobite court would move to Rome for the winter. Murray set off at the beginning of October, taking with him his sister. In the event the princess was arrested 'en route' at Innsbruck, on the orders of the emperor Charles VI, and the marriage had to be postponed. When Hay was released, he, his wife, and Murray rejoined the king, and accompanied him to Rome. 
It was not expected that the court would remain in Rome for very long. In February 1719 James III and Hay travelled to Spain, where a fleet and an army were being assembled to invade England. At the same time Mar resigned as secretary of state and left Rome to travel overland, hoping to be able to rejoin the king in England. In the meantime Murray was entrusted with the entire management of the court, and authorized to conduct negotiations as acting secretary of state. 
Murray's peremptory and haughty manner, already commented on in England, was now given free rein. He deeply offended not only the king's household servants but also, more importantly, a group of Scottish exiles, several of whom were peers, who had been living at the court since the rising of 1716. His self-importance increased when Clementina escaped from her imprisonment. She was met by Murray at Bologna, where a proxy marriage service took place on 10 May, with Murray standing in for the king. The new queen was then installed by the pope in a convent in Rome, while news of the planned restoration attempt was awaited from Spain and England. 
Murray now monopolized Clementina, not allowing anyone but himself and his sister to gain access to her. By the late summer the members of the court were anxiously awaiting the opportunity to present their grievances to the king, and bring Murray down. It was observed that the queen shared their hostility towards him. 
In August 1719, after the failure of the Spanish invasion attempt, James III returned to Italy and himself formally married Clementina at Montefiascone on 1 September, in the presence of Murray, his sister Marjorie, and Hay. The king received a torrent of complaints from his courtiers, including the duke of Mar, but he brushed them all aside, declaring his entire confidence in the way Murray had managed his affairs during his absence. As Mar had been captured and imprisoned in Switzerland, and anyway showed no desire to return, James also confirmed Murray's position as acting secretary of state. 
Murray remained in Rome throughout 1720, and the king continued to receive numerous complaints. James's wish to appoint a new secretary of state eventually brought Murray down. The Jacobites in both France and Great Britain made it clear that they were reluctant to have any dealings with Murray; yet no one else was willing to accept the post so long as he remained at the court. When even Hay joined Mar in advising that Murray would have to be sent away, James III reluctantly agreed, assuring Murray that he himself was still satisfied with him. But the king decided that he would not in the event appoint anyone else, and instead ordered Hay to take over as acting secretary of state. 
By this time the queen was pregnant, so Murray asked to be allowed to remain at the court until after the birth of her child. Prince Charles Edward was born on 31 December 1720, and Murray finally left Rome on 6 February. Before he went he sent the king a long apologia, in which he asked to be given a peerage as evidence that he was not in disgrace, and so that he might continue to serve the king elsewhere. James agreed to continue paying him his monthly pension of 200 livres but declined at that moment to give him a peerage. 
For the next four and a half years Murray moved between Lorraine, France, and the Spanish Netherlands, mixing in Jacobite circles. He maintained a regular correspondence with his sister and brother-in-law in Rome, and thus with the king, and made no secret of the deep hostility he now felt towards Mar. At one point in 1721 he thought of returning to Scotland, but the king would not give his permission. Eventually, at the beginning of 1724, the king agreed to give him a Scottish peerage as earl of Dunbar, backdated to before his departure from Rome in February 1721, but on condition that it should not yet be publicly declared. 
In May 1724 Murray received a letter from his mother asking him to return to Scotland to help settle a family disagreement, and this time the king agreed to let him go. Murray planned to go during the autumn, but changed his mind when he heard in September that his sister, who had gone ahead to help settle her husband's financial affairs, had been arrested at Dover and imprisoned in Newgate. He decided to retire permanently to Lorraine. His elder brother was unmarried and in bad health, so he hoped eventually to inherit the family peerage and then obtain a pass to return. 
Murray's life and prospects were dramatically changed during 1725. His sister was released from Newgate and returned to Rome in time for the birth in March of Clementina's second child, Prince Henry (the future Cardinal York). To mark the occasion Hay was appointed secretary of state and publicly recognized as earl of Inverness (a peerage originally given him in 1718). Then, in July, Murray himself received a summons to rejoin the court. James III had decided that the upbringing of Prince Charles, though he was only four and a half years old, should be entrusted to men. Since his under-governor and preceptor were to be Catholic, a protestant, Murray, was to be his governor. He reached Rome in September, was publicly acknowledged as earl of Dunbar, and created a knight of the Thistle on Prince Charles's fifth birthday. His new appointment and these honours meant that he could never return to Scotland without a Stuart restoration, so he now resigned himself to a life of exile, further confirmed when his elder brother married, and in 1727 had a son and heir. 
As Dunbar grew older he probably became less brusque and high-handed, but his sense of self-importance does not seem to have diminished, and he was thoroughly disliked by most members of the Jacobite court, notably the few other Scots who were there. It was his return to the court in September 1725 that caused Clementina, already exasperated by the influence of Lord and Lady Inverness, to separate from her husband and take refuge in the convent of Santa Cecilia in Trastevere. His return also provoked Pope Benedict XIII to take sides with Clementina, which led to James III's decision to remove his court to Bologna from 1726 to 1729. 
Dunbar was now reunited with his sister and brother-in-law, and he quickly consolidated his influence over the king. When Lord and Lady Inverness left the court in April 1727, as an essential condition for the return of Clementina, he stayed on as James III's principal minister, a position he held for the next twenty years. He served as the governor of Prince Charles until the latter achieved his majority in December 1738, after which he remained in attendance as the prince's gentleman-in-waiting. From 1729 until March 1743 he also served as the governor of Prince Henry. It is not true, as is often stated, that he was the tutor to either of the princes, nor that he became secretary of state. 
Dunbar's position at court was eased by the death of Clementina in January 1735, but his relations with Prince Charles, which were never good, grew steadily worse. Indeed it is fair to say that the profound hostility the prince felt towards his governor, whom his father continued to trust and employ, contributed to the breakdown in relations between James III and his son, which was to have such a significant impact on the future of the Jacobite movement. 
Nevertheless Dunbar's influence with James III began to wane after 1740, partly because he was considered too anti-French, at a time when the War of the Austrian Succession had revived the possibility of a Franco-Jacobite alliance. When Prince Charles left for France in January 1744, followed by Prince Henry in August 1745, Dunbar had no role at the court, but he remained there until after the defeat of the Jacobite rising in Scotland and the safe return of Prince Charles to France. Then, when the prince failed to get further French support, Dunbar defended his irresponsible behaviour in Paris. This, according to Benedict XIV, made James III lose all confidence in him, and resulted in his retirement. He left Rome in April 1747, at the age of fifty-seven, and went to live with his sister (a widow since 1740) at Avignon. Together they acquired a country house outside the city, which they called Belvedere. 
The final twenty-three years of Dunbar's life were relatively uneventful. He and his sister received Prince Charles when he was expelled from France and stayed at Avignon from December 1748 to February 1749. He then irritated both James III and Benedict XIV by continuing to defend the prince's behaviour. In September 1751, having studied some of the writings of Bishop Bossuet, Antoine Arnauld, and Pierre Nicole, he converted to Catholicism at Dijon. His sister, who had already converted in 1731, left him all her property in a will dated August 1756. She died in October 1766. His own will, in which he left everything to his former charge Prince Henry, by then Cardinal York, was dated April 1769. 
By the time of his own death at Avignon in August 1770, three and a half years after the death of James III in Rome, Dunbar had lived long enough to see the rest of his family well established in the service of George II and George III. His elder brother David, sixth Viscount Stormont, had died in 1748 and been succeeded as seventh viscount by his son David, who now also inherited Dunbar's Jacobite earldom. But Lord Stormont had a successful diplomatic career, serving the Hanoverian kings, and never assumed the title. Dunbar's younger brother William was appointed lord chief justice of king's bench in 1756 and given a peerage ['see 'Murray, William, first earl of Mansfield]. 
Dunbar is chiefly remembered today as the man who, having negotiated the marriage between James III and Maria Clementina Sobieska, stood in for the king during their proxy marriage, and was given responsibility for the upbringing and education of their children. But he should also be remembered as the man who, with his sister and brother-in-law, allowed his ambition and vanity to destroy the harmony of the Jacobite court in exile. His behaviour drove some people to leave, and prevented the arrival of others. His determination to dominate the court, and to be the king's chief political confidant, played a major role in creating the barrier between the king and both Clementina and Prince Charles, with such disastrous effects on the prospects of the Jacobite movement in 1725-7 and after 1746. 


@@@@@


doc= 92616


Young, Hugo John Smelter (1938-2003), journalist, was born on 13 October 1938 at 9 Shearwood Road, Sheffield, the eldest of the five children of Gerard Francis Young (1910-2004), engineer and industrialist, and his wife, Diana Graham, 'nee' Murray (1915-2012), daughter of Charles Graham Murray, general practitioner. His father held many posts of public service, including high sheriff of Hallamshire, lord lieutenant of south Yorkshire, pro-chancellor of Sheffield University, and member of the Prices and Incomes Board and Top Salaries Review Body. 
Family business and family religion defined Young's childhood. The business -- the Tempered Spring Company -- was one of Sheffield's most respected specialist steel manufacturers (and its chairman, his father, one of Yorkshire society's most prominent figures). The religion -- Roman Catholicism -- made schooling at Ampleforth College a natural and hugely influential choice. Young, like his father and grandfather, another Smelter Young, went through all Ampleforth's stages: from Gilling Castle to Junior House to St Bede's House where, in 1955, Father Basil Hume was appointed housemaster. Hume promoted Young his first head of house and the two forged a close, natural friendship that lasted until Cardinal Hume's death in 1999. The Benedictines of Ampleforth, then as now, saw teaching as a 'moral undertaking' where truth and faith dictated 'a sense of humble searching together for what is valuable, and an awareness of the quality of goodness in a life' (http://www.ampleforth.org). In his later writings Young always seemed aware of those precepts, which lent his prose a distinctive moral tone. 
Young finished his schooling as head monitor and proceeded to Balliol College, Oxford, to read law. He was already a compelling figure: tall, ramrod straight, and precise, somehow graver and older than his years, with no trace of the accent of his native county. Fellow students thought of him as a high court judge in waiting -- and his interest in the bar and the workings of law remained manifest through many later articles -- but it was journalism in general and politics in particular that rapidly came to absorb him. He joined the student newspaper, 'Cherwell', and swiftly became its deputy editor, producing twice-weekly columns that surveyed the national as well as the university scene and sought unequivocally to distinguish right from wrong. Young at twenty-two and Young at sixty-two shared the same taste for the magisterial. He was always serious in tone and clear in judgement. Though personally often amusing company, he seldom allowed himself to experiment with humour in print. 
Young's career path was already obvious when he left university with a second-class degree in jurisprudence in 1961. He got a trainee job on the 'Yorkshire Post', which gave him a grounding in all aspects of editorial work, and then, in 1963, won a Harkness fellowship to the United States, an experience he used the following year to secure a congressional fellowship on Capitol Hill. He learned the fundamentals of journalism and the lessons of raw politics viewed in close focus very early on. He was already a high flier. It was natural that in 1965, still only twenty-six, he should move to the 'Sunday Times', a rich and influential paper about to experience its golden age under the editorship of Harold Evans from 1967 to 1981. He became chief leader writer in 1966, and on 15 October the same year married a thirty-year-old fellow journalist, Helen Mason (died 1989), daughter of James O'Brien Mason, schoolmaster. They had three daughters and one son. 
Young remained with the 'Sunday Times' until 1984, having become political editor, with column-writing responsibilities, in 1973. Though he enjoyed political reporting and, in the 'Sunday Times' fashion of the time, helped produce several instant books on big political stories of the day, his interest was always more in declaring what ought to happen rather than examining what had already happened: the column was his natural habitat. Positioning and placement in newspapers define scope and content. Young was not the paper's main political columnist: that honour belonged first to William Rees-Mogg and then to Ronald Butt, their weekly wisdom dominating the page opposite the leader page. Young's article, by contrast, could be found towards the bottom of the pile, buried beneath the editorials and letters. He couldn't write about big topics that also needed editorial comment; he couldn't trample on Rees-Mogg's or Butt's patch. Therefore he needed to take a sideways look at the week's news, to highlight the peripheral and develop different perceptions. He did that with widely acknowledged brilliance; and the sideways slant, setting a different agenda, was actually turned to his advantage. He built a reputation for quirky independence and unexpected insights. 
Then in 1978-9 came the year-long strike that shut both 'The Times' and the 'Sunday Times' and drove Lord Thomson to sell both papers to Rupert Murdoch. By 1981 Evans had moved to edit 'The Times' and wanted Young as his deputy and dauphin. But Frank Giles, the new editor at the 'Sunday Times', also demanded Young as deputy, and appealed to Murdoch. Giles won and 'Sunday Times' staff saw him as their editor in waiting. Instead, when Giles went in 1983, Rupert Murdoch appointed Andrew Neil from 'The Economist'. The two did not get on. 'Young was wary and aloof,' Neil wrote, 'he was the high priest of the collectivist consensus that had already brought Britain to its knees... [but] the staff looked up to him as guardian of [the paper's] integrity... I realised early on that both of us could not survive at 'The Sunday Times'. (Neil, 33-4)' Inevitably, it was Young who departed, staking out his position as a committed foe of the Murdoch papers in a final column entitled 'A press we don't deserve' (18 March 1984). After nineteen years on the 'Sunday Times', and twice being named columnist of the year in the British press awards, he was out of a job. Hopes of an editorship had utterly faded. 
The hiatus did not last long. Peter Preston, his old editor on 'Cherwell' at Oxford, was editor of 'The Guardian' now and swiftly offered Young a column there. It was not an altogether easy transition. First Young had to find a means of working alongside another renowned political columnist of the time, Peter Jenkins, who soon solved the problem for him by mounting Fleet Street's merry-go-round and departing to the 'Sunday Times'; then he had to master techniques for addressing the major issues head-on. Sideways didn't work any longer. Little daunted, Young fast became an essential asset to 'The Guardian', winning two more columnist-of-the-year awards in rapid succession. His views -- essentially as the voice of liberal conscience -- fitted 'The Guardian' just as snugly as they had fitted Harold Evans's 'Sunday Times'. He was not a party man and never a party apologist; nor, quite explicitly, did he make close friends of politicians, though tory 'wets' and the coming young men of New Labour both knew him well. He researched diligently, kept his distance, and pronounced in a way that the politicians who read him found compelling. He could not be an editor, but he could be a master of his trade (and perhaps of something greater). 
For Young, 1989 was a difficult but momentous year. His wife, Helen, died of cancer after a long illness, leaving him alone to care for their four children. He was devastated but, characteristically, hid his grief and rallied his family. His major book, 'One of Us', a history of the Thatcher years, was published to critical acclaim in Britain and America, and became an international best-seller. And then an invitation to chair the Scott Trust, the close-knit grouping of great and good that owned 'The Guardian' and its group, arrived out of the blue. The trustees had been brooding fruitlessly over who could replace the retiring Alastair Hetherington, when one of them, Liz Forgan, suddenly asked 'What about the lovely Hugo?' (personal knowledge). Within five minutes the invitation was agreed and Young became an honorary member of the newspaper proprietors' club, sitting as quasi-owner on the group board, hiring and firing editors, and -- as the trust deed required -- seeking to secure the future of 'The Guardian' 'in perpetuity'. 
Young took the role of chairman of the Scott Trust with customary diligence and seriousness. 'The Guardian' itself, after several years of circulation and financial success during the 1980s, had been wrong-footed by the founding of 'The Independent' and by years of difficult production problems after the Murdoch-owned press's move to Wapping. It had just undergone a sweeping redesign and needed resolute trust backing. Young supplied that in full measure. He was also keenly engaged by the other great challenge on the 'Guardian' horizon: the fate of its natural Sunday partner, 'The Observer'. Several times through the previous twenty years, 'The Guardian' and 'The Observer' had seemed on the brink of joining forces. It had never quite happened. Now, though, Roland ('Tiny') Rowland of Lonrho was in a mood to sell as Sunday losses mounted. The only known buyer in town was 'The Guardian''s principal rival, 'The Independent', which saw an alluring way of strengthening its own struggling 'Independent on Sunday', by buying 'The Observer', then closing it, so turning two papers into one. This was a serious strategic threat to 'The Guardian', one that the editor, Preston, and his managing director, Jim Markwick, were determined to meet. But first the trust had to agree, and help find the $25 million it would cost. Young, who always described himself as 'just a journalist', saw the imperatives of journalism and of a historic title in need of rescue. The trust was persuaded. The deal was done within forty-eight hours. But debilitating difficulties remained. 

'The Observer', after decades of decline, could not be turned round in a trice. One editor followed another in dispiritingly quick succession until the arrival of Roger Alton in 1998 steadied nerves; Young clearly found this side of quasi-proprietorship personally gruelling. Some appointments were relatively easy: of Bob Gavron and then Paul Myners to the group chairmanship, of Bob Phillis from the BBC as group chief executive and Alan Rusbridger as editor of 'The Guardian'. But 'The Observer' produced crisis after crisis. Young was much fortified through these difficult years by his marriage on 22 December 1990 to the American artist, Lucille (Lucy) Waring, daughter of Forsyth Massey, sailor. 
'Only in mid-career', Young confessed, 'and to my shame, did I begin to understand that, for Britain, Europe is the issue overshadowing all others' (Young, xxii). Another scholarly and passionate book -- 'This Blessed Plot: Britain in Europe from Churchill to Blair' -- made good this omission in 1998 and provided a constant theme for Young's column work (which continued throughout his time as chairman of the Scott Trust). He was the most consistent and vociferous supporter of European integration in the British national press. He also found himself widely derided in other, more euro-sceptical organs. 'After the heady 70s and the combative 80s, pro-Europeanism had become a quite unfashionable position', he lamented in 2003 ('The Guardian', 27 June 2003). But fashion was always anathema to Young. 
As he prepared to give up the Scott Trust chairmanship (a term due to end in 2004), Young returned eagerly to the love of his working life: the column. 'For the most part I've been less interested in influencing events and the ministers who make them than in enlightening readers who may want to understand what is going on. I don't see myself as a player, more a watcher, a finder-out, a discloser, an alerter, a reporter. (Young, xvii-xviii)' He saw no reason why he should ever put aside this role, but one reason came suddenly. Young was diagnosed with cancer and his readers knew its seriousness because, for weeks on end, he stopped writing. In the summer of 2003, however, he was back in action: chairing trust meetings, producing columns of memorable ferocity (including one final one on 16 September denouncing Tony Blair as a failure and 'tragic figure' who deserved no further support), and even travelling to the United States to assess the beginning of the presidential election campaign. Then the cancer returned. He died at his home, 22 Christchurch Hill, Hampstead, London, on 22 September 2003. He was survived by his wife, Lucy, and the four children of his first marriage. 
Following Young's death a sense of loss across the political spectrum was instantly manifest. Tony Blair, tragic figure or not, spoke of a 'genuinely nice human being' of 'exceptional ability and integrity'. Gordon Brown praised Young's 'great intellect' and said that his knowledge and wisdom 'shone through his writing'. Lord Patten described him as 'one of the greatest liberal voices of our age'. Lord Biffen never thought of him as a political adversary: 'We were jointly examining a topic in a detached and good natured manner.' Jacques Delors, highlighting the 'central importance' of 'This Blessed Plot', paid 'homage to a great journalist and remarkable historian' ('The Guardian', 24 Sept 2003). Such tributes -- and there were many more -- went far beyond mere formality. They attested to a respect and to a reputation rarely found in the world of British journalism. 
Young, as he was often the first to admit, was in no sense infallible. Some of his trust dealings with editorial management, especially over 'The Observer', bordered on the chaotic -- and one ex-editor at least thought him a flawed defender of editorial freedom. Sometimes his columns, especially on European themes, could seem repetitive (indeed, on one occasion, 'The Guardian' printed an old one by mistake, and only Young noticed). But these, as Young himself acknowledged wryly, were proofs of his humanity, reminders of how rough and complex a trade journalism could be. Time and again he had proved himself an adornment to that trade. In private or public, his natural authority and elegantly incisive prose set him apart as a potent source of conviction and integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 92619


Blake, Robert Norman William, Baron Blake (1916-2003), historian and college head, was born at Brundall, Norfolk, on 23 December 1916, the elder son of William Joseph Blake, schoolmaster, and his wife, Norah Lindley, 'nee' Daynes, the daughter of a leading Norwich solicitor. He was born two weeks after Lloyd George and Bonar Law ejected Asquith from 10 Downing Street -- an episode on which he later wrote in much detail. He was very much a Norfolk man, supposedly descended from that other Robert Blake, Cromwell's admiral, and he was devoted to East Anglia all his life. His future wife also came from Norfolk while the one post which almost enticed him from Oxford was the vice-chancellorship of the new University of East Anglia in the 1960s. 
From being taught in a dame school in Brundall, Blake went as a day boy to King Edward VI School, Norwich, where his father taught him history. It was decided not to enter him for the Eton scholarship examinations because of their emphasis on classics. He went on to Magdalen College, Oxford, on an Eldon law scholarship, but he decided to read philosophy, politics, and economics (modern greats) instead of law. He gained first-class honours despite diversions that included a hockey blue and playing cricket (as a pacy opening bowler) for the Oxford Authentics. One friend at Magdalen was the future Conservative politician Keith Joseph. 
Blake considered becoming a lawyer but the Second World War intervened, and it saw him engaged in fierce active service in the western desert in the 124th field regiment of the Royal Artillery. He was captured when Tobruk fell in June 1942 and was sent to Italy as a prisoner of war. He and two British colleagues managed a daring escape and were given refuge by a peasant family. Eventually they got away, evading both Italian soldiers and fierce red-eyed wolves in the harsh winter of 1943-4, to rejoin the Eighth Army. Blake described in unfinished memoirs these exciting military experiences, which led to his being mentioned in dispatches. In the latter stages of the war he worked for MI6, one colleague being the apparently harmless Kim Philby. 
Blake's academic career began in 1947 when he succeeded Lord Pakenham, now a member of Attlee's Labour government, as student and politics tutor at Christ Church, Oxford. There he rapidly built up a distinctive personal role, bonding closely in university politics with such colleagues as Hugh Trevor-Roper and Roy Harrod, serving as a university proctor and as senior censor (senior tutor) of the college in 1953-6, and upholding its interests vigorously against the threat of a highway being bulldozed through Christ Church meadow. Blake readily acknowledged that this was a Conservative-inspired project, eventually thwarted by Harold Wilson's Labour government in 1965. He nevertheless showed himself to be an active tory, serving as a Conservative city councillor (from 1957 to 1964) and a magistrate, and defending the Eden government in the 1956 Suez crisis. 
What made Blake's national reputation was a series of authoritative works on modern British history. The first was a skilful edition of the diaries of Field Marshal Haig (1952), a project facilitated by Trevor-Roper (who later married Haig's daughter), which began a partial rehabilitation of the reputation of that controversial commander. The revelation of Haig's blunt views on the French generals (kept hidden in Duff Cooper's biography of Haig) caused some stir in France. But Blake, like another Oxford historian, A. J. P. Taylor, later, moved on to a higher plane of celebrity when he was introduced to Lord Beaverbrook. One factor that particularly impressed the old press baron was Blake's ability to consume large quantities of champagne without apparent effect. It was a talent that endured. The outcome was a fine, trenchant biography of Bonar Law, 'The Unknown Prime Minister' (1955), which brought the career of this apparently drab politician vividly to life by locating him precisely within the 'Sturm und Drang' of British politics between 1910 and 1923. Blake illuminated Bonar Law's relationship with Lloyd George as no other writer had done, and provided a remarkably balanced analysis of the Ulster question. However, his account of an alleged bridge game involving the prime minister, Herbert Asquith, on Whit Monday 1916 at the height of the First World War, was savaged by Asquith's daughter, Lady Violet Bonham-Carter, and Beaverbrook had reluctantly to help out, which diminished his regard for Blake thereafter. An important personal landmark was Blake's marriage on 22 August 1953 to Patricia Mary Waters (1925-1995) of The Grove, Great Plumstead, Norfolk, the daughter of Thomas Richard Waters, farmer. Trevor-Roper was best man. It was an exceptionally serene marriage, which produced three lively daughters. 
Blake's scholarly masterpiece was his majestic biography 'Disraeli' (1966). Himself a man of seemingly conventional views, with the rubicund appearance of a country squire, Blake wrote of this colourful Jewish 'arriviste' in vivid fashion, sparing nothing in his account of the raffish sex life, money troubles, and driving ambitions of the 'the most potent myth-maker in British history'. Blake also wrote brilliantly on Disraeli's novels, 'Sybil' and 'Coningsby' with their feel for the social realities of industrial and political life, 'Tancred' with its eccentric flights of orientalism, and 'Lothair' with its 'fascinating but faintly disturbing ambiguity' ('Disraeli', 735). Blake saw Disraeli as living 'in the long shadow of the Byronic Myth' (ibid., 52), but he also shared his subject's passion for the poet and was a member of the Byron Society. It was widely thought that Blake went too far in playing down Disraeli's concern for the trade unions and impact on the social legislation of his government of 1874-80. But it was a dazzling book, as strong on foreign and imperial matters as on domestic, and it led to Blake's being elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1967. 
Blake next intended to write a large biography of another Conservative prime minister, Lord Derby, but he lost interest. Instead, he wrote a best-selling general survey, based on his 1968 Ford lectures, 'The Conservative Party from Peel to Churchill' (1970; later extended to include Margaret Thatcher and, in 1997, John Major). Written with admirable economy, it accounted for the success of the party in terms of its adaptable, undoctrinaire nature. Even though he switched his allegiance from Edward Heath (who gave him his peerage, as Baron Blake, in 1971) to Margaret Thatcher, he delivered views in the 1980s that read like a Peelite warning against contemporary versions of 'stern unbending toryism'. His Romanes lecture of 1992 was highly sympathetic towards Gladstone, and he also directed enthusiastically the multi-volume edition of Gladstone's diaries by Colin Matthew. His mother's family, the Dayneses, had a strong Gladstonian Liberal tradition. 
Blake perhaps never again recaptured the 'elan' of his Disraelian high noon, but he continued to be an active and greatly respected historian for the next thirty years. His 'History of Rhodesia' (1977) was an interestingly different kind of book, essentially a study of white rule from Rhodes onwards, ending with sharp comments on the illegal breakaway regime of Ian Smith, where Blake's views were much influenced by his friendship with the liberal Garfield Todd. His later works included a fair-minded textbook, 'The Decline of Power, 1915-1964' (1985), an excellent volume of essays on Winston Churchill (1993), edited jointly with William Roger Louis of the University of Texas, and a final study of the trading house of Jardine Matheson (1989) which had involved several agreeable colonial-style visits to Hong Kong. In addition to his own flow of publications he worked vigorously to facilitate publication by others. He was a long-term delegate to the Oxford University Press, and with Christine Nicholls was editor of two large supplements to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' (that for 1971-80, published in 1986, and that for 1981-5, published in 1990), injecting new momentum into a project somewhat flagging at the time, and directed by Blake with his usual urbanity. He himself wrote the entry on Anthony Eden, whom he had known well. Meanwhile he also fulfilled other important roles in academia and elsewhere, including chairing the Rhodes Trust (1983-7) and the Historical Manuscripts Commission (1982-9), serving as a trustee of the British Museum (1978-88), on the board of Channel 4 television (1983-6), and as high bailiff and searcher of the sanctuary (1988-9) and high steward (1989-99) of Westminster Abbey. 
In his later career, as well as being a leading Oxford historian, Blake became a major Oxford personality. In 1968 he was elected provost of Queen's College, where his genial and gregarious style helped massively in turning a somewhat cantankerous body of dons into a happy and thriving community. His wife, Patricia, also contributed to this end, and on her death in 1995 was given the unique honour for a provost's spouse of a college memorial service. Blake presided admirably over both the governing body and the high table. He particularly enjoyed the company of Labour guests, notably Michael Foot, with whom he shared a common interest in Byron and Disraeli. The hauteur of a head of house was always spiced with personal kindliness towards college associates and with humour. When college tenants on a progress explained that they were being paid for the non-cultivation of land, Blake observed that Queen's might be paid for not teaching classics. He seldom took a controversial line in college matters, except when he spoke against Queen's admitting women undergraduates. He advanced then views somewhat similar to those offered by Peel in opposing the 'Reform Bill' of 1832. However, Blake accepted a heavy defeat with his usual good humour, and he vigorously opposed sex discrimination as chairman of the Rhodes Trust. 
One of the many reasons why Blake's provostship from 1968 to 1987 was such a great success, however, was that he was outward-looking, with worlds outside Oxford. His university and political activities intersected in clubland and he was a member at various times of Brooks's, Pratt's, the Beefsteak, and the Oxford and Cambridge. The journalist Alan Watkins wrote that when he went to London to enjoy the political or media scene Blake 'went into overdrive' ('The Independent', 25 Sept 2003). His parliamentary interests were reflected in some magisterial pronouncements in the Lords, often embellished with historical analogies as on Ireland or constitutional matters. These usually reflected the Conservative orthodoxy: thus Blake became increasingly Eurosceptic. A radical exception, however, was that, in the Hansard Society's report of 1976 and later as chairman of the Electoral Reform Society, Blake became a strong supporter of proportional representation. He also joined a revolt of tory peers over the 'War Crimes Bill'. 
Blake left Queen's and Oxford in 1987 in less than agreeable circumstances. He stood for the chancellorship of the university, in succession to Harold Macmillan, earl of Stockton, but was narrowly defeated (by 575 votes) by a fellow historian, Roy Jenkins. As a loyal supporter of Margaret Thatcher, Blake was chagrined to discover that Oxonian Tory MPs and peers were dispatched to Oxford with instructions to vote for the dissident former leader, Edward Heath, who split the Conservative vote. Blake regarded this as betrayal by the tory whips. He seldom returned to Oxford thereafter, but kept his distance somewhat from the Lords, and retired to his Norfolk home, Riverview House, Brundall, inherited from his mother's family in 1966, to write. One enjoyable interlude was a semester as Cline professor of English literature at the University of Texas in Austin, where he lectured on the novels of Trollope. His retirement was sadly interrupted in 1997 by a fall at the Oxford and Cambridge Club which led to a leg being amputated. He remained active, however, reviewing books, penning a long-running column in the 'Illustrated London News' (where he succeeded another Queen's man, Arthur Bryant), and pronouncing on the radio as a 'constitutional expert', especially on the monarchy. His views on constitutional questions were sought by the queen's private secretary. It was said that Blake represented in his own person the unwritten constitution. His public engagements became much more occasional after the death of his wife. But he kept busy in Brundall, starting to write his memoirs in a converted coach-house, and enjoying his garden and the views of the River Yare. At the time of his death from coronary scelerosis, at his home on 20 September 2003, he was anticipating the visit of a television crew, busy to the end. He was buried in the parish church nearby at Braydeston. 
Blake was a man of understated wisdom, shrewd judgement, courtesy, and good humour, excellent company on all occasions. He was as pleasant a guest as he was a host, with a genuine interest in others, emphasized by a stooping posture when he met them. As a historian he was sometimes underestimated. There was no flashiness of style, no arresting Blake thesis or overarching doctrine. He was never caught up in historical or personal controversies as was his Christ Church colleague and friend Hugh Trevor-Roper. New developments in historiography in the 1980s and 1990s made scant impact on him. However, he was consistently successful in making his books readable without sacrificing their scholarly quality. He brought his subjects to life both in print and on the platform. His masterpiece on Disraeli was described by an American scholar, Clarence Cline, as 'the best biography of anyone in any language' (private information); his life of Bonar Law was not far behind. Above all, he was chronicler and custodian of British Conservatism. Almost single-handedly he revived historical study of the Conservative Party, and gave it new academic prestige. As a man, blending simplicity with sophistication, he was widely felt by colleagues far removed from his political outlook to have represented many of the humane virtues and the best values of Oxford college life. There is a portrait of him by John Whittall (1982) in the senior common room of Queen's. 


@@@@@


doc= 92623


Brymer, John Alexander (1915-2003), clarinettist, was born on 27 January 1915 at 92 South Woodbine Street, South Shields, co. Durham, son of John Alexander Brymer, builder, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Dixon. An autodidact, he became interested in the clarinet at the age of four, after finding one of his father's old instruments lying around the house. With his father's music-making in his ears, he progressed quickly and played with a military band when he was eleven. While still at South Shields grammar school he came under the spell of the oboist Leon Goossens, whose approach to vibrato later influenced his clarinet sound. In 1933 he moved south and enrolled as a trainee teacher at Goldsmiths' College, University of London. There he met his future wife, Joan Richardson, a violinist and viola player, also training to be a teacher. She was the daughter of John Richardson. They married at the parish church of St Andrew, Eastbourne, on 21 October 1939, when both were aged twenty-four. They had one son, Timothy. 
At Goldsmiths' College Brymer developed as an orchestral player by joining the Goldsmiths' Evening Institute Orchestra and the Ernest Read Symphony Orchestra. But he did not intend to pursue a career in music at that time, and accepted a post as a schoolmaster at Heath Clark School, Croydon, in 1935. Although he taught general subjects, he specialized in music and continued to be active as an amateur musician. In later life he argued that no musician was completely self-taught and recalled that he supplemented his knowledge of the art by attending performances of leading clarinettists, including Charles Draper, Haydn Draper, Frederick Thurston, and Reginald Kell. After Heath Clark School was evacuated to Eastbourne at the beginning of the war, and later to Llanelli, Brymer joined the Royal Air Force in 1940. On completing his basic training at Uxbridge he was deployed to Morecambe as a physical training instructor with the rank of corporal. At Morecambe he continued to pursue his interest in music and could be seen playing in the Morecambe Central Pier dance band dressed in his RAF uniform. 
After demobilization Brymer returned to teaching at Croydon in 1945. But during his time in the RAF he had met the horn-player Dennis Brain, who recommended him to Sir Thomas Beecham as a possible replacement for Reginald Kell as principal clarinettist of the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. Beecham acted on Brain's suggestion and, in July 1947, unexpectedly telephoned Brymer to invite him to audition. Within days of that audition, Brymer was engaged as Kell's replacement and soon became one of Beecham's most devoted acolytes. He remained with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra until 1963 and considered his days in the orchestra and his relationship with Beecham as high points in his career. He continued to admire Beecham for the rest of his life, and of particular significance to him was his recording of Mozart's clarinet concerto that he made with the conductor in 1958. Although he made two further recordings of the work, with Sir Neville Marriner and Sir Colin Davis, it was his recording with Beecham that was admired most. 
With the death of Beecham in 1961 Brymer became increasingly dissatisfied with life in the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and, when William Glock invited him to join the BBC Symphony Orchestra as co-principal clarinettist with Colin Bradbury in 1963, he leapt at the chance. But when Pierre Boulez was appointed conductor of the orchestra in 1969 it soon became clear that Brymer's warm sound was at odds with Boulez's vision for the orchestra. Brymer decided therefore to leave the BBC Symphony Orchestra in 1972 to become co-principal clarinettist of the London Symphony Orchestra, with Gervase de Peyer. He remained with that orchestra until 1985, when the orchestra honoured him with a seventieth birthday concert (an unusual tribute to an orchestral player). Ten years later the English Chamber Orchestra marked his eightieth birthday with a celebratory concert at which he played Mozart's clarinet concerto, the same composer's clarinet quintet (with the Medici Quartet), and Weber's clarinet concerto in F minor. 
Although Brymer was an outstanding orchestral musician and solo clarinettist, he was also a distinguished chamber musician, jazz player, teacher, writer, and broadcaster. He was a founder-member of the Wigmore, Prometheus, and London Baroque ensembles, was the director of the London Wind Soloists and the Michael Krein Saxophone Quartet (later the London Saxophone Quartet), and was a member of the Tuckwell Wind Quartet and the Robles Ensemble. He played jazz with leading jazz musicians throughout the United States, and recorded the jazz-inspired clarinet concerto by the American composer Elie Siegmeister. He taught at the Royal Academy of Music between 1950 and 1958, the Royal Military School of Music, Kneller Hall, between 1969 and 1973, and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama from 1981. His three books -- 'The Clarinet' (1976), 'From Where I Sit' (1979), and 'In the Orchestra' (1987) -- were well received, and his easy manner before the microphone meant that the radio programmes that he presented for the BBC, such as 'At Home', were popular favourites. A well-rounded person, he was a keen rugby player in his youth and enjoyed gardening and carpentry. He was honoured widely during his career and was, 'inter alia', made an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Music in 1955 and OBE in 1960, and received honorary degrees from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne and Kingston and De Montfort universities. He died of septicaemia and a urinary tract infection at East Surrey Hospital, Redhill, on 16 September 2003. He was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 92625


Chilcott, Susan (1963-2003), singer, was born in Bristol on 8 July 1963 of unknown parentage; she was adopted by Cyrus Oswald Chilcott, a builder, and his wife, of Timsbury, Somerset. Showing early signs of great musicality and of the possession of a fine soprano voice, she studied singing from the age of twelve with Mollie Petrie, who remained her teacher throughout her life. After studying at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, in 1986 she won the Festival gold medal (and a prize of $2750) at the Royal Overseas League music competition. 
Chilcott's first engagement, in 1987, was as Musetta in Puccini's 'La Boheme' for Scottish Opera-Go-Round, which entailed more than thirty one-night stands on a twelve-week tour of the smaller towns of Scotland. Her career was slow to take off and she had to take on other work, such as cleaning, until the 1991-2 season when she sang Frasquita in 'Carmen' and First Lady in 'The Magic Flute' for Scottish Opera. For Opera North she took part as Donna Luisa in the British premiere of Roberto Gerhard's 'The Duenna' (1992), and sang Lady Penelope Rich in Britten's 'Gloriana' (1993). She obtained a notable success as Tatyana in 'Eugene Onegin' for Glyndebourne Touring Opera in 1994 when her singing was highly praised as well as her characterization of Pushkin's heroine. The same year she auditioned for the Theatre Royal de la Monnaie in Brussels, originally for the small part of one of the Nieces in Britten's 'Peter Grimes', but in the event she sang Ellen Orford, the chief female character, scoring a personal triumph. Her voice was now fully developed and under perfect control, while she had become an excellent actress. She repeated Ellen Orford at the Snape Maltings with equal success. 
Chilcott appeared frequently in Brussels during the next few years, singing Desdemona in Verdi's 'Otello', the Composer in Strauss's 'Ariadne auf Naxos', and Alice Ford in Verdi's 'Falstaff'. She also appeared at the Opera Garnier in Paris as Fiordiligi in Mozart's 'Cosi fan tutte' and as Tatyana, while she sang Donna Elvira in 'Don Giovanni' in Geneva and at Santa Fe. She had another Mozart role in her repertory, the Countess in 'The Marriage of Figaro', which she sang for Scottish Opera and Welsh National Opera; the latter production was seen at Sadler's Wells Theatre in London. 
At English National Opera in 1995 Chilcott was particularly admired in the title role of Dvorak's 'Rusalka', the water sprite who wants to become human, while Helena in Britten's 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' enabled her to display her considerable gifts for comedy. She acquired two very sympathetic new roles, the protagonist of Janacek's 'Katya Kabanova' and Blanche in Poulenc's 'Dialogues des Carmelites' at Netherlands Opera. She returned to Brussels in 1998 for another Britten role, the Governess in 'The Turn of the Screw', which she also sang in Cincinnati. Chilcott showed a special understanding of the more neurotic heroines of Britten's operas. The following year Chilcott repeated Katya Kabanova, this time for Scottish Opera; her interpretation of the character had become even more sensitive, while her performance showed a greater intensity. Also in 1999 she created Hermione at the premiere of Philippe Boesmans's 'The Winter's Tale' in Brussels. An adaptation of Shakespeare's drama, the opera -- and Chilcott's performance in particular -- was very well received. 
Meanwhile, having had a son by a previous relationship, on 1 October 2000 Chilcott married David Alfred Sigall, her agent and manager. He was the son of Rudolf Sigall, fur merchant. The first signs of the breast cancer from which she eventually died became apparent that year, but she underwent chemotherapy, and seemed to recover, returning to the opera house in 2001 to give a very fine account of Desdemona at the Glyndebourne Festival, a performance that displayed both the physical frailty of the woman and the courage deriving from her love for Otello. Her next new role was Lisa in 'The Queen of Spades' which she sang first for Welsh National Opera in 2001 and then repeated for her sensationally successful Covent Garden debut the following year, when Tchaikovsky's opera was conducted by Valery Gergiev, while Placido Domingo sang Hermann. Lisa was undoubtedly one of Chilcott's finest characterizations; she was able to express the rawest emotions of the young woman, besottedly in love with a man whose only thoughts were of gambling, while singing with beautiful, unforced tone. She also made a triumphant debut at the Metropolitan, New York, in 2002, as Helena in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. 
Chilcott's last new role, in 2003, was Janacek's Jenufa; she gave a searing performance for Welsh National Opera that equalled her Katya in its dramatic effect. Her cancer had by then returned and she was forced to cancel a much-heralded appearance as Natasha in a new production of Prokofiev's 'War and Peace' at English National Opera. Her final engagement was a concert of songs and poetry devoted to Shakespeare, with Fiona Shaw as reciter and Iain Burnside as pianist. She died on 4 September 2003 at her home, Woodbine Cottage, Sladacre Lane, Blagdon, Somerset. She was survived by her husband and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 92628


Fitzpatrick, Anthony James (1951-2003), engineer, was born on 9 June 1951 at Forest Gate Hospital, West Ham, London, the second child of James Matthew Anthony Fitzpatrick and his wife, Ornella Maria, 'nee' Corti. His father was a machine operator at a works in Stratford following his army service in Italy. His mother was Italian, and the young Fitzpatrick spent vacations near Florence. His upbringing was Roman Catholic, and he was an altar boy. His secondary schooling, from 1962 to 1969, was at St Bonaventure's Grammar School, Forest Gate, where he took his A-level examinations in mathematics and physics, studying Spanish to supplement his Italian. He took part in school activities, including the debating society. He chose civil engineering as a career in the belief that it would offer tangible and visible measures of his abilities, and he went to Leeds University from 1969 to 1972, where he was an outstanding student. He was a voracious scholar, taking all the courses that timetabling allowed beyond examination requirements. He responded to the intellectual freedom that characterized the Leeds civil engineering department at that time. The rigour of structural design and analysis attracted him. He graduated with a first-class degree, winning the Holst prize for civil engineering in 1972. He married Janet (Jan) Turnbull ('b'. 1950), a Leeds graduate in history, and daughter of William Turnbull, coalminer, on 24 June 1972. 
Fitzpatrick was recommended by Leeds to Duncan Michael at Ove Arup and Partners. Michael was to remain a mentor throughout his career. Fitzpatrick began work in 1972 full of potential as an engineer, working with Frank Atkinson and Michael Shears on the Vestey headquarters building at Smithfield. For family reasons he and his wife moved to Pity Me, co. Durham, in 1973, and he worked on designs in the Newcastle office, commuting to York from August 1974 to be the supervising engineer on the new building of York District General Hospital. Arup had won some very high profile projects in Iran in the 1960s and after the Arab-Israeli War of 1973 used this platform for new business to replace the void of the collapsed UK property market. Fitzpatrick and his wife moved in 1976 to Tehran (Janet continuing her teaching work), where he worked under Nigel Thompson and then Richard Haryott. He thrived in that chaotic context of glamorous projects, powerful people, the world's talent on tap, and excess of ambition with disorganized delivery, all overlaid on the politics, commerce, and culture of the imperial Persian court. This unreality came to an abrupt end with the overthrow of the shah in 1979, and Fitzpatrick rejoined his colleagues in London. He worked with David Croft and Michael Glover on the engineering system for the new British Library at St Pancras. Their designs and construction methods proved robust enough physically and financially to survive the reluctance and delays surrounding the project. 
As the consulting engineer to the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank for rebuilding its head office in 1978, Arup drew up the list of architects to take part in a competition. The Croft-Glover-Fitzpatrick team was assigned to assist Jack Zunz, the engineer supporting Norman Foster, who duly won and was appointed to the project. After the initial design work Fitzpatrick moved to Hong Kong in 1982 with Janet and their first child, Sarah ('b'. 1981), to be the Arup project manager and 'de facto' project leader. Again he thrived in the highly charged context of the bank's ambitions, the architect's leadership, and the rapid growth of the Arup office. Soon he was engineer also for new hotels in Dalian and Shanghai, with the position of project director. He was called back to London by Zunz in 1987 to become a director of Ove Arup and Partners. This marked his transition to acceptance at world level as a principal engineer in his own right. The family, by now including three girls, Kristina having been born in 1984 and Alexandra in 1986, made a new home at Tewin Wood, Hertfordshire, where their fourth child, Nicholas, was born in 1991. 
Fitzpatrick joined Arup's structural engineering business, based in London, to help rejuvenate it. By 1987 this original activity of the firm had been overtaken by its various new interests but it remained essential overall that Arup's structural engineering should be pre-eminent in quality. Fitzpatrick gathered round him talented young engineers and sought collaboration with the best architects operating in Europe. In this he was spectacularly successful. There was a stream of Foster projects, with Ken Shuttleworth particularly, including Independent Television News's headquarters in Gray's Inn Road, Century Tower in Tokyo, the headquarters of the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation at Canary Wharf, and Swiss Re (popularly known as 'the gherkin') at St Mary Axe. Concurrently, Fitzpatrick worked with Richard Rogers and his colleagues on the Reuters headquarters at Isle of Dogs and terminal 5 for the British Airports Authority at Heathrow. He engineered the covered Velodrome in Berlin with Perrault, built by the city authority for its Olympic games bid. He also worked with Herzog and de Meuron on the conversion of Bankside power station into Tate Modern. Some projects, like the 400 m tall Tour Sans Fin in Paris with the architect Jean Nouvel, the Mori Tower in Shanghai with Kohn Pedersen Fox, and London Bridge Tower, where Fitzpatrick proposed and introduced Renzo Piano to the developer, never did get built, despite their fame. Jane Wernick, one of Fitzpatrick's staff, had been the engineer working with the architects David Marks and Julia Barfield in the invention of the Millennium Wheel (the London Eye). As its development progressed, Fitzpatrick took responsibility for the Arup engineering. British Airways, by now the part owner, opted to procure the wheel's engineering directly from manufacturers and Fitzpatrick ended the Arup connection. Among these next-generation constructs, the expansion of the Royal Opera House was an odd one for Fitzpatrick. Stuart Lipton greatly admired Fitzpatrick, employing him on his commercial developments. When asked to sort out the Opera House project he insisted on Fitzpatrick joining as engineer, with immediate results. Through this storm of activity Fitzpatrick joined the Arup main board in April 1993. 
The idea for the form of the Millennium Bridge between St Paul's and Tate Modern came from Roger Ridsdill Smith and Chris Wise, two of Fitzpatrick's engineer colleagues. Their design was used for the competition by the team of Arup (Sir Jack Zunz), Sir Anthony Caro, and Lord Foster, who won and were appointed for the detailed design and procurement work. In June 2000 the bridge was opened to the public but some hours later was closed after developing a swing, caused by the huge crowd walking in rhythm with one of the bridge's natural lateral frequencies. Fitzpatrick reverted to being project chief for the remedial work, throwing his huge energies into the technical, financial, and relationship aspects, while almost all others backed away. The bridge reopened successfully in February 2002, the energy dispersing devices which were designed and installed looking as if they were intended. Fitzpatrick took this episode totally onto his own shoulders. Though he had sympathetic support from Lipton and key people within Arup, particularly its chairman, Bob Emmerson, who handled the reputational aspects, he put no dependence on anyone in his mission of restoring the bridge to the public. 
Emotionally exhausted and looking for a new task, Fitzpatrick took up the leadership of Arup America in 2001 to develop the potential of the firm's work there, which had been only partly realized since it opened in 1984. Based in Tiburon, California, he commuted between California, New York, and the UK. He set out to be a good leader for the many talented engineers of Arup America and to improve their integration with the whole firm. In contrast to the field generalship of his approach in Europe (where he still carried on) he did not immediately engage with the owners or the project architects in the USA, instead reshaping the various offices and their leaders, preparing for a large, high-quality expansion. The USA was a discovery for Fitzpatrick. He was hugely in tune with what he found -- the opportunities, the openness, the people, the mountains, and the style. 
Fitzpatrick joined the Institution of Structural Engineers in 1979, the Hong Kong Institution of Engineers in 1983 (becoming a registered structural engineer in the same year), the Royal Academy of Engineering in 1993, and the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1999. He was made an honorary fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 2002. He shared in the publication of papers about his projects, especially the bank in Hong Kong and the Millennium Bridge, and lectured on his work all over the world. He took no interest in further formal education for himself after Leeds, but acquired new knowledge, skills, and methods as he went. 
Fitzpatrick had long had an interest in diet and in fitness. He extolled Italian cookery and practised it, though he would munch and talk through one apple for a business lunch. He had broken his leg badly on a railway platform and thereafter exercised frequently, on a machine early in his office and excitedly on a mountain bicycle whenever he could find time to visit rough terrain. It was a release. He was eloquent on the finer aspects of carbon and titanium in a bicycle. In California he joined the Marin Cyclists. 
On the morning of 26 July 2003 Fresno Cycle Club held its annual climb to Kaiser Pass, a 160-mile round trip up to an elevation of 9200 feet in the Sierra and back down to Clovis, with 400 cyclists participating. Coming down Huntingdon Lake Road, on a steep right-hand bend, Fitzpatrick lost control of his bicycle and slid under a truck which was climbing up the incline, dying instantly in the impact. His funeral was held in St Peter's Church at Tewin on 14 August and a memorial celebration of his life was held at Tate Modern, Bankside, on 26 October. He was survived by his wife, Janet, and their four children. 
Fitzpatrick embodied paradox, continually acting out dualities: he had no interest in sport but used mountain biking as his outlet; he wanted women to succeed in engineering but was paterfamilias at home; he had to be his own man but gave total loyalty to demanding architects; he was not athletic but was obsessive about fitness and strength; he cared for people but could not tolerate less than competence; he recognized engineering ability but found it hard to operate as an equal; he was forcefully noisy in argument but accepted a better case completely; and he had to be a name but threw in his lot totally with the Arup way. He identified talented people and lifted them. Quite often they were not as perfect as he then believed and he would find himself having to move back and remedy matters. 
When he was a new graduate Fitzpatrick had little expectation of the prospects that lay ahead for him. He just wanted to learn his trade and take part in projects. That he had the potential to be much more than that was clear to his seniors and he had the wit to appreciate and take the unfolding opportunities. He was painfully honest, compelled to get to the heart of an issue without obfuscation. He tried to be rigorous intellectually, moving arguments on at alarming speed. He hated not getting to the point first. In all this he was consistent throughout his life. His religious and political views were not on display, and were probably not overt determinants for him. His relationship with his family was very intense but also intermittent, whisking some of the children off to a cycling Saturday in the Yorkshire dales, or taking others for a couple of days to European cities, or camping high and cold in the Pyrenees. They were all growing up and at schools and university when Fitzpatrick moved to California, and they had not yet moved to join him when he died. What he would have achieved in his next twenty years if he had lived is not clear, though it would have been leadership rooted in engineering in real, active contexts. 


@@@@@


doc= 92629


Frost, Sir Terence Ernest Manitou (1915-2003), artist, was born on 13 October 1915 at 27 Rugby Road, Leamington Spa, the son of Ernest Walter Frost, who was then serving as a bombardier with the 97th Royal Field Artillery, and his wife, Millicent Maud, 'nee' Lines. 
His father left his mother when Frost was still young, and he was raised by his grandmother, Edith Lines, and relied on three uncles for paternal influences. He was educated at Rugby Road school, Leamington Spa, and from about 1926 at Leamington Spa central school. Though in later life he would recall early signs of creativity, including creative writing and an interest in drawing and decorative arts, he was originally destined for work in the light industries of the midlands. He left school at fourteen and a subsequent series of jobs included employment at Curry's bicycle shop in Leamington Spa, a bakery, the Armstrong Whitworth aircraft factory in Coventry (where, he later claimed, he painted the red, white, and blue roundels on RAF planes), and an electrical components wholesaler. During a period of unemployment he took evening classes in drawing and joined the Territorial Army. 
As a member of the Territorial Army Frost was called up as soon as the Second World War broke out in September 1939. Having served in France, Palestine, and the Lebanon, he joined the commandos as a corporal and with them saw service in the Sudan and Crete, where he was captured in June 1941. He was imprisoned in Salonika, then Poland, and finally in Stalag 383 in Hohenfels, Bavaria. There he felt a 'tremendous spiritual experience, a more aware or heightened perception during starvation' ('The Times', 3 Sept 2003). He renewed his interest in art, producing many portraits of his fellow prisoners of war using a variety of recycled material for supports and paints. By chance he met Adrian Heath, a young artist who had abandoned the Slade School of Art for wartime service. Heath encouraged and mentored Frost, who thus gained a better knowledge of the history of art as well as of technique. After liberation Frost returned to Leamington. On 11 August 1945, at St Peter's Roman Catholic Church, he married Kathleen May (Kath) Clarke, a 23-year-old engineer's machine operator, and daughter of George Clarke, engineer. They had five sons and a daughter. 
Frost returned to his job selling electrical components, but he became frustrated at not being able to fulfil his desire to be an artist, and fell ill. He secured a serviceman's grant and, with Heath's help, a place at Camberwell School of Art. At the same time, again on Heath's advice, he and Kath moved to St Ives, Cornwall, then becoming established as a centre for avant-garde artistic practice. There life was hard as they lived initially in a caravan and took odd jobs as domestic servants, housekeepers, postal workers, and so on. It was probably in 1946 that they secured 12 Quay Street, which remained their home until they left St Ives for good in 1961. Initially Frost painted in his bedroom or at the St Ives School of Painting, where he attended classes. He soon integrated into the artistic community of St Ives, getting to know such contemporaries as Peter Lanyon, John Wells, Denis Mitchell, Sven Berlin, Patrick Heron, and Bryan Wynter. Through Lanyon he met Ben Nicholson, who would be an important supporter, and Barbara Hepworth, for whom he worked as an assistant in 1950-51. For a while he occupied a space close to Nicholson in the historic Porthmeor studios. 
Meanwhile, from the autumn of 1947, Frost attended Camberwell School of Art. The regime there under William Coldstream promoted figurative painting and the idea of objective vision. With a tendency towards a more formalist approach already emerging, Frost found himself torn, and his work of those years varied widely. An important mentor was Victor Pasmore, a tutor at Camberwell who was himself moving away from representational painting and towards total abstraction. Pasmore appropriated Coldstream's dependence on geometric composition and, in particular, the golden section, for abstract purposes, and Frost did likewise. This classical geometric formula was used in the work he made in 1949 in response to an assignment based on 'a madrigal'. Frost took W. H. Auden's poem of that name and produced a largely abstract composition, 'Madrigal' (Leamington Spa Art Gallery), in which shapes and colours alluded both to the details of the poem and to the emotions it evoked. The abstraction of external references, the expression of subjective emotions they provoked, a geometric composition, and a passionate engagement with poetry would become staples of Frost's work. 
During his time at Camberwell Frost commuted from St Ives and lodged in Albert Bridge Road, Battersea. Through his friends in Cornwall and, in particular, Pasmore and Heath, he immersed himself in the history of abstract art. In St Ives, a breakthrough work led to a series of abstract compositions based on the shapes and movements of the town's harbour. 'Walk along the Quay' (1950; priv. coll., on loan to Graves Art Gallery, Sheffield) is non-representational, using the golden section as its compositional determinant. Its forms, however, were suggested by the shapes defined by the arc of a swaying mast or the slack curve of a rope hanging between boat and quay. Frost used a long, thin board and progressed up it in imitation of his original walk along the quay. The semicircles and half-ellipses of this composition would become common features of his work for several years and would return later in life. As well as leading to Frost's first mature series of paintings, it impressed Nicholson enough for him to begin promoting Frost. It was included in the important exhibition of abstract art at the Artists' International Association Galleries in 1951, and in 1952 Frost had his first solo exhibition in London at the Leicester Galleries, where he showed regularly until 1958. 
Frost became associated with a group of artists known as the constructionists, which included Pasmore, Heath, Kenneth and Mary Martin, Anthony Hill, and others. He showed with them in several exhibitions at Heath's studio in Fitzroy Street, London. The group reached its high point in 1954 with the publication 'Nine Abstract Artists', which included an introduction by Lawrence Alloway as well as images and a statement by each of the artists. The book was accompanied by an exhibition at the Redfern Gallery. In his introduction Alloway drew a distinction between those of the constructionists whose art was completely non-representational and those, including Frost, Roger Hilton, and William Scott, who retained external references. He dismissed the latter group's reluctance to abandon picturesque references. This tension between total abstraction and the natural world would, however, remain central to Frost's art. At the same time Frost was teaching life drawing at Bath Academy of Art, Corsham Court (1952-4), and occasional classes at Willesden Art School, London; this was the beginning of a long and fruitful teaching career. 
In 1954 Frost became the first Gregory fellow in painting at Leeds University. The publisher E. C. Gregory, already a collector of his work, established fellowships in painting, sculpture, poetry, and music, to bring the creative arts into the life of the university. The fellows' formal duties extended little beyond the odd lecture and being available for students. Leeds College of Art at that time was developing a ground-breaking introductory course under the leadership of Harry Thubron and, inevitably, Frost became involved. The course -- 'basic design' -- was based on Bauhaus principles and became a model for British art education from the 1960s. Though the fellowship provided the Frosts with more security than they had enjoyed since the war, life for their large family was still austere, as is clear from photographs of the time by Frost's friend Roger Mayne. In Leeds, Frost embarked upon a new, and perhaps his most powerful and original, body of work. Again the paintings were based on his experience of and subjective response to landscape. The experience of the Yorkshire dales in the snow led to the use of stark black and white contrasts leavened with small areas of other colours. New forms emerged, apparently partly inspired by the sight of a low sun through bare trees: vertical forms, a polygon, and a fan-like pattern of striations which were, Frost claimed, inspired by the sight of sheep's tails spinning in the wind. With a larger scale and more expansive forms, Frost sought to recreate the sensation of being in dramatic nature. His descriptions of these occasions ('moments of being') and his work associated him with the tradition of sublime landscape painting and its concern to express the existential state of feeling minuscule and vulnerable in the face of nature's enormity and power. This, more than the works' appearance, associated Frost with his American contemporaries like Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko, whose work was just becoming known in Britain. 
By 1958, when Frost returned to St Ives from Leeds, he was well established as a leading artist. That year he joined the new Waddington Galleries in London, where he exhibited regularly until 1978. He was consistently included in major exhibitions of abstract art in Britain and in British Council exhibitions that toured the world. In 1960 he had his first solo exhibition in the United States, at the Bertha Schaeffer Gallery, New York. In 1964 a retrospective exhibition toured from Newcastle to York, Hull, and Bradford and, in the same year, an exhibition toured to San Francisco, Santa Barbara, and San Jose, where Frost was teaching for the summer at the University of California. In 1961, Frost had moved from St Ives to 2 Old Parr Road, Banbury, Oxfordshire. He taught for a short time at Coventry Art College and then at Reading University, where he worked full time from 1965. He became professor of painting there in 1977, and professor emeritus in 1981. 
No doubt affected by the flat surfaces, unmodulated colour, and simple forms of American abstract painting in the 1960s, Frost's work became progressively more simple. He continued, however, to look to external references. The fronts of lorries became an important source of inspiration, for example, as did road signs and the civil war flags seen in the chapel of Compton Wynyates. Works such as 'M17, October 1962' (British Council) are more emblematic than those of the Leeds and St Ives years. This work is made up of a series of forms; gradually these would be reduced in number and complexity until in a work such as 'June 1965, Red and Black' (Tate collection) there are only six red or black shapes against a field of white, the gaps between the shapes providing the tension of the composition. The new simplicity of these paintings was further enhanced by Frost's use of acrylic as opposed to oil paint. Despite their apparently totally abstract nature, Frost still associated his bulging shapes with external sources -- boats and the female body in particular. The latter was made explicit in a relief in which semicircular forms protrude bulbously, and which he subtitled 'Mae West'. The implication of movement and weight became an interest in Frost's work of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Using increasingly vivid colours, he produced a series of paintings of 'suspended forms' in which areas of colour bulge downwards a little like balloons full of water. Another series of paintings in which columns of semicircles lean or curve to one side was apparently inspired by the leaning tower of Pisa or by the trajectory of the space flights to the moon in those years. This aspect of his work led him to make a small number of sculptures: soft, suspended forms in the 1970s and rocking constructions in the 1980s. 
In 1974 Frost bought a house and studio in Newlyn, a former artists' colony a few miles from St Ives. At the top of a hill above the village, Gernickfield House and Studio, Tredavoe Lane, offered extraordinary views across Newlyn and Mounts Bay. Its position allowed Frost to see the sun rise in the morning and set later in the west. The harbour, boats, sea, and what Frost described as the 'two gods' -- the sun and moon -- became recurrent themes in his work as a representational element began to re-emerge. Having established a reputation as a purveyor of brightly coloured, joyous paintings, Frost increasingly associated himself with sunny climes and cultures. In 1977 he made the first of many visits to Cyprus, and the colours of the island and, in particular, the motif of the black olive entered his work. On occasion these celebrations of life were produced despite profound despair at the state of the world and his own situation. Having had, in 1976, an important retrospective that toured Britain before showing at the Serpentine Gallery, London, Frost felt his career had slowed down. He still relied on teaching for his income and broke off his relationship with Waddington Galleries. 
Frost's new-found independence and his retirement from Reading University in 1981 opened up a period of massive productivity as he anxiously sought to maximize exhibitions and sales. This he did with great success, and it might be said that he became over-productive. His output was not limited to painting: he produced sculptures, jewellery, and ceramics. His interventions in the decorative arts included watches for the Royal Academy and five new tailfin designs for British Airways. In 1998 he made his first glass sculptures in collaboration with a foundry in Murano, Venice. Most importantly, he became a prolific printmaker, and it could be argued that during the 1990s his prints were his most successful products aesthetically as well as commercially. A crucial work was the portfolio 'Eleven Poems by Federico Garcia Lorca' (1989), which was the culmination of a long-standing fascination with Lorca's poetry. The combination of sensual pleasure and an awareness of death that both occupy Lorca's concept of 'duende' fitted perfectly Frost's own visual reinterpretation of nature and the sublime. 
By the end of the twentieth century Terry Frost was one of the best-known artists in Britain. He had been elected a Royal Academician in 1992, and in 2000 had a small retrospective exhibition in the academy's Sackler Galleries. Though his critical reputation among the art world 'cognoscenti' was not what it had been, he was one of a small band of artists whose names reached beyond those narrow confines to the wider consciousness. In recognition of this status, he was knighted in 1998. His work is well represented in the collections of Tate, the Victoria and Albert Museum, the British Museum, and the national galleries of Scotland and of Wales, and can also be found in most major regional art galleries around the UK, and in the USA, Canada, Israel, and Portugal. 
Following a relatively short illness, Frost died of cancer on 1 September 2003 at St Julia's Hospice, Hayle, close to St Ives. Following a funeral at St Peter's Church, Newlyn, he was cremated at Truro on 9 September. He was survived by his wife, Kathleen, and their six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92635


Humphreys, Arthur Leslie Charles (1917-2003), computer industry executive, was born on 8 January 1917 at 102 Manor Lane, Lewisham, London, the son of Percy Stuart Humphreys, insurance agent, and his wife, Louise, 'nee' Weston. He was educated at Catford grammar school, but left at the age of fourteen to train as a solicitor's clerk. Invalided out of the army during the Second World War on account of a heart defect, in October 1940 he became the share registrar of the British Tabulating Machine Company (BTM), manufacturers of electro-mechanical punched-card machinery -- the forerunners of office computers. BTM was the licensee of International Business Machines (IBM), the world's largest manufacturer of punched-card machines and later computers. On 11 September 1943 Humphreys married the 25-year-old Marjorie Irene Murphy Jones, a photographer for the Ministry of Supply, and daughter of John Jones, builder's carpenter. They had two sons and one daughter. 
In 1949 BTM and IBM terminated their licensing arrangement by mutual agreement, freeing BTM from royalty payments but exposing it to direct competition from IBM. In 1951 Humphreys was appointed assistant secretary with responsibility for commercial affairs. He was closely involved in the negotiations in 1958 between BTM and Powers-Samas (the other British punched-card machine manufacturer) which resulted in the creation of International Computers and Tabulators Ltd (ICT). Appointed head of product and corporate planning in 1962, he oversaw ICT's transformation into Britain's leading computer company over a period of five years, during which it acquired the computer interests of GEC, EMI, and Ferranti. In 1963 he was elected to the ICT board, and was instrumental in the decision to launch a major new computer range, the ICT 1900 series. The new range of computers was based on an obscure Canadian machine, the Ferranti Packard 6000, to which ICT had manufacturing rights, saving the company many months of development time. When in April 1964 IBM announced the System/360, an advanced computer range that reshaped the computer landscape worldwide, ICT was quickly able to respond with the 1900 series. It was the company's first major financial success in computers. 
In 1967 Humphreys became managing director of ICT. He played the leading role in the merger of ICT and its principal competitor, English Electric Computers, to create International Computers Limited (ICL), Britain's flagship computer manufacturer. The creation of ICL was a major strand of the Wilson government's strategy to create national champions in key industrial sectors. The merger agreement provided government research and development funding for the creation of a new range of computers for the 1970s and beyond (later named the 2900 series). 
ICL was vested in July 1968, with Humphreys as its first managing director. In driving the merger forward, Humphreys had been caught up in the political and industrial mood of the time. He would, he later avowed, have preferred the firm to have grown organically, rather than been distracted by the organizational difficulties subsequent to the merger. In the event, the government's research and development subvention was insufficient to develop a new range of computers, and in the early 1970s the entire computer industry fell into a worldwide recession. Following disappointing results, Humphreys was replaced as managing director of ICL by an executive from an American computer company, and he was 'kicked upstairs' to become deputy chairman of the company from 1972 to 1977. He remained a director until 1982. During this period the government assisted ICL with loans that enabled it to survive and introduce the 2900 series. ICL was acquired by Fujitsu in 1990. From 1982 Humphreys served as a part-time director of Computer Associated Systems Ltd -- later Knowledge Engineering (UK) Ltd. He had a keen interest in computer history and was a trustee of the Charles Babbage Institute for the History of Information Processing, University of Minnesota, from 1978. He had been appointed CBE for services to the computer industry in 1971. 
Portly, and balding from middle age, Humphreys had enormous stamina and a genius for friendship. Gruff in speech and with a wry sense of humour, he was held in great affection by colleagues and subordinates. He loved to travel, which enabled him to maintain many international friendships with former officials of companies with whom he had once negotiated. He was a lifelong supporter of Charlton Athletic Football Club and Kent County Cricket Club, and an expert bridge and table tennis player. He had a reputation for being unbeatable at 'liar dice' -- and he attributed both this, and his business success, to a talent for making good decisions on the basis of uncertain information. Following the death of his first wife in 1970, on 6 December 1975 he married Audrey Norah Urquhart, a 58-year-old widow and clerical officer, and daughter of Edmund Aubrey Dunningham, confectioner. She died in 1985, and in 1994 Humphreys married (Marion) Terry Rushton, 'nee' Greest. He died on 29 August 2003 at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, of pneumonia and chronic lung disease, and was survived by his wife and the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 92636


Hunter, Sir Ian Bruce Hope (1919-2003), impresario, was born on 2 April 1919 at Green Croft, 63 Crescent West, Hadley Wood, Middlesex, the youngest of the five children of William Ouchterlony Hunter, a Scot, and his English wife, Edith Alice Millicent, 'nee' Glover. His father, who had served as a captain in the 12th Bedford regiment during the First World War, was then working as a stockbroker; he was later a sheep farmer and company director. Hunter was educated at a preparatory school in Dorset and at Fettes College, where he learned the horn and resolved to become a conductor. Oxford eluded him but he took lessons with Edinburgh's professor of music, Sir Donald Tovey, and these qualified him for a job as assistant to Fritz Busch, music director of Glyndebourne. There, for two years (1938-9), he was a jack-of-all-trades: he made notes for Busch, copied orchestral parts, and even appeared in Verdi's 'Macbeth' in a silent role. He once accompanied Busch on a Scandinavian tour, encountering Rachmaninov and an artist whom, years later, he was to represent -- the violinist Nathan Milstein. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 Hunter enlisted in the Royal Army Service Corps, serving in north Africa and Italy and reaching the rank of lieutenant-colonel. Before being demobilized he arranged the reopening of the opera house in Klagenfurt. He had permission to fraternize with the Austrians and in assembling a complete company he discovered the intense satisfaction of working with musicians and technicians towards the goal of public performance. The impresario was born -- and the soldier was awarded the MBE. 
The war over, Hunter approached Glyndebourne's general manager, Rudolf Bing, who engaged him as his assistant for the planning of the first Edinburgh Festival in 1947. When Bing moved to New York to direct the Metropolitan Opera, Hunter succeeded him. The six festivals he directed (1950-55) demonstrated his professionalism and his showmanship. In 1951 he brought over the New York Philharmonic to give fourteen programmes under Bruno Walter and Dimitri Mitropoulos. The following year he ruffled Glyndebourne's feathers by replacing it with the Hamburg State Opera, none of whose six productions had been seen in Britain before. He persuaded Thomas Beecham to preside over the 'Royal Fireworks Music' on the Castle Esplanade and he commissioned the 'Fantasia Concertante on a Theme of Corelli' from Michael Tippett, then by no means a fashionable composer. He was particularly proud of bringing the visual arts into the festival, Rembrandt, Degas, Renoir, Cezanne, and Gauguin being among the painters featured. Characteristic of his flair was the engagement of Richard Buckle to curate, in 1954, a lavish and exotic exhibition devoted to Diaghilev. 
In 1953 Hunter was invited to join the board of Harold Holt, a leading artists' and concert agency, and when Holt died not long afterwards he succeeded him as managing director (declaring an interest in any Holt artist engaged by the festival). The firm was the central platform of his professional life for many years and he saw to it that, while its activities diversified, it continued to act as an agency dedicated to the careers of musicians of exceptional talent or exceptional promise: Hunter signed up Daniel Barenboim when he was fourteen. But the creation of arts festivals was his special passion and his record in this sphere was remarkable. He had launched the Bath festival with Yehudi Menuhin as early as 1948. Among the festivals which followed were the City of London (1962-80), Brighton (1967-83), Windsor (1969-72), Hong Kong (1973-5), and Malvern (1977-82). Especially imaginative was the Commonwealth Arts Festival of 1965. Held in London, Glasgow, Cardiff, and Liverpool over two weeks, it was a colourful celebration of Caribbean, African, and Indian dance, and Australian and Canadian ballet. Classical music jostled with jazz; Menuhin shared a platform with Ravi Shankar; there were fireworks and balloons. Hunter believed that festivals should be festive. 
In the late 1960s Hunter began to undertake committee work at the Arts Council and in 1978 he became president of the British Arts Festivals Association. In 1981 he was elected chairman of the council of the Royal Society of Arts, and in his inaugural address he made an eloquent plea for the arts to be accepted as a central and indispensable ingredient of education. Knighted in 1983, he moved gradually towards disinterested charitable activity: he was influential in the Royal College of Music's 1983 centenary appeal, and was made a fellow of the college; he was also a founder, in 1984, of the Young Concert Artists' Trust (a non-profit agency for emerging soloists). From 1987 to 1995 he was chairman of the Musicians' Benevolent Fund, the most important charity of its kind. He still found time to mastermind some international festivals -- the American Festival (1985), the Festival of German Arts (1987), and the Japan Festival (1991), of which he was vice-chairman. 
In Hunter's spare time -- such as it was -- he painted (with modest but attractive skill) and gardened. He also took up hunting, surviving a serious fall in 1979. It slowed him down but he was on form again within a year or two. He had married Susan Russell, daughter of Brigadier Alec Gaudie Russell, army officer, on 17 September 1949, and with her had four daughters. Her death from cancer in 1977 profoundly grieved him. His second marriage, on 4 October 1984, to Marie Sadie Showering, Lady Showering (Sir Keith Showering's widow, and daughter of Charles Wesley Golden, company director), did not last into his old age, and during his last years he relied on the help of his daughters. He died at his home, Balcombe Place, Haywards Heath Road, Balcombe, Sussex, on 5 September 2003, of bronchopneumonia, and was survived by his daughters. 
Ian Hunter was arguably the most successful impresario of his generation and was perhaps unique in his migration from a world in which he promoted and profited from the careers of eminent musicians to one in which he concerned himself both with those who had not yet arrived and with those who, because of ill health, accident, or old age, needed charitable support. 


@@@@@


doc= 92650


Palmer, Robert Allen (1949-2003), singer and songwriter, was born on 19 January 1949 at the maternity hospital in Batley, Yorkshire, the son of Charles Leslie Palmer, a naval engineer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Lockwood. He was brought up from 1950 in Malta, where his father served with the Royal Navy, and attended a naval school there. About 1960 the family returned to England, where Palmer attended Scarborough High School for Boys. He found this environment alienating after the more intimate education he had enjoyed in Malta, but took consolation in his passion for music. He had become enamoured of such singers as Nat 'King' Cole and Billie Holiday after hearing their records on American Forces Network radio in Malta. He passed six O-level examinations in 1965. He briefly attended art college, leaving in disgust after a cleaner accidentally destroyed his portfolio. For the next two years he worked as a graphic artist, and fulfilled a heavy schedule of live performances with a local 'rhythm and blues' (R&B) band, the Mandrakes. His voice was ideally suited to material by American soul artists, and he moved to London in search of full-time musical employment. 
In 1968 Palmer succeeded Jess Roden in the London R&B band the Alan Bown Set. He had previously chosen to be known as Alan Palmer, but now he resumed using his real name to avoid confusion with his bandleader. His first assignment was to overdub vocals on their album, 'The Alan Bown!' (1968), although the record was issued in the USA with Roden's original performances intact. On his twenty-first birthday, 19 January 1970, Palmer married the 22-year-old Susan Eileen Thatcher, a fabric designer; they had two children, James and Jane. 
In 1970 Palmer joined the rock band Dada, where he first met the vocalist Elkie Brooks and the guitarist Pete Gage. The three musicians soon formed a new band, Vinegar Joe. The combination of Palmer's soul-inflected vocals and Brooks's earthier R&B style attracted Chris Blackwell, the founder and head of Island Records, who signed Vinegar Joe in 1971. A year later they issued their debut album, 'Vinegar Joe', the first of three LPs for the label. Although Palmer later dismissed the band as something he 'would happily sweep under the carpet' ('Daily Telegraph', 27 Sept 2003) Vinegar Joe's raw-edged sound made them a popular live attraction. 
Vinegar Joe disbanded in the spring of 1974, and Palmer launched a solo career with Island Records. These events provoked an estrangement from Elkie Brooks that lasted until his death. Chris Blackwell arranged for Palmer to record in New Orleans with the R&B band the Meters. The result was an album of 'blue-eyed' soul, 'Sneakin' Sally Through the Alley' (1974). It launched a series of projects recorded outside the UK, including 'Pressure Drop' (1976, recorded in New York) and 'Secrets' (1979, recorded in Nassau, Bahamas). Palmer moved his family to Nassau in 1978. His album covers customarily showed him sharp-suited and surrounded by near-nude models, while the music was similarly slick. 
Palmer's fascination with cutting-edge black music led him to explore sequencer technology on his albums 'Clues' (1980) and 'Pride' (1983). In 1985 he joined the all-star band the Power Station, alongside former members of Duran Duran and Chic. But he opted out of their live commitments, concentrating on his solo project, 'Riptide' (1985), which became his biggest seller to date. The album's success was sealed by the hit single 'Addicted to Love', for which Palmer was awarded the 1987 Grammy award for best rock vocal performance. The song became notorious for Terence Donovan's glamorous, highly sexist video. The clip boosted Palmer's image as a lounge lizard and ladykiller, which increasingly overshadowed his talent as a vocalist. Many critics regarded him as the personification of 1980s 'yuppie' taste. He rejected any connection between his personality and his image, explaining: 'I was set up. This guy made the video behind me' (Miserandino). 
In 1987 Palmer and his family moved to Switzerland. Over the next few years he became a bona fide pop star, producing a succession of danceable disco-rock concoctions. He won a second Grammy award for his 1988 hit 'Simply Irresistible', and satirized his image in the video for 'Change his Ways'. Despite attempts in the early 1990s to diversify his musical identity with covers of big band and Broadway standards, his sales figures dipped as the public turned its back on the perceived glossiness of the 1980s. In 1993 he divorced his wife and began a lengthy relationship with Mary Ambrose, who was portrayed on the cover of his next album, 'Honey' (1994). Thereafter Palmer recorded only sporadically, with little commercial success, although the critics finally learned to distinguish his 'yuppie' image from his vocal skills. His final album, 'Drive' (2003), returned to the R&B sound that was his natural environment. He died suddenly of a heart attack on 26 September 2003 at the Warwick Hotel in Paris, where he was staying with Mary Ambrose. He was survived by her and his two children, and was buried in his adopted home town of Lugano, Switzerland. 


@@@@@


doc= 92652


Procktor, Patrick George (1936-2003), painter, was born on 12 March 1936 at 15 Lower Hatch Street, Dublin, the younger son of Eric Christopher Procktor (died 1940), accountant, of Desmond, Crosthwaite Park West, Kingstown, Dublin, and his wife, Barbara Winifred, 'nee' Hopkins; but he was not Irish, as his Wildean wit and exotic persona later suggested. (His parents were English, and the family returned to England when he was still young.) On his father's premature death his mother worked to assure her children a private education; none the less, lack of money forced Procktor to leave Highgate School early, when his ability at classics had marked him out for Oxford. After a fruitful period of national service, when he was assigned to learn Russian, opening the gates to a culture that rhymed with his own melancholy and romantic nature, he entered the Slade School of Fine Art in 1958. He always believed his true calling was acting but his height, 6 feet 7 inches, disqualified him. He treasured the comment of an art critic that he was 'a comic off the old boards'. 'One hopes to entertain', he would drawl. 
Procktor was a star pupil at the Slade, but while honouring its accent on sound drawing and figurative commitment he was never a slave to its measured prescriptions. The sale of a watercolour through the Redfern Gallery as a student began a career-long engagement, sustained early and late by the gallery's eventual director Maggie Thornton, his 'Picture-Dealer Extraordinary' (McEwen, 29). His first Redfern solo show, the product of a visit to Greece paid for by a Slade travelling scholarship, was his most successful. Bryan Robertson, foremost English curator of the mid-century, became his champion and included him in his 'New generation' show at the Whitechapel Gallery, where Procktor proved the exception to the prevailing 'Pop and op' art rule. Robertson noted that Procktor, for all his sociability and quest for diversion, was an 'unusually self-sufficient man'; that his art had 'a keen satirical and theatrical sense as well as a concern for the reality -- including the tragedies -- of life'; and that his colours had become 'increasingly personal, decorative and rich' (Robertson, 250). Robertson's perception held true. 
In 1967 Richard Buckle, Britain's leading ballet historian, commissioned Procktor to decorate a pavilion at Montreal's Expo '67, in which placards of Mao and the Rolling Stones appeared; but his first watercolour exhibition at the Redfern the following year was more indicative of the lonelier road he now took. Watercolour on paper, poor sister of oil on canvas, suited his taste for travel, and over the years he made prolonged visits to China, Egypt, India, Japan, Morocco, and his favourite, Venice. It was a drift eastward, stylistically as much as geographically. He found 'the light in Egypt is violet, in China daffodil, in Venice opalescent' (McEwen, 9). He became a master in watercolour, every effect painted with one wispy brush; but he remained a fine and ever more daring painter in oils, and resented categorization. Denying a distinction between his landscapes and portraits, he said: 'Eyebrows are rather hedge-like' (ibid.). He was equally adept at flowers and still lifes. 
In the 1960s Procktor became a close friend of James and Kirsten Bo Benson, founders of Odin's restaurant in Marylebone, where he lived. After James died in 1966 Peter Langan took over Odin's and later opened Langan's Brasserie. He commissioned artists' work for his restaurants and paid them by allowing them to eat and entertain there free of charge. The largest was Procktor's panoramic mural of Venice in the Brasserie's upstairs room. On 25 August 1973 Procktor married Kirsten (died 1984). She was the daughter of Niels Bo Andersen, engineer, and at the time of their marriage was aged thirty-three. They had a son, Nicholas, a stepbrother for Edward and Juliet Benson. 
In 1976 Procktor published a suite of aquatints and etchings illustrating 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner', consolidating his outstanding reputation as a printmaker. In 1983 he was commissioned to design 'Turandot' for the Royal Opera House and also by the Imperial War Museum to paint the British army in Belize. In 1984 his wife died and he painted a reredos for a chapel in Chichester Cathedral. In 1996 he was elected a member of the Royal Academy, which he enjoyed but whose pomposities he liked to tease. In 2003 he suffered a devastating fire in his studio. He died not long after, on 29 August 2003, at Whipps Cross University Hospital, Leytonstone, of a pulmonary embolus. He was survived by his son and his two stepchildren. His family scattered his ashes in Marylebone public gardens, pursued by an irate park keeper. 
Patrick Procktor's fashionable artistic moment was in the 1960s, when he and his friend David Hockney were twin stars in the new firmament of young British painters. But he never rested on his laurels, perfecting his skill and extending his subject matter, with no thought of the commercial consequence. To spurn acceptance was a productive goad to his imagination. In art as in life he was 'agin' the government'. And yet, contrary to his theatrical persona and liberated sexual mores, which placed him at the centre of the 'swinging London' social scene, Procktor, like Hockney, was a traditionalist at heart -- a defender of art and craft at a time when the academic training from which he had benefited was abandoned, and even the ancient concepts of painting and sculpture were widely repudiated as redundant emblems of the 'status quo'. That he lived to see a reversal of these attitudes, albeit in the lax form of bland tolerance, was to some degree the reward for his own faith and persistence through a lean time. This was especially true of Procktor, who remained a parochial figure in terms of the market, rooted in London and loyal to the Redfern Gallery in Cork Street, whereas Hockney, in Californian exile, achieved fame in the USA and therefore the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 92653


Pryce, Maurice Henry Lecorney (1913-2003), physicist, was born at 7 Clyde Road, Croydon, Surrey, on 24 January 1913, the son of William John Pryce, civil servant, and his wife, Hortense Elvire, 'nee' Lecorney. His father, who was born in Swansea, half Welsh and half English, had taken a degree in mathematics at University College, Cardiff, where he was subsequently briefly a lecturer; in his early years he had hoped to become a theoretical physicist (and passed this enthusiasm on to his son), but family and financial pressures led him to become a civil servant, first at the Patent Office and eventually at the Ministry of Aircraft Production. His mother came from Argentan in Normandy, and because the family spoke French at home and he spent much time with his grandparents, Pryce often insisted that French was his first language; one of his scientific contemporaries later said that he spoke it with the accent of a Normandy peasant. 
From 1923 to 1929 Pryce attended the Royal Grammar School in Guildford, where his scholastic ability became apparent and he held a king's scholarship. He always paid tribute to his mathematics teacher, Tudor F. Jones, who encouraged him to study beyond the normal syllabus and under whose guidance he won a state scholarship and open exhibition to Trinity College, Cambridge. He began his studies there in 1930, having spent some time with a German family in Heidelberg to learn, at his father's insistence, 'the language of science'. At Trinity he was recognized as one of the brightest mathematicians of his generation, taking first-class honours in both parts of the tripos. Subsequently he began research with W. H. Fowler on the theory of internal conversion in nuclear decay, and then with Max Born on field theory. In 1935 he was awarded a Commonwealth Fund fellowship to study at Princeton, where he worked with Wolfgang Pauli and John von Neumann and interacted socially and professionally with Einstein and the renowned mathematician G. H. Hardy. Having completed a PhD he returned to Cambridge in 1937 to take up a fellowship at Trinity College, where his research on the new field theory and on the two-neutrino theory of the photon greatly impressed Paul Dirac and other colleagues. 
In 1939 Pryce married Susanne Margarete (Gritli) Born (1915-2000), daughter of Max Born; they had three daughters and one son. Soon after their marriage they moved to Liverpool, where he had accepted a readership in theoretical physics in the department headed by James Chadwick. During the early stages of the Second World War he worked on the feasibility and internal mechanics of the atomic bomb, but was so horrified by his results that he decided not to be involved in further work on this project. At that time radar was considered a higher wartime priority and in 1941 he was directed to work at the Admiralty Signals Establishment. There he made seminal contributions to the design of microwave components. He also provided the critical analysis of the way in which radio waves might follow the curvature of the earth, accounting for the way in which the Germans were able to use this method to guide their bombers to targets in the midlands. Fred Hoyle, who worked with Pryce at Cambridge and at the Admiralty Signals Establishment, described this work as 'the most awesome piece of mathematical virtuosity I ever saw' (Hoyle, 93). Later in the war, after a refusal to work on the atomic bomb, Pryce joined the atomic energy team in Montreal concerned with the design of nuclear reactors. He was later responsible with others for the design of the British experimental Pile 0 reactor built at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell in 1947-8. 
Pryce returned to Cambridge in 1945 but shortly afterwards moved to Oxford, where the Wykeham chair, which had been held since its inception in 1900 by Sir John Townsend with no statutory retiring age, had been reallocated to theoretical physics. It was a bold appointment for someone aged only thirty-two (who looked so much younger than his years that soon after his arrival in Oxford, while drinking in a pub, he was mistaken by the proctors for an undergraduate). Once in Oxford he rapidly built up a large group of research students, many returning from war service. Several of these went on to make important contributions to the subject (six were subsequently elected fellows of the Royal Society), and two in particular, Anatole Abragam and J. C. Ward, were reckoned by Pryce to be much cleverer than himself. He created an effective department with a regular series of lectures and seminars and a journal club, and encouraged members of the group to spread their interests widely across different aspects of theoretical physics. Thus important contributions were made in the areas of field theory, nuclear structure, statistical mechanics, and magnetism. Pryce's own interests focused on the study of magnetic resonance, a new technique made possible by the wartime radar developments which was being actively pursued in the Clarendon Laboratory by Brebis Bleaney and others. In addition, following the arrest on charges of espionage of Klaus Fuchs, the head of the theoretical physics group at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, Pryce served part-time as acting head of that group until a new head was appointed. His breadth of knowledge and interests made him almost uniquely qualified for this role. 
In 1954 Pryce moved to Bristol University as H. O. Wills professor and head of the physics department in succession to Nevill Mott. In spite of the success of his research group in Oxford, Pryce had become frustrated by the constraints on his position in the Clarendon Laboratory, where every administrative and financial decision was referred to Lord Cherwell as head. There was little money for research support and in particular only one other permanent position, so that several outstanding colleagues on short-term appointments had moved to other universities. At Bristol he had major administrative duties as head of a large laboratory and he carried these out most effectively. However, his research began to suffer, and although he continued to work on magnetism, particularly the Jahn-Teller effect, the number of his research students and his output of research papers declined rapidly. In fact his research output never recovered and throughout the latter part of his career he published little. Nevertheless he was the most stimulating critic of others' work and could give useful advice across the whole range of physics. He could, however, be a harsh critic and many colleagues, particularly junior ones, found his interventions at seminars upsetting. 
During his time at Bristol Pryce's marriage ran into problems, and it ended in divorce in 1959. In 1961 he married, second, Freda Mary Kinsey (died 1989), the former wife of a scientific colleague he had known in Cambridge and in Canada. Driven in part by personal and financial considerations he made a somewhat surprising move in 1964 to the position of distinguished professor of physics at the University of Southern California. He had been promised the resources to build there a new first-class department of physics, but these did not materialize in the way he had anticipated and he was unable to mould the situation as he wished. He therefore moved again in 1968 to the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, where he spent the rest of his life. He proved an assiduous and hard-working member of that department, teaching and providing guidance to others in their research, but he published very little. After retirement in 1978 he continued to play an active role, although he was deeply affected by the death of his second wife. For the last four years of his life he was confined to hospital, incapacitated by osteoporosis-induced bone fracture and subsequent infection. 
Pryce was one of the most gifted British theoretical physicists of his generation, working in the 1930s, when quantum mechanics was in its infancy, with many of the great scientists who had carried forward that revolution. His wartime work both in radar and in atomic energy was highly important. The research group which he built in Oxford after the war was a model for such departments. Given this background his subsequent career must be regarded as a disappointment, as he himself sometimes said. He regretted that he had accepted appointments which required a great deal of administrative effort to the detriment of his research. Nevertheless his final years at the University of British Columbia were some of his happiest, where he could play the role of elder statesman and mentor to many colleagues. He died in Vancouver on 24 July 2003, and was survived by the four children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 92655


Rowe, Arthur (1936-2003), athlete, was born on 17 August 1936 at 12 Long Row, Smithies, near Barnsley, Yorkshire, the son of Arthur Rowe, a colliery worker, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Traviss. After leaving school at fifteen he became an apprentice blacksmith, a job which helped develop his renowned upper body strength. He was a keen sportsman who played full-back in the reserve team of Rotherham United and who also enjoyed swimming and cricket. 
In 1954, when waiting to bat for a local youth cricket team, Rowe chanced on a group of trainee shotputters and, challenged to have a go, threw the shot ten feet further than any of them, while still wearing his pads. He was hooked. He practised at night after work, hurling the weight along the tarmac under the local street lamps. His potential was brought to the attention of the national coach Geoff Dyson, who advised him to begin weight-training and join the Doncaster Plant Works athletic club, where he would receive specialist training. Under Dyson's tutelage Rowe developed his fine technique and explosiveness across the throwing circle. He won his first Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) title in 1958, followed in the same year by the European shot putt championship in Stockholm and the gold medal at the empire and Commonwealth games in Cardiff. These achievements led him to become the first field event performer to win the AAA's athlete of the year award. 
After his empire and European titles Rowe's employers at North Gawber colliery allowed him liberal time off on full pay and also provided him with a weight-training shed at his home. He also capitalized on his celebrity by becoming a 'shamateur', often avoiding major athletics meetings to secure appearance money at gala days and the like. He later remarked that 'maybe if you have gone to Eton or Oxford, you can afford to turn down such offers, but if, like me, you haven't got the brass, you take backhanders' ('The Herald'). It is perhaps significant that he compared an Olympic gold medal to winning $200,000 on the football pools. It was widely anticipated that he would be on the podium at the Rome Olympics of 1960, but the Italian heat and a stomach upset attributed to nerves meant that he did not even qualify for the final. His initial reaction was to quit the sport but the following year he was undefeated in all competitions and raised the British, European, and Commonwealth records to 19.56 metres, which ranked him third in the world. 
On 23 December 1961, at St Mary's Church, Lundwood, Barnsley, Rowe married a comptometer operator, Betty Lovery, daughter of James Lovery, a surface worker at a local pit. They had two daughters, Stephanie and Louise, and a son, Steven. Abruptly in July 1962 Rowe turned to professional rugby. As many British athletes of the time found, representing their country did not bring significant economic reward. In contrast his signing-on fee for Oldham produced enough money to buy a house and a new car, and still leave some in the bank. Nevertheless his sojourn in rugby league was brief. He wanted to use his speed in the backs; his employers wanted him to use his strength in the forwards. 
After quitting rugby Rowe could not return to amateur athletics as the rules of the time, rigidly enforced by the AAA administrators, forbade a professional in any sport from competing as an amateur in track and field. He established Honeywell Building, a construction company in Barnsley, but was soon attracted to athletics in Scotland, where the highland games offered reasonable prize money and the big men of the heavy events rather than the track athletes were the stars. The organizers hit on the idea of gaining publicity (and of providing some serious competition for Bill Anderson) by inviting the Yorkshireman to compete. In his first games, at Aboyne in September 1962, wearing the mandatory kilt, which he borrowed from a fellow competitor, he even entered the long jump, in which he came fourth, with a jump of 18 ft 113/4 in. As in his shot putting he relied on technique as well as strength, and at the Braemar games of 1963 he smashed four records in a day, including throwing the 56 pound weight over a bar 14 ft 2 in. high. He also mastered the art of caber tossing, becoming 'world champion' at the Aberdeen games in 1968 and retaining the title the following year. His jousts with his Scottish rival Anderson enlivened the circuit for almost a decade. He continued to compete north of the border until 1977, after which he concentrated on his construction work. He died in Barnsley General Hospital on 13 September 2003, twelve months after being diagnosed as suffering from bladder cancer. He was survived by his wife, Betty, and their three children. More than forty years after quitting the sport he was still ranked eighth on the all-time British shot putt list. 


@@@@@


doc= 92659


Shearman, John Kinder Gowran (1931-2003), art historian, was born on 24 June 1931 at the Louise Margaret Hospital, Aldershot, Hampshire, the only son (there was also a daughter) of Charles Edward Gowran Shearman (1889-1968), army officer, and his wife, Evelyn Winifred, 'nee' White. At the time of his birth (when his parents' address was given as Elm House, Longton, Preston, Lancashire) his father was a major in the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire regiment; he served in both world wars, retiring in 1945 with the rank of brigadier. Shearman's grandfather was Ernest Charles Shearman, the architect of St Silas the Martyr, Kentish Town. Shearman was educated at St Edmund's School, Hindhead, and Felsted School, Essex. In 1951 he went to the Courtauld Institute of Art as an undergraduate, at that time a somewhat unusual step, and swiftly followed his BA with an outstanding PhD ('Developments in the use of colour in Tuscan paintings of the early 16th century', 1957), which in turn led to a remarkable early article, 'Leonardo's colour and chiaroscuro' (published in the 'Zeitschrift fur Kunstgeschichte' in 1962), and already adumbrated many of his future intellectual interests. On 29 June 1957 Shearman married Jane Dalrymple Smith, the 24-year-old daughter of Charles Clarence Smith, of the Shell Petroleum Company; they had one son (like his great-grandfather, an architect) and three daughters. 
The major early influence on Shearman was Johannes Wilde, the deputy director of the Courtauld Institute from 1948 to 1958, although it should not be overlooked that this was Anthony Blunt's Courtauld, and that Shearman's first book was a collaborative venture with Blunt on one of the volumes of the catalogue raisonne of Poussin's drawings (1963). Shearman joined the staff of the Courtauld in 1957 as an assistant lecturer; after progressing to lecturer and senior lecturer he was appointed a reader in 1967, and professor and deputy director in 1974, posts he held until 1979. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1976, and subsequently received numerous foreign distinctions. 
Shearman's time at the Courtauld was arguably the most productive and inspired period of his career, and yielded numerous major articles, many on Raphael, as well as a substantial and widely acclaimed monograph on Andrea del Sarto (1965) and the book by which he became best known, 'Mannerism' (1967), in the Pelican 'Style and Civilization' series. In it Shearman rejected previous notions of mannerism as a reflection of personal neurosis and crisis, and instead defined it as 'the stylish style', drawing numerous illuminating parallels between the visual arts, literature, and music. In the early 1970s, however, there were two setbacks which were to prove profoundly influential on the course of Shearman's career. The first, which may also in part have caused the second, came with the publication in February 1970 of an article in the 'Burlington Magazine' entitled 'Raphael at the court of Urbino'. Its subject was a portrait of a girl, recently acquired by the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, which Shearman argued was by Raphael. The attribution was not generally accepted, and it soon emerged that the work's export from Italy (of which Shearman was entirely ignorant) had been illegal, which led to its repatriation. The second check to a hitherto effortless rise came in 1974, when Peter Lasko succeeded Blunt as director of the Courtauld. 
The practical consequence of these setbacks was that in 1979 Shearman crossed the Atlantic to teach at Princeton (where he had been a research fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1964), and chair the department of art and archaeology until 1985, before moving to Harvard in 1987, where he chaired the department from 1990 to 1993, and remained until his retirement as Charles Adams university professor in 2002. The intellectual consequence was that his subsequent scholarship never quite recaptured the fearlessness and bravura of his early publications, a change already apparent in the armour-plated erudition of his 'Raphael's Cartoons in the Collection of Her Majesty the Queen and the Tapestries for the Sistine Chapel' (1972). The monograph on Raphael which should have been Shearman's crowning achievement was never written, and instead his final production was a dauntingly massive collection of documents, 'Raphael in Early Modern Sources: 1483-1602' (2 vols., 2003). In addition to that 'magnum opus' Shearman's last two decades also saw the publication of 'The Early Italian Paintings in the Collection of Her Majesty the Queen' (1983) and 'Only Connect... Art and the Spectator in the Italian Renaissance' (1992), both of which in their different ways revealed a far greater range of concerns than his narrowly specialist publications might have led one to expect. 'Only Connect' -- which was based on his Mellon lectures at the National Gallery of Art, Washington, in 1988 -- also preserves much of the tone of his lecturing style, limpidly clear, utterly compelling, and relentlessly convincing. 
Shearman's American years were darkened by the suicide of his wife in 1983. He subsequently married Sally Roskill, the former wife of another art historian, Mark Roskill, but the marriage ended in divorce (and he deleted reference to it from his 'Who's Who' entry); he found happiness with his third wife, the art historian Kathryn Brush, whom he married in 1998. Both at Princeton and at Harvard, moreover, he attracted a succession of devoted graduate students, as well as wide audiences for his more general lectures. He was a physically compact man with a distinctly military moustache; his reputation at the Courtauld had been as a somewhat prickly if scrupulously devoted teacher, but in his new home he transformed himself into a quizzically benign if always demanding elder statesman. It is revealing that his Festschrift, 'Coming About' (2002), was an American initiative, and that at least forty of its fifty-two contributors were his Princeton and Harvard graduate students. 
Beyond the world of art history, Shearman's great passion was sailing (he was a member of the Bembridge Club), which he pursued with the same ferocious will to win that he applied to his academic career. He died of a heart attack at the wheel of a car, on holiday in Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada, on 11 August 2003. He was survived by his wife, Kathryn, and the four children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 92660


Sisson, Charles Hubert (1914-2003), poet, essayist, and civil servant, was born on 22 April 1914 at 468 Stapleton Road, Bristol, the third of four children of Richard Percy Sisson and his wife, Ellen Minnie, 'nee' Worlock. His father, who came from Kendal in Westmorland, kept a watch and clock repair shop in Bristol. Business was poor, and when his father later qualified as an optician the family was saved from probable ruin. Sisson was born above the shop. His mother was the daughter of a tenant farmer from Wiltshire, who later moved to a farm near Bristol. This rural connection and 'the faint intonation and marked rhythms of west country speech' in his mother's voice were to mean much to Sisson, providing a link with 'centuries of the spoken word' ('On the Lookout', 233). Poetry was for him always a matter of the spoken word, the more plainly spoken the better. 
The impoverished and in other ways strained circumstances of Sisson's boyhood, as they were suggested by 'On the Lookout' (1989) and other autobiographical writings, were keenly felt by him. A certain harshness or awkwardness remained for him a touchstone of the real (though by no means the only one) in his own writing and that of others. A close attachment of his boyhood was to a younger sister, badly disabled and confined to the house, who died when he was fourteen. Sisson also spoke of himself, a little later, as 'struck down by an appalling adolescent grief' ('In Two Minds', 271). Both events played a part in confirming the view of life, at once bleak and passionate, which his poems later revealed. 
Sisson was bookish from an early age. He attended Fairfield secondary school and went on to Bristol University, where he read philosophy and English literature, specializing in the seventeenth century, a study which continued throughout his life. After graduation in 1934 he spent a year in Germany, followed by six months in Paris. His revulsion at Nazi Germany was matched by a love of France and of its literature which always remained with him. He shared the 1930s obsession with politics, and a preoccupation with the 'res publica' would be central to his writing. But he differed from his 'bien-pensant' contemporaries by thinking in terms of national interests, rather than of ideologies. 
On his return to England, with no other employment in prospect, Sisson took the civil service examination and in 1936 entered the Ministry of Labour. On 20 August 1937 he married Nora Gilbertson (1914-2003), whom he had known as a girl at school. She was a teacher, and daughter of Anthony Huddleston Gilbertson, also a teacher. There were two daughters of the marriage. Being over twenty-five and in a reserved occupation, Sisson was unable to volunteer at the outbreak of the Second World War. He enlisted in the army in January 1942, and was sent to India, where he spent the years until 1945 in the ranks, becoming a sergeant. The experience of these years was recorded in 'One Eye on India' (published with 'On the Lookout' in 1989). It also appeared in his excellent first novel, 'An Asiatic Romance' (1953). This period of enforced exile strengthened Sisson's always powerful sense of patriotic attachment. His reaction to 'the endless elusiveness of Hinduism' ('Is there a Church of England?' 1993, 5) also helped to set in motion his slow approach to the Anglican church. 
From the army Sisson returned to the civil service. Of his career there after this time he wrote in 'The Pleasers': '
All that remains is to tell how, later, 

I became a top person in my way 

' adding wryly '
But did not reach the top after all, 

Because I had not the right sort of mind. 
('Collected Poems', 343)' By 1962 he had risen to become under-secretary at the Ministry of Labour. (No English poet has had greater experience of public affairs and the practical business of government.) But, though ambitious and 'altogether a rather good performer' ('Contemporary Authors', 303), he was not naturally one of the pleasers. His career closed bitterly. Having been promised and then denied a post he coveted, he was promoted out of harm's way, and 'set the seal' on his disgrace when he published in 'The Spectator' three 'knowledgeable' articles about the management of the civil service, 'then reaching a high pitch of folly' ('On the Lookout', 225). He engineered his early retirement in 1973 by using an administrative reform with which he was charged to abolish his own job. He moved from near Sevenoaks to Langport in Somerset, to a house looking out from a bluff over the River Parrett and low fields to the Dorset hills. This was the country he cared for most. 'You could look out on worse than that', he would say with ironic feeling (personal knowledge). 
Sisson's life in the civil service had been in acute tension with his life as a writer. The drive toward expression was unrelenting. Between 1937 and its close in 1949 he was a regular contributor to the 'New English Weekly'. In 1959 he published 'The Spirit of British Administration', a classic study comparing British, French, and German traditions of public administration. A second novel, 'Christopher Homm', the portrait of a modern Everyman in limbo, appeared in 1965. Other notable productions were 'The Case of Walter Bagehot' (1972), an assault on nineteenth-century liberalism and its heirs, a small masterpiece of incisive polemic; and 'English Poetry 1900-1950' (1971), an engagingly personal account from a modernist perspective. Sisson also published three volumes of poetry. But it was not until after his retirement that he came to prominence as a poet, with the appearance of 'In the Trojan Ditch' (1974). This volume marked the beginning of an association with the Carcanet Press and its founder, Michael Schmidt, whose support encouraged Sisson in the extraordinary productivity of his later years. 
All but a very few pages of Sisson's 'Collected Poems' (1998) were written after the age of forty. They were 'poems of the return journey'. But after hesitant beginnings the story was one of increasing fluency and range. Poetry for Sisson meant a 'rejection of whatever appears with the face of familiarity' ('In Two Minds', 286). Rather than being a construction, it is a kind of unbuilding. The attempt to establish, in however limited a way, the real, or in Sisson's preferred word, the 'solid', also means the dismantling of illusion and pretence. This insistence could give an aggressive or satirical edge to his writing. There was always a fierce undertow of feeling. The 'Collected Poems' was a daunting book in which the best poems were widely scattered. Any list of these would include 'A Letter to John Donne', 'The Usk', 'The Red Admiral', 'In Flood', the last section of 'Burrington Combe', and 'Taxila'. 'Poetry', Sisson said, 'is the nearest thing to human speech we have' (Clive Wilmer, 'Poets Talking', 1994, 14). 
Sisson was a prolific translator of poetry. Translation was for him a way of reading works not by contemporaries, to which he wanted to come close. It also enabled him 'to release the energies of poetry without passing for having said anything of his own' ('In Two Minds', 286). Besides lesser undertakings, he produced vigorous versions of Catullus (1966), Lucretius (1976), Dante's 'Divine Comedy' (1980), and Virgil's 'Aeneid' (1986), the Dante being arguably, the Virgil certainly, the best twentieth-century versions of these works in English verse. These translations bore out Sisson's rule that the formal properties of verse in one language cannot be rendered directly in another; the matter of the original is faithfully given. Sisson was also continuously active as a reviewer, essayist, and editor. A bulky volume of collected essays, 'The Avoidance of Literature', appeared in 1978. (What he meant by the paradoxical title is that it is fatal to the truth to write derivatively.) Several further collections followed. 
Sisson's religious and political beliefs, as his essays show them, emerged, as if by subterranean tunnel, out of the seventeenth century. He was a tory by Dr Johnson's definition, a persuasion fundamentally at odds with modern Conservatism. He detested banking interests and a managerial class adept in manoeuvre but irresponsibly divorced from the body politic. His admiration went instead to those who 'without relaxing their hold on the business of the day, are able to see it as a manifestation of more permanent interests' ('Case of Walter Bagehot', 1972, 43). An embodiment of these permanent interests for him was the Church of England, which he joined at the age of thirty-nine, having been brought up a Methodist. The virtual abandonment by the clergy of the 'Authorized Version of the Bible', and then the 'Book of Common Prayer', aroused his contemptuous fury and drew him into public controversy. 'What is at stake', he wrote, 'is not some literary frivolity about the 'old' and the 'new', but the profoundly important distinction between the more and the less meaningful' ('Is there a Church of England?', 7). The betrayal, as he considered it, of the church was one aspect of a vaster sense of loss by which his later poetry was haunted. We exist, Sisson believed, (if at all) not as individuals but in relation to each other, as part of a congregation, a 'historical community' (Scruton), the relation being proved by language, our ability to speak to and understand each other. Loyalty was a central value for him. But loyalty meant being prepared to speak out, to rock the boat -- and this, when he felt it to be necessary, he would do with panache. 
To someone meeting Sisson for the first time and expecting to discover a Timon in his cave, it could come as a surprise to find 'a modest and extremely humane man' ('The Times'). His gruffness was of a courteous kind, in part the effect of diffidence, and was shot through with humour. He was mischievously observant of the human comedy, yet accepting of shortcomings. While there was nothing of the bohemian about him, he remained sceptical of the 'bourgeois virtues' that he practised ('Contemporary Authors', 303). Any theoretical scheme for, or pretension to, the self-sufficient perfectibility of man or society raised his hackles. In an unshowy way he tried to live a Christian life, as he found it represented in such manuals as Jeremy Taylor's 'Holy Living and Holy Dying'. Sisson had to keep his mind occupied with tasks to prevent it from preying on itself. He worked hard and regularly and always, it seemed, with result -- his first thoughts being usually his best; yet he appeared to spend as much time in his garden or in the countryside around Langport as at his desk. A gardener, he was proud of his fruit trees, his herbs, and the homegrown vegetables on his table. (He refused to have in his garden any plants which had been introduced into England after the seventeenth century.) Over the years he collected a fine library. He also possessed a small collection of modern art, strikingly akin in sensibility to his poems. He was a man of robust appearance, whose way of walking, head forward, one leg very slightly dragging, indicated both the determination and the acknowledgement of imperfection with which he approached life. These also appeared in the contrast, at poetry readings, between his throwaway, rather mumbled manner of introducing a poem, and his vehemence when it came to reading the poem itself. In 1993 he was made a Companion of Honour for 'services to literature'. 
The final poem in Sisson's definitive 'Collected Poems' (1998) was a deliberate signing-off. In 1997 he suffered the first of several strokes, and his last years -- as he was not shy of saying -- were spent looking forward to death. Of his poetry he said (but as if the remark had a wider application), 'All that is past. There's nothing now' (personal knowledge). He died at his home, Moorfield Cottage, The Hill, Langport, on 5 September 2003, following another stroke. He was survived by his two daughters, his wife having predeceased him by seven months. He was buried beside her in the graveyard of St Mary, Huish Episcopi, the parish adjoining his, after a funeral service conducted according to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. 


@@@@@


doc= 92666


West, Peter Anthony (1920-2003), broadcaster and sports commentator, was born on 12 August 1920 at 39 Sefton Road, Croydon, Surrey, the only child of Harold William West, businessman, and his wife, Dorcas Anne, 'nee' Williams. He was educated at Yardley Court preparatory school in Tonbridge and Cranbrook School, Kent, where he was captain of the rugby, hockey, and cricket teams and head of school. By his own admission he was academically lazy and twice failed attempts at university scholarships before going to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He was commissioned into the Duke of Wellington's regiment, but the onset of spondylitis ensured that he saw no active service, and he was invalided out of the army in 1944. After the war he worked briefly for the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association, where he met his future wife, Pauline Mary Pike, secretary, daughter of Evan Cuthbert Pike, accountant. They married on 14 September 1946 at Christ Church, Hounslow (she was then aged twenty-two), and had a daughter and two sons. 
The press officer at the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association encouraged him to seek work in the media and in 1947, then working for the Exchange Telegraph Agency, West gained his entree into broadcasting after offering to dictate C. B. Fry's copy to the 'Sunday Graphic' from the press box at Taunton; Fry, impressed by West's charm and clear diction, recommended him to Seymour (Lobby) de Lotbiniere, head of outside broadcasts for the BBC, who gave him the opportunity to do some cricket commentaries. In the early 1950s West chose to focus on television rather than radio, where the cricket commentators seemed well established. Despite remaining a freelance throughout his career, he commented on test cricket every year from 1952 to 1986. Extremely versatile, he also supported Dan Maskell's coverage of Wimbledon tennis from 1955 to 1982 and reported on virtually every sport covered by BBC television. 
In 1953 West appeared on the panel game 'What's My Line', which opened up a second, parallel career as host or compere of numerous BBC game shows and other non-sporting programmes. From 1957 to 1972 (despite stating that his wife wore shin guards when they danced) he hosted the hugely successful series 'Come Dancing'. From 1961 to 1966 he introduced the annual Miss World contest. His programmes for children included 'Question Marks' (1957), 'Ask Your Dad' (1958), and 'What's New?' (1962-4), a science programme. In the 1970s West diversified into print journalism, as the rugby correspondent for 'The Times' (1971-82), and he later covered both rugby and cricket for the 'Daily Telegraph'. 
West's father had made a fortune in the oil business and retired early to become a poultry farmer, but this venture failed in the financial crisis of 1931, forcing West to become a day boy at Cranbrook until he gained a scholarship. Possibly the financial insecurity of that time influenced West's later exhausting employment schedule and his reluctance to turn down assignments. He claimed to have worked for every department of the BBC except drama. Sometimes he took on too much. He failed to pull his weight in an insurance broking venture with his friend John Newman. Another venture was more successful, though again his partner was the more active. In 1971, with the advertising entrepreneur Patrick Nally, he set up a sports public relations group, the West Nally Group, which focused on organizations rather than individual sportspeople. West, as congenial chairman, was instrumental in persuading Benson and Hedges to sponsor a new one-day cricket competition, and Cornhill Insurance to sponsor test cricket. West resigned in 1983 to enjoy his garden and play bridge. 
West's departure from 'The Times' was less amicable when for the second time they refused to send him to cover a Lions' tour. His pique was one of the few documented instances of his schoolmaster's assessment continuing into maturity: 'Peter's character and temperament are of that mercurial type which must inevitably provoke storms' (West, 30). Generally he remained calm and never at a loss for words, the ideal anchorman in an era of live television when things could go wrong. Not everyone appreciated his television charm. He braved a hostile Yorkshire crowd after criticizing the cricket captain Brian Close; the tennis star Jimmy Connors once refused to be interviewed by him; and Scottish 'Come Dancing' fans always felt he was biased against their team. 
West retained what he conceded were old-fashioned ideals of sportsmanship, in which the referee's decision was accepted, rugby players were not paid, stubble-faced cricketers were anathema, and poor standards of courtesy ought to be condemned. He was particularly irritated that on several occasions his contracts with the BBC were not renewed, without a letter of thanks for past efforts. His final years were clouded by the onset of prostate cancer, from which he died at his home, 55 Priory Close, Combe Down, Bath, on 2 September 2003. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92668


Williams, Gareth Wyn, Baron Williams of Mostyn (1941-2003), barrister and politician, was born on 5 February 1941 in a taxi travelling from Mostyn to Prestatyn, Flintshire (the birth was recorded at Hawarden House, Prestatyn), the son of Albert Thomas Williams (died 1964), schoolmaster, of Mostyn, and his wife, Selina, 'nee' Evans (died 1985). The family spoke Welsh at home -- his father later started the first Welsh-speaking state school -- and Williams learned English with the aid of Linguaphone records. From Rhyl grammar school he won a scholarship to Queens' College, Cambridge, to read history. After switching to law he won the university prize in jurisprudence in 1962, and graduated two years later with a first in the LLB. He then returned to north Wales to work as a schoolteacher for a year, in order to pay for his further legal education. In 1965 he was called to the bar at Gray's Inn. On 11 August 1962, while still a student at Cambridge, he had married Pauline Clarke, a 23-year-old teacher, and daughter of Ernest Clarke, cabinet maker. They had two daughters, Martha and Emma, and a son, Daniel. 
After qualifying as a barrister Williams returned to Wales where, based in Swansea, he built up a busy practice on the Wales and Chester circuit, and earned a reputation as a quick-witted and eloquent advocate, adept at winning over juries. In 1978 he took silk, moved to London (joining Farrar's Building in the Temple, eventually becoming head of chambers), and became a recorder. The following year he achieved national prominence through his defence of George Deakin, a businessman from south Wales who was one of those accused with the Liberal leader Jeremy Thorpe of conspiracy to murder the male model Norman Scott. His defence of Deakin -- who admitted a conspiracy to frighten but not to murder Scott -- was widely regarded as one of the most effective in what the newspapers of the time invariably described as the 'trial of the century'. Though he continued to appear in criminal trials he increasingly specialized in defamation cases, acting for both plaintiffs and defendants, and frequently appeared opposite George Carman, who had also made his name in the Thorpe trial; the contrast between Carman's ruthless cross-examination of witnesses and Williams's emollient but no less effective style was frequently noted. Both enjoyed their share of successes; Williams's appearance for the footballer Graeme Souness in his libel case against 'The People' (which had accused him of mistreating his former wife) in 1995 was a particularly notable victory for Williams over Carman. Williams's other clients included Viscount Linley, Diana, princess of Wales, and the American singer Michael Jackson. From 1987 to 1989 he was leader of the Wales and Chester circuit, and in 1992 he became chairman of the Bar Council (having been a member since 1986). This latter position gave him a platform from which to promulgate his views on the legal system, which included calling for an overhaul of the judicial appointments system and for the retirement of judges at sixty-five. Although better than almost all of his contemporaries in understanding court, and reading how the judge or the jury would react, Williams had profoundly radical views on the law. 
A lifelong Labour supporter, he was made a life peer, as Baron Williams of Mostyn, in 1992, on the recommendation of the outgoing Labour leader, Neil Kinnock. In opposition until 1997, he served as party spokesman in the House of Lords first on Northern Ireland (in whose problems he took a particular interest) and then on home and legal affairs, developing a close and mutually respectful relationship with the party's chief spokesman on home affairs, Jack Straw. Meanwhile, his first marriage having ended in divorce, on 19 August 1994 he married Veena Maya Russell, a 41-year-old divorcee and fellow barrister, originally from Durban, South Africa; she was the daughter of Dennis Russell, photographer. They had one daughter, Imogen. 
Following Labour's election victory in 1997 Williams was appointed parliamentary under-secretary at the Home Office, with special responsibilities for constitutional issues. He was promoted to minister of state at the Home Office in 1998, simultaneously becoming deputy leader of the House of Lords. The Home Office minister in the Lords had the heaviest workload of legislation of all Lords ministers. He had to deal with the policy issues in which the Lords took the greatest interest, and had the most profound disagreements with the government. In Williams's two years in this position his dominance as a parliamentary performer became apparent, and in an impressive front bench team he emerged as among the very ablest. As Home Office minister he persuaded a reluctant Lords to reduce the age of consent in homosexual relations to eighteen, secured passage of the 'Crime and Disorder Act', and, as minister with responsibility for prisons, struck up a hugely effective relationship with Martin Narey, the director-general of the prison service, working in particular for better education and rehabilitation in prisons. 
In 1999, on the retirement of John Morris, Williams became attorney-general. He was the best advocate to hold this office in a generation. He appeared in court much more often than his predecessors, in particular opening the public inquiries into the sinking of the bulk carrier 'Derbyshire' and the Thames pleasure boat 'Marchioness'. He had the trust of the legal profession, and was steadfast in private in ensuring compliance by the government with the rule of law, particularly in the context of the peace process in Northern Ireland. His standing both within the government and outside meant his views on these issues prevailed. He continued throughout his period in successive ministerial jobs with his close connection with Northern Ireland. As attorney-general he provided powerful leadership for the independent prosecution service there. He was also an effective leader of the crown prosecution service. Those in the service knew they had one of the best advocates as their leader. They willingly followed when he initiated a series of reforms, designed to take them from the doldrums into which they had sunk, towards an effective prosecuting agency, respected by the other parts of the criminal justice system. He procured favourable public expenditure settlements with the Treasury, which allowed them to be better resourced. For the first time in many years the service was given confidence it could succeed. 
Following Labour's second electoral victory, in 2001, Williams was the obvious candidate to succeed Baroness Jay as leader of the House of Lords. His years as attorney-general had increased his already high authority in the Lords. He became lord privy seal at the same time as leader of the House of Lords. He was highly respected right across the house, from the outset. He introduced a series of procedural changes to Lords business that perhaps no other peer could have persuaded the house to agree to. As the opposition to the government became much more organized after 2001 he proved a master of ensuring both that the government got all its legislative business through, and that relations across the house remained good. He proved an adept business manager for the government, and an effective leader for the whole house. The house, while aware of his radicalism, and indeed aware of his frustration with many of the practices of the house, nevertheless trusted him to look after their interests in a non-partisan way. 
Williams had long been interested in constitutional reform. He wanted an elected House of Lords, an independent judicial appointments commission, a supreme court, and a department of justice. In June 2003 the second and third of these items became government policy. The first and last got lost. He was pleased about the reforms adopted, though dismayed by the loss of the other two. In a highly charged atmosphere his charm, quick wit, and devastating logic proved critical in helping the government through the fall-out from these abrupt changes in policy. He never disguised his support for an elected second chamber nor his disappointment when it was rejected. His radicalism was not confined to reform of the House of Lords and the judiciary: he was, for instance, prominent in calling for the disestablishment of the Church of England, the strengthening of parliamentary watchdogs, and the removal of legal obstacles to positive action to bring about a greater representation of women in parliament. 
A voracious reader, Williams was also knowledgeable on art, including modern art. He disliked sport, 'apart from the bloodsport of litigation' ('Daily Telegraph', 22 Sept 2003). He retained strong links with his native Wales, as pro-chancellor of the University of Wales, president of the Welsh College of Music and Drama, a fellow of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, and an honorary professor at the University College of North Wales. A keen interest in children's welfare made him an active trustee of the NSPCC. He was also a member of council of Justice (1993-7) and president of the Prisoners' Advice Service (1992-7). 
Williams was one of the most successful members of the Labour cabinet, both as a parliamentarian and as an effective reformer. He died suddenly of a heart attack at his home, Poplars Farmhouse, Evenlode, near Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire, on 20 September 2003, while still leader of the House of Lords. He was survived by his wife, Veena, and his four children. It was obvious to all that his death had robbed the government not just of one of its keenest intellects, but also of one of its wisest counsel. 
Gareth Williams held well-thought-out views with great strength. He was a committed reformer. He was a man of great personal integrity. He was supremely able. He lacked personal vanity. He wanted to change the institutions of which he had been so successful a member. But he never lost the support of the two institutions where he achieved pre-eminence -- the Lords and the bar. 


@@@@@


doc= 92669


Amin, Idi (c.1924-2003), president of Uganda, was born about 1924 in Koboko in north-western Uganda to Muslim parents. His mother was a Kakwa; his father is said to have been Nubian, a term used of the Sudanese troops brought into Uganda by Emin Pasha. He was brought up by his mother, who lived at an army barracks among Nubian troops of the King's African rifles. He received minimal education. 
In 1946 Amin joined the King's African rifles. He was six feet four inches tall and became a heavyweight boxing champion and rugby player. He claimed falsely to have fought in Burma during the Second World War. He was, however, among troops sent to Kenya to deal with the Mau Mau uprising, a role he later tried to play down. He reached the rank of sergeant-major, the highest rank an African could achieve under colonial rule, and did part of his military training at Stirling in Scotland. In 1960, in the run-up to Uganda's independence, he was one of only two Ugandans to receive a commission. In late 1961 and early 1962 the army was called in to control an incident of serious cattle-raiding. Amin's platoon was responsible for massacring villagers. The governor, Sir Frederick Crawford, and prime minister, Milton Obote, baulked at court-martialling one of the only two Ugandan commissioned officers on the eve of independence, and he was let off lightly, a decision that Obote came to regret. 
In 1966 Obote, who had come to power through an alliance with a Ganda tribal party, no longer needed to rely on their support and scrapped the constitution under which the traditional ruler of Buganda, the kabaka, was president and Obote prime minister. The kingdoms of southern and western Uganda were shorn of all powers and Obote appointed himself president. Buganda alone resisted. Amin, now a colonel, led the troops which besieged and overran the kabaka's palace with great loss of life, driving the kabaka into exile, an act for which the Ganda held Obote responsible, and for which they never forgave him. From 1966 until Obote's overthrow in 1971 a state of emergency was imposed, smouldering resentment grew among the Ganda, and freedoms were increasingly restricted, especially after an assassination attempt on Obote in late 1969. 
In early 1971 Amin was in trouble. He had massively recruited men from his own west Nile region, putting him at odds with the Acholi, who had previously been the backbone of the army. He had been moved sideways in an army reorganization; he was threatened with having to account for a massive misappropriation of army funds; and a police investigation had implicated him in the murder of a rival for power, Brigadier Okoya, an Acholi. Amin also feared that his involvement with the southern Sudanese independence movement, the Anya Nya, was about to be revealed, just when Obote was moving towards allying Uganda with the Sudan government, which was engaged in seeking a peaceful end to the insurgency. He therefore took advantage of Obote's absence at a Commonwealth heads of government meeting to seize power in the early hours of 25 January 1971, helped by the Israelis, who were involved in training and supplying the armed forces, and, so it was widely believed, the British, who had forces just over the border in Kenya. If not actively involved, they gave their tacit support. 
Britain's Conservative government was glad to be rid of Obote, who had led embarrassing protests against the sale of arms to Rhodesia, and was moving too far to the left for comfort during the cold war era. The British government therefore formally recognized the new regime. Much of the British press supported the coup, believing that Amin would be easier to deal with than Obote. The 'Daily Telegraph' welcomed him as a contrast to other African leaders and a staunch friend of Britain. The Ganda, some of whom seem to have been complicit in the coup, were jubilant at the overthrow of Obote. Amin cemented their support by bringing back from Britain the body of the kabaka, who had died in exile, and arranging for him to be suitably buried. In the immediate aftermath of the coup there was a temporary respite: extensive spy rings were unmasked, the state of emergency was lifted, road-blocks were removed, and most political prisoners were released. Amin presented himself as a reconciler, bringing together factions in the (Anglican) Church of Uganda and the Muslim community. He promised to step down within weeks and install a civilian government, promises he failed to keep. 
When news of the first killings of Acholi and Langi in the barracks emerged, it was assumed that blood-letting was to be confined to the army. In July 1971 two Americans, the journalist Nicholas Stroh and a sociology lecturer, Robert Siedle, went to Mbarara barracks to investigate reports of killings, despite being warned not to do so. Both were murdered. Because of urgent inquiries by the USA, Amin was forced to set up an inquiry under Judge David Jeffrys Jones, who uncovered much of the truth, but left Uganda before his report was published, fearing for his life. No action was taken against those he named as responsible for the murders. 
In July 1971 Amin visited Britain and Israel, the two countries who had had most to gain from the overthrow of Obote. (Israel was supplying arms to the Anya Nya in order to tie up Sudanese and Egyptian military resources in this conflict and so reduce the threat to Israel; Obote's growing alliance with Sudan had threatened this tactic, whereas Amin supported the Anya Nya for ethnic reasons.) In Britain he met the prime minister, Edward Heath, and had lunch at Buckingham Palace. He tried to obtain large quantities of arms to use against Tanzania, which had given refuge to Obote. This encounter ought to have enabled the British government to get the measure of the person whom they had backed earlier in the year. He also visited Scotland, where he had done some of his army training. He admired all things Scottish, dressed a regiment of his army in the kilt, and called four of his sons by Scottish names. In the mid-1970s a small fringe group, the Scottish National Liberation Army, which occasionally resorted to low-level violence including letter-bombing, won Amin's support and he offered to become king of Scotland should they request his services. The title of Giles Foden's 'The Last King of Scotland' (1998) refers to this offer, but the book is a fictional account of an ugly example of collaboration with Amin. 
From Britain Amin went on to Israel with the same request for arms. Neither Britain nor Israel acceded to his request, though the British would have provided some small arms had he been able to pay. After this rejection Amin went to Libya, where Colonel Gaddafi promised help. Amin now stridently asserted his adherence to Islam, persuaded Gaddafi and other Muslim leaders that Uganda was 70 per cent Muslim (the previous census had shown the Muslim population at 5.6 per cent), made Uganda a member of the Organization of Islamic States, and placed limits on the Christian churches, recognizing only the Catholics, Anglicans, and Orthodox. 
In the first two years of Amin's rule several bouts of killings within the army took place as he and his immediate supporters eliminated rivals. Only one of these, a massacre which took place in January 1972 at Mutukula, on the border with Tanzania, gained much publicity and then only because the trouble spilled over into Tanzania. The nature of the regime only became clear to the outside world when in August 1972 Amin announced that non-citizen Asians would have to leave the country within ninety days. At independence Asians in the east African territories had been offered the possibility of acquiring British citizenship and some had chosen to do so. Others had chosen local citizenship. Asians dominated the retail trade and large sections of business and manufacturing throughout east Africa, as well as being prominent in the professions and the administration, and their privileged position attracted growing resentment. Britain had negotiated an agreement with Obote to speed up the admission of 20,000 British passport-holding Asians, but the prime minister, Edward Heath, procrastinated in the face of opposition from the Conservative right wing. On 4 August 1972 came Amin's bombshell announcement. There was an outcry from sections of the British press and public. Britain, of course, had no option under international law but to admit its own nationals. Arrangements for an evacuation were delayed while Britain tried to find out if Amin could be dissuaded, and while they tried to persuade other countries to accept some of the Asians. After further unaccountable delays and rising panic in Uganda, only a UN airlift ensured that all were got out on time. 27,000 came to Britain. British attitudes began to change when people saw their plight. Television pictures showed women and children clutching all that remained to them in small suitcases: many had been robbed in Uganda on their way to the airport. Voluntary groups and churches provided generous help. One of the few Ugandans who protested at the treatment of the Asians was the chief justice, Benedicto Kiwanuka, who also intervened on behalf of a Briton, Daniel Stewart, wrongly arrested by the army. This cost Kiwanuka his life. He was abducted on 21 September and murdered. 
On 17 September, in the middle of the Asian crisis, Ugandan exiles mounted an invasion from Tanzania. This was a fiasco: the plane intended to land at Entebbe never got off the ground, and the small force which entered through western Uganda was ill disciplined and had to pass through hostile territory. Nevertheless Amin grew increasingly anxious about guerrilla activity, and in early 1973 eleven alleged guerrillas were shot publicly by firing squad. 
By the end of 1972 most Britons had left Uganda after Britain withdrew financial support. A declining handful stayed throughout his rule, including Bob Astles, who had taken Ugandan citizenship and acted as an aide to Amin, allegedly helping to set up the notorious State Research Bureau. He fled to Kenya when Amin fell but was extradited to Uganda and imprisoned. In 1985 he was stripped of Ugandan citizenship and deported to Britain, where at first he defended Amin. He later revealed nothing of what he knew. Amin was supplied with luxury goods throughout his period of rule by the so-called 'whisky-run' from Stansted airport, which Britain unaccountably permitted. 
Britain's economy benefited from the arrival of the Asians, but Uganda's suffered disastrously. Asian businesses were handed to soldiers who had no idea how to run them and lacked creditworthiness. Rampant inflation followed, and shortages of every kind, even of basic necessities. To compound his problems, throughout 1973 and 1974 Amin faced threats of assassination and coups from within the army. He dispensed with the cabinet and ruled through his defence council. Having alienated the West -- he expelled fourteen members of the British high commission in 1974 -- he increasingly turned to Libya and the Arab world, and to the Soviet Union (whom he embarrassed by professing admiration for Hitler: they made him recant this publicly). He courted African support by his noisy denunciation of apartheid in South Africa, and during the Arab-Israeli War of 1973 helped to persuade almost all African states to break off relations with Israel. 
In July 1975 the Organization of African Unity (OAU) held its summit in Kampala, and Amin became its chairman for the following year. He embarrassed Britain by making a group of Britons carry him to a reception at the OAU summit. Later in the year he humiliated James Callaghan, then foreign secretary, who had to come to Kampala to plead for the life of Denis Hills, who had called Amin 'a village tyrant' in his book 'The White Pumpkin' (1975). When Amin addressed the UN general assembly he insulted Britain by inflammatory remarks about Northern Ireland. The British ambassador to the UN walked out. 
On 27 June 1976 an Air France plane was hijacked 'en route' from Tel Aviv via Athens to Paris, carrying many Jewish passengers. It landed at Entebbe, Uganda, where a group of Palestinians was awaiting it. Amin himself came to the airport and was clearly in league with the hijackers. The non-Jewish passengers were released, and the Jewish passengers held as hostages at gun-point in the airport buildings. A week later, with deadlines running out, the Israelis mounted a spectacular night-time airborne operation to rescue the hostages. They knew the layout of the airport, as they had built it; they rescued the hostages, blew up all Uganda's fighter planes, and took off again after only ninety minutes, to Amin's shock and bewilderment when he awoke in the morning and discovered what had happened. Ugandans inside the country had to keep their glee to themselves: in Nairobi the exiles rejoiced in the streets. Kenya had perhaps allowed the Israeli planes to refuel in Nairobi because of previous events. Early in 1976 Esther Chesire, a relative of the Kenyan vice-president, Daniel arap Moi, and a student at Makerere University, had disappeared. Amin had set up an inquiry into her disappearance, but no trace of her was ever found. In February there was a major confrontation with Kenya over Uganda's boundaries. Until 1902 a large part of western Kenya had been part of the Uganda protectorate. Amin now claimed it as part of 'greater Uganda' and was eventually forced by the Kenyans into a humiliating climbdown. 
On 3-4 August 1976 the army invaded Makerere University. Tension there was high after the murder of a student, the disappearance of Esther Chesire, the murder of Theresa Mukasa-Bukenya, a respected warden of the hall of residence where Chesire had lived, and the presence on the campus of Amin's son, Taban Amin, who had not qualified for entrance to the university. Student protests erupted on 3 August, and were put down with great force over two days. Cardinal Nsubuga and Archbishop Luwum went to the campus together to investigate and were told that all was peaceful. Many students were beaten up and temporarily imprisoned by the army, and five were murdered. Later Amin forced the university to award him an honorary doctorate of laws. 
Religious leaders had become increasingly concerned about the growing antagonism between Muslims and Christians and the rising tide of violence. Late in 1976 Luwum chaired a conference of Anglican, Catholic, and Muslim leaders to discuss this, and they pledged themselves to fight this evil. They requested a meeting with Amin, who was furious that the conference had been held without his knowledge, feared that he was losing the support of the Muslim community, and misunderstood their phrase 'fight evil'. Luwum was falsely accused of involvement in plotting armed insurrection, to which the Church of Uganda bishops responded in a carefully worded letter. On 17 February 1977 Luwum was paraded in front of journalists and the army, the latter clamouring for him to be killed. When the following day the Ugandan media announced that he and two ministers had died in a traffic accident, no one believed them. Amin himself is believed to have shot the archbishop. There was international outrage and Luwum was acclaimed as a martyr. He is memorialized in Canterbury Cathedral and on the west front of Westminster Abbey. A few months after these murders Amin announced that he would attend the Commonwealth heads of government meeting to be held in June in London, to which he had not been invited, and the queen's silver jubilee. Although he kept the British government on tenterhooks for months, he did not show up. Earlier he had awarded himself the VC ('Victorious Cross') and appointed himself CBE ('Conqueror of the British Empire'). 
Faced with growing disloyalty in the army, Amin created a diversion by invading Tanzania on 30 October 1978 and annexing the Kagera Salient, a triangle of land adjacent to south-western Uganda, to which he had previously laid claim. The Tanzanian army, accompanied by Ugandan exiles, pushed the Ugandan army back across the border and then advanced on foot, liberating Kampala in April 1979 before moving on to secure the rest of the country. Amin fled, first taking refuge in Libya, and then moving to Saudi Arabia. In January 1989 he tried to return to Uganda through Zaire. Saudi Arabia took him back only under pressure from the United States. He was placed under strict control in Jiddah. He died there on 16 August 2003 and was buried the same day, in accordance with Muslim custom. 
Amin had at least five wives. Malyamu (sister of Wanume Kibedi, a former foreign minister), with whom he had had a long-standing relationship, he formally married in 1966. He married Kay Adroa, the well-educated daughter of a clergyman, later in 1966, Norah a year later, and Medina in 1972. In March 1974 he divorced according to Islamic custom Malyamu, Kay, and Norah, saying that he wished to live monogamously with Medina, his Muslim wife. Kay died in August 1974, possibly after a botched abortion, though it was generally believed at the time that she had been murdered. Amin married Sarah Kyolaba on 2 August 1975 on the eve of the summit of the OAU held in Kampala, after having her boyfriend murdered. Malyamu fled to Britain in November 1975 after recovering from a suspicious road traffic accident. Sarah also sought refuge in north London. Norah lived quietly in Uganda running a business. Amin also had many concubines, some of whom claimed to be his wives, and is thought to have fathered some fifty children. Medina shared his exile in Saudi Arabia. 
Amin is seen as the quintessential African tyrant. Allegations of cannibalism and of dementia resulting from tertiary syphilis attached themselves to him -- though the latter at least seems to have been incorrect. He appears to have lacked any moral sense. It is impossible to say how many died during his rule. He himself did not order all the killings, but he was responsible for the behaviour of the army and the State Research Bureau, the main killing machine. Census returns suggest a population shortfall of between 420,000 and 850,000 by the end of his presidency, but the shortfall does not represent the number of killings. Many died in the fighting; health services had collapsed; those who died were not able to reproduce; large numbers fled the country; and many personal scores were paid off with the aid of Amin's men. Henry Kyemba in 'State of Blood' (1977) listed one hundred prominent people murdered by the regime. Many of the rest were ordinary people who happened to get in the way of Amin's thugs. Amnesty International's estimate of 300,000 killings is probably as near the truth as we shall ever get. 


@@@@@


doc= 92672


Skelton, Kenneth John Fraser (1918-2003), bishop of Lichfield, was born on 16 May 1918 at 21 Lynton Road, Hornsey, London, the eldest son of Henry Edmund Skelton and his wife, Kate Elizabeth, 'nee' Mann. At the time of his birth his father was serving as a gunner in the 128th heavy battery. Skelton's father had an inherent disposition for minutiae, method, calculation, and seriousness befitting his peacetime occupation as a watchmaker and jeweller. These traits were later evident in his son, who was a small, somewhat dapper, figure, shy, self-effacing, and straightforward. 
Skelton won a scholarship to Dulwich College in 1929, thence to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he achieved a double first. Following his vocation he trained at Wells Theological College and was ordained in 1941, serving curacies in three Derbyshire parishes, in one of which he met Phyllis Barbara Emerton, daughter of James Emerton; during the Second World War she served as a WAAF officer. They married at St Giles' Church, Normanton-by-Derby, on 17 July 1945, and later had two sons and a daughter. 
After returning to Wells as lecturer and priest-vicar of the cathedral in 1946, Skelton developed a thoughtful radical theology. In 1950 he moved to Manchester as vicar of Howe Bridge, a small mining village. This bespectacled, hesitant, and donnish vicar did not at first appeal to Lancashire parishioners, but they soon realized that behind his unassuming presence was a very determined person who had the steel and drive to ensure that his goals were achieved. Thus proven, Skelton left in 1955 for seven years as rector of the ancient parish of Walton-on-the-Hill, Liverpool. There he was dynamic, propelling people to think and act on contemporary social and moral issues. 
The diocese of Matabeleland in Rhodesia elected Skelton as its bishop in 1962. Two years later Ian Smith took over the Rhodesian Front and began actively pressing for independence. From the outset Skelton was fearless, tapping away on his typewriter, turning blank sheets of paper into missiles aimed at government policies. He was rarely out of the newspapers and was dubbed 'a political bishop' by government ministers, who referred to him as Red Skelton. He deliberately embarked on a collision course with the government, an episcopal thorn in its side, as it inexorably moved towards the unilateral declaration of independence on 11 November 1965. Skelton was a hero to the black African community, with whom he spent extended time on pastoral visits, while many Europeans opposed his views. Skelton sent confidential reports to the prime minister, Harold Wilson, whose Labour Party had come to power in 1964, and wrote controversial (though anonymous) articles for 'The Guardian'. He 'spied' for MI6 after meetings with Maurice Oldfield. To thwart the police bugging of his telephone he spoke to Cecil Alderson of Mashonaland, the other Anglican bishop in Rhodesia, in Latin. He was in touch with many supporters of Joshua Nkomo, leader of the Zimbabwean African People's Union. By 1969 it was clear that the Rhodesian government would find grounds for removing him, and there were death threats. Skelton had the moral fibre to face any consequence of his actions but he was also married -- with three children being educated in England -- and pressures on his family prompted a return to England. He was appointed CBE in 1972. 
On Skelton's return to England, Ian Ramsey, bishop of Durham, invited him to be rector of Bishopwearmouth and assistant bishop in the diocese. Then in April 1974 there came an invitation from Harold Wilson to accept nomination to the see of Lichfield, one of the largest dioceses in England. There he succeeded the respected and conservative Stretton Reeve. To the existing suffragan bishoprics of Shrewsbury and Stafford, Skelton added Wolverhampton in 1979, inaugurating a full area system. He had the ability to delegate without abrogating responsibility, although he could be insensitive to those who disagreed with him, and disliked outside interference. Anglo-Catholics were uneasy with a liberal bishop, the 'county set' was shunned, and relations with successive deans in a rather Trollopian close were strained. The Bishop's House may have been a palace but the Skeltons lived simply, almost frugally, in an upstairs flat; yet their hospitality was warm and genuine. 
Skelton was an indefatigable worker, never in bed before midnight. He had an inner strength and spiritual integrity which enabled him to be decisive and imperturbable in all situations, and he relied on intuition and his own inquiries when making senior appointments. His relaxed style of leadership was rewarded by two celebrations in Stafford at the county showground, attended by huge crowds. His addresses to the diocesan synod arrested attention with their clarity of thought and pellucid expression. Yet he was never a churchy figure. His blood pressure shot up when Margaret Thatcher became prime minister, although his declarations about contemporary social and moral issues affecting ordinary people came from a Christian, not from a party-political, stance. He chaired a commission which produced 'Marriage and the Church's Task' (1978). The report was not unanimous on the crucial proposal that divorcees should be allowed to remarry in church. When Skelton presented the commission's findings to the general synod, the archbishop of Canterbury made an ex cathedra pronouncement condemning it, but it was only narrowly defeated. 
Skelton retired in 1984 to Sheffield, and was made an assistant bishop in the dioceses of Sheffield and Derby. He was never happier than when playing the organ. He could have been a professional musician had he not been ordained. He also retained a good tenor voice to the end, singing oratorios and masses. His last years were clouded by illness. His wife died in 2002 and he followed her, at the Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, Surrey, on 30 July 2003, after a stroke. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92673


Poole, Monica Mary (1921-2003), wood-engraver, was born on 20 May 1921 at 43 Whitstable Road, Canterbury, Kent, the younger daughter of Charles Reginald Poole, a bank clerk, and his wife, Gladys Aline, 'nee' Haskell. Her sister died at the age of seven as the family was moving to Ramsgate. Poole was then only six months old. After contracting polio she was unable to walk until she was five. Her mother developed tuberculosis and in 1929 Poole accompanied her for two years to a sanatorium in the Bernese Oberland in Switzerland. The magnificence of the landscape made a deep impression and she returned there throughout her life. After education at Abbotsford School in Broadstairs she studied at Thanet School of Art, Margate, where she was introduced to the art of wood-engraving by Geoffrey Wales. In 1940 her family moved to Bedford, where she worked in an aircraft factory. From 1945 to 1949 she studied wood-engraving at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London under John Farleigh, whom she found an ideal teacher. 
Poole's first commission on leaving the Central School was to do thirty-seven illustrations for Reginald Turner's 'Kent' in Paul Elek's 'Vision of England' series, published in 1950. However, feeling unable to portray activity and emotion, she considered that her work -- which is often austere -- was 'too cold' for her to have a career as an illustrator. On 28 May 1952 she married Commander Alastair George Murison Small, a retired naval officer and widower (with one son) who was twenty-four years older than her. The son of Alexander Murison Small, writer to the signet, he worked at the Armament and Research Establishment near Sevenoaks until 1959, when he set up a heating and ventilation consultancy; Poole worked with him in the latter business. 
In the immediate post-war period Poole's instinctive feeling for nature made her creative output seem very much part of the British art scene at a time when neo-Romantic artists like Graham Sutherland, Ceri Richards, John Piper, John Craxton, and John Minton were at the height of their reputations. The success of this movement was short-lived, however, and before long both her art and her chosen medium of wood-engraving were regarded as completely unfashionable. She continued to exhibit during the 1960s and 1970s while teaching at Tonbridge Adult Education Centre, but an exhibition review which appeared in 1975 in 'The Connoisseur' was typical: 'many individual blocks are interesting or enjoyable... but the sensation persists that wood-engravers live in the past, still waiting for the second coming' ('The Times', 7 Aug 2003). With the sudden death of her husband in 1969 these years were particularly bleak for Poole. It was not until the 1980s that the tide of fashion turned. In 1984 Graham Williams's Florin Press printed a number of her finest blocks in 'Monica Poole: Wood Engraver' and the following year she published 'The Wood Engravings of John Farleigh'. The London dealer Duncan Campbell gave her solo shows in 1989 and 1993, and during 1993 there was a retrospective of her work at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford. 
Poole's work was remarkable for its intense images of organic form. What fascinated her imagination were the strange and intricate structures of nature which appeared in the roots, vegetation, stones, and shells she collected as inspiration for her extraordinary, surreal wood-engravings. 'Those twisted shapes will not leave me alone', she wrote ('The Guardian'). They seemed like explorations of a deeply private world. Although not inspired by pure landscape (she preferred things to spaces), in the 1970s she began a series of tree and woodland studies. Her 'Spring after the Hurricane' was commissioned by the National Trust and the Society of Wood Engravers to commemorate the damage done by the great storm of 1987, which left her personally traumatized. 
Between 1947 and 1970 Poole exhibited prints and watercolours at the Royal Academy. She was elected an associate of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers (subsequently the Royal Society of Painter-Printmakers) in 1957, and a fellow in 1976; a member of the Art-Workers' Guild in 1970; and a member of the (revived) Society of Wood Engravers in 1984. The concentration required by the technique of engraving on hard boxwood blocks, as well as Poole's own preference for working on a large scale, meant that her output as an engraver was relatively small. However, her work is extensively represented, including in the Ashmolean Museum (thanks to her own generosity), the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and Boston Public Library in the United States. Uncompromising in pursuit of both her chosen art and her imagery, Poole was described as a 'benchmark for excellence' by the wood engraver Hilary Paynter ('The Independent'). She was unquestionably one of the finest wood-engravers of the twentieth century. 
Poole was a slight although not a fragile figure; her manner was quiet and reserved but to those who knew her well she was warm and enthusiastic. In later years she became reclusive and lived largely in one room at her house, 67 Hadlow Road, Tonbridge, Kent, as the after-effects of her childhood polio caught up with her. She died of cancer on 3 August 2003 at the Hospice in the Weald, Pembury, Kent. She was survived by her stepson. 


@@@@@


doc= 92678


Thesiger, Sir Wilfred Patrick (1910-2003), explorer, was born on 3 June 1910 at the British legation, Addis Ababa, Abyssinia, the eldest of four sons of Captain Wilfred Gilbert Thesiger (1871-1920), British consul-general and minister-plenipotentiary in Addis Ababa, and his wife, Kathleen Mary (1880-1973), elder daughter of Thomas Mercer Cliffe Vigors, of Burgage, co. Carlow. His father was the third son of Frederic Augustus Thesiger, second Baron Chelmsford. 
As a small boy Thesiger watched his father shoot big game in Abyssinia, and in India where Captain Thesiger's eldest brother, Frederic Thesiger, third Baron Chelmsford, was viceroy. At Addis Ababa he saw white-robed priests dance at Epiphany before the ark of the covenant; and a wildly thrilling victory parade on the field of Jan Meda, after the decisive battle of Sagale, which ended the revolution in 1916. Such memorable experiences in early childhood gave Thesiger his craving for adventure, 'savagery and colour' (Maitland, 45), which he later maintained had influenced the whole of his life. 
After he returned, aged eight, with his family to England in 1919, Thesiger was educated at St Aubyn's preparatory school, Rottingdean, Sussex (1919-23), and then at Eton College (1923-8) and Oxford (1929-33). When his father died in 1920 Thesiger's mother moved from Brighton to a farmhouse in Herefordshire, and from there to The Milebrook, Radnorshire, which remained the family's home from 1921 until 1942. She remarried in October 1931. Her second husband, Reginald Basil Astley, a 69-year-old widower, died in 1942. 
In November 1930, as honorary attache to the duke of Gloucester, Thesiger attended the Abyssinian emperor Haile Selassie's coronation in Addis Ababa. After the ceremonies he hunted big game for a month along the Awash River, whose unmapped exit he became determined to discover. He boxed for Oxford from 1930 to 1933 and captained the university side in his final year. In 1933 he left Magdalen College with a third-class degree in modern history. From 1933 to 1934 he explored the Awash through hostile Danakil (or Afar) country to its end in Lake Abhebad. During this dangerous journey he became the first European to traverse the forbidden sultanate of Aussa in north-east Abyssinia. Although his intended companion, David Haig-Thomas, an ornithologist, was unable to join the expedition due to illness, Thesiger managed to collect and preserve no fewer than 872 birds, including 192 species and three new subspecies, from the Danakil region; his report, 'Birds from Danakil, Abyssinia', was published in 'The Ibis' in October 1935. 
In 1935 Thesiger joined the Sudan political service, serving as an assistant district commissioner in northern Darfur from 1935 to 1937, and the western Nuer district from 1937 to 1939. The district commissioner in northern Darfur, Guy Moore, taught him to appreciate deserts and to treat the men with whom he lived and travelled as companions instead of servants. Thesiger put this advice into practice in 1935, trekking with camels in April to Jebel Maidob in northern Darfur and in November and December to Bir Natrun in Libya. He shot seventy lion in five years, all of which he tracked on foot or galloped after on horseback. He was charged by lion sixteen times, yet he found the urge to go on hunting them was 'irresistible'. In the western Nuer district he killed twelve buffalo and four elephant, but always maintained that he shot 'selectively and seldom' (Maitland, 174). Thesiger's faithful companion of those years, Idris Daud, a reprieved murderer and Zaghawa-Kobe tribesman, hunted and travelled with him. In 1938 Thesiger and a small party, including Idris, crossed the Sahara from the Sudan border to Tibesti, journeying with camels for three months. The experience he gained of desert travel in Abyssinia, northern Darfur, and the French Sahara was crucial in preparing him to undertake journeys in Arabia after the Second World War, including the two crossings of the 'empty quarter' with which his name came to be indelibly associated. 
Thesiger viewed the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in 1935 and its atrocities there as the 'rape' of his homeland (Maitland, 203). Commissioned a bimbashi in 1940, he joined the Sudan defence force and served with Orde Wingate during the Abyssinian campaign in 1941 which restored the exiled Haile Selassie to his throne. He was awarded a DSO on 30 December 1941 for capturing Agibar fort and its garrison of 2500 Italian troops. He wrote in his autobiography: 'this... for a subaltern, was far beyond my expectations' ('The Life of My Choice', 349). With the rank of major he served in 1942 in Syria, as second-in-command of the Druze legion raised by Colonel Gerald de Gaury. After the Vichy French surrender Thesiger joined Colonel David Stirling's recently established Special Air Service (SAS) brigade. In 1942-3 he took part in raiding and sabotage behind enemy lines in north Africa, and afterwards served with the SAS in Palestine. In 1944, at Haile Selassie's request, he was transferred to Abyssinia (now Ethiopia) as political adviser to the crown prince, Asfa Wossen, at Dessie. Halfway through the two-year appointment, frustrated by restrictions on his movements and apparent lack of co-operation, he resigned. 
On his way back to England, at Addis Ababa, Thesiger met Owen Bevan Lean of the Middle East Anti-Locust Unit, whom he had met first at the Natural History Museum, South Kensington, in 1933. Lean was then looking for someone experienced in desert travel, to investigate possible locust outbreak centres in Arabia. Thesiger seized this opportunity to explore the empty quarter, the great sand desert of southern Arabia, which had been his ambition for a decade. The empty quarter or Rub' al-Khali had been crossed by Bertram Thomas in 1931 and by Harry St John Philby in 1932. Understandably Thomas had followed the easiest route. Philby's journey, on the other hand, involved a trek of 400 miles between wells, which Thesiger regarded as an epic of desert exploration. Despite such important journeys, vast areas of the empty quarter still remained unexplored. Thesiger first crossed the empty quarter in 1946-7, a journey of 2000 miles that began and ended at Salala, on Arabia's south coast. In February 1947 he met Salim bin Kabina, a sixteen-year-old Bedu of the Rashid tribe, who, together with Salim bin Ghabaisha, also of the Rashid, became Thesiger's inseparable companion during his years in Arabia. Bin Kabina and bin Ghabaisha accompanied his second crossing of the empty quarter, in 1947-8, and his later journeys, in 1949 and 1950, in Oman. 
After travelling in Iraqi Kurdistan, in 1950, Thesiger visited the marshes of southern Iraq. From then until 1958, except for 1957, he spent several months every year with the marsh Arabs, sharing the communal life of the villages and travelling by canoe throughout the marshes. To escape the hot, humid marsh summers, he travelled among the mountains of western Asia and Morocco: Chitral in 1952; Hunza in 1953; the Hazarajat, Afghanistan, in 1954; the High Atlas, Morocco, in 1955; and, in 1956, Nuristan, where he returned in 1965. He spent the winter of 1957 in Copenhagen, writing 'Arabian Sands' (1959), his first and -- in his opinion -- his finest book. In 1959 he trekked with donkeys across southern Ethiopia to the Kenyan border. The following year, he travelled in northern Ethiopia. 
In 1960, accompanied by Frank Steele, whom he had met in 1951 when Steele was vice-consul at Basrah in Iraq, Thesiger journeyed with camels from Kula Mawe near Isiolo, to Lake Rudolf (later renamed Luke Turkana) and Marsabit in the northern frontier district of Kenya. For the next three years he travelled with camels or donkeys in northern Kenya and northern Tanzania. A second book, 'The Marsh Arabs', published in 1964, confirmed Thesiger's reputation as a writer and a photographer. Also in 1964 Thesiger crossed the Alborz mountains in Iran, and afterwards joined Bakhtiari nomads on their annual migration through the mountains of Zagros. That same year, in October and November, he crossed the Dasht-i-Lut (Desert of Lot) to Yazd. From June to September 1965 he travelled again through Nuristan and in Badakhshan, where he photographed Kandari nomads and their flocks coming down from Lake Shiva. In October 1965 he tramped from Tafileh, following the Wadi Arabah, to Petra in Transjordan. 
Thesiger served in 1966-7 with the royalists during the civil war in Yemen. From 1968 to 1976 he spent much of the year travelling in northern Kenya, including anti-poaching safaris along the Uaso Nyiro River and north-east shore of Lake Turkana. After a six-month voyage round the Indonesian islands in 1977 with the writer Gavin Young, he returned to northern Kenya where he and his Samburu protege Lawi Leboyare built themselves a cedar-wood house near the small township of Maralal. For the next sixteen years, for about nine months every year, Thesiger lived in one or other of the houses he had built for his Samburu adoptive 'families'. In September and October 1983 he made his last long journey, using animal transport, when he travelled for six weeks with ponies or yaks across Ladakh. Much later some of the magnificent photographs he took of Ladakh and its people illustrated 'Among the Mountains' (1998), based on Thesiger's diaries of his travels in western Asia. 
After 'Desert, Marsh and Mountain' was published in 1979 Thesiger worked on his autobiography, 'The Life of My Choice', which he wrote in Maralal, London, and Hyderabad. It was published in 1987, the same year as 'Visions of a Nomad', a large-format work devoted to his photography. By 1991 his sight had deteriorated so much that he could neither read nor write unaided. Operations for astigmatism and cataract in 1995 and 1996 improved his failing sight. Meanwhile, in 1992-3, at Maralal, he dictated 'My Kenya Days' (1994), a postscript to his autobiography. In 1996 'The Danakil Diary', an edited version of Thesiger's original record of his 1933-4 Danakil expedition, was published, illustrated with some of his earliest travel photographs. The second postscript to his autobiography -- 'Among the Mountains' (1998) -- was followed in 1999 by 'Crossing the Sands' (a lavishly illustrated edition of 'Arabian Sands' with a reduced text); and in 2001 by 'A Vanished World'. The first anthology of his writing, 'My Life and Travels', was published in 2002; 'A Life in Pictures' in 2004; and an authorized biography by Alexander Maitland, 'Wilfred Thesiger: the Life of the Great Explorer', in 2006. In 1993 and 1997 Thesiger loaned collections of his photographs and travel artefacts to the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford (after his death the collection was accepted by the government in lieu of inheritance tax, to be held permanently at the museum). The museum arranged an exhibition of his photographs in 1993, and in 2000 it loaned a selection of his desert photographs to exhibitions held in Paris and Barcelona. 
In October 1994 Thesiger left Kenya and returned to live permanently in England. From 1994 to 1998 he lived in London in the Chelsea flat he had inherited from his mother. He survived two of his younger brothers: Brian, born in 1911, died in 1982; Dermot, born in 1914, was killed in 1942 when the RAF aircraft he was piloting crashed into the North Sea. His youngest brother, Roderic, born in 1915, died in 2005. 
In June 1998 Thesiger moved to a retirement home near Coulsdon in Surrey. There he worked on new editions of his books, gave interviews, and took part in television films about his life. His frequent visitors included old friends, members of his family, other travellers, writers, photographers, and new acquaintances. His admirers from all over the world included Prince Charles. Among his numerous awards and distinctions were the founder's gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society in 1948; the Burton memorial medal of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1966; fellowship of the Royal Society of Literature in 1965; honorary fellowship of the British Academy and of Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1982; honorary degrees from Leicester and Bath universities (1967 and 1992); a CBE in 1968; and a KBE in 1995. 
Thesiger was admitted to the Mayday Hospital, Croydon, in August 2003, after his left hip had been fractured by a fall. He died there of bronchopneumonia a week later, on 24 August 2003. A small private service on 8 September at Putney Vale crematorium, south-west London, was followed on 7 November by a memorial service held at Eton College chapel. His ashes were scattered on Stowe Hill, above the Teme Valley in Powys, close to The Milebrook, where so many of his happiest childhood days were spent. He had never married. 
During more than fifty years spent travelling Thesiger documented magnificently, by his photography and prose, peoples and ways of life which by the time of his death had changed irrevocably or else had vanished altogether. Motivated initially by the excitement of big-game hunting and travel among hostile peoples, by 'the lure of the unknown' (Maitland, 265), and the search for peace of mind among other races, he admitted that since boyhood he had longed to 'win distinction as an explorer and a traveller' (ibid., 123). In this he succeeded. St John Philby praised his post-war journeys as 'crowning touches... on... exploratory activity in Arabia' and described Thesiger himself as 'probably the greatest of all explorers' (ibid., 380). Sir John Glubb viewed him as 'perhaps the last, and certainly one of the greatest, of the British travellers among the Arabs' (ibid.). Thesiger's achievement was perhaps all the more remarkable in that by the time he started on his travels, there were few areas of the world which had not already been explored. Indeed, in terms of their contribution to purely geographical knowledge, Thesiger's travels cannot be compared with the journeys of discovery made by his famous predecessors in Africa and Arabia during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. As he wrote in 1938, 'It is not easy to be the first Englishman nowadays' (ibid., 187). Far more important than where he travelled, however, was the manner in which he travelled, the enduring relationships he forged among tribes in remote, seldom visited areas, and the way he captured for posterity fast disappearing ways of life. By the time of his death he was widely acknowledged as among the greatest of twentieth-century explorers. 


@@@@@


doc= 92680


Webster, David James (1931-2003), television producer and broadcasting executive, was born at 22 Belvedere Road, Taunton, Somerset, on 11 January 1931, the younger child and only son of Alexander James (Alec) Webster, a master draper and outfitter, and his wife, Clara (or Clare), 'nee' Bond. His mother was an early feminist and a founder of one of the first birth control clinics. His sister became, as Sheila Kitzinger ('b'. 1929), a leading birth educator and a social anthropologist. He was educated at Taunton School (1938-49). When he was called up for national service he registered as a conscientious objector and worked first as a farm labourer and later as a hospital porter. In 1951, as an administrator of the World Movement for World Federal Government, he got his first taste of international politics, which was to occupy him for much of his working life. He then spent a year at Ruskin College, Oxford. 
In 1953 Webster joined the BBC's external services news department at Bush House, London, as a trainee. Two years later he married Lucy Law, of Princeton, New Jersey; they had two sons. After a variety of assignments he joined BBC television talks in 1959 at a time when that department was at its strongest, and he rubbed shoulders in the Lime Grove studios in London with the likes of Huw Wheldon, David Attenborough, Alasdair Milne, and Anthony Jay. Alongside such talented people he learned his television skills and prospered. His colleagues learned to admire his ever growing address book. As a producer on 'Panorama' from 1959 onwards he did several tours of duty in Vietnam at the height of the war there and he did some distinguished work with Richard Dimbleby after the earthquake in Skopje. By 1967 he was the editor of 'Panorama', and he ensured that the programme continued to matter in the week's viewing. There were two nicknames for him at Lime Grove: King-size because of his physique, and Slosh because of his genuine enjoyment of the good life. He became executive editor of the BBC's current affairs group in 1969, and assistant head in 1970. 
But it was the United States that attracted Webster and it was in New York and in Washington, DC, that he was seen at his best. The BBC shrewdly made him its representative in the United States in 1971 and for the next four years he ensured that Americans at all levels knew what the BBC stood for. He was encouraged to come back to London in 1976 to take charge of the BBC's information services, a post renamed the following year as director, public affairs, in charge of the BBC's public relations. He was promoted to the board of management in 1977 but in 1981 he was back in New York, this time with the newly coined title of director, United States. Also in 1981, his first marriage having ended in divorce, he married another American, Elizabeth Drew ('b'. 1935), of Washington, an influential political writer and 'New Yorker' columnist. Always a lover of long lunches and decent dinners, Webster was known in New York as the 42 Man -- twice a day at 21, the restaurant he preferred. The then chairman of the BBC, George Howard, allowed him to fly to London by Concorde for monthly board meetings, an indulgence too far for the next chairman, Stuart Young, who reportedly found Webster irritating. Webster's BBC career ended in 1985, although he remained a consultant and continued to live in the United States. 
After leaving the BBC Webster worked as an adviser to several media organizations. But without the crutch of the BBC he became a relatively peripheral figure. Although beset by illness, he continued to travel and set up the Trans-Atlantic Dialogue on Broadcasting and Information Society in 1988. Dismissed by some as another talking shop, it did provide generous support after the fall of the Berlin Wall to the newly liberated countries of eastern Europe, especially Czechoslovakia, in the form of advice on broadcasting legislation and regulatory bodies. Webster fought to ensure that the countries formerly under Soviet influence learned to liberate their media. He was also a resident associate of the Carnegie Endowment (1985-7), a senior fellow at the Annenberg Institute, Washington (1987-92), chairman of the International Disaster Communications Project (1987-91), and a member of the advisory council of the Ditchley Foundation of the USA (from 1981). These activities underlined the fact that Webster was more than a TV executive: he genuinely believed that dialogue could make things better. He died from heart failure, on 6 August 2003, in Washington, DC. He was survived by his wife, Elizabeth, and the two sons of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 92683


Wright, Esmond (1915-2003), historian and politician, was born at 142 Hugh Gardens, Benwell, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 5 November 1915, the son of Esmond Wright, armature winder and later electrical engineer, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Gray. His parents were both Scottish. From Heaton grammar school he secured an open scholarship to King's College, Newcastle, then part of the University of Durham, from which he graduated with first-class honours in 1937. A graduate scholarship beckoned at New College, Oxford, but he chose instead to take up a Commonwealth Fund fellowship at the University of Virginia, where his intellectual encounter with the world of Thomas Jefferson and the American War of Independence did much to shape his career. Here, too, began his lifelong fascination with American politics. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Wright abandoned plans for a doctorate at the University of Virginia, and settled for a master's degree. This was conferred by Franklin Delano Roosevelt on 10 June 1940. The American president, responding to Mussolini's declaration of war on Britain and France the same day, delivered his celebrated 'hand that held the dagger' speech, and joined with the audience in a gesture of solidarity with Wright, the lone British student present. Sailing back to England, Wright arrived in Liverpool during an air-raid, 'with shrapnel falling like heavy confetti on the deck' (Wright, 'The origin of American studies', 295). He joined the army as a private, declining an offer to lecture to troops. After square-bashing with the King's Own Yorkshire light infantry he served in Egypt and the Middle East, first in the intelligence corps, where he was commissioned, and later, after the shooting stopped, in the Royal Army Education Corps. He reached north Africa in time for El Alamein. Back in England, on 16 November 1945 at a Unitarian ceremony in Newcastle, he married Olive Adamson, the 27-year-old daughter of William Adamson, marine engineer. In a close, lifelong, but childless partnership he would draw on her devoted support. 
Following his demobilization in 1946 as a lieutenant-colonel, Wright went to Glasgow University as a lecturer in modern history, 'at a vastly lower salary... than that of an acting full colonel' (Wright, 'The origin of American studies', 295). Drawn increasingly to teaching the history of the United States, and having written on George Washington and the era of the War of Independence, he was appointed professor of modern history in 1957, the first historian of America to hold a general chair of history in Britain. He captivated students with an inimitable lecturing style, graceful in both word and gesture ('a gentle deft twist of his upraised right hand slowly descending'; 'BAAS Newsletter'). In both teaching and scholarship his forte was synthesis. 'Fabric of Freedom' (1961), an elegant survey of the American War of Independence, won plaudits on both sides of the Atlantic. One of the twelve founding fathers of the British Association for American Studies in 1955, Wright served as its secretary (though he was not a model of administrative efficiency, and was known to mislay applications for membership) and later chairman, to which post he brought 'a wonderfully relaxed, informal manner and an effortless personal charm which made it almost impossible to have an argument with him, or persist in any kind of grievance' ('The Guardian'). 
A professor at forty-two, Wright was concerned about what he would do with the rest of his life. He chose to become a pioneer 'media don', reaching out to a middlebrow audience, writing reviews and leaders for the Glasgow 'Herald' (he was later its deputy chairman), and broadcasting on radio and television, where he was noted for his courteous and even-handed interviews with politicians. A Conservative himself, but of conciliatory bent and with no strong political ambitions, he surprised many when in 1967 he stood in a parliamentary by-election in the safe Labour seat of Glasgow Pollok. Even more surprisingly, he won, chiefly because tory support held firm while the popular Scottish Nationalist candidate squeezed the Labour vote. A grammar-school Conservative who personified the 'new' tory of the Edward Heath era, Wright found it hard to adjust to Westminster. But his academic associates especially valued his role in preventing the British government withdrawing its funding of the Fulbright programme of scholarly transatlantic exchange. Labour's recapture of Pollok at the general election of 1970 left him 'dejected' but not regretful (Wright, 'Reflections on not being an MP', 78). From 1972 to 1976 he served as principal of the Conservative College at Swinton, but he harboured no further major political ambitions himself. 
Returning to academic life, as director of the Institute of United States Studies and professor of American history at the University of London (1971-83), Wright encouraged a collaborative research project on the loyalists of the revolutionary era, sought to preserve the institute in the face of Conservative government spending cuts, and continued to write. Beyond academia, he acted as vice-chairman of Border Television from 1976, and later as chairman (1981-5). Bizarrely, since he was neither a car-owner nor a driver, he served as treasurer and vice-chairman of the Automobile Association from 1971 to 1985, and subsequently as its vice-president. 
In retirement in Masham, Yorkshire, his Georgian house swollen with books, Wright wrote his best work of scholarship, the culmination of twenty years' study: an elegantly written biography, 'Franklin of Philadelphia' (1986), for which he was honoured with the Franklin medal of the Royal Society of Arts in 1988. Knocked down on a pedestrian crossing in Bloomsbury, he survived the terrible accident, but during the final fifteen years of his life never fully recovered his mental vigour. He found question-and-answer sessions difficult and lost his discipline in writing. An old-fashioned approach and alleged slipshod historical practice meant that his three-volume history of the United States -- 'The Search for Liberty'; 'An Empire for Liberty'; 'The American Dream' (1995-6) -- was an achievement of sorts but not a great success. He died on 9 August 2003 in Rutson Hospital, High Street, Northallerton, Yorkshire, of pneumonia and degenerative vascular disease. His wife survived him. 
Whether or not his early appointment to a chair was the result of his having had 'a good war' (the suggestion of a fellow pioneer of American studies in Britain, Harry Allen), Wright's genial professorial presence, impeccable elegance, disarming charm, personal warmth, 'unobtrusive sharp eye' ('BAAS Newsletter'), and realism -- along with his contribution as an eloquent lecturer and elegant writer -- made him a most effective communicator within and without the ivory tower. He was an attractive spokesman for the first generation of professional Americanists in Britain. He wrote much, but would not have quarrelled with the judgement that he was 'not a dedicated research scholar' ('The Independent'). His historical writings emphasized the biographical and the contingent, an approach influenced by his wartime experience and -- earlier still -- by his reading of Acton, Lecky, and Namier. His scholarly distrust of ideology, revolutionary blueprints, and grand schemes was equally a feature of his politics. The next generation of British-based scholars of the American past found much of his writing rather old-fashioned, but they did so within a framework of acceptance of American studies in Britain that Wright and his generation had done much to create. 


@@@@@


doc= 92684


Price, Cedric John (1934-2003), architect, was born at The Croft, Walton, Stone, Staffordshire, on 11 September 1934, the elder son of Arthur John Price (died 1953), cinema architect, and his wife, Doreen Catherine, 'nee' Emery, whose father's firm provided dyes for the pottery industry. At the time of his birth his parents lived at Ash Green, Trentham, Stoke-on-Trent. He went to Alleyne's School, Stone, studied architecture at St John's College, Cambridge, from 1952 to 1955, where he was president of the Cambridge University Society of the Arts (1954-5), and completed his training at the Architectural Association in London from 1955 to 1957 under John Killick and Arthur Korn. He was employed initially in the offices of two of the most eminent British modernist practices: those of Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew (Fry, Drew & Partners), and Erno Goldfinger, where he worked on the seminal exhibition 'This Is Tomorrow'. He also taught part-time at the Architectural Association between 1958 and 1964. 
In 1960, at the age of twenty-six, Price set up Cedric Price Architects. An early collaboration was with the inventor Buckminster Fuller on an adaptation of his geodesic dome, which solved the intrinsic access problem by raising the whole structure for the audience to get in and out. Meanwhile Price's ideas for his most famous projects were already under way. The Snowdon Aviary at London Zoo, the Fun Palace, and later the Potteries Thinkbelt all offered an entirely unusual -- indeed revolutionary -- view of what architecture should be. He eschewed, as far as possible, the architect's normal, definitive control of what a building might look like, and instead worked expansively on what architecture might do: what amenities it might provide and how those might be taken control of by the user. 
The Fun Palace (1961-4) was a collaboration with Price's friend the theatre director Joan Littlewood, who sought a truly flexible community facility and questioned what role architecture would play in it. Price, the 'anti-architect' (as he described himself on his letterhead), devised a huge, serviced, mobile framework of towers, gantries, and lifting components to support roofs, equipment, and enclosure, and to be used by audience and performers alike. Climate control, not dependent on rooms, included warm and cool air 'curtains'. The whole project was like a vast backstage, to be constantly remade for an unimaginable range of activities. Price's friend the critic Peter Reyner Banham commented, 'It will probably look like nothing on earth from the outside' ('New Statesman', 7 Aug 1964). Plans to build the Fun Palace in London's East End were scuppered by politics, but it remains the seminal project of flexible (Price would more precisely say indeterminate) architecture. Apocryphally more than accurately, it has often been quoted as the source for the 1971-7 Pompidou Centre, by Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano (though the Pompidou's industrial structures, moving components, and sense of institutional challenge are certainly related). Price's projects deliberately pursued 'doubt, delight and change' (the title of an exhibition of his work at the Design Museum), and structures quoted as influenced by him are often those where architectural ingenuity and profound public enjoyment meet. The London Eye is another example: Price first proposed what one startled journalist described as 'a great wheel-like structure of observation cars' on the South Bank in 1984 ('Daily Telegraph', 15 Aug 2003). 
Price treated time as a critical design factor. His 'anticipatory architecture' actively promoted change. Deliberately -- almost uniquely -- he resisted architecture's normal tendency to act as a process of ossification, limiting the behaviour of users to outdated ideas. He argued that architects should plan for their buildings' demolition, and was himself a member of the National Federation of Demolition Contractors. Asked on radio in 1974 what he would do about the structurally endangered York Minster, he replied 'Flatten it'. He was delighted when his own Inter-Action, a Portakabin-plus-community facility in Kentish Town, was demolished in 2003. 
The Potteries Thinkbelt (1964), designed to anticipate decades of change, linked the Potteries' industrial decline with the expansion of tertiary education, and proposed a vast and detailed project combining transport, education, housing, and infrastructure. Trains running along the old rails would provide educational facilities for all, with 'transfer areas' into national networks. Housing (with the deliberately provocative names of Crate, Capsule, Sprawl, and Battery) was designed to suit people of all ages and terrible ground conditions. By the end of the century, when it should have been working, Price's Potteries Thinkbelt would be understood as a major urban regeneration plan for integrated, post-industrial, brownfield development: concepts which were decades away from recognition in 1960s Britain. 
Price's most famous built project was, perversely, rarely accredited to him. The Snowdon Aviary at London Zoo (1961) popularly credits Lord Snowdon as the designer. In fact, Snowdon was more client/consultant; the design was by Price and the engineer Frank Newby. This was the first major tensegrity structure in the UK, its four 'floating' aluminium tetrahedra held up by a cats' cradle of cables, with just four compression members on the ground. Price negotiated a change of site, opening up the zoo across the public canal and towpath, while simultaneously helping to drain Primrose Hill Park. Typically of Price, the enjoyment and technical cunning are more visible than any overt 'architecture'. 
Over a career lasting more than forty years, Price produced an extraordinary number of influential projects. 'Non-Plan' (1969), with Paul Barker and Peter Hall, proposed zones of planning deregulation (ironically becoming a left-wing progenitor of the Thatcher government's enterprise zones). A workplace protocol study for the building firm of Alfred McAlpine included redesigning donkey jackets and giving workers a good breakfast, after discovering a peak in accidents during early mornings. 'The Generator' (1976), with the cybernetician Gordon Pask and John Frazer, was the first 'intelligent building' proposal, in which the building could be altered by a central computer to suit the current needs of the user, and which included a boredom factor to prevent stasis, by reorganizing itself. There were detailed masterplanning projects for the British Airports Authority at Heathrow and for British Rail at Stratford, where Price advised on the Channel Tunnel and station siting. There were follies, paper cups, bridges, major housing studies, and many others. Price also wrote and published prolifically, usually in magazines and journals (he thought books too slow), including regular columns in the much-read trade papers 'Building Design' and the 'Architects' Journal'. Highly condensed, usually short, and casting a wide net from his astonishing research range, they called on the reader to think, and frequently proved predictive. 
Price's practice fluctuated in size but continued its challenging activities unabated until his death. One of his biggest late proposals was Magnet (1996), a series of temporary, mobile structures to be assembled out of standard hired building site components such as scaffolding, staircases, and lifts, providing temporary amenities and making use of spaces normally considered unusable. His ten prototypes included a bridge held on cranes in the trees overlooking Regent's Park Zoo, affording a free glimpse of animals, a treetop walk, and safe road crossing; and a rolling 'town square' over the North Circular Road reconnecting communities severed by traffic. 
Price's enormously influential contribution to the world of ideas rarely translated into buildings. He consistently argued that architects should recognize when architecture was not appropriate, and famously suggested that this might involve telling clients they needed a divorce, not a building. This has been misinterpreted as a disinclination to build. Price was not a 'theoretical' architect; his were real proposals and he wanted them built. But he resisted the desire to build for its own sake, when that compromised the real purpose of the project. His 'anti-aesthetic', as it was often described, was a deliberate abjuration of the usual architectural preoccupation with form and style, rather than evidence that he didn't care what things looked like. He saw things, and taught others to see things, in ways which encompassed activity and possibility. The precision and charm of his casual-looking, cartoon-like sketches have been much discussed. Similarly, his advocacy of demolition and time-spans has been seen as a disregard for context, whereas his encyclopaedic knowledge and love of architectural and social history and context informed his work in myriad ways. 
Price enjoyed his own contradictions: a technological innovator who kept the same photocopier for decades and disliked mobile phones, a gourmand with no noticeable income, a left-winger clad in striped shirt and stiff collar, a promoter of architectural change whose delightful Alfred Place office in central London was fundamental to his work. He often immured himself in the white room, 'East Grinstead', at the top of Alfred Place (callers were told 'Sorry, he's in East Grinstead'). But this was also the venue for parties and meetings, where selected visitors were bidden to early, sometimes brandy-fuelled, breakfasts. A polymath, he founded Polyark, the architecture schools' network, an annual cricket match (with his brother, David), and his own elusive Hot Stuff Club. His extraordinary network of friends and collaborators followed no known social or political grouping. He was a committed socialist, whose party guests might include trade unionists and his friend the prominent Conservative Lord McAlpine, his long-term partner, the actor Eleanor Bron, his friend Joan Littlewood, the architect-philosopher Roy Landau, and the architectural editor Paul Finch, alongside scruffy journalists and assorted others of all ages. He was an extraordinary physical and intellectual presence: generous, demanding, and challenging. Conversations with him involved hard imaginative work. He was incomparably stimulating, a larger-than-life man who changed people's way of seeing. He died of heart disease at University College Hospital, London, on 10 August 2003 and was cremated at Kensal Green cemetery on 18 August, a metronome ticking on the coffin along with his favourite brandy, cigars, notebooks, pens, and pencils. He was survived by his partner, Eleanor Bron. 


@@@@@


doc= 92685


Prince, Frank Templeton (1912-2003), poet and scholar, was born in Kimberley, South Africa, on 13 September 1912, the second of three children of Henry (Harry) Prince (formerly Prinz), a diamond merchant from London's East End, of Dutch descent, and his wife, Margaret Templeton, 'nee' Hetherington, a teacher from Scotland. Prince's father was Jewish, his mother Presbyterian. Despite this he was educated at the Catholic Christian Brothers' College in his native Kimberley before attending the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. He came to England in 1931 to study English at Balliol College, Oxford, obtaining a first class degree in 1934; in 1935 he took up a one-year graduate fellowship at Princeton University in New Jersey. In the mid-1930s he also spent time travelling, notably in Italy, where he deepened his knowledge of its language, art, architecture, and culture. He also made a pilgrimage to Ireland in order to meet Yeats, who for him was and would remain 'the greatest poet of the twentieth century' (Devereux, 6). 
In the late 1930s Prince converted to Catholicism, a faith he held to firmly until his death. Shortly after completing his undergraduate studies, he was already contributing to T. S. Eliot's influential magazine 'The Criterion', which printed three of his early poems. These were reprinted in his first book, 'Poems', published in 1938 by Faber and Faber, whose poetry list was edited by Eliot. Prince was thus among those who joined that precocious trio -- George Barker, David Gascoyne, and Dylan Thomas -- as very promising 'first-volumed' poets in the 1930s. The final issue of 'The Criterion' (January 1939) contained a not entirely favourable review of Prince's book by Janet Adam Smith. These were early days and, anyway, Prince later agreed that the book 'was altogether out of tune with the needs and thoughts of the time' (Devereux, 9). Perhaps Janet Adam Smith and other reviewers can be forgiven for not finding in the poems the complex beauty, enigmatic power, and tradition-based high modern strategies which would give later readers cause for rejoicing. Subsequently there was a significant analysis by Donald Davie of Prince's early Browning-influenced 'An Epistle to a Patron', a poem highly regarded by poets as different from each other as Geoffrey Hill and John Ashbery, as well as by American writers of the New York Poets and L-A-N-G-U-A-G-E schools. For all of these, Prince's sophisticated mastery of elaborate syntax as a matrix of thought or rather of educated feeling -- influenced by Milton and Henry James, Mallarme and Proust, as well as Italian poets such as Giovanni della Casa -- was a key virtue. Prince, however, raised his eyebrows at one sentence in Davie's analysis: 'And so this splendid poem goes on. There is no reason why it should ever stop' (Davie, 92). Every reason, Prince told one of his publishers: 'it has a beginning, middle and end' (private information). 
Prince joined the study groups department at the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House) in 1937 and worked there until 1940, when he embarked upon his six years' service in the Army Intelligence Corps. Halfway through his army service, on 8 March 1943, by then a captain, he married, at the church of St James in Manchester Square, London, (Pauline) Elizabeth Bush ('b'. 1920), the daughter of Harold Ferdinand Bush, cotton merchant. His address on the marriage certificate was given as 10 North Street, Bletchley. Apart from a year in Egypt where he was sent shortly after his marriage, he spent his entire war service at Bletchley. The couple had two daughters, born in 1945 and 1948. 
After the war Prince joined the faculty of Southampton University, where he became professor of English in 1957 on the strength of his magisterially learned and seminal critical work, 'The Italian Element in Milton's Verse' (1954), his only published book apart from editions of other poets and the successive volumes of his own poetry. Following the 1938 'Poems', Prince did not bring out another volume until 1954, the same year as the Milton book. Having been dropped by T. S. Eliot, he went ('out of sheer perversity', he later said) to the egregious Reginald Caton at the Fortune Press, who brought out the eponymous volume 'Soldiers Bathing'. The book contained many memorable poems, not least the passionate 'The Old Age of Michelangelo'. 'Soldiers Bathing' itself, written in 1942, was and remained one of the best-known poems of the Second World War. In 1975 Prince even began a reading at the Poetry Society with the words: 'I have written other poems, you know' (private information). The energy of this great poem is generated by powerful rhythmic circuits, its perfectly judged rhymes serving as morphological punctuation, its very syntax meshing the thematic categories of beauty, compassion, ordeal, and revelation, which continued to be concerns throughout his work. 
Prince remained at Southampton until his retirement in 1974. His distinguished and distinctive years there included a sabbatical taken at All Souls College, Oxford (1968-9), and delivery of the Clark lectures at Cambridge (1972-3) on Yeats, Eliot, and other poets. These, sadly, were never published and all requests by friends to read them were refused, because the author felt they were not up to scratch. Following 'Soldiers Bathing', his next volume of poetry was the handsomely produced 'Doors of Stone', published by a fan, Rupert Hart-Davis, in 1963, the same year as his new 'Arden' edition of Shakespeare's poems. 'Doors of Stone' reprinted all the poems Prince wanted to preserve from 'Poems' (1938) and 'Soldiers Bathing' (1954). The new poems in 'Doors of Stone' included the masterful and thrilling sequence 'Strambotti', named after this complex stanzaic form which Prince appears to have been the first poet to use since Sir Thomas Wyatt. Over the years, too, Prince brought out various editions of Milton, later dismissed by him as 'mere potboilers'. His edition of Wyatt was never published. 
After retiring from Southampton, Prince spent most of the next decade as a visiting professor in the USA (at Brandeis University, and Washington University, St Louis), Jamaica (University of the West Indies), and North Yemen (Sana'a' University). But it was in 1970, while he was still at Southampton, that Prince's involvement with small presses began, and it lasted for the rest of his life. Wider questions about British literary culture are raised when such an important poet's books are published outside the commercial mainstream. Thus Fulcrum Press published 'Memoirs in Oxford' in 1970 (a pamphlet-length ruminative poem, more immediately personal than his earlier dramatic monologues and personae poems). Then Menard Press published his next two pamphlet-length poems, 'Drypoints of the Hasidim' (1975) and 'Afterword on Rupert Brooke' (1976). Menard's publisher, Anthony Rudolf, later wrote that he knew he must publish 'Drypoints', this 'ravishingly beautiful, achingly beautiful long poem' even before inheriting Prince from Fulcrum Press ('F. T. Prince: a Tribute', 27). As a professing Roman Catholic, Prince wrote an essay for the magazine 'European Judaism' on the genesis of the poem. 
In 1979 Menard Press co-published, with Anvil Press, Prince's first 'Collected Poems'. During the 1980s Anvil Press also published two short books, 'Later On' (1983) and 'Walks in Rome' (1987), the latter (like 'Memoirs in Oxford') one of his rare works of 'confessional vulnerability' (Geoffrey Hill, in 'F. T. Prince: a Tribute', 29) and written in variable syllabics, a vehicle that 'mediates between set measures and free verse' (Anthony Howell, ibid., 36). In 1985-6 Prince was president of the English Association and delivered his polemical presidential address, 'Fragment Poetry' (1986), in verse. Its tone was typical of the long poems he wrote from 1970, lighter and more direct, lucid and more transparent than the richly imbricated poetry of the previous thirty-five years. The concluding lines served as a summary of his life's work in poetry: '
Last, full 

Meanings are out of fashion; 

But there is a devil, 

A good devil, at work in poetry, 

Who will toil, toil on to damn 

Himself, and save us from ourselves. 

The art itself will try and cry for 

Fullness, meaning, not fragments, 

Like Blake who in the 'Proverbs of Hell'


Cried for 'Enough! Or Too much.' 
('Fragment Poetry', 10)' Anthony Howell's video magazine 'Grey Suit' published a reading by Prince in 1993, and in the same year Carcanet Press published the later 'Collected Poems'. By this date it was becoming clear that Prince was a poet of consequence. Influential younger poets such as Mark Ford and Anthony Howell were talking about him, thus following in the precocious footsteps of Lee Harwood a generation earlier. His portraits and dramatic monologues, his deployment of masks and personae -- utterly personal to him albeit with a genetic connection to Browning via Pound -- allied to the mastery of syntax and traditional verse forms, bespoke a master craftsman, a late high modernist, and in the eyes of many a major poet. His admirers included Geoffrey Hill, J. H. Prynne, John Ashbery, and Donald Davie. He was incisive about the poet's predicament, writing to his publisher in 1975 that 'There is always some complexity in one's feelings about a recently completed poem -- a mixture of fed-up-ness, disappointment that it isn't better, and pleasure and pride' (Prince to A. Rudolf, 16 April 1975, priv. coll.) and later that 'A poem can sometimes follow a simple intense emotion (more often painful than not), even if it doesn't seem to be directly related. And the ability to go on writing from time to time has to be paid for instantly by instalments of anxiety or misery' (Prince to A. Rudolf, 16 October 1977, priv. coll.). 
Some critics may prefer to rephrase Geoffrey Hill's 'confessional vulnerability' in reference to 'Walks in Rome' as 'personal vulnerability', in order to avoid confusion with what has become known as confessional poetry, than which nothing could have been more foreign to Prince's nature. But whether or not 'Walks in Rome' and 'Memoirs in Oxford' are to be characterized as personal or confessional, no poet -- when it comes to Prince's other important works -- would go to such extremes in terms of masks and personae, 'alienation' and rhetoric, if he did not want to tell himself and his readers something profoundly personal, something universally personal indeed, about inner feelings and hidden thoughts, refracted through the lives of other people: a Zulu chief, a sibyl, a patron, a leper, Michelangelo, a group of Hasidic rabbis, Rupert Brooke, Laurence Sterne, and so on. This is not to say that he had something to hide, only that we all have something to hide, in the sense that there is an ineluctable disjunction between inner and outer projections of the self. This is what it means to be human. Moral concerns and intellectual preoccupations are dialectically addressed and are come to terms with, perhaps resolved, in a poetic language so self-aware that the truth-telling qualities of language have themselves to be understood as prime material. Along with language, beauty, compassion, ordeal, and revelation, Prince the poet was also concerned with virtue, faith, morality, and suffering -- what one critic called 'tragic nobility' (Kirkham, 76) -- for example how a man alone (as in 'Les conges de lepreux', the valediction of a poet contracting leprosy) confronts the cruel impositions of the world or of God. Conflict and tension are the 'sine qua non' of human existence and, therefore, of the best poetry. 
Prince spent the last decade of his life quietly at home in Southampton with his wife, Elizabeth. He died of a stroke at Southampton General Hospital on 7 August 2003, and was survived by his wife and their two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 92686


Ray, Robin (1934-1998), broadcaster, was born on 17 September 1934 at 630 Fulham Road, Fulham, London, elder of the two sons of Charles Olden (1905-1977), better known as the comedian Ted Ray, and his wife, Dorothy Sybil Stevens ('b'. 1909), a dancer. He was educated at Highgate School (May 1947 to March 1950) -- he wanted to become a concert pianist but realized he was not good enough -- and at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, and did national service as a Royal Army Service Corps officer (second lieutenant, 5 December 1953). At school and in the army he used his real name, Olden, but he subsequently used as his professional name Robin Ray and became generally known by it: he omitted 'Olden' from his 'Who's Who' entry. His television debut was in 1956 in an ITV crime play, 'The Guv'nor', and his London stage debut was in 1960 in 'The Changeling' at the Royal Court Theatre. Following further acting, he was chief technical instructor at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (1961-5), but resigned over internal politics in support of the principal, John Fernald, then was associate director of the Meadowbrook Theater, Detroit (1965-6). He married on 25 January 1960 Susan Myra Ann Stranks ('b'. 1939), actress and later children's television presenter; they had one son. 
Urbane, stylish, with boyish if then unfashionable good looks and an enthusiasm for and extensive knowledge of classical music -- and since childhood an avid record-collector -- Ray enjoyed from 1965 a successful and varied career in BBC and commercial radio and television broadcasting, as a writer, producer, and presenter. Programmes in which he was involved included 'Face the Music', 'Call my Bluff', 'The Movie Quiz', and 'Cabbages and Kings'. He was musical adviser to the commercial radio station Classic FM, and its artistic director (1988-91), compiling for it a music database. He continued to act intermittently, and he wrote or devised and presented several shows including 'Tomfoolery' (1980), 'Cafe Puccini' (1986, with Andrew Lloyd Webber), and 'Let's Do It' (1994). In 1977 he was a member of the Booker prize panel, and he was 'Punch' drama critic (1986-7). He compiled several books including 'Robin Ray's Music Quiz' (1978). After a short illness he died in Martlets Hospice, Wayfield Avenue, Hove, Sussex, on 29 November 1998 from lung cancer and was privately cremated on 3 December. His wife, Susan, survived him. 
Ray's younger brother, Andrew Ray (1939-2003), actor, was born on 31 May 1939 at Onslow House, Chase Road, Southgate, London. He was educated at Franklin House preparatory school, Palmers Green, London, but his success in the title role of the film 'The Mudlark' (1950), alongside Irene Dunn as Queen Victoria, brought an effective end to his formal education. He scored further successes in such films as J. Lee Thompson's thriller 'The Yellow Balloon' (1953), the same director's 'Woman in a Dressing Gown' (1957), and John Ford's 'Gideon's Day' (1958). His father had put his earnings into a trust until his seventeenth birthday; when he came into the trust he went, as he later said, 'a bit mad' ('Daily Telegraph', 23 Aug 2003), buying sports cars and writing off two in six months in near-fatal crashes. On 25 August 1959, against his father's wishes, he married the twenty-year-old actress Susan Joan Burnet (1938-2010), daughter of Gordon Stewart Burnet, accountant; they had a son and a daughter. In 1960 he won critical acclaim for his portrayal of Geoffrey in Shelagh Delaney's 'A Taste of Honey' in New York, but on his return he found that work had dried up. In April 1965 he was taken to hospital after taking a drugs overdose. After treatment he rebuilt his career, winning plaudits for his portrayal of Leonard Bast in 'Howard's End' at the New Theatre (1967). There followed a steady stream of film, theatre, and television roles, notably as George VI in 'Crown Matrimonial' at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket (1972), the younger George (when duke of York) in the television series 'Edward and Mrs Simpson' (1978), and Klaus Fuchs in Ian Curteis's 'Atom Spies', for Anglia Television (1979). He also appeared in television series such as 'Dixon of Dock Green'; 'Upstairs, Downstairs'; and 'Inspector Morse'. He and his wife Susan separated in the 1970s but remained on good terms and never divorced. In his final years he lived in Hove, Sussex. He died on 20 August 2003 at University College Hospital, London, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92689


McIntosh, Sir Ian Stewart (1919-2003), naval officer, was born on 11 October 1919 in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, the only son of Alexander James McIntosh (1890-1973) and his wife, Islay Stewart, 'nee' McArthur (1893-1985). He was educated at Geelong grammar school, but left early to pursue a career in the Royal Navy, which he entered as a special entry cadet, gaining the king's dirk for passing out in first place in that entry in 1940. 
McIntosh volunteered for service in submarines and, as a newly promoted sub-lieutenant, took passage in the troopship 'Britannia' to join the 1st submarine flotilla, then based in Alexandria, Egypt, via the Cape. On 25 March 1941 the 'Britannia' was intercepted and sunk by the German merchant raider 'Thor' in the central Atlantic. McIntosh took his appointed station in lifeboat 7, which eventually was manned by eighty-two people, far in excess of its safe capacity. The party included three other naval officers and one from the merchant navy, and all contributed to the conduct of the subsequent voyage, but from McIntosh's later modest account it is clear that he emerged as a leader, as well as showing personal courage in plugging shot-holes under water. The most important decision that had to be taken was which way to go: towards the nearer African coast, or that of Brazil. With a rudimentary sailing rig and some knowledge of winds and currents, they rightly chose the latter. The voyage took twenty-three days; there was very little food (the ration was an eggcup-full of water, one ship's biscuit, and a smear of condensed milk on the hand, twice a day), much exposure, and deaths were frequent. When the boat finally beached on the Brazilian coast only thirty-eight had survived. Aided by villagers, themselves extremely poor ('Neither before nor since', McIntosh wrote, 'can I remember such generosity from people with so little to spare'; 'Lifeboat no. 7'), the party made their way to the provincial capital Sao Luiz, and eventually were repatriated to England. During this voyage, McIntosh said, he had been sustained by two things: the epic journey of Captain William Bligh after the 'Bounty' mutiny, which he had studied in some detail and the boat's navigation had emulated, and the memory of a beautiful Norwegian girl, Elizabeth Rosemary Rasmussen (1923-1995), whom he had met in Australia. They married in Wallington, Surrey, two years later, on 30 March 1943. She was the daughter of Albert Henry Rasmussen, a lieutenant in the Royal Norwegian Air Service. They had three sons, and a daughter who died in infancy. 
Made MBE later in 1941 for the lifeboat exploit, McIntosh quickly forged ahead toward submarine command, commissioning the newly built 'Sceptre' in 1943. It was an outstandingly successful command. In several war patrols 'Sceptre' sank some 18,000 tons of axis shipping, one small surface combatant, and a supply submarine. However, the most unusual task was towing, on three separate occasions, midget submarines (X-craft) to attack targets in the Norwegian fjords. The first was the battleship 'Tirpitz', and of the six X-craft involved, two laid their charges successfully, putting the ship out of action for seven months. Some months later 'Sceptre' supported 'X-24' in an attack on a floating dock off Bergen; a large merchant ship was destroyed by mistake, so the operation was repeated six months later and the dock was duly sunk. These operations had required highly professional skills of navigation and submarine handling, as well as daring and initiative, and in 1944 McIntosh added a DSO to his MBE and the DSC awarded for service in the submarine 'Thrasher' in 1942. 
After the war McIntosh commanded several submarines with distinction, and in 1956 became executive officer of the aircraft carrier 'Ark Royal'. In this exacting appointment, which demanded a sure touch in co-ordinating the ship's general activities with the operation of the air group, his success was recognized by early promotion to the rank of captain. He then returned to submarines in command of the 2nd submarine squadron before being appointed captain of the aircraft carrier 'Victorious' in 1966. This successful commission, in an old, albeit extensively refitted ship, led to promotion to rear admiral in 1968, in which rank, and subsequently that of vice-admiral, to which he was promoted in 1971, he took up a new metier in the field of operational requirements, first on the naval staff (1968-70) and then as a deputy chief of defence staff (1971-3). In this post he carried through the project for the Sea Harrier aircraft, which was crucial in the south Atlantic campaign some years later. 
Throughout his career, into the highest ranks, McIntosh was a byword for courtesy, intellectual breadth, and relaxed leadership that inspired confidence and affection. One national serviceman later recalled McIntosh's 'memorable advice... of always keeping in our pocket a softback book so as not to miss a moment of good reading' ('The Times', 18 Aug 2003). Placed on the retired list in 1973, he was made KBE the same year, and subsequently was chairman of the Sea Cadet Association (1973-83) and of the trust created to preserve the destroyer HMS 'Cavalier' (1974-88). He died on 30 July 2003 at the Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth, Hampshire, and was survived by his three sons. He was buried at St Anne's Hill cemetery, Gosport, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 92691


Mosley, Diana, Lady Mosley (1910-2003), Nazi sympathizer and author, was born on 17 June 1910 at 1 Graham Street (now Graham Terrace), Belgravia, London, the fourth child and third of the six daughters of David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford, later second Baron Redesdale (1878-1958), and his wife, Sydney (1880-1963), daughter of Thomas Gibson Bowles, politician. Her eldest sister was the novelist Nancy Freeman-Mitford -- who portrayed her as Linda in 'The Pursuit of Love' (1945) and 'Love in a Cold Climate' (1949) -- and her younger sisters included Unity Freeman-Mitford, Nazi sympathizer, and Jessica Freeman-Mitford, left-wing author and journalist. She was educated at home (first at Malcolm House, on the Batsford Park estate in Gloucestershire, then by governesses at the family home of Asthall Manor in Oxfordshire) before attending a day school in Paris for six months at the age of sixteen. 
She was the most beautiful of six good-looking sisters -- James Lees-Milne, who professed himself in love with her all his life, described her as 'the nearest thing to Botticelli's Venus that I have ever seen' ('The Independent', 13 Aug 2003). Her blue-eyed, blonde looks were immortalized in the Boris Anrep mosaic on the first floor of the National Gallery and in portraits by Augustus John, Pavel Tchelitchew, and Henry Lamb. From early adolescence she longed to leave the small Cotswold village of Swinbrook (to which the family had moved from Asthall) for the wider world of art, music, and letters. When Bryan Walter Guinness (1905-1992), poet, novelist, heir to the Guinness fortune, and later second Baron Moyne, fell in love with her during her first season she persuaded her parents to allow her to marry him (on 30 January 1929) despite their well-founded reservations that she was too young to know her own mind. The Guinnesses' house in Buckingham Street quickly became a centre for the 'clever and amusing people who could chat endlessly' that Diana had always wanted to meet (de Courcy, 42) -- among them Robert Byron, Harold Acton, John Betjeman, Cecil Beaton, and Evelyn Waugh, who fell deeply in love with her and dedicated his novel 'Vile Bodies' to her. After her first son, Jonathan, was born in 1930, her father-in-law bought the young couple Biddesden House in Wiltshire. Their second son, Desmond, was born in 1931. 
In February 1932, at a twenty-first birthday party dinner given by one of her best friends, she met the politician Sir Oswald Ernald Mosley (1896-1980), then married to Lord Curzon's daughter, Cynthia (Cimmie). She was soon enthralled both by the man and his cause -- initially, largely, the alleviation of the chronic unemployment of the thirties, about which she felt strongly. By the time he launched the British Union of Fascists on 1 October 1932 her dedication to his political ideas was complete. She left Bryan Guinness, and set herself up in 2 Eaton Square, London (on 1 January 1933), as Mosley's mistress, Mosley having told her he would never leave his wife. In May 1933 Cimmie Mosley died, and almost immediately Mosley began an affair with her sister Baba (Lady Alexandra Metcalfe). Later that year Diana took her sister Unity to Munich to see at first hand the first Nazi party rally since Hitler's accession to power. In 1934 her own marriage was dissolved. Throughout the 1930s she visited Germany constantly, becoming a close friend of Hitler. She and Mosley married on 6 October 1936 in the Berlin drawing room of Hitler's propaganda minister, Joseph Goebbels. Hitler's wedding present was a signed photograph in a silver frame. News of the marriage was kept from family and friends -- and Baba Metcalfe -- until November 1938, after the birth of their first son, Alexander. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 Sir Oswald Mosley was interned under defence regulation 18B. In July 1940, eleven weeks after the birth of their second son, Max, Diana -- who hastily stuffed Hitler's photograph under Max's cot mattress when the police came to arrest her -- was interned in Holloway prison, where Mosley was allowed to join her in December 1941 in makeshift married quarters. They grew vegetables in the deserted garden, Diana's sister Nancy sent in parcels of books, and, like all the detainees, they could order (off-ration) food from outside. 
The Mosleys' release in November 1943 on grounds of Sir Oswald's ill health triggered widespread demonstrations of anger. They remained under house arrest until the end of the war, after which they were so ostracized that they decided to live abroad. They bought a house in co. Galway, Ireland, which burned down after two years; from 1951 they settled permanently at La Temple de la Gloire, a classical mini-chateau outside Paris where they entertained constantly, with a steady stream of visitors from England. Diana Mosley joined her husband in an unsuccessful publishing venture, Euphorion Books, edited a far-right magazine, 'The European', for six years, and supported his attempts to re-enter British politics, this time by exploiting anti-immigrant sentiment. An avid reader, she published many book reviews and several books, including her memoirs, 'A Life of Contrasts' (1977), a biography of her Parisian neighbour and friend, 'The Duchess of Windsor' (1980), and sketches of other friends, 'Loved Ones' (1985). To the last she was beautiful, witty, adored (or hated), a profuse letter writer with a spiky, elegant style, fiercely defensive of her husband's views, and unrepentant about her friendship with Hitler. Her appearance on 'Desert Island Discs' (choosing Wagner's 'Ride of the Valkyries' as one of her records) on 26 November 1989 aroused strong and unfavourable reaction. She died in Paris on 11 August 2003 of a heart attack, a week after suffering a stroke, and was survived by her four sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 92694


Pickering, Sir Edward Davies (1912-2003), journalist and newspaper editor and executive, was born at 311 Newport Road, Middlesbrough, on 4 May 1912, the third son of George Pickering, master pawnbroker and draper, and his wife, Louisa Jane (Louie), 'nee' Davies. He was educated at Middlesbrough high school. On 3 October 1936 he married Margaret Grant Soutter, also twenty-four years old, and the daughter of John William Paul Soutter, technical engineer. They had one daughter. By the time of his marriage Pickering (usually known as Pick or Ted) had begun his career as a journalist with the 'Northern Echo', a daily morning newspaper published from Darlington. He remained a working journalist until a few months before his death, following a remarkably long and distinguished career during which he worked closely with three of the most powerful British newspaper barons of the twentieth century -- the second Viscount Rothermere, Lord Beaverbrook, and Rupert Murdoch. 
After his apprenticeship on the 'Northern Echo' as district reporter and sub-editor, Pickering moved to Fleet Street, first to the 'Daily Mirror' as a sub-editor and then to the 'Daily Mail' where by 1939 he was chief sub-editor, a senior and demanding position requiring sure news judgement and technical proficiency. After the Second World War was declared he joined the Royal Artillery. He became an instructor in radar, was commissioned, and by 1944 was working as a major on group planning communications for General Eisenhower on the staff of supreme headquarters, allied expeditionary force. When the invasion of Normandy was launched Eisenhower himself wrote the historic 'Crossing the Channel no. 1 communique' but the regular 11 a.m. message was drafted by a committee representing the American, Canadian, and British armies, navies, and air forces. When Eisenhower slimmed this unwieldy body into a more efficient unit, Pickering remained as the only British representative. Trying to edit a communique whose chief contributors were such prima donnas as generals Montgomery, Bradley, and Patton, and the RAF's Bomber Harris, was the hardest 'subbing' job he had ever done, Pickering subsequently recalled. But the final drafts never missed Eisenhower's 9 a.m. deadline. Pickering became so close to Ike that he sometimes attended his regular meetings with King George VI when Eisenhower reported on progress after D-day. After the war Pickering and Ike continued to meet when Eisenhower was in London, and Eisenhower invited Pickering to the White House when he became president, but Pickering never found the time. 
After the war, and a brief stint in Manchester, Pickering returned to Fleet Street in 1947 as managing editor of the 'Daily Mail' and number two to the editor, Frank Owen. It was a reasonable expectation that he would be the next editor but in 1950 the job went instead to Guy Schofield and Pickering immediately resigned. As he considered his future in a gloomy nightclub, he was summoned to the phone where the rasping voice of Lord Beaverbrook, owner of the 'Daily Express', offered him a job, and in 1951 he became second-in-command to Arthur Christiansen, editor of the 'Daily Express', the 'Mail's' fiercest rival. The partnership of the capricious and demanding Beaverbrook and Christiansen, the supreme journalistic professional, had driven the 'Express' to a sale of more than four million; for ambitious journalists it was the most glamorous and exciting newspaper in Fleet Street. But Christiansen had been editor for eighteen gruelling years. His health was failing and Beaverbrook was beginning to lose confidence in him. It was soon Pickering who really ran the paper and who was in control at night, as he was on the night before the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II when, as so often happens, another big news story broke: 'The Times' reported that Edmund Hillary and Sherpa Tenzing had conquered Everest. As he studied the front page with its picture of the eve-of-coronation celebrations, Pickering had a simple solution of genius and wrote a headline across eight columns: 'All This -- and Everest Too!' 
In 1956 Christiansen suffered a heart attack when he was staying with Beaverbrook in the south of France. He was moved aside and in 1957 Pickering became editor of the 'Daily Express'. It was now his turn to be at the beck and call of the constant phone calls and memos from 'the lord'. Among journalists the flamboyant and inspirational Christiansen had been a legend and there were doubts in Fleet Street that Pickering could follow him successfully. But Pickering confounded the critics, mainly because he was an utterly different kind of editor, quiet and unruffled, especially against the barrage from Beaverbrook, who sometimes complained that Pickering was an 'old soldier' who always had an excuse ready to hand. He would tell Beaverbrook that the phones were down or the reporter was ill to explain why he had been scooped by the 'Mail'. 'That will make him stutter', Beaverbrook would say savagely as he dictated his latest memo. The truth was that Pickering protected the staff from Beaverbrook's rages, often saving them from the sack or at least delaying their departures. 
Although Pickering was a man of few words and of conversational silences, he relished the rivalry, companionship, and conviviality of Fleet Street in the 1950s and 1960s, when it was known to journalists as the Street of Adventure (and often too, more cynically, as the Street of Disillusion). He enjoyed a drink and gossip in El Vino or the Press Club, especially when the 'Express' had been put to bed and he relaxed by displaying his gift as a pianist who played Gershwin and Cole Porter to professional standards. There was a tried and tested system of protecting him if Beaverbrook called when he was enjoying a drink, 'We'll find him and get him to ring back immediately', his office would say. Beaverbrook's secretary would know that he was in the pub and could soon be got back to the office. Just as Beaverbrook shouted 'Where's Pickering?', Pickering was on the phone as calmly as if he had just returned from sorting out a problem in the composing room (private information). Any anger, impatience, or anxiety Pickering was feeling, whether from Beaverbrook's menacing calls or stupid editorial decisions, were kept effortlessly concealed. When others ranted, Pickering would raise a quizzical eyebrow or permit himself a shrug of the shoulders. When angry, he might allow a quarter smile of disdain. He was generous with praise. 
Any early doubts about Pickering's translation to the editorship were quickly dispelled and under his editorship the 'Daily Express' reached the highest circulation in its history of 4,313,000 in the first half of 1961, up by more than 200,000 in four years (when he died it had fallen below a million). But his triumph was short-lived. Beaverbrook was now eighty-four, his time was running out, and although he was successful, the taciturn Pickering could not give him the political conversation he relished. Beaverbrook decided that the 'Daily Express' again needed an editor with the flair and panache of Christiansen. On Christmas eve 1962 Pickering was fired and replaced by his deputy, Robert Edwards. It was a characteristically brutal act by Beaverbrook, who further humiliated Pickering by putting him in charge of 'Farming Express'. 
Pickering was rescued from journalistic oblivion by Hugh Cudlipp, chairman of the Mirror Group. The 'Sunday Mirror' had had to pay heavy damages for a libel when Cudlipp was away and Cecil King, chairman of the International Publishing Corporation, which owned the 'Mirror' titles, was advised that he needed an experienced editor by his side during Cudlipp's absences. Cudlipp recommended Pickering and in 1964 he became editorial director of the 'Daily Mirror', 'Sunday Mirror', and 'The People'. He was subsequently chairman of the newspaper division and the International Publishing Corporation's magazines before retiring in 1977, when he was knighted. His 'retirement' did not last long. When Pickering was editor of the 'Daily Express', Sir Keith Murdoch, the Australian newspaper tycoon, had asked his old friend Beaverbrook if he could find work experience for his son Rupert, who had just graduated at Oxford. Beaverbrook put him on the sub-editors' table. 'Take care of him, Pick, you never know where he might end up', he said (private information). Pickering did indeed take good care of the young Murdoch and taught him the rudiments of journalism. After his father, said Murdoch, Pickering was his great mentor. Murdoch remembered his mentor in 1981 when he had bought 'The Times' and 'Sunday Times' and had fallen out both with Harold Evans, whom he had made editor of 'The Times', and with Gerald Long, the managing director whom he had hired from Reuters. Murdoch invited Pickering to become an independent director. He soon became executive vice-chairman and started restoring calm and equilibrium after a period of turmoil, particularly at 'The Times'. He remained with Murdoch and News International, owner of the 'Times' titles, until his death. 
Pickering worked a long day. When at the 'Express' he was in the office at 9.30 a.m., when he had read all the other newspapers, and stayed until the second edition was completed at 11 p.m. He was the journalist's journalist, a peerless craftsman, according to Rupert Murdoch, who mastered the entire detail of newspapers in a manner Murdoch never saw bettered by any editor. He was as keen on the power of an eighteen-word 'intro', a properly cropped picture and its caption, or a twenty-five-word news in brief as he was on a top leading article. No detail was too trivial: to keep the circulation department on its toes, Pickering even kept a railway timetable on his desk. Even at ninety he worked a full day, interrupted only by lunch at the Garrick Club. He was quick to detect threats to press freedom from parliament or the courts and editors relied on him for sage advice. Nothing escaped him, said one 'Times' editor, Simon Jenkins. The unicorn's head of 'The Times' coat of arms had mysteriously tilted. Who did it? Was the College of Arms consulted? What on earth was that item on the court page? Pickering prepared papers for meetings of 'The Times' board and was a hands-on chairman of the 'Times Educational Supplement', the 'Times Higher Education Supplement', and the 'Times Literary Supplement', and appointed the editors. Above all he had the ear and the trust of Rupert Murdoch. 
Pickering was a man of many interests. He was a skilled bookbinder. He was the first Western editor to interview the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchov and the first editor to serialize a James Bond novel -- 'Dr No' -- which put Ian Fleming on the map. He knew Picasso well enough for the artist to inscribe a book to him with a personal drawing. At various times he was vice-chairman of the Press Council and chairman of the Commonwealth Press Union; master of the guild of St Bride's, the Fleet Street church; and an honorary freeman of the Stationers' and Newspaper Makers' Company. He organized the campaign to celebrate the 500th anniversary of the birth of William Tyndale in 1994 and masterminded the negotiations with the Chinese embassy and the British Museum which led to the successful sponsorship by 'The Times' of the 'Mysteries of ancient China' exhibition in 1996. And he had a unique relationship with Winston Churchill. Once or twice a week after the Second World War, Churchill would phone Pickering at the 'Daily Express'. The conversation never varied: '
Good evening, Mr Pickering. 

Good evening, Mr Churchill. 

You have my information? 

I do. 

' Pickering would then read out the closing prices of certain stocks on Wall Street. 
Pickering's first marriage ended in divorce in 1947, and on 3 June 1955 he married his second wife, Rosemary Alice Whitton, a 28-year-old fashion model, and daughter of Harry George Whitton, a pictorial advertiser. They had two sons and one daughter. Pickering died of heart failure on 8 August 2003 at his home, 22 Rutland Gate, Knightsbridge, London. He was survived by his wife, Rosemary, and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92715


Kennedy, Thomas, ninth earl of Cassillis (1726-1775), smuggler and landowner, was born on 12 February 1726, the seventeenth child and second surviving son of Sir John Kennedy of Culzean, second baronet (died 1742), and Jean Douglas (died 1767), daughter of Andrew Douglas of Mains, Dunbartonshire. His father was a Jacobite, who had turned to smuggling, using the caves underneath his castle on the Ayrshire coast to store his contraband. Nothing is known of Kennedy's education, but probably like his brothers he attended the University of Glasgow. He inherited the baronetcy on the death of his brother John in April 1744. Instead of devoting himself to the Culzean estate, he had already decided on a military career in the British army, serving as an ensign in the 33rd regiment in the Netherlands from October 1744. While there he struck up friendships with James Caulfeild, fourth Viscount Charlemont, Francis Willoughby, third Baron Middleton, and John Ward, later Viscount Dudley and Ward. He purchased a captaincy in 1745 and took part in the battle of Fontenoy. His regiment was recalled in September to meet the threat of the Jacobite rising. He took part in a skirmish at Fort William in the spring of 1746, and was back in France by October. 
Kennedy left the army the following year, appointed Archibald Kennedy, an Ayrshire wine merchant, to factor his estate and to manage the family's smuggling enterprise, and set off on an extended grand tour. In 1748 Kennedy travelled to the Academie d'Equitation at Caen, Normandy, studying riding, fencing, music, and languages there. He seemed to revert to his family's Jacobite roots, taking a reputed Jacobite named Bulstrode as his tutor. In 1750 he travelled to the French court to learn the bass viol just as his Jacobite grandfather Sir Archibald 'the Wicked' had done. He remained in France from 1748 to 1750, writing constantly to his factor about improvements to the estate and to the castle, which included a new dining room and an elaborate entrance gate. He then moved to Rome, where several of his army friends were living, including Charlemont and Ward. He was in Italy for several years, becoming a well-known figure among the British connoisseurs, and featuring in Joshua Reynolds's 'Parody on Raphael's 'School of Athens'', playing his bass viol with a thistle in his hat. Acquaintances made in Italy included Abbe Peter Grant, a Jacobite. Kennedy also purchased a papal indulgence. He bought several paintings, and ten cases of statuary, probably for the rooms he had altered or added at Culzean. He was an accomplished linguist, speaking at least French and Italian, and possibly German, and engaging in literary projects. 
On his return to Scotland in 1755 Kennedy began determinedly to improve his vast estate of over 250,000 acres. Many of the plans executed during his absence abroad had been opposed by his mother, who moved out of Culzean in 1753 taking several items of furniture with her; these in the event made room for items brought by Kennedy from the continent. He enclosed the more fertile land along the shore and up the river valleys. To help him he recruited John Foulis, the son of the factor to the earl of Eglinton, to act as his overseer. He commissioned Foulis's father to survey parts of the estate and analyse the likely returns from improvement schemes. He also turned his attention to the garden and the castle policies, planting shelter belts and growing exotic fruit trees. He built himself a fine Palladian villa in nearby Maybole, presumably as a winter retreat. He continued smuggling, even though after the outbreak of the Seven Years' War in 1756 there was a danger that those who were caught would be pressed into the navy. Commodities traded included soap, port, burgundy, genever, claret, and green and black tea. Goods were run in wherries, flat-bottomed fast boats that could be beached at Culzean, and the goods taken into the caves in front of the castle. A further addition to the castle, in 1760, was a new library, which Kennedy stocked with several of the most recent or celebrated works of natural philosophy, literature, and history. He was advised in part by the painter Gavin Hamilton. 
In 1758 John Kennedy, eighth earl of Cassillis, Sir Thomas Kennedy's fifth cousin and head of the wider Kennedy family, died childless, having previously entailed the Cassillis estate on Sir Thomas Kennedy and his heirs male, failing which, on his next brother David Kennedy. This assumed that Kennedy, as heir male, was heir to the Cassillis title, which with the estate was also claimed by the heir general, William Douglas, third earl of March, whose mother was a daughter of the seventh earl. The court of session ruled in favour of Kennedy by a narrow margin; March took the case to the House of Lords, which ruled that Sir Thomas Kennedy was indeed ninth earl of Cassillis in January 1762. The new earl took possession of Cassillis House, inland from Culzean, along with the estate that adjoined Culzean and a London town house. He began to improve the Cassillis estate as well as Culzean. He visited Italy again in 1764 where he sat for the fashionable portrait painter Pompeo Batoni. Visiting Madeira, Marseilles, Montpellier, and Geneva, he did not return home until 1765, when he began work on a new wing to the castle overlooking the sea that included a casino, billiard room, and additional bedrooms. The castle itself was completely refurbished. A passionate sportsman, he constructed a hunting lodge in the wild and beautiful hill country on the border of Ayrshire and Wigtonshire, with spectacular views to the Galloway hills. These developments were accompanied by further improvements. John Bulley, an Essex agriculturalist, was recruited as overseer to replace John Foulis, who had died, and to introduce new ideas from the south. 
Smuggling became more difficult after the removal of a major smuggling centre with the purchase of the duke of Atholl's lordship of the Isle of Man by the British crown in 1765. By this time Cassillis was probably already engaged in the slave trade through his former smuggling agent Robert Kennedy, who between 1767 and 1774 owned four slave ships called 'Lord Cassillis', suggesting that the earl was an investor. He had a long-standing association with Scipio Kennedy, a freed slave who had previously worked for his father as a personal servant. Cassillis bought a new home for Scipio at Culzean on a plot that cost the considerable sum of $90 sterling. About 1767 Cassillis acquired land in Florida, intending to produce rice, cotton, and indigo, but sold it in 1770 in the shadow of political discontent in North America. He retained a sixteenth share in an East Indiaman, the 'Bute', acquired at about the same time as the Florida property, which made several profitable voyages. He also speculated with success in East India stock between 1769 and 1771. To the concern of his Edinburgh lawyer, John Bell, he borrowed heavily to finance these investments and the improvements to his estate. He was neither a shareholder nor major depositor in Douglas, Heron & Co. -- the Ayr Bank -- but many of his tenants were involved or paid in Ayr Bank notes, and the earl's finances were badly damaged by the collapse of the bank in 1772. 
Although he had not engaged much with either society or politics in Britain, he was elected, to his surprise, a representative peer for Scotland in 1774, very probably because of his brother David's alliance during the 1774 election with John Campbell, fourth earl of Loudoun, and the government interest in Ayrshire. He only enjoyed the position for a year, dying in Edinburgh on 30 November 1775. He was full of contradictory passions, an aesthete and a musician who was devoted to the chase, a student of classical antiquity who restored and preserved his family's ancient strongholds, and a soldier in the protestant cause who flirted with Jacobitism and even Roman Catholicism. He never married, and was succeeded by his brother David. 


@@@@@


doc= 92716


Kennedy, David, tenth earl of Cassillis (1727-1792), patron of architecture and landowner, was born on 25 June 1727, the eighteenth child and third surviving son of Sir John Kennedy of Culzean, second baronet (died 1742), and Jean Douglas (died 1767), daughter of Andrew Douglas of Mains, Dunbartonshire. He was educated at the University of Glasgow from 1742 to 1744, and qualified as an advocate in 1752, 'with very great applause' (Archibald Kennedy to Sir Thomas Kennedy, 17 Jan 1751, NA Scot., GD 25/9/40). He practised in Edinburgh where he was several times a public examinator for the Faculty of Advocates. In 1754 he was one of two candidates nominated by the faculty for the post of joint professor of universal history and Greek and Roman antiquities in the University of Edinburgh, but he was not appointed. He only returned to Ayrshire in 1762 when his brother Thomas Kennedy, ninth earl of Cassillis, purchased Newark Castle, near Ayr, and its surrounding estate for him. 
In 1767 Kennedy announced that he was to stand for parliament as member for Ayrshire. His family's interest joined with that of John Campbell, fourth earl of Loudoun, another prominent Ayrshire landowner, and with several other influential figures, and he was successfully elected in 1768. Loudoun supported the government and Kennedy followed his lead, though he seems never to have spoken in the Commons. He had agreed with Loudoun not to contest Ayrshire again, and during his time in the Commons sought a judicial appointment. In 1770 it was thought that he might become a lord of session. In 1771 he hoped to be appointed a baron of the Scottish exchequer. Neither appointment took place. While in London he socialized with James Boswell, who thought him 'a good, honest, merry fellow indeed, but one so totally incapable of the business of legislation, and so devoid of the talents which distinguish a man in public life' ('Boswell for the defence', 168) and mocked his relationship with his brother, suggesting he was entirely dependent on him. In 1774 he was again a candidate for Ayrshire, backed this time not only by Cassillis and Loudoun but by the earl of Eglinton. This alliance of the three earls was resented by the lesser landowners, and Kennedy was defeated. He succeeded his brother as earl of Cassillis in 1775, and was elected a representative peer the following year, again as an ally of Loudoun and the ministry of Lord North and also with the support of John Stuart, Lord Mountstuart, eldest son of the earl of Bute. As a representative peer he continued to support North after he had fallen from office, and from 1784 acted consistently with the opposition to William Pitt the younger's government as an ally of the duke of Portland, who was also an Ayrshire landowner. He ceased to be a representative peer in 1790. 
No sooner had Cassillis inherited Culzean Castle, the family seat on the Ayrshire coast, than he invited Robert Adam to advise him how to refashion it. Adam's first operations, between 1776 and 1782, were to build new kitchens, to refashion the L-shaped castle into a square, to crenellate the existing garden terraces and entrance gate, and to lay out a new walled garden some distance from the castle. These enormous undertakings were described by a visitor in 1787 as doing 'great credit to Adam, the architect' (Moss, 70). Cassillis accelerated his brother's estate improvements, enclosing the upland farms and marginal parts of the estate. In 1787 he commissioned Adam to build a new model home farm some distance from the castle with offices for his overseer, which had previously been in the castle. This was accompanied by extensive landscaping in the policies to improve the prospect from the castle. When the home farm was completed, Adam persuaded Cassillis to embark on an ambitious scheme to replace the wing built fifteen years earlier by his brother the ninth earl with an august drum tower overlooking the sea and an imposing circular staircase. This addition was to make Culzean one of Adam's finest compositions. At the same time, probably at Adam's suggestion, Cassillis commissioned the landscape gardener Thomas White of Retford to lay out the grounds. 
All this building work was very costly; Cassillis had inherited an already indebted estate, and by 1790 he had debts of over $65,000. He fell ill in February of that year, and with his creditors pressing he had no alternative but to put a stop to any further building. The estate was effectively in the hands of receivers. Unmarried like his brother and with no direct male heir, Cassillis had sought out his third cousin once removed, Captain Archibald Kennedy, a distinguished naval officer, who had been born in New York. Captain Kennedy had made a substantial fortune in prize money during the Seven Years' War, and settled in London in 1780. As far as could be discovered, he was the nearest male heir to the earldom. In 1790 Cassillis entailed his estates to the captain and his son, an army officer, in the expectation that their wealth would not only allow the castle to be completed, but preserve it in the family. The estates were to be managed by trustees in the interest of paying off the debts. Cassillis died at Culzean on 18 December 1792, some months after Robert Adam, and was buried in the collegiate church of Maybole, Ayrshire, on 31 December. 
It is hard to explain why Cassillis chose to rebuild Culzean on such an ostentatious scale: perhaps he wanted a more fitting building to house the ninth earl's collections, or perhaps he was simply a follower of fashion. Colonel William Fullarton of Fullwood, another Ayrshire landowner, commented wistfully in 1794, 'the greatest number of old families have, within the present century, been obliged to sell their property, embarrassed by the reigning spirit of conviviality and splendour, disproportionate to their income' (Fullarton, 91). As it turned out, Cassillis's decision to bequeath Culzean to his wealthy distant cousins was provident. The castle was completed over the following three decades. It was given to the National Trust for Scotland in 1945, and at the start of the twenty-first century was the trust's most visited property. 


@@@@@


doc= 92720


Bellenger, Frederick John (1894-1968), politician, was born at 46 Bishops Road, Bethnal Green, east London, on 23 July 1894, the son of Eugene Bernard Bellenger, dairyman, and his wife, Isabella Annette Henner. After an elementary education he worked in a tea warehouse, was a post office messenger boy, and had a range of commercial jobs. He volunteered for military service in 1914, went to the western front the following year as a gunner in the Royal Artillery, was twice wounded, and was commissioned second lieutenant in 1917. While serving in the army of occupation in Cologne, he met and in 1922 married Marion Theresa, daughter of Karl Stollwerck, one of the largest chocolate manufacturers in Germany. They had five sons and one daughter. 
Bellenger's marriage meant economic security. He worked as a surveyor and estate agent in west London and was active in East Fulham Conservative Association. In 1922 and again in 1925 he was elected to Fulham borough council as a Municipal Reformer (that is Conservative) for Barons Court ward. He did not stand again in 1928 and shortly afterwards joined the Labour Party. His reason for this shift is unclear. He never showed any evidence of a decisive political conversion. In June 1930 he became the prospective Labour candidate for South West Bethnal Green but abandoned the candidacy a year later on health grounds. He was not tempted to support the National Government, and in the early 1930s served as honorary secretary of the Labour Candidates' Association. In November 1933 he was selected as Labour candidate for the north Nottinghamshire constituency of Bassetlaw. His selection could have been facilitated by his willingness to finance the local party: in the 1930s he paid $190 a year, one-third of the local party's annual income. 
The seat had traditionally been Conservative but its politics were gradually transformed by the eastward expansion of the Nottinghamshire coalfield. Bassetlaw's first Labour member in 1929 had been the party leader's son, Malcolm MacDonald; he had retained the seat easily in 1931 as a supporter of the National Government. Four years later, in November 1935, after a close contest, Bellenger won the seat from MacDonald, and held it until his death. Bellenger's victory was based on the near monolithic support of the mining villages. 
Once in the Commons Bellenger rarely articulated the concerns of his most loyal constituents. One exception came in the spring of 1937 when a long-running dispute at Harworth colliery heralded the end of the decade-long split between the Nottinghamshire Miners' Association and the breakaway Nottinghamshire Miners' Industrial Union (the 'Spencer Union'). Bellenger dutifully presented the Nottinghamshire Miners' Association's case in the Commons, but his distance from the harshness of coalfield life was apparent. His electoral position became impregnable but his affluence and army officer style distanced him from many supporters. He could evoke a degree of deference but others found him aloof, relating to party members with the expectations of a commanding officer. 
Bellenger's parliamentary career began inauspiciously when an early dinner with Hugh Dalton produced a dismissive verdict by that political talent spotter -- 'talked disconnected rot in a tiresome way' (20 Nov 1935, 'Politica diary', 194). Dalton's verdict arguably highlighted a lack of political judgement on Bellenger's part, an assessment that would become more widely held. Yet in the late 1930s Bellenger was a highly visible MP, not least in his criticism of Neville Chamberlain and the Munich agreement. Less ostentatiously Bellenger disagreed with the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) in its opposition to compulsory military training in the spring of 1939 and abstained on two votes of principle. 
As a member of the officers' emergency reserve, Bellenger was called to the colours in October 1939. A captain in the Royal Artillery from February 1940, he went to France in April 1940 as a staff officer. He returned briefly to Westminster early in May and spoke in the debate that precipitated the fall of the Chamberlain government. With the retreat of the British expeditionary force he spent two days and nights on the Dunkirk beaches, helping to organize the evacuation and living off scraps of chocolate and bottles of French wine. Two months later he resigned his commission to concentrate on his parliamentary work. 
Although he supported Labour participation in the Churchill coalition, Bellenger became a back-bench critic, arguing for a more efficient prosecution of the war. He was one of the eight Labour MPs to support the no confidence motion moved by Sir John Wardlaw-Milne in July 1942, and later rebelled on several issues including opposition to British policy in liberated Greece in December 1944. Although such dissent could align him with members of the Labour left, his own position remained firmly on the party's right. His standing within the PLP remained modest, but he acquired prominence as a journalist. From February 1941, he wrote a weekly column for the 'Sunday Pictorial' initially under the byline 'The Voice of the Army', and later 'Voice of the Services'. He became identified as the 'soldier's friend', a source of advice on problems and grievances. 
Bellenger's reputation for expertise on military matters ensured a ministerial post in the post-war Labour government. Few Labour MPs were interested in the subject, and new MPs with recent military experience were not considered. He became financial secretary at the War Office, with Jack Lawson, a Durham miners' MP, as secretary of state. Lawson was amiable and administratively passive. Bellenger succeeded him as secretary of state at the beginning of October 1946. His promotion was part of a wider reconstruction that took A. V. Alexander to a new post as minister of defence. As a consequence Bellenger was not in the cabinet but was appointed to the privy council. 
Bellenger's wartime column might have led some generals to dismiss him as a 'stunt journalist', but as secretary of state he rapidly gained the approval of Bernard Montgomery. 'He leaves me alone, signs everything put to him and is clearly anxious to please' (Montgomery to Sir John Grigg, 31 Oct 1946, Scott, 77). Bellenger's ministerial outlook was immediately apparent in his response to a crisis inherited from his predecessor -- the sentences imposed in September 1946 on 243 airborne division mutineers at the Muar camp in Malaya. The action had been in response to appalling living conditions; their plight aroused considerable sympathy within the labour movement. Although the sentences were quashed on legal grounds, Bellenger's robust defence of military discipline eroded the image of the 'soldier's friend'. 
Bellenger also acquiesced in military demands for manpower. Such compliance produced criticism from Labour back-benchers associated with the Keep Left group. When the army estimates were debated in March 1947 Bellenger had a rough passage; his critics were forceful and often knowledgeable. A few weeks later he was involved in the passage of legislation to introduce peacetime conscription, a measure that produced widespread disquiet in the PLP. In the ministerial reshuffle of October 1947, which followed a period of difficulties for the Attlee government, Bellenger was replaced by Shinwell (whose removal from the Ministry of Fuel and Power had become a political necessity). Bellenger's demotion was the result of his limitations as a minister, the complexities of a reshuffle, and his lack of a political base within the PLP. 
As a senior back-bencher Bellenger spoke frequently in the Commons and at PLP meetings. He was an early supporter of Hugh Gaitskell's claims for the Labour leadership, a thorough champion of the Anglo-American alliance, a firm anti-Communist, and a strong advocate of German rearmament. The last reflected both his support for the western alliance and his commitment to Anglo-German friendship. He became sceptical about Labour's attachment to public ownership and saw strikes as unnecessary. Yet in other respects he was far removed from Gaitskellite liberalism. He opposed attempts to reform laws governing sexual behaviour. As decolonization gathered pace, he became increasingly sympathetic to Rhodesia's white settlers, a position unaffected by the declaration of independence by Ian Smith's government in November 1965. Within the PLP Bellenger was seen increasingly as an anachronism. The Bassetlaw party, concerned at his distance from party policy on steel nationalization and Rhodesia, insisted that the 1966 election should be his last. He died at his London home, 198 Old Brompton Road, Kensington, on 11 May 1968. 
Bellenger's limited political impact owed something to his style; he was not an inspirational speaker. More significantly his unusual background meant that he did not fit any of the dominant Labour Party identities. He was distant from and could be hostile to trade union practices. He lacked a socialist pedigree, and especially in his later years barely referred to socialism, nor was he at one with the university-educated progressive intellectuals who were influential within the post-war Labour Party. A man of the right, he was close neither to Bassetlaw's moderate miners, nor latterly to the self-conscious modernizers around Hugh Gaitskell. 


@@@@@


doc= 92721


Levitt, Dorothy Elizabeth (1882-1922), motorist and author, was born Elizabeth Levi at 11 Colvestone Crescent, Hackney, London, on 5 January 1882, the second of three daughters of Jacob Levi (1852-1934) and Julia Raphael (1856-1942). The Levi family was a prosperous and well-established Jewish family. Dorothy's father was a jeweller as was her paternal grandfather, Leman or Lemon Levi ('c'.1804-1895). Her maternal grandfather, Joseph Raphael (1807-1893), a retired diamond merchant, kept a hotel in Duke Street, London. 
By 1901 the family was living in Leconfield Road, Islington, London. Jacob Levi had Anglicized the family surname to Levit or Levitt and was engaged in the tea import business. Now aged nineteen, Elizabeth Levit was working as a typist or secretary, an occupation that was becoming increasingly acceptable for middle- or upper-class women. By 1903 she was employed as a secretary with the Napier Car Company, which manufactured cars, among them racing cars. A striking young woman, she was spotted by Selwyn Edge, the Australian entrepreneur, racing driver, and director of the Napier company. She told a journalist that Edge arranged for her to serve a six-month motoring apprenticeship with a firm of automobile makers on the outskirts of Paris, where she trained as a mechanic and chauffeur. She was already an accomplished horsewoman and it is known that she took to driving easily. She described it as 'exhilarating', and all commentators agreed she was an intrepid and skilful driver. On her return to London she earned a living giving driving lessons to high-born and wealthy women, while Edge decided to use her as a works driver and to promote his cars. 
As Dorothy E. Levitt she came to public attention in 1903, when she became the first British woman to compete in a motor race. She did not win her first race, in April 1903, but recorded in her diary that she 'will do better next time' (Byng-Hall, 8), and she certainly did. Between 1903 and 1908 she competed in motoring events in the UK, France, and Germany, achieving considerable honours and publicity. Competitive driving had emerged in the mid-1890s and was still largely a male preserve. Very few women, among them the Frenchwoman Camille du Gast, had taken up racing, and Levitt pioneered the sport for women in Britain. 
In October 1903 Levitt amazed the public when, driving a 12 hp Gladiator, she won her class at the Southport speed trials, achieving a time of 1 minute 4.4 seconds for the flying kilometre. The following year she won her class at Southport and Blackpool speed trials. In 1905, driving an 80 hp Napier, she won the Brighton sweepstakes, hitting a speed of nearly 80 m.p.h. and beating many professional drivers. In October 1906, driving a 90 hp Napier, she broke her own record and created a new world speed record for women of 91 m.p.h. at Blackpool. Not surprisingly she was dubbed 'the fastest girl on earth'. According to an extract from her diary, during this race she had a near miss when the bonnet of her car, a 90 hp six-cylinder Napier, worked loose and might have beheaded her if she had not pulled up in time. 
Sponsored and encouraged by Selwyn Edge, with whom she had a very close relationship, Levitt became Britain's foremost woman racing driver. As well as speed events she competed in long-distance reliability trials and hill climbs. In May 1903, driving a 16 hp Gladiator, she took part in the Glasgow-London non-stop run, a distance of some 400 miles. Problems with tyres meant she had to stop, but she still gained 994 marks out of a possible 1000. In 1904 she entered the Hereford 1000 mile event and in March 1905 created a new record for the 'longest drive achieved by a lady driver', when she drove a single-cylinder De Dion Bouton from London to Liverpool and back again in two days, averaging a speed of 20 m.p.h. She travelled with an official observer but did not take a mechanic, preferring to do her own repairs. In 1906 she set another women's speed record at the Shelsley Walsh speed hill climb in a 50 hp Napier, achieving the climb in 92.4 seconds, a record that was not broken until 1913. 
In 1907 the new Brooklands track opened but Levitt, even with Edge's backing, was not allowed to compete because Brooklands did not admit women until 1908. Turning her attention to Europe, in June 1907 she achieved a gold medal in the Herkomer trophy race, in Germany, coming fourth out of 172 competitors. Commenting on the lacklustre performance of the British competitors, 'The Times' stated that 'the single exception was the Napier car driven with skill, courage, and cool judgement by Miss Dorothy Levitt' ('The Times', 20 June 1907). Two months later she raced in Trouville, France. 
Motoring journals such as 'Autocar' constantly featured Levitt's racing achievements as did papers such as 'The Times' and the 'Jewish Chronicle'. Her driving skills, combined with an excellent dress sense, attracted considerable press attention. In 1904, at the Hereford 1000 mile trial, where she was the only female competitor, she finished to cheers, a bouquet from Edge, and the acclaim of the press, who photographed her with her Pomeranian dog, Dodo, who accompanied her on long-distance events. Male drivers were so irked that they reportedly turned up the following day with toy dogs attached to the bonnets of their cars. She had the last laugh, sending dog biscuits to the male competitors at the prize-giving concert. 
Levitt was a staunch advocate of a woman's right to motor. She wrote articles on motoring for women, including a series in the 'Daily Graphic' in 1908, and expanded these into a book, published in 1909, 'The Woman and the Car: a Chatty Little Handbook for All Women who Motor or Want to Motor'. She stated that 'Motoring is a pastime for women: young, middle-aged, and -- if there are any -- old'. She believed that if a woman 'wants to learn how to drive and to understand a motor-car, she can and will learn as quickly as a man' (Levitt, 15-16). An excellent driver, she was also a very efficient mechanic and her book not only gave advice on choosing a car and its accessories, it also provided clear instructions on how to drive and carry out roadside repairs, supported by photographs by Horace W. Nicholls of her doing so. She devoted a chapter to 'the all important question of dress', urging women to favour comfort and practicality over fancy frills, and suggesting they carry gloves, chocolate, and a revolver in the drawer under the driver's seat. She also recommended using a long-handled mirror to see what was happening behind the car, possibly the first recorded use of a rear-view mirror. 
After 1908 Levitt seems to have stopped racing. In 1910 she attended a flying school in France, learning to fly a Farman machine. There is no record of her obtaining a pilot's licence but, as a well-known figure and pioneer aviator, she gave an interview to the 'Daily Chronicle' in March 1910 about her experiences of learning to fly and ambitions for flight. After this there is little recorded information. 
According to a biographical profile which introduced her 1909 book Levitt lived in a smart, well-furnished flat in London's West End. As well as driving some 400 miles every week, she hosted lunch parties, enjoyed the theatre, and attended all the major social events, including Ascot, Goodwood, and Cowes, where in 1903 she had powered a Napier speed boat to victory in a race, after which she had been introduced to King Edward VII. The sketch writer, though, declared he was 'forbidden to tread too deeply' in areas of her 'delightful private life', and little was revealed of her identity (Byng-Hall, 6). 
Between 1907 and 1913 Levitt lived in Portman Mansions, Marylebone, London. In 1921 she was living at 50 Upper Baker Street, where she died on 17 May 1922, being found dead in her bed. The death certificate, which named her as Dorothy Elizabeth Levi, recorded that she was unmarried and of independent means, identified her as the daughter of Jacob Levi, and gave her age as thirty-eight. The cause of death was morphine poisoning, while suffering from heart disease and an attack of measles. An inquest recorded a verdict of misadventure. Her will, in the name of Dorothy Elizabeth Levitt, left her property, including a diamond brooch and ring, to her sister Elsie Ruby Lewis (1892-1959) and expressed a wish to be 'simply buried in a field by the sea'. 


@@@@@


doc= 92722


Stewart, Gwenda Mary (1894-1990), racing driver, was born at Burnaby Villas, Fulwood, Preston, Lancashire, on 1 June 1894, the daughter of Frederic Manley Glubb (1857-1938), captain and later major-general in the Royal Engineers, who was created KCMG in 1918, and his wife, Frances Letitia, 'nee' Bagot (1861/2-1959). She combined Cornish and Irish descent. The army officer and Arabist Sir John Bagot Glubb [Glubb Pasha] was her younger brother. In January 1913 she became a student at St Hilda's Hall, Cheltenham, a residential college attached to Cheltenham Ladies' College, where she took a course in librarianship. 
In April 1915 Gwenda Glubb left Cheltenham to undertake war work in the intelligence department of the War Office. She then joined the Scottish Women's Hospitals for Foreign Service unit as a volunteer. Driving motor ambulances in the Serbian division of the Russian army, she served in the Balkans where she took part in the Russian retreat from the Dobruja, Romania, early in 1917. She was later decorated for her bravery, receiving the Cross of St George and Cross of St Stanislaus. After returning to Britain she taught motor driving in Hyde Park for the Women's Legion and at Hurst Park, East Molesey, a training base for the Women's Royal Air Force (WRAF). 
At Hurst Park, Glubb met Lieutenant-Colonel Sam Janson (1887-1943), deputy-inspector of transport in the RAF. Allegations of immorality at Hurst Park were made by the WRAF commandant Violet Douglas-Pennant, who was subsequently dismissed. In July 1919, moving for an inquiry into Douglas-Pennant's dismissal, Lord Stanhope alleged in a speech in the House of Lords that Janson and a female officer had been found together in the same bedroom in the early hours of the morning. Both Glubb and Janson, who were legally represented, appeared in person to give evidence before a select committee of the House of Lords. The hearings took place in October 1919 and were widely reported in the press. The committee received medical testimony confirming Glubb's virginity, Stanhope withdrew the statement he had made about Janson and Glubb, and the committee's report in November 1919 refuted the accusations. 
In December 1919 Glubb's engagement to Janson was announced. He was the son of George Janson, merchant, and they married on 17 February 1920. Her personal life was bound up with her motoring career. In the early 1920s, as Gwenda Janson, she began racing. She preferred attempts to make absolute records rather than the more contrived 'women's records'. In November 1921 she raced a Ner-A-Car motorcycle in a thousand miles trial under the supervision of the Auto Cycle Union. In July 1922 she rode a 249 cc Trump-JAP at Brooklands to break double-twelve, effectively a twenty-four hour speed record for motor cycles (undertaken in two twelve-hour periods, as overnight racing was not permitted at the Surrey circuit) and did so at the same time as Selwyn Edge was beating his 1907 double-twelve feat in a car. Sustained, it was said, mainly by tea and cigarettes, she achieved an average speed of 44.65 m.p.h. over the twenty-four hours. She also co-rode a Rudge 350 cc motorcycle at Montlhery, France, to set a twenty-four hour record, each rider alternating for two-hour stints at an average of 54.21 m.p.h. 
Gwenda Janson began a relationship with her co-rider Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Neil Stewart in the autumn of 1922, and Colonel Janson divorced her in 1923. On 25 April 1924 she married Stewart. A retired army officer, he was involved in the company which made the motorcycles which she rode, and was the son of John Charles Stewart, of independent means. The Stewarts settled in France and collaborated with the engineer (Wallace) Douglas Hawkes (1893-1974), who ran the Derby car company near Paris, and who prepared her cars. 
As Gwenda Stewart she continued to make record attempts at Montlhery, many of them in the presence only of official observers and time keepers rather than in front of crowds. She later remarked that the autodrome at Montlhery was a home from home for her. In 1929 she set a series of records there in a Morgan three-wheeler, achieving 101.5 m.p.h. With S. C. H. Davis as co-driver, in 1930 she set further Morgan records, including an average of 72.72 m.p.h. over twelve hours. 
In 1930 Douglas Hawkes acquired the Derby-Miller car which he adapted for Stewart's subsequent record attempts. At the Arpajon speed trials she reached 140 m.p.h. followed in early 1931 by a world 10 mile record of 137.20 m.p.h. That year she was elected to honorary membership of the British Racing Drivers' Club (BRDC) and at the Paris Motor Show was awarded the Montlhery challenge trophy for her record attempts at the autodrome. In poor health during 1932, she returned to the track in 1933, achieving a lap time at Montlhery of 140 m.p.h. in the Derby-Miller. She raised this to 147.79 m.p.h. in a Derby Special in a drive which ended with her front two wheels torn off, and her suffering from mild concussion. She took part in the Le Mans 24 hour race in 1934 and 1935, in a Derby, but failed to finish on either occasion. 
Encouraged by the Brooklands promoters, who welcolmed the publicity, a contest between Gwenda Stewart and Kay Petre was arranged for the August bank holiday meeting in 1935. In a preliminary contest, on 3 August, Stewart, driving an eight cylinder super-charged Derby-Miller, broke the 130 m.p.h. barrier, and Kay Petre's existing lap record of 129.59 m.p.h., with a lap of 130.17 m.p.h. Petre regained her record that evening, with a lap of 134.75 m.p.h., which Stewart, though reaching 133.67 m.p.h., could not better in the main event on 5 August. On the following day, with few spectators present, Stewart regained the ladies' lap record at 135.95 m.p.h., which was also an official Brooklands record for class E cars (up to 2000 cc). Both women earned prestigious Brooklands 130 m.p.h. badges: two of a total of seventeen issued before 1939. In September 1936 she took part in the BRDC 500 mile race at Brooklands in a single-seater Dusenberg, sharing the drive with its owner, Jack Duller, and finishing seventh. In 1936 she received an award from the French government in acknowledgement of her racing performances. 
In 1937 she married Douglas Hawkes and returned to Britain, where together they ran the Brooklands Engineering Company at the racing circuit. She worked a lathe, as well as overseeing the men, and also served in the London Auxiliary Ambulance Service during the war, when the company shifted to munitions production. She had always preferred a nomadic life, and after the war she and Douglas Hawkes went to sea in their yacht 'Elpis' to enjoy complete privacy. They eventually settled on the Greek island of Poros. After her husband's death Gwenda Hawkes moved to mainland Greece, where she died at Amarousion, Athens, on 27 May 1990. Her funeral was held the next day in Athens, later followed by a service of thanksgiving at St Dunstan's, Mayfield, Sussex. Remarkable for her speed and endurance ability on two, three, and four wheels, she was regarded by S. C. H. Davis, who co-drove with her and supported many twenty-four hour attempts, as the greatest woman driver of her time. 


@@@@@


doc= 92723


Oxtoby, John (1767-1830), evangelist and Primitive Methodist preacher, was born early in 1767 at Little Givendale, near Pocklington, East Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Robert Oxtoby, a farmer, and his wife, Jane. He received a little education at a country school, worked in agriculture, but lost carefully acquired property by 'placing it in faithless hands' (Leigh, 9). He led 'a sober, steady and respectable life' and 'was a most regular and consistent church goer' (Shaw, 10, correcting Leigh, 9). In 1804 he came under a painful conviction of sin from which he was delivered by a Methodist preacher's sermon on 'Saving faith'. He immediately went from house to house telling of his conversion, acquired the sobriquet Praying Johnny, and at Warter village gave $10 towards building a chapel. 
Oxtoby always dressed plainly, and was unremarkable in appearance, but his voice was 'clear, strong, musical, and agreeable' (Leigh, 11), though with a strong East Yorkshire accent. His ministry from 1804 to 1818, during which he worked for a time as a farmer and engaged in evangelism with the Wesleyan Methodists, is poorly recorded. 
In 1818 Oxtoby worked alongside the preacher George Nicholson in a remarkable religious revival in villages of north Lincolnshire, where once, when Nicholson's sermon would not 'go', Johnny's personal testimony was instantly effective. They then successfully evangelized villages to the west of Hull, where, on 5 January 1819, Oxtoby was among those who welcomed the gifted Primitive Methodist preacher William Clowes. Oxtoby was impressed with Clowes's faith and fruitful ministry, and worked for a time as his assistant. He identified strongly with the Primitive Methodists, whose cause had flourished since their foundational camp meeting at Mow Cop (1807), and was placed on their preaching 'plan'. 
Oxtoby's diary, quoted at length by his biographers, makes clear his expectations and reception. At his home prayer meetings, his love feasts, his open-air preaching, he looked for unbelievers to be converted ('set free'), and (following John Wesley) for believers to experience 'entire sanctification'. To this end he spent hours in prayer. At Beverley in 1824 he spent 'as much as six hours at a time praying and holding intercourse with God under a tree in Mr J. Jenkinson's garden' (Shaw, 96). According to a member at Halifax he 'generally spent about six hours a day upon his knees' and 'sometimes devoted whole days and nights to God' (Petty, 89). The response to his ministry was often violent, many falling to the ground, rolling around, and shouting out. Their critics dubbed them 'ranters'. In response to his sermon at a district meeting in 1824 'believers rejoiced, sinners trembled, while the noise of weeping, praising, and shouts of joy filled the place' (Shaw, 48). 
Oxtoby's mission, early in 1823, to the Yorkshire fishing village of Filey was particularly notable. He had urged action on leaders daunted by previous failures and volunteered his services, but approaching Filey knelt under a hedge in an agony of prayer. A miller resting at the other side heard him cry out to God: 'Thou munna mak a feal o' me!... I told them at Bridlington that Thou was ganing to revive Thy work, and Thou must deah so, or I shall never be able to show my face among them again, and then what will the people say about praying and believing?' At last he rose, shouting 'It is done Lord. It is done. Filey is taken!' (Shaw, 31). His mission produced an immediate and astonishing response and also made a lasting impression. Some gave up Sunday fishing, drunkenness was 'all but abolished', and there was charitable giving to the poor (ibid., 32-5). 
In 1823 Oxtoby was commissioned as a Primitive Methodist itinerant minister, to which his unmarried state and remarkable stamina were suited. In September 1824 he was dispatched to the Westgate branch in Weardale, co. Durham, and played a sustained and effective part in the remarkable revival already under way. A certain William Dent recalled in 1882 how he first found Oxtoby's person 'unprepossessing' and 'his dialect the most vulgar Yorkshire'. But he had to acknowledge the power that came from Oxtoby's 'taking God at his word', and concluded, quoting '1 Corinthians' 1:27, that 'God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise' (Shaw, 62). 
Oxtoby, like other Primitive Methodists, was particularly effective among close-knit communities such as fishermen, miners, and farmers, but several educated women were also converted. His later ministries included towns such as Darlington, Beverley, Barnsley, Doncaster, and Tadcaster. Many remembered his ability to cope with opposition, whether from pranksters or deists; others recalled instances of healing. At Bridlington he comforted a shipowner, Mr Stephenson, by claiming a vision of his long overdue vessel, and when later called to the quayside by its amazed owner instantly recognized it (Shaw, 93-5). 
In July 1828, at Tadcaster, Oxtoby's health began to give way, and at Leeds at Christmas declined further. He was then appointed to the Halifax circuit but was obliged to rest at his sister's house in Londesborough near Market Weighton, in the East Riding of Yorkshire. He worked for a while in July but was then obliged to return and take to his bed. His disease baffled his doctors, since he was in little pain, with lungs, intellect, and spirit unimpaired. He died at Londesborough on 19 January 1830, crying 'Lord, save souls: do not let them perish!' and then, 'Glory, glory, glory!' (Shaw, 117). He was buried in the churchyard at Warter where a memorial headstone was erected. Recollections of his character and work remained strong in the East Riding and north Lincolnshire long after his death. His biographers acknowledged that his was not a powerful intellect: he was extraordinary rather for his spirituality and, most of all, for the fervour and persistence of his prayers, which earned him the nickname Praying Johnny. 


@@@@@


doc= 92759


Delaval, Sir Francis Blake (1727-1771), rake, was born on 16 March 1727, the second child and eldest son of Francis Blake Delaval (bap. 1692, d. 1752) ['see under 'Delaval family] of Seaton Delaval and Ford, Northumberland, and his wife, Rhoda (died 1759), daughter of Robert Apreece of Washingly, Huntingdonshire, and maternal granddaughter and heiress of Sir Thomas Hussey, second baronet, of Doddington, Lincolnshire. His ten siblings -- seven brothers and three sisters -- included John Hussey Delaval and Edward Hussey Delaval. His paternal ancestors were long-established coal-owning landowners in Northumberland whose estates had been consolidated by Francis's great-uncle George Delaval and then extended by advantageous marriages. He was educated at Westminster School (1737-44) and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1747 but did not take a degree. Delaval established an early reputation for wrongdoing. In 1747 he was one of four Christ Church undergraduates suspected of being responsible for the death of a college servant. However, the coroner's court ruled that the servant was murdered by 'persons unknown' and the Oxfordshire grand jury refused to bring charges against the four. 
From Oxford Delaval moved to London where he became known for his good looks and enthusiastic gambling. In March 1747 he was reported by Horace Walpole to be keeping an Italian mistress, Tedeschi (probably the singer Caterina), and having beaten her and her lover the castrato Gaetano Guadagni on finding them in bed together. During 1749 he became the lover of Elizabeth Roach or La Roche ('b'. 1730/31), a minor heiress, daughter of a Major Roach of Fort St George, India, and Mariana Raworth, and the ward of John Potter (died 1750), under-secretary of state in Ireland, who had married Delaval's cousin Susan Robinson of Dissington, Northumberland. Marriage was rumoured but did not take place, perhaps because Delaval's parents objected on the grounds of Roach's illegitimacy. Delaval and Roach had two children. In November 1749 Delaval unsuccessfully attempted to be elected as MP for Andover, Hampshire. 
Financially embarrassed, Delaval was introduced by the actor Samuel Foote to a much older widow said to possess over $110,000, Lady Nassau Pawlet, 'nee' Lady Isabella Tufton ('c'.1700-1763), daughter of Thomas Tufton, sixth earl of Thanet. After the infliction of 'Terrors alias Humbug' upon Isabella (William Kelynge to F. B. Delaval, 1754?, Northumberland Archives, 2DE/38/4/6), convincing her that her conduct was thought to be in question, Delaval and Isabella, were married in the parish of St George, Hanover Square, on 8 March 1750. Lady Isabella proved only to have $23,000 under her control, barely adequate for Delaval's needs. After several months of paying Delaval's debts, Lady Isabella sought shelter with Foote. Delaval forced Foote to surrender a promissory note for $12,000, kidnapped Lady Isabella, and forced her to sign a new marriage settlement surrendering control of her income. His friendship with Foote was later repaired. 
Delaval's notoriety seems to have been cemented less by these activities than by his devotion to the performing arts. When resident in Newcastle upon Tyne, he studied music with Charles Avison. In London, in March 1751 he led a 'Set of Gentlemen and Ladies' in a performance of 'Othello' at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in which Delaval played Othello and his brother John Iago, with Elizabeth Roach as Emilia. Attended by the prince and princess of Wales and other members of the royal family, the event was hailed in the press as a triumph of gentility over professionalism. Delaval followed this social triumph with election as member of parliament for Hindon, Wiltshire, in the by-election of 4 May 1751. By June his debts were already being consolidated and extended through his brother John. 
Delaval was elected at his old target, Andover, in 1754. The seat was probably chosen as one where a vulnerable ally of the duke of Newcastle might be unseated, a tactical move against Newcastle whom the Delavals were working to undermine as principal patron at Newark. Though Delaval was hailed as one of those 'Men of large Property' who deserved to win 'every Borough in the Kingdom' ('London Evening Post', 8 Nov 1753), his electoral adventures added to his excessive debts. He remained more remarkable for spectacle than for politics, engaging in episodes such as a rowing-boat race on the Thames where he lost 'a considerable Sum of Money' to his victorious brother John ('Whitehall Evening Post', 2 May 1754). In January 1755 Delaval was prosecuted for adultery with Elizabeth Roach, but he countered with claims that Lady Isabella had been seen in bed with another man at a bawdy house in Charing Cross. With his debts now exceeding $45,000, in 1755 a private act of parliament settled fixed proportions of the revenues of the Northumberland estates upon Francis while the property itself was managed by his brothers John and (in the case of Hartley salt pits) Thomas. 
Following Henry Fox's appointment as secretary of state in October 1755, Delaval joined the government side in the Commons. He startled society in May 1758 when he went as a volunteer on the expedition to St Malo. He confounded expectations by landing first and acquitting himself bravely, albeit in the face of minimal resistance from the French. He was created a knight of the Bath in March 1761, and secured re-election in Andover in 1761 after Newcastle arranged support from his former antagonist, the earl of Portsmouth. After a disastrous attack on Pitt in the Commons on 9 December, from which he then tried to withdraw, his career in debate ended. He wavered between government and opposition depending on which was most likely to help the appointment of his brother Edward to the chair of modern history and languages at Cambridge, promised by Newcastle but awarded elsewhere by the earl of Bute, or else (successfully) a pension. His move in 1762 to 11 Downing Street assisted his efforts with lobbying, though his surviving letters to George Grenville, his neighbour from 1763 to 1765, reveal a petulance at what he saw as his lack of favour. 
Delaval granted his brother John power of attorney over his estates and shares in government securities in 1758, and further rearrangements of his financial affairs were made in 1761 and 1764. Elizabeth Roach had left him in 1758 to marry Sir Henry Echlin, third baronet. By February 1763 a young actress, Ann Catley, was living openly with Delaval as his mistress. Catley had been apprenticed to the musician William Bates, whose interest Delaval bought out for $200 plus the estimated revenue from her singing engagements, before binding Catley as his own apprentice by way of formalizing their union. Catley's father protested, leading to Delaval producing Catley in the court of king's bench on a writ of habeas corpus on 16 May and on 22 June appearing alongside his lawyer and Bates on charges of conspiracy to remove Catley from the musician and to place her in the hands of Delaval for the purposes of prostitution. Lord Chief Justice Mansfield's judgment that the charge was 'contrary to decency and morality' was a legal turning point, expressing Mansfield's view that king's bench was 'the custos morum of the people' ('R. v. Delaval', 3. Burr. 1434 at 1437-8). Catley's seduction and contractual obligation to be Delaval's mistress-apprentice were understood by the court primarily as offences against society and not against her father's authority over a dependent female. Delaval was found guilty at the subsequent trial and heavily fined, and his relationship with Catley ended soon afterwards. His wife died in December 1763, but his debts and reputation deterred other potential brides. 
Delaval's lifestyle was jolted when in February 1766 he brought Samuel Foote to Cannon Park, Hampshire, home of his sister Sarah and her husband John Savile, first earl of Mexborough. Delaval, John Delaval, and Prince Edward, duke of York, encouraged Foote to ride York's notoriously unmanageable horse. Foote was thrown and broke his leg in two places, leading to its amputation. It was Francis Delaval who accompanied Foote back to London in April, though it is John's contrite letter of apology for his part in causing his injury which survives, epitomizing the division of business between the two brothers. A rumour that Delaval was Foote's partner in the patent for the Little Theatre, Haymarket, was mistaken. 
Delaval's love of stagecraft led him into an interest in mechanics. In August 1766 he demonstrated on Westminster Bridge a safety cord which successfully separated a passenger carriage from runaway horses. He also collaborated with Richard Lovell Edgeworth on a series of illusions exhibited at Downing Street to 'those who sought mere amusement' and 'men of letters and science' (Edgeworth and Edgeworth, 76). Edgeworth was stage assistant for Delaval's return to public amateur dramatics in May 1767 with several performances of Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent' at Delaval's private theatre on James Street. These performances were less fashionable than those of 'Othello' in 1751: 'none of the royal family have been audience' (Walpole, 22.521). In the same year he was the dedicatee of Christopher Smart's translation of Horace. 
Despite a visit from the duke and duchess of Northumberland to show their support, Delaval lost his Commons seat at Andover in 1768. However, at the election for Middlesex that year he appeared on the hustings as a supporter of John Wilkes, and afterwards embarked on an extra-parliamentary career as a member of the Society of Gentlemen Supporters of the Bill of Rights. He chaired some meetings of the society in Westminster, encouraged opposition to Wilkes's exclusion from the Commons in Newcastle upon Tyne, and arranged petitions from the gentlemen, clergy, and freeholders of Northumberland and from the burgesses of Newcastle in 1770 requesting a dissolution of parliament. Delaval was unable to gain a parliamentary nomination on the back of this activity, Wilkes supposedly believing him a spy for the court. Perhaps more representative of Delaval's interests was the scheme he devised with Edgeworth at about this time for a telegraph system which would rapidly convey racing results from Newmarket to London. While their experiments showed that a chain of mechanical semaphores was possible, it was too expensive for everyday use. 
By early 1771 Delaval's financial position was irrecoverable and John Delaval enforced a new settlement in which Francis and their other surviving brother, Thomas, surrendered their estates, collieries, and saltworks in Northumberland to a trustee in return for annuities, in Delaval's case of $4000. Having suffered from chest pains for over a year, Delaval died at the Mexboroughs' house in Dover Street, London, on 7 August 1771. A post mortem found his stomach in 'a very inflamed state' ('General Evening Post', 15 Aug 1771) and another report described an incurable inflammation of the liver (ibid., 17 Aug 1771). He was buried on 23 August at the family chapel adjacent to Seaton Delaval Hall, Northumberland. 
Delaval displayed frequent signs of melancholy: Elizabeth Roach complained of his indifference and indolence, he urged Edgeworth to live a useful life, and in his will he expressed the wish that he could have died twenty years sooner. His children with Elizabeth Roach -- a son, Francis (died 1826), and a daughter, Frances -- were provided for within the Delaval family. As well as a child with Ann Catley, he also had two daughters, Frances and Lydia Davidson, possibly with the same mistress, Mrs Davidson of Gateshead. 
Delaval's behaviour as a young man was often reprehensible, though contemporaries thought him possessed of great charm. He personified through his lavish expenditure and love of show the paradoxes of 'the gentleman, and the man of honour' ('Gazetteer and New Daily Advertiser', 4 Sept 1771), playing the roles of defender of constitutional liberty, generous patron, and jovial gambler while undermining the basis of his social standing by financially compromising his estate and appearing in court as a threat to public morality. In approaching marriage as an economic transaction he treated his older and vulnerable wife with great cruelty, while his apparent indifference to convention regarding his relationships with Elizabeth Roach and Ann Catley appealed to pamphleteers who could depict him as a real-life manifestation of the stock literary figure, the unscrupulous seducer of maidens. 


@@@@@


doc= 92795


Radcliffe, Mary (c.1550-1617/18), courtier, was one of the four daughters and two sons of Sir Humphrey Radcliffe of Elstow, Bedfordshire (1508/9-1566), and his wife, Isabella, daughter of Edmund Harvey and his wife, Margaret Wentworth. She may have been only semi-literate, for she signed her will with a mark. By 1564, when she was probably in her mid-teens, she was a maid of honour -- the story goes that her father, attending the court at the end of 1560, offered his daughter to Queen Elizabeth as his new year's present. Mary's subsequent career in the privy chamber has a number of unusual aspects, best explained by the queen's fondness for her. Maids of honour were normally funded by their families, but Elizabeth paid her the comparatively generous stipend of $40 a year; in 1569 two and a half years' arrears were paid out of the privy purse. She was still a maid in 1574, but had become an unwaged gentlewoman by July 1587, when 'A book of such jewels and other parcels delivered to the charge and custody of Mrs Ratcliffe one of the gentlewomen of the queen's majesties privy chamber as were parcel of the jewels as were in the charge of Mrs Blanche Parry' was drawn up (BL, Royal MSS, appx 68). She only entered into wages on 31 December 1589. Despite hints of a romance in the early 1570s she never married; she and Blanche Parry were the only waged women of the privy chamber to share the queen's virginity. Unlike many other gentlewomen, Mary Radcliffe has left no evidence of involvement in patronage; all that survives is a few friendly references in the Manners family correspondence. In 1599 it was rumoured she would retire and be replaced by Elizabeth Southwell, but she was still in post on the queen's death and attended her funeral. The jewels in her custody had been surrendered to the keeper of the wardrobe during the survey of the wardrobe of the robes in July 1600, but they were returned to her on 28 May 1603, possibly as the result of a verbal bequest by Elizabeth (who did not leave a will). 
Mary Radcliffe drew up her own will on 5 November 1617. It shows that by then she was living in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, and that she had at least two servants, to whom she made bequests. It also records her pride in her court employment. Describing herself as 'sometimes one of the gentlewomen of her late Maiesties honourable privie Chaumber', she requested burial in the parish church of whatever place she died in, along with the distribution of $20 among the local poor, and the erection there of 'a comelie and convenient Monument in Stone shewing bothe the race and birthe whereof I am discended and allso the Roome and place wherein I lyved and served her saied late Maiestie' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/132, fols. 75'v'-76'r'). Several of her bequests took the form of silver plate, for instance those to her nieces Mary Spencer and Elizabeth Molle, but she left an annuity of $5 to her nephew Radcliffe Gostwick, the son of her sister Martha, while her brother Sir Edward Radcliffe (died 1643), later sixth earl of Sussex, received an annuity of $50. Her nephew Sir Thomas Cheke, the son of her sister Frances, was named as her residuary legatee, and also as her executor. Mary Radcliffe had died by 18 July 1618, when her will was proved. She is not recorded as having been buried in the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields; if she was commemorated there, her monument would have disappeared when the existing church was built in the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 92810


Pyke, Geoffrey Nathaniel Joseph (1893-1948), educationist and inventor, was born at 19 Phillimore Gardens, Kensington, London, on 10 December 1893, the eldest son of Lionel Edward Pyke QC (1854-1899), a barrister at the Admiralty bar who stood unsuccessfully as a Gladstonian Liberal parliamentary candidate for Wiltshire South in the general election of 1895, and his wife, Mary Rachel, 'nee' Lucas. The Pykes were a well-established Jewish family in London. His grandfather Joseph Pyke (1824-1902) had been the warden of London's Central Synagogue; the food scientist Magnus Pyke was his cousin. 
Following his father's death when he was only five, Pyke was educated for two years at Wellington College (1907-09), where he was very unhappy; this experience shaped the rest of his life. His reaction against the education he received at Wellington turned him into a bohemian character with Marxist leanings and an educational reformer. Wellington's links with the army also made him wary of the military establishment. He then had private tuition, and entered Pembroke College, Cambridge, to study law, but he never took a degree because of the outbreak of the First World War. After a brief spell as Reuter's correspondent in Copenhagen he came up with the audacious idea of becoming the Berlin correspondent of the 'Daily Chronicle', working undercover. He was soon arrested by the Germans for spying and was detained at the internment camp at Ruhleben on the outskirts of Berlin. He methodically planned his escape from the camp, and in June 1915 he broke out with Edward Falk. They eventually reached the Dutch border and Pyke found himself a hero when he arrived back in Fleet Street. He took advantage of his new-found celebrity to publish 'To Ruhleben and Back: a Great Adventure in Three Phases' (1916). Unwilling to produce misleading propaganda for the 'Daily Chronicle', he moved to an intellectual review, the 'Cambridge Magazine', edited by Charles Kay Ogden. 
On 8 June 1918, at the Marylebone register office, Pyke married Margaret Amy ['see 'Pyke, Margaret Amy], the daughter of William Lindsay Chubb, a medical practitioner. Soon afterwards the 'Cambridge Magazine' closed down and he began a new career as an investor in the City, principally in metals. Pyke believed he could use a scientific approach, with the use of charts and data analysis, to make large profits on the metals exchange (where the margins were smaller than the stock exchange) and he used the financial technique of hedging to increase these profits. His methods were, with hindsight, pioneering if also very risky. The Pykes had a son, David (1921-2001), who became a consultant physician at King's College Hospital, London, and an expert on diabetes. Geoffrey was soon preoccupied by the question of his son's education. He wanted to create an education that promoted curiosity and equipped young people to live in the twentieth century. To do this he set up a school in his Cambridge home, The Maltings, in October 1924, funded by his City speculations. He hired the psychologist Susan Isaacs to run the school and promised her that he would not interfere. She created a new type of education based on the theories of the American philosopher and educationist John Dewey, the concept of self-directed learning through playing and a heuristic approach to teaching science. For a short time The Maltings was a critical if not a commercial success; it was visited by many educationists and it was the subject of a film documentary. Pyke had ambitious plans for the school and began to interfere with the day-to-day running, whereupon Susan Isaacs left The Maltings. 
Soon afterwards, at the end of 1927, the value of Pyke's holdings in metals collapsed. The school was forced to close, Margaret Pyke had to take a job as headmistress's secretary in Kent, and she left Geoffrey although they were never divorced. Already suffering from periodic fits of depression and burdened with huge debts to his brokers, he now withdrew from normal life altogether and existed on donations from his close friends. It was only in 1934 that he began to work on a major project again, proposing the establishment of a research institute in South Africa to meet the intellectual challenge of the Nazis' racial and antisemitic theories. This idea came to nothing, but two years later he set up Voluntary Industrial Aid for Spain, which sent the Spanish republicans a wide variety of goods, ranging from Harley Davidson motorcycles and microscopes to sphagnum moss for wound dressings. In this period Pyke found his true metier as a serial inventor, coming up with ingenious solutions for the various problems created by the Spanish Civil War. 
In the summer of 1939 Pyke had the idea of carrying out an undercover opinion poll in Germany, the results of which could be used to dissuade Hitler from going to war. The polling itself was successful but the Second World War broke out before the results could be sent to Hitler. Pyke's efforts to carry out similar polls in occupied Europe brought him to the attention of the politician Leo Amery, who became one of Pyke's strongest supporters. Pyke then developed a plan to pin down large German forces in occupied Norway using small but highly mobile units that would attack remote strategic targets like railway lines and hydroelectric plants. Although outnumbered, these units would defeat the Germans because they would be equipped to attack in the snow, using yet-to-be-invented motorized skis rather like modern skidoos. When Louis Mountbatten was made chief of combined operations in March 1942 Amery recommended Pyke to him. Pyke was just the kind of scientific yet unconventional thinker that Mountbatten wanted, and as director of programmes for combined operations Pyke became one of Mountbatten's scientific advisers alongside the physicist J. D. Bernal and the zoologist Solly Zuckerman. Although his ideas often seemed as bizarre as the way he dressed, Pyke had the knack of presenting the basic solutions to problems but allowing specialists to sort out the details. Pyke's Norway strategy developed into a wide-ranging project based on the study of arctic conditions and ice. It led to the manufacture of the Weasel tracked vehicle by the Studebaker Corporation. Originally planned for use on snow in Norway, it actually became a versatile amphibious craft for crossing marshy terrain. 
An even more ambitious concept was Project Habbakuk (the spelling originated in a typing error), the development of an ice-ship. Pyke reasoned that ice was a much better material for large ships than steel. It was readily available, did not cost anything, was lighter than water, and most importantly could absorb the shock of a torpedo attack. Furthermore any breach in the ship could be quickly repaired by making more ice. These ships would be huge, twice as large as the SS 'Queen Mary', and would be used as mobile airports, freighters, and administration centres. Real icebergs could even be used as decoys. At the suggestion of Bernal, this project was taken up by the Austrian refugee chemist Max Perutz, who soon realized that ice mixed with powdered wood was much stronger than ice and also resisted melting; this composite material was later called 'Pykecrete'. Churchill gave his backing to the project and a small prototype was constructed in Canada. Project Habbakuk was abandoned in December 1943, when the U-boat danger to the Atlantic conveys had passed and the site of the allied invasion of France had been switched from the Bay of Biscay to Normandy which would be inaccessible to the large ice-ships. 
In 1946 Pyke was invited by the psychologist John Cohen to carry out research for a working party preparing a report on nursing recruitment -- which was considered to be the largest problem facing the nascent National Health Service -- for the minister of health, Aneurin Bevan. Pyke became obsessed with the question of how much a country should pay for its National Health Service. He realized that this enormously complex question had never been posed before and yet a successful answer was crucial to the long-term viability of an institution he firmly believed in as a socialist. He soon came to the conclusion that the key factor was the selection of the correct time frame for planning healthcare and decided that this was the lifetime of the youngest child of the youngest child now living. Such a long time span raised the question of whether people would be willing to make a sacrifice for future generations and if they would be willing to pay to ensure the health of unrelated others. In Pyke's view it was essential to find a society-wide economic imperative for a health service to supplant the individual imperative to maintain one's good health. 
Pyke believed he was getting close to the answers he sought when he took an overdose of barbiturates, probably on the evening of 21 February 1948. He was found dead by the landlady of his home in 30 Steele's Road, Hampstead, London, on the morning of 23 February and a coroner's inquest was held on 26 February. The reasons for his suicide are not clear. Working on his own, the complex calculations he was carrying out clearly imposed a great strain on him. He may have despaired of the economic sustainability of the National Health Service, dependent as it was on mass altruism. He was certainly concerned that Whitehall would never allow his report to be published. From his wartime experience, he had become convinced that government officials were the greatest barrier to scientifically based administration and progress. In a letter he wrote to 'The Times' a month before he died Pyke railed against Britain's failure to give financial support to the newly formed United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF). He argued that many poorer countries had already contributed and wondered how the humanities-based education of British officials made them so lacking in common humanity. His letter was credited with shaming the British government into becoming a contributor to UNICEF but also exposed his doubts about the ability of contemporary British society to reform itself. Pyke had suffered from depression for many years and this alone may be enough to explain his suicide, given the severe weather conditions prevailing during the winter of 1947-8. 

'The Times' opened its obituary of Pyke by saying his death 'remove[d] one of the most original if unrecognized figures of the present century' ('The Times', 26 Feb 1948, 5d). Despite producing numerous memoranda he had not published any of his ideas and as they were known only to a close circle of friends he was quickly forgotten by the public. He is best known for Project Habbakuk, but it is his trading of metals, his educational reforms, and his prophetic unfinished report on the economic sustainability of the National Health Service that mark Pyke out as a man ahead of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 92811


Pimm, James (1798-1866), caterer and inventor of the Pimm's cocktail, was born on 9 November 1798, the fifth of twelve children of James Norris Pimm (1769-1848), a yeoman farmer of Linstead, Kent, and Susanna Mills (1772-1846); he was baptized at Newnham, Kent, on 9 April of the following year. At his marriage to Mary Southernden Mallery (1797-1864) on 2 June 1822 in Chatham, Kent, Pimm's occupation was given as an oyster dealer, Kent being the principal source of oysters for the London market. Nine children were born of this marriage, of whom several died shortly after birth. 
Baptism records for Pimm's children show that by 1824 he was established as the proprietor of an oyster bar, located first at Lombard Street, later at George Street, and finally at larger premises at 3, 4, and 5 Poultry in the City of London, where as 'James Pimm's Oyster Bar' it was depicted on (John) 'Tallis's Street Views' of 1840. These 'fast-food' establishments served oysters and lobsters as well as other food, customarily accompanied with either stout or a rum-based 'house-cup'. The drink offered by Pimm, which he had devised in the 1840s, was based on the newly fashionable gin, mixed with fruit extracts, liqueurs, spices, and bitter herbs, and soon gained in popularity. 
Mary Pimm died on 28 February 1864. James Pimm died on 16 August 1866 at Bush Place, East Peckham, Kent. It is unclear exactly how and when Pimm's business was transferred to Horatio David Davies (1842-1912) who had other hotel and restaurant interests. Davies was elected alderman for Cheap, the ward in which Pimm's bar was located; he subsequently rose to be lord mayor and then MP for Chatham. Under Davies's supervision the business expanded into five Pimm's restaurants, the last of which closed in 1967. By the end of the nineteenth century James's cocktail was being produced commercially and found a worldwide market. The original cocktail, now known as Pimm's no. 1, was accompanied by Pimm's numbered 2 to 6, based on Scotch and rye whiskies, rum, brandy, and vodka, but these were never as popular and were phased out by 1972. Eventually the firm was taken over by Guinness and is now owned by the Distillers Company. The recipe for Pimm's no. 1 remains a secret confined to a few within the firm, but is declared to be identical to that devised by James Pimm in the 1840s. 


@@@@@


doc= 92813


Elliot, Launceston (1874-1930), weightlifter and strongman, was conceived in Launceston, Tasmania (hence his first name), but born in Bombay, India, on 9 July 1874, the first son of Gilbert Wray Elliot (1833-1910), who was from 1853 to 1877 an official in the Bombay covenanted civil service and who had two children from two previous marriages, and his Scottish third wife, Ann (1850/51-1939), 'nee' Mason, whom he met in Australia. His great-grandfather was Hugh Elliot (1752-1830), governor of Madras and brother of the first earl of Minto, and his grandfather was Admiral Sir Charles Elliot (1801-1875), governor of St Helena. 
In 1887 Gilbert Elliot moved his family to England to take up farming, and settled at Highfield, High Road, Mottingham, Kent. There the well-built Launceston, who attended school at least until the age of sixteen, came under the tutelage of Eugen Sandow, father of modern bodybuilding, and in 1891 he first entered the British weightlifting championships held at the fashionable Cafe Monico in London's Piccadilly. Although unsuccessful on that occasion, three years later he won the British title at the Royal Aquarium, Westminster, in an event decided on aggregate poundage over eight different types of lift. 
In April 1896 Elliot added an Olympic title for raising 71 kg in the one-handed lift at the inaugural modern Olympic games in Athens. He also came second in the two-handed lift, equalling the weight lifted by the winner, Viggo Jensen of Denmark, but losing because of what one judge, Prince George of Greece, deemed an inferior style as he moved one of his feet during the lift. Having, like all the British competitors, paid his own way, Elliot opted to participate in several other events, thus becoming one of only three athletes who have competed in four different Olympic sports. He gained fourth place in the heavyweight Greco-Roman wrestling but lost in the heats of the 14 metre rope climb and the 100 metres. As the latter were held on the opening day of the games, he was among the first of Britain's Olympians. 
In 1898 Elliot won the first British physique contest not held in conjunction with a weightlifting tournament. He also participated regularly in Cumberland and Westmorland, Greco-Roman, and catch-as-catch-can forms of wrestling. He continued with his weightlifting and in 1898 set a new world record for the single-handed lift. According to some accounts, he competed in the Paris Olympics, held in 1900, but this time, as there was no weightlifting event, in the discus, where he was placed eleventh. 
Shortly afterwards Elliot opted to become a professional strongman on the music hall circuit. According to family legend this was because his father had played the stock market and lost so much that he had to sell a farm that he had promised to his son on the latter's marriage, in 1897, to Rose Emilia Kathleen (1873-1945), daughter of Francis William Helder, vicar of St Mildred's, Lee, in Kent. They had three daughters who, after father and son were reconciled, often stayed with Elliot's father in Mottingham, while Elliot toured with his troupe in Britain and on the continent. 
Elliot and his exhibition partner, Montague Spencer, an old weightlifting colleague, would engage in mock gladiatorial contests using weapons of the arena. His personal act usually began with Elliot adopting muscular poses in imitation of classical statues. He then moved from exhibiting his physique -- at his prime he stood at 6 foot 2 inches, weighed 224 pounds and had a chest measurement of 54 inches -- to demonstrating his strength, usually by the lifting of humans rather than iron weights. The highlight was the bicycle spin in which he supported a long metal pole across his shoulders from which, at each end, was suspended a bicycle and rider. With this load Elliot would start revolving, slowly at first, but finally at such a speed that the riders would be swung into a horizontal position, often circling over the orchestral pit in the theatres. His entourage included four black and four white bodybuilders, dressed respectively in leopard skins and togas, and at each venue he also employed eight well-built local bodybuilders who wore sailor suits. Ultimately all sixteen men would be supported in pyramid fashion on Elliot's broad shoulders. 
Although Elliot opted not to tour so much after the First World War, he did venture to South America in the early 1920s. However, following the death of his youngest daughter, Constance Joan, in December 1923 he emigrated to Australia, settling in Whittlesea near Melbourne. He died there on 8 August 1930, after failing to recover from an operation for cancer of the spine, and was buried in Fawker cemetery. Although he is not known to have lived or even competed in Scotland, his Scottish lineage served to have him inducted into the Scottish sporting hall of fame in 2002 as that nation's first Olympic gold medallist. 


@@@@@


doc= 92814


Morton, Lucy (1898-1980), swimmer, was born at New Tatton, Knutsford, Cheshire, on 23 February 1898, the daughter of Alfred Morton, a groom in domestic service, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Bradbury. The family subsequently moved to Blackpool, Lancashire, where her father became an attendant to the mayor of Blackpool with accommodation for the family provided in the town hall. She attended Christ Church School in Blackpool and became a member of Blackpool amateur swimming club in 1908 at the age of ten. 
Following a few years of local club competition, Morton won her first northern counties title in 1913 when, at the age of fifteen, she became the ladies' 100 yards breaststroke champion. In 1916 she held the first world record for the 150 yards backstroke using the traditional English version of breaststroke leg kick on the back and the double overarm action. She also became well known for open-water swims such as the Morecambe cross bay championship, the Mersey mile championship, the London two hours race, the Preston to Lytham race (9 miles), and the Preston to Freckleton race (6 miles), all of which she won. 
The cancellation of the Olympic games in 1916, owing to the war, and then the lack of either breaststroke or backstroke swimming events in the 1920 Olympic games at Antwerp, deprived her of opportunities for international competition during a period when she was at the peak of her performance. In 1920, aged twenty-two, she held the world record for the 200 yards breaststroke with a time of 3 minutes 6 seconds. In the same year she was also the Amateur Swimming Association (ASA) champion for both the 200 yards breaststroke and the 150 yards backstroke. The local council in Blackpool supported her efforts and recognized her potential Olympian status: when, in February 1924, she was invited to participate in the trials for the British swimming team for the Paris Olympics, Blackpool council immediately opened its Cocker Street baths, which were closed for the winter season and not scheduled to reopen until Easter, to facilitate her training. With the help of her coach, R. L. Swarbrick, who was the baths superintendent, she trained before and after her day's work at St Anne's post office. 
Morton was selected a member of the 443-strong British team for the 1924 Olympic games held in Paris. In addition to officials and coaches, the team comprised 307 competitors, including thirteen female swimmers who were to contest the five female swimming events. The swimming events took place in July 1924 at the new purpose-built 50 metre pool at Tourelles on the outskirts of Paris, which had seating for 10,000 spectators and the innovative feature of lane ropes with cork floats. She was one of three British swimmers in this inaugural 200 metre breaststroke event and won her heat in 3 minutes 29.4 seconds, ensuring her passage to the final. She was not, however, the favourite, as the American swimmer Agnes Geraghty had qualified faster in 3 minutes 27.6 seconds, while Morton's team-mate Irene Gilbert, who had been ill and in bed for several days prior to the heats, had qualified for the final and was the current world record holder in the event. In the final the American led through the 150 metre mark and then Morton closed the gap to win in a time of 3 minutes 33.2 seconds, just ahead of the American with the other British swimmers, Gladys Carson (Leicester) and Irene Gilbert (Sheffield), in third and fifth places. The only non-American female winner in the swimming and diving events at the Paris games, Morton was the first British woman to win an Olympic gold medal for swimming. 
Following her Olympic success Morton was given a public welcome on her arrival home, later followed by a civic reception and musical evening hosted by the mayor of Blackpool, when she was presented with the diploma awarded to her by the International Olympic Committee and also with a piano which had been donated, at a cost of $82 4's'. 4died, through public subscription. She recorded her thanks to R. L. Swarbrick, her teacher and coach throughout her career, 'for his untiring efforts in making me what I am' ('Blackpool Gazette and Herald', 8 Nov 1924). On her birthday in 1927 she was married, at Christ Church, Blackpool, to Harry Heaton, the 29-year-old son of Reuben Heaton, master draper. She had met her husband, a post office clerk and later assistant head postmaster in Blackpool, at a Post Office dance. They lived throughout their married lives at 13 Mereland Road in the Marton area of Blackpool. 
Having retired from competitive swimming after the Olympics, Lucy Heaton committed herself to helping other young swimmers in the Blackpool area, a role that she fulfilled for over forty years. In March 1928 she was awarded an Amateur Swimming Association teaching certificate, with advanced honours, and taught many youngsters over the years, including local primary school children, pupils of the collegiate school in Blackpool, pupils from Highfurlong School for Pupils with Special Educational Needs, and also young swimmers in Blackpool amateur swimming club. She also fulfilled other supporting roles in the competitive swimming world including acting as a coach and chaperone, and at the age of seventy-two she served as a competitors' steward at the Amateur Swimming Association championships at Derby baths in Blackpool. In 1970 she received the Harold Fern award for her outstanding contribution to swimming. In 1988 she was inducted into the International Swimming Hall of Fame as a pioneer swimmer, one of only thirty-four British swimmers recognized in the forty years of its existence. She died at the Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, on 26 August 1980, and was cremated at Lytham Park, Blackpool. She was survived by her husband and son, and by her sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 92841


McBride, (Sara) Vonla Adair (1921-2003), naval officer, was born on 20 January 1921 at Ballygarvey, co. Antrim, the elder daughter of Andrew Stewart McBride, farmer and miller, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Martin. She was educated at Ballymena Academy and Trinity College, Dublin, where she graduated with honours in modern literature in 1942. After teaching for some years at Ballymena and subsequently at Gardenhurst School, Burnham-on-Sea, Somerset, she decided at the age of twenty-eight to apply for a direct entry commission in the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS), and was accepted in 1949 as a personnel selection officer. This was a new specialization for career members of the WRNS; the task of interviewing new entrants to the naval service to discover their aptitudes and potential had previously been carried out by officers only in the context of wartime duties. McBride quickly made her mark as a perceptive and brisk assessor and continued in this specialization for several years, being promoted second officer in the process. Her final appointment in this rank was as staff officer to the London division of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve; this considerably broadened her horizons and allowed her to move easily into the higher ranks, which beckoned with early promotion to first officer in 1958. She then commanded WRNS units in five different establishments, four of them naval air stations, where she came into contact with, and was responsible for the welfare and organization of, Wrens from a very wide spread of specializations and skills. 
McBride's success in these posts led to a key appointment as first officer training at the new entry establishment, HMS 'Dauntless' at Burghfield near Reading. Promoted chief officer in 1964, she went on to an even more important job as officer in charge of the WRNS officer training unit at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. There she wrote her only full-length book, 'Never at Sea' (1966). This was a volume in the 'My Life and My Work' series for 'Educational Explorers', books designed to help young people choose a career. But McBride's book was much more than a straightforward description of work; her character, interests, and tastes, as well as her humour and resilience, came through strongly. 
In 1967 McBride moved on to her first appointment in the Ministry of Defence, where she remained for five years, first in the directorate of naval manning and then as deputy director of WRNS. She then became command WRNS officer to the flag officer, naval air command, being promoted superintendent in 1973 and moving on to command HMS 'Dauntless'. In 1975 she became command WRNS officer for the whole of the naval home command, and in 1976, as commandant, was appointed director of WRNS, the highest WRNS post in the naval service. Even though her progress through the ranks had been rapid, her relatively late entry to the service made her age an obstacle, but a sensible change in the regulations ensured that she could take up the post for which she was so clearly fitted. 
McBride's time as director was marked by a steady expansion of the scope of duties and opportunity for members of the WRNS, and notably for their coming under the 'Naval Discipline Act' where previously they had been subject only to relatively informal regulation that meant, for example, that they could leave the service without permission in circumstances which, for a male rating, would have brought a charge of desertion. She did not, however, press for female service at sea nor for full integration of the WRNS into the Royal Navy. These were both to occur during the next decade and a half, and McBride probably foresaw them, but she did not hurry them. 
McBride was appointed CB on her retirement in 1979 and, already a freeman of the City of London, became a director of the London region of Lloyd's Bank. She became a liveryman of the Shipwrights' Company in 1983, the first woman to be so appointed, and her charitable work included vice-presidency of the Ex-Servicemen's Mental Welfare Society, the Officers' Pensions Society, and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution. 
Vonla McBride never married but always remained a strongly feminine person. She was known for her charm and wit, qualities that came to the fore in an amateur acting career of considerable accomplishment and in sparkling performances as an after dinner speaker. She had the rare gift of personal involvement with every individual with whom she came in contact. But behind these attributes lay a keen intellect and great administrative skill that served the WRNS, and the nation, well. She died at Ashley Grange nursing home, Lode Hill, Downton, near Salisbury, on 2 August 2003, following a stroke. 


@@@@@


doc= 92846


Hislop, Robert Steven (1962-2003), racing motorcyclist, was born at Haig Maternity Hospital in Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 11 January 1962, the first of two sons of Alexander (Sandy) Hislop (1936?-1979), joiner, and his wife, Margaret ('b'. 1946?), knitwear mill worker. The family lived in a rented farm cottage in the village of Chesters, south-east of Hawick. He came from a motorcycle racing family and neighbourhood. His father, Sandy, had been a club racer between 1956 and 1961, while he and his younger brother, Garry, grew up idolizing the Hawick rider and local hero Jimmy Guthrie. 
Hislop attended Hobkirk primary school and then Jedburgh grammar school and enjoyed neither. He first raced in 1979 and started work as an apprentice motorcycle mechanic at T. B. Oliver's garage in Denholm, whose owner Jim Oliver was an early supporter and sponsor. He spent four years there before fully qualifying, and then another four years before quitting to race full-time in the 1988 season. His commitment to racing was, however, in the face of repeated personal adversity. In 1979 his father died in his arms of heart failure, and in 1982 his younger brother, Garry, who had established himself as a rider of enormous promise, died in a club meeting at Silloth in Cumbria. Hislop spent the next few years drinking heavily and crashing a succession of cars. 
In 1983 Hislop started racing again in earnest, entering the 350 cc Newcomers' race at the Manx grand prix, which his late brother had won the previous year. He finished second. This was the start of a long and famous association with the Isle of Man. Thereafter he reined in his socializing and worked around the clock. In 1985 he entered the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy (TT) for the first time on machines loaned by Jim Oliver, finishing twenty-first in the formula 1, tenth in the production 750, and eighteenth in the senior. Only two years later, in 1987, he took his first win, in the formula 2 race, in fortuitous circumstances. He had been leading that year's Junior TT by a huge margin when a failed ignition unit ended his race. After drowning his sorrows in a Manx pub Hislop joined the queue at a burger van where he was overheard bemoaning his inability to afford a replacement unit by a sponsor who agreed to buy him one. It was fitted the following day for the formula 2 race, which he won by 17 seconds. 
Between 1987 and 1994 Hislop went on to eleven wins on the island, a number then surpassed only by Joey Dunlop and Mike Hailwood. In 1989 he also became the first rider to lap the island at over 120 m.p.h. In all he won one formula 2 and three formula 1 races, one production, two 600, and four of the blue-riband senior races. The most famous of these was his win in the 1992 Senior TT, a race which passed into motor-racing legend. Having swept all before them on the dominant factory Honda RC30s the previous year, Hislop and his rival Carl Fogarty were on less fancied equipment, Fogarty with Yamaha and Hislop on a mechanically brittle and largely untested rotary-engined Norton 588 developed at a fraction of the cost of the factory machines, and on which he had had virtually no practice. In the senior race, which is the climax to TT week, held over six laps of the 37.74 mile circuit, Hislop and Fogarty were never more than 7.4 seconds apart, changed places eight times, and repeatedly broke lap records which they had set the previous year, Fogarty's desperate final lap at an average speed of over 123 m.p.h. standing unbroken for seven years. Hislop hung on to a riotously popular win over the 226 mile race distance by just 4.4 seconds, the first rider to win the Senior TT on a British bike since Hailwood three decades previously in 1961. The race was regarded as the greatest in TT history. Both Hislop and Fogarty subsequently announced that they would not race again on the island since the power and pace of the machines had made it too dangerous, though Hislop did reluctantly and for contractual reasons return for the formula 1 and senior races with Honda in 1994, winning both. 
Hislop's distinction was that while most British and Irish riders of the modern era tended to specialize in either road or circuit racing, he was one of the handful to excel in both. On circuits he won the British 250 cc championship in 1990, and twice the British Superbike (BSB) Championship, the acme of British motorcycle racing. He claimed the title (on a Ducati) at his first attempt in 1995, though always resenting the suggestion that this was effectively due to the withdrawal that year of his rival contender James Whitham with cancer. After breaking his neck in a horrific crash during a World Superbike (WSB) round at Brands Hatch in 2000, he was closing in on another title in 2001 when he crashed into his title rival John Reynolds at Rockingham, and finished second in the championship. That season he showed his potential in world superbike racing, finishing an impressive third as a wild-card entry in the WSB round at Donington Park, where the following season, on a standard national-class bike, he also broke the track record set by the multiple world champion Valentino Rossi on a far more powerful factory grand prix machine. Having recovered from his injuries in 2002 Hislop reclaimed the BSB title for Ducati. 
In the summer of 2003 Hislop was reigning BSB champion and, after twenty years in motorcycle racing, likely to retire at the end of that season. He had taken up helicopter flying in 2001, in anticipation of a substitute for the excitement of racing. As he was flying alone from a friend's house in Horsleyhill, near Hawick, to Wycombe Air Park, Buckinghamshire, on 30 July 2003, his borrowed Robinson R44 helicopter crashed in low cloud near a remote Borders hillside at Caerlanrig Farm, near Teviothead, Roxburghshire. A report by the Air Accidents Investigations Branch released in May 2005 concluded that pilot error or a technical problem were to blame, confirmed by a Scottish fatal accident inquiry in May 2008. He was survived by two sons, Aaron and Connor, from a previous relationship with Kelly Bailey, with whom he shared custody and remained on good terms, and by his then partner, Ally Greenwood, a banker. His funeral service was held on 7 August 2003 at Teviot parish church, Hawick, attended by crowds of mourners to whom the service was relayed by loudspeakers, while around a thousand motorcyclists joined the cortege to Southdean cemetery, near his boyhood village of Chesters, where he was buried alongside his father and brother. His headstone bore an engraving of him riding the Ducati which took him to his final BSB title. 
Hislop, journalistically tagged 'the Flying Haggis' but known overwhelmingly simply as Hizzy, was widely regarded as one of the most naturally talented and smoothest riders of his generation. But as his rival James Whitham observed, Hislop 'never needed much encouragement to feel the world was against him' (Whitham, 179), and his temperamental nature, and disinclination to take unnecessary risks on machines with which he was unhappy, established his reputation for being, in the words of the former TT and grand prix rider and later team boss Rob McElnea, a 'flawed genius', unbeatable on his day but on others exasperatingly off the pace. Hislop further inhibited his prospects by retaining a direct and outspoken personal style, and disdaining the commercial and corporate expectations of international racing. 
If anything this enhanced Hislop's domestic status and popularity, which are reflected in the number and the distribution of memorials to him. A life-sized statue of the rider in bronze, by the Fife sculptor David Annan, was erected in Wilton Park, Hawick, standing directly opposite that of his boyhood hero Jimmy Guthrie; another was placed at Onchan Head on the Isle of Man, where Hislop had settled in 1991. A permanent Steve Hislop exhibition was created in the Drumlanrig Tower Museum, Hawick, as well as a simple memorial cairn at Caerlenrig where his helicopter came down, while a corner at Knockhill circuit in Scotland, and a chicane at Oulton Park, are named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 92848


Hancock, Norman (1916-2003), naval architect, was born on 6 March 1916 at 5 Home Park, Plymouth, the only son of Louis Everard Hancock, a ship fitter in Devonport dockyard, and his wife, Rose Violetta, 'nee' Bowden. He attended Plymouth grammar school, joining Devonport dockyard at sixteen as a shipwright apprentice. He shone academically and gained a national cadetship to study naval architecture at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, as a probationer in the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors. After achieving near-record marks in all subjects, he was appointed in 1940 to the Admiralty's hydrodynamic test tanks at Haslar, Gosport. On 15 June 1940, in Bath, he married Marie Eva Bow (1916-2003), shorthand typist, and daughter of William Ernest Bow, examiner of dockyard work for the Admiralty; they had two sons, Robin and Mark. 
After four years at Haslar, Hancock moved to Bath on promotion to constructor to work under Sir Stanley Goodall, the director of naval construction. His duties required him to examine hundreds of warships damaged in action. When the battle cruiser 'Hood' blew up Hancock disagreed with his superiors about the cause; his claim that the explosion was caused by a shell penetrating an ammunition store amidships was proved right in 2001 when the wreck was filmed for a television programme. At the end of the Second World War he travelled to Germany and Japan to inspect damaged German ships and their designs and to assist the United States Navy in its study of the Japanese fleet. In 1946, acknowledged as an international authority on action damage, he was a British observer at operation Crossroads, the American atom bomb tests at Bikini atoll in the Pacific. 
From 1949 to 1952 Hancock was based at Singapore dockyard, before returning to Bath to work on the design of the Salisbury and Leopard class frigates. He introduced large-scale layout drawings and full-scale mock-ups of operational spaces, innovations that became standard practice. Early promotion to chief constructor followed in 1954, in charge of warship research and development. In 1957 he began a five-year appointment as professor of naval architecture at Greenwich, where he quickly gained a reputation as a modernizer, as hard on his lecturers as on his students. After returning to Bath as assistant director of naval construction in 1963 he took charge of all conventional and nuclear fleet submarine design. The Swiftsure class of nuclear submarine was his greatest technical achievement. He rigorously controlled every aspect of the design, introducing innovations in hull form, structural design, sonar, propulsor, machinery, layout, and detailed design to enable major improvements in operational capability, particularly in diving depth, enemy detection, and quietness. Swiftsure was laid down in 1969 and once in service proved to be well in advance of contemporary American and Soviet designs. Six of the class were built, followed by seven Trafalgar class boats developed from Hancock's design. 
In 1969 Hancock was appointed director of warship design (the post formerly named director of naval construction), based in Bath. Over the next seven years he was responsible for all Royal Navy surface ship design and procurement, and acted as project director for the introduction of two notable classes of gas-turbine-powered warship. The design of HMS 'Invincible', the first of three carriers, was largely complete by the end of 1970, although the build contract was delayed by political distractions until 1973. This was the first jump-jet carrier, with an innovative 'ski jump' for launching Harrier aircraft. The Broadsword class anti-submarine frigates, whose construction began in 1974, carried two Lynx helicopters, the Seawolf anti-missile system, and advanced electronics. Ships of both classes played a vital role in winning the Falklands campaign of 1982 and made major contributions in the later Gulf conflicts. 
Hancock was appointed CB on retirement in 1976. He then spent ten years as a consultant to Marconi on the Stingray torpedo design. He was a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Shipwrights and a member of council of the Royal Institution of Naval Architects from 1970 to 1976. He was a keen amateur cabinet maker and an enthusiastic organ player both for his local church and at home, and he and his wife were intrepid travellers. He cared for his wife through a long illness before dying at his home, 41 Cranwells Park, Bath, on 5 August 2003, of ischaemic heart disease. His wife died a few days after him. They were survived by their two sons. 
Hancock was a strong-minded man with great drive and determination, combined with an eye for detail. He had little time for those unable to meet his own high standards and could berate less capable staff in front of their peers. With his reputation, high intelligence, pebble glasses, and strong presence, he could make even top civil servants and admirals nervous. However, he pressured staff to achieve great things, and his obvious ability, dry sense of humour, and honest integrity led all who knew him to hold him in great respect. His contribution to the design of Royal Navy warships of the second half of the twentieth century was immense. 


@@@@@


doc= 92851


Flemming, John Stanton (1941-2003), economist, was born on 6 February 1941 at Lenia House, Bath Road, Reading, the younger son and, with his twin sister, the youngest of the four children of Sir Gilbert Nicolson Flemming (1897-1981), civil servant, and his wife, Virginia, 'nee' Coit, of 73 Carnarvon Road, Forest Gate, London. At the time of his birth his father was secretary to the wartime production executive; he later rose to be permanent secretary at the Department of Education, and was made a KCB in 1953. Like many of his generation, Gilbert Flemming had been deeply influenced by the poverty he had witnessed as a young man in the East End of London, and he remained throughout his life a man of the left. 
John Flemming was educated at Rugby School, where he specialized in mathematics. He seems to have been reasonably happy and successful there, but his outstanding qualities did not really blossom until he went as an undergraduate to Trinity College, Oxford. He took a first in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1962, and then went as a graduate student to Nuffield College. Only a year later he was offered and accepted a position as official fellow and tutor in economics at Oriel College. In 1963 also he made what has rightly been called the best choice of his life when on 27 July he married Jean Elizabeth Briggs, a 27-year-old schoolteacher, and daughter of George Briggs, decorating contractor. Their characters were complementary rather than similar. They made an ideal match, and had a happy family life for forty years. They had three sons and one daughter. 
Flemming was a good tutorial teacher to those students who were already highly motivated, but the heavy burden of run-of-the-mill tutorials that fell to an Oxford college tutor at that time was not his metier. He did well to return in 1965 to Nuffield as an official fellow, a research appointment. He remained a fellow of Nuffield until 1980. This was his most productive period as an academic economist. 
In that capacity Flemming was cast in a mould that was -- at that time -- characteristically British. He did not confine himself to a single field but ranged widely, believing that the basic principles of economics had general application. His breadth had a certain cost: he produced many subtle and ingenious papers, but no 'magnum opus'. Perhaps the best-known of his original ideas related to the possibility of 'changes of gear' in price-expectations, an idea put forward in chapter seven of his short but pithy 'Inflation' (1976) -- his only book. The idea was that people's expectations about inflation may focus on the level of prices, or on the rate of increase of prices, or on the rate of acceleration of price-increase, or at least in principle on some even higher derivative; and that a shift between gears might be particularly important in times of rapid inflation, such as prevailed at the time he was writing the book. Most of Flemming's publications were theoretical, but he also did some good empirical work, for example the derivation of widely cited measures of the cost of capital to firms. 
While he was an official fellow at Nuffield Flemming spent a year on secondment to the Bank of England. This prepared the way for him to take up later, in 1980, a full-time appointment as senior economist at the bank. He presently became economic adviser to the governor (1984-8) and then one of the bank's executive directors (1988-91). In 1991 he rather surprised some of his friends by leaving the bank and moving to become chief economist at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). The EBRD was a new body, set up on the initiative of President Mitterrand of France, with a French head, Jacques Attali, but with its head office in London (a political compromise). Its intended task was to perform, in relation to the former Soviet Union and the ex-communist countries of eastern Europe, a function rather like that performed by the World Bank in relation to developing countries, but with special attention to the problems of transition from a planned economy to a market one. 
As a staff economist at the Bank of England and at the EBRD Flemming excelled in inspiring the work of his subordinates, so contributing to the academic reputation of the organizations. His awareness of there being two sides to most questions was not always welcome to his superiors. What they sometimes wanted, but did not get from Flemming, was a spirited statement of a particular view. As a result he probably had less influence at the time on policy thinking within the Bank of England than his imaginative but sometimes eccentric predecessor, Christopher Dow, had had. But the policies later practised through the bank's monetary policy committee probably owed more to Flemming than they did to Dow. 
Flemming did good work during his time at the EBRD, but he was conscious of a certain lack of clarity in its remit. Matters were not made easier for him by the powerful personality of the EBRD's head, who, among other things, found it easier to work with the French-speaking members of his staff. So, while retaining his interest in the economics of transition, Flemming was not sorry after only a couple of years to return to Oxford to become warden of Wadham College. Even during the many years when he was working in London he had continued to live in Oxford, commuting daily. Indeed, he was once described as an Oxford don who happened to be working in London, rather than a public servant who happened to live in Oxford. It was appropriate that he should end his career as head of an Oxford college. 
Being warden of Wadham was perhaps the most congenial phase of Flemming's career. Despite his many outside activities, he was an active, hands-on warden. He sought by means of his experienced skills in chairmanship to guide the college towards its own consensus, exercising only a steady hand on the tiller. He and his wife, Jean, liked living in the warden's lodgings and taking a full part in the life of the college. He was extremely popular among the fellows and he enjoyed their company and the company of students alike. He also made valued contributions in the central affairs of the university, notably as chairman of the committee charged with the invidious task of reviewing the rules about redistribution of income between colleges. 
Flemming was highly intelligent, judicious, widely informed, moderate, unpompous, and averse to confrontation, though capable of giving a firm lead. He made no enemies. These characteristics were apparent in the way he performed all the roles of his career: as academic economist, as public sector staff economist and adviser, as a leader among British economists, and as academic administrator. Apart from his career appointments, his non-egocentric, unpushy, but incisive style made him a natural choice as a part-time member or chairman of committees and as part-time administrator, both in bodies of economists and in bodies where an economic contribution was needed. The number of such appointments (many of them very responsible and time-consuming) that he held at one time or another was remarkable. He was, 'inter alia', editor of the 'Economic Journal' (1976-80), chairman of the economic affairs committee of the Social Science Research Council (1981-4), a member of the Advisory Board on Research Councils (1986-91), chairman of the council of management of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (1996-2002), and a member of the royal commission on environmental pollution (1995-2003). On the financial side he was investment bursar of Nuffield College, treasurer of the Royal Economic Society and of the British Academy, and chairman of the investment and finance committees of Brunel University. He took much interest in Brunel, and the university conferred an honorary doctorate on him in 2003 ('my first post-graduate degree', he said). 
Flemming was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1991 and appointed CBE in 2001. He was diagnosed with terminal cancer in 2000, but bore his illness with courage and dignity. He died at the warden's lodgings, Wadham College, on 5 August 2003, and was survived by his wife, Jean, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92856


Eccles, Mary Morley, Viscountess Eccles (1912-2003), literary collector and scholar, was born on 8 July 1912 in Detroit, Michigan, USA, the last child of Stanford Tappan Crapo (1865-1939), landowner and businessman, and his wife, Emma Caroline, 'nee' Morley (1872-1937). The Crapo family traced its descent from a French sailor, nicknamed Crapaud, who was washed ashore on Cape Cod in the late seventeenth century and founded a dynasty of whalers. Mary's great-grandfather, Henry Howland Crapo, left New England before the civil war to make his fortune in Michigan, where he was governor from 1864 until shortly before his death in 1869. From this paternal line Mary Crapo inherited a love of literature, a taste for country life, and the means with which to cultivate both. 
Though rooted in Michigan the Crapo family continued to take its educational and professional bearings from the north-east. Accordingly Mary Crapo attended Hartridge School in Plainfield, New Jersey (1926-30), and Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New York (1930-34). A passion for drama led her to contemplate a career as a playwright, but ultimately she decided to explore the theatre from a scholarly vantagepoint, entering the graduate programme in English at Columbia University in 1934. After taking her MA the following year she embarked on a doctoral dissertation that earned her a PhD in 1945. Her thesis was published by Columbia University Press as 'Playwrighting for Elizabethans, 1600-1605' (1949). 
The eighteenth-century interests of Donald Frizell Hyde (1909-1966), a lawyer whom she married on 16 September 1939, turned Mary's attention to Samuel Johnson and his circle. Beginning with the A. E. Newton sale of 1941, the Hydes began to acquire Johnsonian books and manuscripts, assisted by the legendary dealer A. S. W. Rosenbach and the swashbuckling collector R. H. Isham. In 1948 they outmanoeuvred Yale University to secure the great R. B. Adam collection. By the following decade the Hydes' library at Four Oaks Farm in Somerville, northern New Jersey, had become a place of pilgrimage. Not only did they share their treasures with scholars and students, but they contributed to scholarship themselves, collaborating with E. L. McAdam on the first volume of the Yale edition of the works of Samuel Johnson, 'Diaries, Prayers, and Annals' (1958). While adding to their Johnsonian and Boswellian holdings, the Hydes also built up significant collections of Oscar Wilde and of Japanese books and manuscripts. 
After the death of her first husband Mary Hyde threw herself into the writing of books that drew on materials in the Hyde collection. 'The Impossible Friendship: Boswell and Mrs. Thrale' (1972) was followed by 'The Thrales of Streatham Park' (1976), which transcribed and interpreted Hester Thrale's intimate record of family life. Mary Hyde's engrossing study was dedicated to 'Our Godchildren' -- a poignant reflection of the fact that the Hydes were childless. She made similar use of her G. B. Shaw archive in 'Bernard Shaw and Alfred Douglas: a Correspondence' (1982). 
Like the heroine of a novel by James or Wharton, this American heiress entered the English peerage as the second wife of David McAdam Eccles, first Viscount Eccles (1904-1999), a businessman, book collector, and politician who had served as a cabinet minister under Churchill, Eden, and Macmillan. After marrying in London on 26 September 1984 the couple divided their time between Four Oaks Farm and Lord Eccles's two English residences, in Wiltshire and Westminster. The following year Mary Eccles was elected to the Roxburghe Club, its first female member. Encouraged by her new husband, she helped to launch, guide, and support 'The Letters of Samuel Johnson' (1992-4), a five-volume edition that was later described as 'the definitive monument to the collection' ('The Independent', 5 Sept 2003). The definitive monument to her second marriage took the form of the David and Mary Eccles Centre for American Studies, established at the British Library in 1992. Her philanthropic ventures continued after Lord Eccles's death in 1999, as did her collecting and writing: when she died at Four Oaks Farm, on 26 August 2003, she was at work on a study of the library at Streatham Park. 
At Four Oaks Farm, as at Streatham Park, Samuel Johnson presided as 'genius loci', his portrait by Joshua Reynolds hanging in a place of honour. This was only one of the many parallels, some designed and others coincidental, that linked Mary Eccles to Hester Thrale. It is significant that, not long before her death, she acquired Johnson's letters to Mrs Thrale's eldest daughter, Queeney. His advice and hopes were realized in the mistress of Four Oaks: 'keep your eyes and your ears open, and enjoy as much of the intellectual world as You can... that You, my dearest, may in every sense live long, and in every sense live well is the desire of, Your humble servant, SAM. JOHNSON' (B. Redford, ed., 'The Letters of Samuel Johnson', vol. 3, 1992, 235). 


@@@@@


doc= 92861


Heller, Erich (1911-1990), German scholar, was born on 27 March 1911 in Komotau, in what was then the German-speaking part of northern Bohemia, in Austria-Hungary, the son of Alfred Heller, a doctor, and his wife, Elsa. The family was of Jewish origin. He became a citizen of Czechoslovakia when that state was created after the First World War. After attending a German 'Gymnasium', he studied law, philosophy, and German literature at Charles University, Prague, from 1930 until 1935, when he graduated with a doctorate of law. He was then attached to a lawyer to train for the profession, but his interests were increasingly turning to German literature, on which he published a short work, mainly about Thomas Mann and Karl Kraus, in 1938. He was active in the Social Democratic Party, and involved himself in efforts to combat the Sudeten German nationalists. But the tide could not be held in check, and the Germans occupied Prague in March 1939. 
Heller fled from Czecholovakia in the summer of 1939 and managed to get away to Poland. He never forgot how last-minute his escape was -- not least because his mother and a number of his family perished in concentration camps. He sailed out of Poland on one of the last boats to leave Gdynia, and docked in London on 26 August 1939. He spent the first months of wartime in a hostel for refugees in Epping Forest, and learnt English swiftly and well. On the strength of his early publication, he was admitted to Peterhouse, Cambridge, to work on a PhD thesis on Thomas Mann, which he completed in 1948. His studies were interrupted by teaching appointments: from 1943 to 1945 he was assistant lecturer in German for the London School of Economics, which had been evacuated to Cambridge, and from 1945 to 1948 he was lecturer in German and director of studies in modern languages at Peterhouse. In June 1947 he was naturalized as a British citizen, and retained British nationality until his death. 
After holding visiting lectureships in the universities of Hamburg, Gottingen, and Bonn, Heller was in 1948 appointed head of the department of German at the University College of Swansea, in the University of Wales, subsequently becoming, in 1950, the first holder of its chair of German. He was eagerly sought after as guest lecturer in the United States -- at, for example, Brandeis, Yale, Brown, and Oberlin College. Finally, in 1960 he moved to the United States to take up a professorship of German at Northwestern University in Illinois; in 1967 he was appointed the first Avalon professor in the humanities, a post which he held until his retirement in 1979. 
Although he never married, Heller had a family life because his brother Paul (a survivor of wartime concentration camps) was professor of medicine at the University of Illinois and lived with his family near Chicago. Erich Heller was frequently honoured -- for example, by the award of the Goethe medal of the Goethe Institut (1968), of the fellowship of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1971), and of the Cross of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (1978). Among his papers, which are deposited at Northwestern University, are exchanges of letters and cards with T. S. Eliot, E. M. Forster, and Werner Heisenberg. He died at Evanston, near Chicago, on 5 November 1990. 
Erich Heller was the author of six books: 'The Disinherited Mind' (1952), 'Thomas Mann: the Ironic German' (1958) -- both of which appeared while he was at Swansea -- 'The Artist's Journey into the Interior' (1965), 'Kafka' (1974), 'In the Age of Prose' (1984), and 'The Importance of Nietzsche' (1988). Three aspects of his writings are especially noteworthy. One is that they all have a unifying theme, which derives from Heller's sense of the devalued, uprooted state of the modern world. For him, the finest representatives of that fraught condition were those writers who most strenuously felt, diagnosed, explored, and resented that spiritual wasteland. The second recurring strand has to do with Germanness. Most of the writers whom Heller cherished were German; but this allegiance to one national literature did not betoken any kind of cultural patriotism on his part; rather he felt that the troubled, often problematic course of German history had brought about an unusual coexistence of high cultural sophistication on the one hand and political catastrophe on the other. He saw German culture, then, as offering a particularly clear, painful, and pained articulation of the modern condition. Third, Heller wrote all his major works in English first, before then translating them into German. It was a quite remarkable English that he wrote: urbane, passionate, profound, moving easily, almost casually, between journalistic and scholarly (often very abstract) vocabularies. He was very fond of the essay form, which he understood in its English mode (as having more to do with registers of spoken immediacy than with austere scholarly dispassion): 'The Disinherited Mind' grew out of material first published in Michael Oakeshott's 'Cambridge Journal', 'The Listener', and the 'Times Literary Supplement'. He once wrote: 'I have grown so allergic to words like 'Rilke-Forschung' or 'Kafka scholarship' that I was rather negligent in providing references, a rather tiresome way of proving one's 'scholarliness'; but partly also because of my -- possibly overambitious -- wish that these essays should be read as essays rather than be looked upon as sources of learned information. ('In the Age of Prose', 1984, xii)' It was, then, arguably Heller's signal achievement to have made the concerns of major German writers and thinkers of the past two centuries or so central to any thoroughgoing understanding of the energies and depradations of modern culture. He mediated between German and Anglo-American culture by thinking and writing in a discourse that truly seemed to embody not some dreary compromise but rather the quickening confluence of the best of both worlds. Particularly in the aftermath of the Second World War his voice had matchless urgency and force. This kind of voice had more to offer to the 1950s and 1960s than to the 1970s and 1980s. And this may account for the fact that Heller's later works seem to be engaged in restating what has already been said with rare authority in 'The Disinherited Mind' and in 'Thomas Mann: the Ironic German'. But even so it must be stressed that precisely Heller's urgent, impassioned, buttonholing mode made him a wonderfully committed and engaged teacher. Generations of students were in his debt because he gave them a firm sense of why literature mattered, and mattered in terms that went beyond any notion of cultural adornment. He was an unforgettable lecturer. Moreover -- and this is something that is not always evident because of the spiritual fervour of his published work -- he could be a wonderfully funny raconteur. One of his best anecdotes was told against himself, and it invoked the herculean efforts he made as dean of arts at Swansea to produce a passable simulacrum of knowing what he was doing and saying when he presented his students for their degrees -- in Welsh. 


@@@@@


doc= 92862


Rosee, Pasqua (fl. 1651-1656), coffee-house keeper, was probably born into the ethnic Greek community in Ragusa, Sicily, in the early seventeenth century. By 1651 Rosee had moved to Smyrna in the Ottoman empire, where he made the acquaintance of Daniel Edwards, an English Levant merchant who had acquired a taste for coffee. As a non-Muslim Levantine, Rosee was well placed to serve as an intermediary between English merchants and the Ottoman Turks, and it is likely that he began to work for Edwards in this capacity in Smyrna. 
Edwards left Smyrna in the latter part of 1651, perhaps to escape an outbreak of the plague in that city in September, and he returned to London with Rosee in his service. Henceforth Rosee was responsible for preparing and serving coffee to Edwards and his household. Edwards's household was located in Walbrook ward in the City of London. Here Rosee served 'two or three dishes' of coffee 'at a time twice or thrice a day' (Houghton, 312). The popularity of the novel drink among Edwards's friends and acquaintances was such that it became impractical to have Rosee serve it in a private house, so Edwards helped Rosee to establish his own business selling coffee to the public from a shed in the churchyard in the parish of St Michael Cornhill. Despite its inauspicious building, Rosee's coffee house was distinguished for its customers by a sign bearing his own head. This was the first coffee house in London. It is likely that Rosee's London coffee house was opened in 1652 as John Aubrey asserted. However, conclusive archival evidence of Rosee's coffee house does not turn up until mid-1656, when parish registers record Rosee's trading partnership with Christopher Bowman in St Michael's Alley. The first coffee house in England was probably established in Oxford a few years earlier in 1650 by a Jewish entrepreneur named Jacob who opened a coffee house at the sign of the Angel in the parish of St Peter-in-the-East. 
Rosee was an energetic entrepreneur and he took great pains to promote the novel practice of coffee drinking. He published a handbill advertisement entitled 'The Vertue of the Coffee Drink' ('c'.1652), in which he claimed credit for being the first person to sell coffee publicly in England. His handbill described coffee as 'a simple innocent thing, composed into a drink, by being dryed in an oven and ground to powder and boiled up with spring water'. He identified coffee as having both cold and dry qualities according to the humoural principles of Galenic medicine. The medicinal properties of coffee were also endorsed by Rosee, who claimed that it 'is good against sore eyes' as well as headaches and it 'will very much stop any defluxion of rheums... and so prevent and help consumptions and the cough of the lungs'. In addition Rosee noted that coffee drinking could both prevent and cure the dropsy, gout, and scurvy, as well as miscarriages in pregnant women, 'the spleen, hypocondriack winds, or the like'. His belief that coffee 'will prevent drowsiness and make one fit for business' has proved more resilient than his other claims for the drink's medical benefits. 
Apart from the handbill which proclaimed Rosee's authorship, three other undated contemporary handbills survive with the same title, two of which state that coffee was sold at the Rainbow Coffee House in Fleet Street. These tracts were most likely issued by James Farr, who probably established the Rainbow as the second London coffee house about 1656 and borrowed much of Rosee's original sales strategy for marketing coffee as a healthy drink with substantial medicinal uses. 
Rosee's business was well received, but he encountered some resistance from some alehouse keepers in the City of London who feared an encroachment on their custom and thus petitioned the lord mayor of London to stop his trade on the grounds that Rosee was not a freeman of the City. In 1654 this problem was solved by Alderman Hodges, the father-in-law of Daniel Edwards, who set up his coachman, Christopher (Kitt) Bowman (died 1663), who was free of the City, as Rosee's business partner. Bowman's freedom and Rosee's skill as a coffee man permitted the two to sell coffee legally. 
In 1656 Rosee and Bowman were able to move their coffee business from the previous shed into a building. They were granted a lease for premises identified as messuage G in the St Michael's vestry's 1696 summary, a site now known as 3 St Michael's Alley. The annual rent for this site, with a building 271/2 feet deep and 19 feet wide, was $4. This business partnership did not last long, however, and soon Bowman and Rosee were running rival coffee houses on opposite sides of the same street in St Michael's Churchyard. Rosee's coffee house was identified by a sign bearing an image of his own face, while Bowman's was identified by a sign with a coffee pot. A doggerel verse poem entitled 'To Mr. Pasqua Rosee, at the sign of his own head and half his body, in St. Michael's Alley, next the first coffee tent in London' was penned by one 'Adrianus del Tasso' to commemorate this trade war. Bowman ultimately prevailed in the contest, for Rosee was later obliged to leave England 'for some misdemeanour' (Houghton, 313), which has never been explained, and Bowman was thus able to convert the original coffee 'shed' into a proper house. 
There is no record of Rosee's life after he left London, although it has been subject to some speculation. Robinson suggests that Rosee went to Holland. Ukers elaborated on this suggestion by claiming that Rosee was also responsible for introducing the coffee house to the Netherlands in 1664. There is no contemporary evidence for either assertion. 
Rosee's innovations and achievements remained in popular memory long after he left England. John Tatham's 1664 play 'Knavery in All Trades' features a Turkish character named Mahoone -- possibly modelled on Rosee -- who runs a coffee house and boasts 'Me travel all the varld, me speak all de 'lingua'' (sig. D3'r'). A satire of 1672, 'A Broad-side against Coffee', recounts derisively that Pasqua had been a coachman and made fun of his foreign accent: 'Me no good Engalash!' It is possible that English was Rosee's third language, after Greek and Turkish, and given his background in the trading world of the Levant he may have been familiar with Hebrew and Armenian as well. Rosee was given credit for the first time as the first London coffee-house keeper by John Houghton, in his report to the Royal Society on 14 June 1699, which was later published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in September 1699 and later reprinted in his own journal, 'A Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade' (nos. 457-61, 25 April - 23 May 1701). The Scottish physician James Douglas also recounted the story of Rosee's achievements in a supplement to his botanical treatise on coffee, 'Arbor yemensis fructum cofe ferens' (1727). Later antiquarians of the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries have variously repeated and elaborated upon, often without evidence, the story of Rosee's coffee house. 
On 25 March 1952 the lord mayor of London commemorated the tercentenary of Rosee's coffee house with a tablet in St Michael's Alley affixed to the Jamaica Wine House, a building which had been preceded by the Jamaica Coffee House, which was built after the great fire. The plaque was paid for by the Coffee Buyer's Association and the ceremony was attended by 'diplomatic representatives of the great coffee-producing countries' ('The Times', 26 March 1952, 6c). 


@@@@@


doc= 92885


Banks, John (1934-2003), bookmaker, was born John Boyle on 19 August 1934 at 62 Dover Street, Anderston, Glasgow, the son of Hugh Boyle, window cleaner, and his wife, Rachel Williamson, 'nee' Brown. As a child he took his father's bets to the local (illegal) bookmaker and on leaving Woodside senior secondary school aged fifteen he first became a bookmaker's runner, earning commission on the bets from the local factory workers, before being elevated to the position of the clerk who registered the wagers. He was quick to pick up the basics of turf accounting and entered the profession himself at an unlicensed dog track, but his bank of $200 was wiped out within two months. Supported by small loans from his father, he moved to making a book at Mount Vernon, a licensed greyhound track in Glasgow, and then at Hamilton Park racecourse. About this time he began using the trade name of John Banks. 
In 1961 off-course cash betting was legalized in Britain and Banks began to purchase betting shops, which he described as 'money factories' with 'a licence to steal money' ('Daily Telegraph', 12 Aug 2003). In these he pioneered new betting avenues such as handicaps on football matches. By 1972 he owned thirty-four shops in Glasgow and Lanarkshire, which he sold to Mecca Bookmakers for about $1 million. He then began operating a tipping service from his house overlooking Sunningdale golf course, selling information to up to 1000 clients a week. As a gambling racehorse owner he also had some success, most notably when Kamundu, ridden by Lester Piggott, won the royal hunt cup at Ascot in 1969. On being asked how much he had won, Banks replied that 'they were still counting' ('The Herald', 12 Aug 2003). 
However it was as a flamboyant on-course bookmaker wearing a big black fedora and dark glasses that Banks became famous. His business was stimulated by offering better odds than his rivals, notably Ladbrokes, with whose chairman, Cyril Stein, he carried on a very public feud. He once wanted to name one of his racehorses Greenwich Mean Stein but, after this was rejected by Weatherbys, racing's administrative body, he opted for Adorable Cyril. His image was enhanced by a willingness to take large bets and to let the betting world know about it. In March 1970 he stood to lose $156,000 before Prince de Galles was beaten by a neck in the Lincoln Handicap. Earlier that month he lost $60,000 when Persian War won the champion hurdle. Never a sore loser, Banks sent champagne to the table of the winning owner when he discovered that they were dining in the same Cheltenham hotel. An unashamed self-publicist, he travelled to the races in a yellow Rolls-Royce, had his private plane painted in his purple and white racing colours, and advertised that he would offer 20:1 on Perry Mason, a fictional lawyer in a television series, losing a case. He gained more publicity by buying horses that had gained notoriety, such as Gay Future, the animal involved in a betting scandal at Cartmel in which the conspirators could have won $300,000. Another purchase was Hill House, a horse that had been at the centre of a doping controversy until a scientific inquiry established that it manufactured high levels of its own cortisone. The purchase brought media exposure but little success on the racetrack, as during the next three seasons Hill House ran twenty-three times without winning. 
Banks developed a friendship with the National Hunt jockey John Francome, and in 1978, following an inquiry into the running of a horse, coincidently called Stopped, Banks was fined $2500 by the Jockey Club stewards and warned off racecourses for three years. Both Banks and Francome were found guilty of 'conduct likely to cause serious damage to the interests of horseracing' by exchanging confidential information on horses. Banks went to the High Court but failed to have the decision overturned, though counsel for the Jockey Club stressed that neither he nor Francome had been accused of corrupt activity. On his return to racing his appetite for publicity had gone. He adopted a lower profile and instead of challenging his fellow layers he became chairman of the Rails Bookmakers' Association and was instrumental in gaining permission for such bookmakers to display odds like the conventional bookmakers. Eventually he handed over the business to his son Geoffrey, one of two sons and three daughters from his first marriage. He had another daughter from a second marriage to Anne-Marie, who nursed him through his losing battle with throat cancer. In July 2003 the John Banks nursery handicap stakes was named after him at Hamilton Park, the course where his bookmaking career had begun. He died at his home, 8 The Grange, Holloway Drive, Virginia Water, Surrey, on 10 August 2003, and was survived by his wife, Anne-Marie, and his six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92891


Bunting, Sidney Percival (1873-1936), political activist in South Africa, was born at 14 Oakley Square, Somers Town, St Pancras, London, on 29 June 1873, the second of four children of the nonconformist social activists Percy William Bunting (1836-1911) and his wife, Mary Hyett, 'nee' Lidgett (1840-1919). Jabez Bunting, paramount figure of early nineteenth-century Wesleyan Methodism, was his great-grandfather. Bunting's father, a barrister who was knighted in 1908, was a prominent figure in the Liberal Party and editor of the 'Contemporary Review'; his mother, who was involved in moral purity campaigns, undertook social work among working-class girls and women. Bunting absorbed his parents' values of moral rectitude and service to others and carried them with him throughout his life. 
Highly intelligent, musically gifted, and disciplined, Bunting excelled in classics, winning a scholarship first to University College School and later to St Paul's School. He entered Magdalen College, Oxford, as a classics demy in 1892, gaining firsts in classical moderations (1894) and 'literae humaniores' (1896), and winning the chancellor's Latin essay prize (1897). But his expectations that academic success would lead to a scholarly career were disappointed, as he narrowly missed election to a fellowship at Magdalen. 
Back in London, Bunting followed his father into law, passing the final solicitors' examination on 24 November 1899. In that year he also helped launch the Oxford and Cambridge Musical Club, the viola being his instrument of choice. A believer in empire, he sailed in May 1900 for South Africa, where he served as a lieutenant in the colonial irregular forces during the South African War. He remained in South Africa after the war, settling in Johannesburg and establishing himself in a legal career. He joined the Rand Club, launched the Johannesburg Musical Society in 1902, and, in his free time, wrote musical reviews. He took the degree of LLB through private study, passing the exams of the Cape of Good Hope University in 1906. His maternal family had land in Natal and, together with his cousin John Lidgett, he convinced the family to establish a wattle plantation. The Lidgetton Land Company was formed in 1907, with Bunting as a director. 
Through his social networks, and particularly his friend Wilfred Wybergh, commissioner of mines in the Transvaal, Bunting became drawn into labour politics. In 1910 he joined the South African Labour Party, which excluded blacks from membership. His political involvement accelerated after his father's death in 1911, which perhaps left him feeling freer to pursue his political interests. The turbulent white mineworkers' strike of July 1913 was a transforming experience. He was apparently at the Rand Club on 5 July when troops shot protesters and pedestrians in front of the club, an act of wanton violence which shattered his belief in the moral legitimacy of the state. From that time on he moved increasingly leftward in his politics. In September 1914, following the outbreak of the war in Europe, he was one of a small minority in the Labour Party that formed the War-on-War League within the party; a year later anti-war critics broke from the Labour Party and formed the International Socialist League. By 1915 Bunting was urging his fellow socialists to turn their attention to the plight of black workers. In contrast to many South African Labour Party stalwarts, his rapid orientation to black labour was possible because of his lack of roots in the white labour movement, but his concern for black workers put him on the margins of the all-white socialist movement. Marriage on 22 December 1916 to his fellow socialist Rebecca Notlowitz (1888-1971), a Lithuanian Jewish emigree, left him further from the conventional norms of his social class. 
Bunting became notorious in respectable white society after his arrest for his role in the African municipal workers' strike of June 1918. Believing in the Russian Revolution, he devoted increasing amounts of time to politics. He edited the International Socialist League's paper with an exhortatory style full of biblical allusions and Latin maxims. The 'bitter cry of outcast London' that he had imbibed as a youth in his parents' Methodist circles became in 'The International' the 'bitter cry of outcast Africa'. 
In line with the Comintern's dictates, Bunting played a leading role in launching the virtually all-white Communist Party of South Africa (CPSA) in July 1921. He and his wife attended the fourth Comintern Congress in Russia in November-December 1922, where he worked on how to apply the Comintern's united front policy to South Africa's racially divided conditions. On his return to South Africa he resigned from the Lidgetton Land Company, no longer able to reconcile his communist politics with his directorship of a plantation. But he continued using his profits from the wattle estate to subsidize his political activities. 
Bunting interpreted the Comintern's Bolshevization policy as a signal to recruit black workers. Largely through his efforts the CPSA became overwhelmingly black in composition. In 1927-8 the Comintern moved to impose the 'native republic' thesis, which called for the establishment of a black republic independent of the British empire. Bunting felt that the thesis shifted attention from the working class to the peasantry and that the call for a black republic would alienate white workers. When he and his wife attended the Sixth Comintern Congress in July-August 1928 they were cold-shouldered. Chastened, Bunting accepted the thesis and facilitated its adoption by the CPSA. But his initial forceful opposition made him a marked man in the Comintern's eyes. 
Eager to prove his commitment, Bunting decided to contest the rural Thembuland seat in the national election of June 1929. He and his companions were shadowed by the police and charged with contravening the 'Native Administration Act'. He lost the election but won enough votes to keep his deposit. He also won his case on appeal. The matter reached the house of assembly in August, where General Smuts called on the government to tighten the law to prevent further communist campaigns in African areas. 
The Comintern's new line hit the CPSA with full force in 1930-31. Bunting's elite background and moralistic attitudes made him the key target of political rivalry and jealousy. 'Buntingism' became a term of opprobrium. In September 1931 he and other leading communists were expelled. Devastated, he tried unsuccessfully to appeal against his expulsion. 
In 1933 Bunting gave up his legal practice on medical advice. In any case, the practice earned little income as his clients were mainly poor Africans. Needing to feed his family, he landed a job in the orchestra of the African Theatres' Trust. This entailed touring the country, not easy for a man of his age with health problems, and in February 1936 he found work as a caretaker. He died of a rupture of arteries in the brain at the Johannesburg General Hospital on 25 May 1936, having suffered a stroke -- his second -- on the previous day. He was cremated at Braamfontein crematorium, Johannesburg, on 27 May. His wife survived him, along with their two sons, Arthur Hugh Bunting (1917-2002), a noted crop scientist who held a chair at the University of Reading, and Brian Percy Bunting (1920-2008), a journalist who became a leader of the South African Communist Party. 
Bunting's life demonstrates that individual members of the imperial diaspora could play a radicalizing role. His political significance lies in transforming the demography of the CPSA, a legacy that has had major political implications for the trajectory of South African politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 92893


Banana, Canaan Sodindo (1936-2003), president of Zimbabwe, was born in Esiphezini, near Bulawayo, Southern Rhodesia, on 5 March 1936. His mother, Jese, was Ndebele, but his father, Aaron Banana, was a migrant worker from Nyasaland. He studied to become a teacher at the Tegwani Training Institute, and a Methodist minister at Epworth Theological College. He was ordained in the United Methodist church in 1962 (the year after his marriage, to Janet Mbuyazwe) and began teaching in church schools. He was able to study briefly at Kansai Industrial Centre in Japan, and began distance studies with the University of South Africa. He eventually won a scholarship to Washington and in 1975 graduated as a master of theology from Wesley Theological Seminary. Before that, however, he had already entered nationalist politics and in 1972 had become vice-president of the Rhodesian African National Council, which campaigned against the compromise British proposals to award independence to Rhodesia without full majority rule. He journeyed to London with his protests but, on his return to Rhodesia, was obliged to flee to Botswana in 1973. It was from there that he went to the USA for further studies. After his return from Washington in 1975 he was subjected to surveillance, arrest, and periodic imprisonment. These intensified after he attended the 1976 Geneva talks which, unsuccessfully, sought to resolve the Rhodesian crisis. A member at that time of Bishop Abel Muzorewa's delegation, he defected to Robert Mugabe's more radical Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), and it was this that marked him out as dangerous to the white minority government of Ian Smith. Meanwhile, he had also embarked on a career of writing. His 'Gospel According to the Ghetto' (1974) inaugurated his reputation as a liberation theologian, which he was able to cement with later works after majority rule and independence were finally achieved in 1980. At one point he suggested that the 'Bible' needed to be rewritten in order to make it relevant to post-colonial societies. 
Because of his membership of ZANU, his Ndebele background in an otherwise Shona-dominated ruling party, his religious respectability combined with his liberationist politics, and his credentials of having been imprisoned, Banana was Prime Minister Robert Mugabe's choice as Zimbabwe's first president. It was a largely titular and ceremonial role, lasting from 1980 to 1987, when the presidency became an executive position assumed by Mugabe himself. Banana greatly enjoyed the role. His tailored Mao suits, love of football, and forays into playing the guitar contrived to depict him as a stylish man of the people. His writing and his religious background lent him a scholarly and clerical dignity. However, he did accomplish something of genuine importance during his tenure, which was to broker talks between Mugabe and the Ndebele leader, Joshua Nkomo, at a time when Mugabe had unleashed the 'gukurahundi' ('whirlwind') of repression against Ndebele dissidents -- and a very great number of innocent Ndebele people. The 'gukurahundi' lasted from 1982 to 1987, and Banana's intervention in 1985 took two years to bear fruit. The result, while ending the pogroms against the Ndebele, also constrained Nkomo as a political force for the rest of his life. 
In 1997, ten years after relinquishing the presidency (he retired with a large cash lump sum, a tax-free pension for life, and various other benefits), Banana was accused by Jefta Dube, one of his own presidential staff, of homosexual rape. (Dube was standing trial for murder, but claimed in his defence that the murdered man had been taunting him as 'Banana's wife'.) Although Banana's proclivities had been widely known for some time, it was impossible to stop the public scandal from spreading rapidly, once Dube's accusations were made in the high court. Many others came forward to say that they too had been subjected to sexual advances or sodomy by Banana. Mugabe had made an infamous speech against homosexuality in 1995, describing homosexuals as 'worse than pigs and dogs', so the political establishment was in no mood to prevent eleven charges of sexual misconduct being brought to court in 1999. The witnesses' testimonies were damning and Banana fled briefly to South Africa. It was Nelson Mandela who persuaded him to return, and probably also persuaded the Zimbabwean establishment to treat him with dignity. A one-year gaol term (ten years with nine suspended) was served, in relaxed surroundings, for six months. Banana lost his university chair of theology, was defrocked by his church, and was jeered out of his presidency of the Zimbabwe Football Association. In his last years he doggedly defended himself against the accusations of homosexuality, declaring it to be an abomination. His wife, Janet, who had stood by him during his trial, fled to Britain in 2000 to claim political asylum. Banana was, however, not harassed again. In his last brief years after Janet's departure he fell into a lingering illness. He died of cancer of the prostate at Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, London, on 10 November 2003. Janet and their children, one daughter and three sons (two of whom were charged with armed crimes, and one convicted), survived him. 
Banana was a man of contradictions. His five books on politics and theology formed a real contribution to an African sense of liberation theology, or what he called 'combat theology'. Before his fall from grace his public image was one of humane conscientiousness, thoughtfulness, and stylishness. His sexuality, however, was what broke him on Robert Mugabe's wheel of intolerance -- although even Mugabe, after Banana's death, called him 'a gift to the nation' ('The Guardian'). 


@@@@@


doc= 92898


Berk, Lieselotte (1913-2003), dancer and fitness trainer, was born on 17 January 1913 in Cologne, Germany, the only daughter of Jewish parents. Her Russian father, Nicolai Heymansohn, was originally a tailor and owned shops selling clothing for men. Her German mother died of a stroke when Lotte was eight years old. She led a life of privilege as a young woman; she was chauffeured around in her father's Mercedes and wore expensive clothes. Her father wanted her to study the piano, which she did for eleven years; however her true love was dancing. Despite her father's opposition, as dancing in Germany in the 1930s had close associations with prostitution, she trained under the seminal modern dance artist Mary Wigman in Cologne. As young as eighteen she danced for some of the more famous choreographers and conductors, including Carl Ebert, Bruno Walter, and Fritz Busch, at many events including the Salzburg Festival in Austria. In 1933 she married Ernst Berk, a fellow dancer. Their daughter Esther was born in 1934. As a Jew in Nazi Germany she was prevented from performing; when the situation in Germany became much more precarious she and Ernst fled to Britain in 1938 on Ernst's British passport (he had been born in Germany of British parents). Her father and his second wife died in Auschwitz. Upon their arrival in London, Lotte and Ernst lived in a shared house for Jewish refugees. Berk continued to dance and also worked as a model at Heatherley's School of Fine Art. The family finally settled in Shepherd's Bush in 1941 and Berk danced with the ballet instructor Marie Rambert's company. During the Second World War she toured the UK with the Entertainments National Service Association, performing for the troops, and had small feature roles. 
In 1953 Berk decided to retire from dancing, partly because she felt that a female dancer's career should end before middle age and also because her type of modern dance was not appealing to London audiences. However, she became concerned with her weight and the prospect of her dancer's muscles turning to flab without constant workouts. Friends persuaded her to start an exercise class based on a combination of modern ballet, yoga, and what she called 'orthopaedic exercises'. With the help of an osteopath, who assisted her with designing certain exercises, she opened her studio at 29 Manchester Street in the West End of London, near the theatre district. When an accident locked her lumbar spine X-rays suggested that she would be crippled for life, but through constant exercise she was better within fourteen days. Her methods proved very popular, at first with friends and then with London's socialites. It was said that in the 1960s Vidal Sassoon was responsible for looking after London socialites' hair, Mary Quant their clothes, and Lotte Berk their figures. The numbers of women attending Berk's classes increased and she eventually counted several internationally famous clients, including Joan Collins, Britt Ekland, Edna O'Brien, Brooke Shields, and Yasmin Le Bon. The exercise regime consisted of barre and floor work and stretching and loosening the spine, all of which took advantage of Berk's lifetime dance training. Classes were for women only and were conducted to pop music. Exercises included muscle toning exercises, pelvic tilts, and tiny but demanding muscle movements. They were creatively named by the mischievous Berk with descriptions such as 'the prostitute' and 'the peeing dog'. Although considering herself fit through years of riding horses, Prue Leith admitted that her legs were 'reduced to jelly' after twenty minutes of Lotte Berk's demanding regime (Berk and Prince, introduction). In the introduction to her book 'The Lotte Berk Method of Exercise' (1978) she wrote: 'There is no need for any young girl to have a shapeless body, for any mother to lose her figure after childbirth, or any mature woman to have an old and decrepit body.' Berk's studios expanded in England to Fulham and Hungerford, where her daughter, Esther, also taught her exercise method. One student gained permission to teach the technique in the 1970s in New York and the Lotte Berk method became international. Others adapted the exercises and developed their own versions of the Berk method. Eventually the Lotte Berk method of exercise was practised in classes in New York, California, Zurich, and Rome. Despite the expansion and popularity of her exercise regime, Berk did not make a vast fortune from her career as an instructor. However, she did have a permanent and lasting impact on women's exercise regimes around the world. 
Lotte Berk had an interesting and varied love life. In later life she said that she had been married seven times, but only twice on paper. She divorced her first husband, Ernst, after thirty years of an 'open marriage' and then married the 61-year-old Herbert Felix Rieser, a commercial photographer (and son of Emanuel Rieser, soap manufacturer) on 31 January 1964. Although the marriage only lasted three weeks, they remained close friends. A staunch supporter of vegetarianism as a way of life, she felt that the 'barrage of chemicals' that animals were fed slowly poisoned the body (Berk and Prince, introduction). However, she still continued to eat the occasional steak. Berk continued to exercise throughout her life, retiring in her early eighties, although she still supervised some classes. She died at the Brendoncare Foundation, Froxfield, Wiltshire, on 4 November 2003, and was survived by her daughter, Esther. 


@@@@@


doc= 92900


Bielenberg, Christabel Mary Harmsworth (1909-2003), author, was born on 18 June 1909 at the Old House, Totteridge, Hertfordshire, the elder daughter and second of the four children of Percy Collingwood Burton (1879-1953), advertising executive, and his wife, Christabel Rose, 'nee' Harmsworth (1879/80-1967), youngest daughter of Alfred Harmsworth, lawyer, of Dublin. 'Chrismary', as her family called her, to distinguish her from her mother, had a comfortable childhood. Her father was a lively Anglo-Irishman who, after service in the South African War, founded an advertising agency that eventually formed part of the London Press Exchange, of which he became vice-chairman; he was also chairman of the World's Press News Publishing Company. Her maternal uncles included Alfred Charles William Harmsworth, Viscount Northcliffe, and Harold Sidney Harmsworth, first Viscount Rothermere. 
Christabel Burton was tall, athletic, and bright, and she enjoyed her girls' public school, St Margaret's, Bushey. However, she decided not to go to university. She had at least one season as a debutante and also went to finishing school in Paris. She played golf and sometimes partnered her father, a lifelong golf enthusiast (and president of the English Golf Union in 1936 and again in 1937), in competitions. She spent time in Ireland with her friend Gwennie McCormack at Moore Abbey in co. Kildare. There they sang duets and were sometimes joined by Gwennie's father, the plangent Irish tenor John McCormack. In 1932 she went to Hamburg, Germany, to train her voice with Alma Schadow and learn the language. 
When she first arrived in Hamburg Christabel Burton expressed some uncertainties in her letters home, but these were dissipated soon afterwards when she met a German law student, Peter Heinrich Wilhelm Bielenberg (1911-2001), the son of Paul Hermann Bielenberg, lawyer. He was tall, striking-looking, and athletic. They danced together divinely and soon they were engaged -- despite rumbles of opposition from both families. Not long after they had met, Peter had taken her to an open-air Hitler rally at Hagenbeck's zoo in Hamburg. The Nazi razzmatazz of drum-rolls and political anthems was too much for him. Christabel had barely begun to decipher the Fuhrer's Austrian-accented rant when Peter spirited her out of the meeting, saying 'You may think that the Germans are political idiots, Chris, and you may be right, but of one thing I can assure you, they won't be so stupid as to fall for that clown' ('The Past is Myself', 21-2). Not long afterwards Hitler was installed as chancellor. 
Against this ominous background Christabel and Peter were married on 29 September 1934 (in London, where Peter worked briefly at the German embassy), and Christabel duly became a German citizen. As the young couple settled down in Hamburg her new compatriots began to fall ever further under the spell of the ruthless demagogue. Peter continued his law studies in Hamburg while Christabel was attempting to play, never quite successfully, the role of the domestically accomplished German 'Hausfrau'. (Some Harmsworth money, filtering through to her from a trust fund, made life more comfortable for the young couple.) 
The price of Nazi economic stability soon became apparent as minorities were targeted and informers started to undermine the social fabric of Germany. Peter disliked the Nazis so much that on his graduation he refused to swear the necessary oath of loyalty to Hitler. He managed, nevertheless, to practise in his father's law firm for a time. But then, when one of his clients was acquitted in court of a political crime but abducted immediately by two uniformed men outside the courtroom, he decided he could no longer practise as a lawyer. He and Christabel considered emigrating permanently to Ireland; she even went there to have a look at some possible farms. But in the end they were talked out of it by their good friend Adam von Trott, who felt they should stay and resist Hitler. In February 1939 Peter took a job in the department of trade and industry in Berlin. By now they had two children -- Nicholas ('b'. 1935) and John ('b'. 1937) -- and they lived in a charming house in the suburb of Dahlem. They soon found themselves part of a group of dissidents. On risky trips to Britain in 1939 von Trott made desperate efforts to persuade the British government to hold back a little longer before confronting Hitler, but he -- and Peter, who made one similar foray -- were largely disregarded. 
When war broke out on 3 September 1939, Hitler and his people became locked together in a self-destructive embrace which the dissidents knew would now be almost impossible to break. Not knowing what was best for the family, Christabel briefly took the children to Denmark and Austria, but as the phoney war continued, returned to Berlin. Peter did not want to fight for this travesty of the country he loved. Undrafted, he moved briefly to the German foreign office -- where he fell out with a senior Nazi -- then back to trade and industry. There he was assigned to manage a fish-paste factory in Norway, and although a third child, Christopher, arrived in 1942, Christabel saw very little of Peter over the next three years. Alone in an increasingly tense Berlin, Christabel briefly sheltered a young Jewish couple. Eventually, as British and American air raids worsened, she and Peter decided that she should take the children out of the city permanently, so in 1943 they set off for Rohrbach, a village in the Black Forest. She nevertheless made long expeditions on impossible trains to see Peter in Norway, and to Berlin to check on the house in Dahlem. In early 1944 she experienced the full force of a raid on the city but managed to meet von Trott, who hinted that now the dissidents had only one option left -- the assassination of Hitler. 
Then, back in the Black Forest, on a beautiful day in August 1944, Christabel heard that the July putsch had failed and that Peter (who had not been involved in planning it, but had been implicated through his connection with von Trott) was in prison. She briefly collapsed, but she had no option but to recover and try to find out what had happened to her husband. She went first to Munich and then, on Christmas eve, to Berlin, where she had to sprint for safety as the allied raids devastated the city. She found out that Peter was not far away, in Ravensbruck concentration camp. She pulled strings through friendly Nazi acquaintances and managed to visit him. There she was able to convey to him that von Trott was dead, so Peter had no need to lie any more to protect his friend. Peter also managed to pass her a message -- enclosed in a cigarette box -- which gave details of what he had said about his involvement with Adam. This proved useful when Christabel achieved an interview with the Gestapo at their partially bombed headquarters in Prinz Albrecht Strasse. By sheer force of personality -- judiciously mixed with a little blackmail involving her press baron connections in London -- she made the Gestapo listen. Astonishingly, after some further bureaucratic delays, Peter was released from Ravensbruck. He was supposed to go to a punishment camp, but managed to slip away and was soon in the Black Forest. There he lived in the woods near Rohrbach and slept in a farmhouse, until at last the area was overrun by the allies. 
The next three years were a time of uncertainty. Peter was keen to contribute to the new Germany, but Christabel felt she could not bear to live there again. She worked briefly as an 'Observer' correspondent in Germany, then returned to England. Mindful of the widows and orphans of those who did not survive the July plot, she, with the help of David Astor, Victor Gollancz, and Lady Cripps, set up a charity to provide food and clothing for them. But life in austere, exhausted post-war Britain did not appeal to either Christabel or Peter when he finally arrived towards the end of 1946. Problems multiplied: she became ill and he had a serious motor-cycle accident. Eventually, in 1948, they resolved their uncertainties -- by putting into action their long-conceived plan of emigrating to Ireland. They bought the sizeable but dilapidated Munny House at Tullow, co. Carlow, some fifty miles south-west of Dublin. With the aid of 'Teach Yourself Farming' Peter turned himself into a farmer who transformed the exhausted soil into rich and profitable land. The longest and most peaceful era of Christabel's life followed. But she was far from inactive. The orphans of the July plot came to visit; she became involved in the very early days of the peace process in Northern Ireland; and she worked hard to foster mutual understanding and reconciliation between Britain and Germany. 
Christabel Bielenberg's extraordinary Nazi decade might have passed quietly into family history had she not decided -- prompted by a request for help with a biography of Adam von Trott -- to write about it. Her memoir, 'The Past is Myself' (1968) was written from a unique point of view. As she put it in her foreword: 'I am English; I was German, and above all I was there.' The first-time writer revealed a novelist's skill with place and character. There was a marvellously vivid account of life in Berlin and the Black Forest; and her portrait of Adam von Trott, with his daunting charm and intelligence, was perfectly rendered. There was pleasant self-deprecation and social comedy, often black, at the expense of the foibles of low-level Nazis; and she was note-perfect in her accounts of the most breathtaking and painful moments of the drama. The book was well reviewed and became a slow-burning best-seller over the next twenty years, culminating in a television version, 'Christabel' (1988), written by Dennis Potter and starring Elizabeth Hurley. Demand from readers wanting to know what happened after 1945 prompted a sequel, 'The Road Ahead' (1992), which added interesting insights into the family's immediate post-war difficulties but inevitably lacked the intensity of the first book. 
In 1988 Christabel Bielenberg was made a commander of the German Federal Order of Merit and given a gold medal of merit by the European parliament. Her eyesight failed in her later years, but she and her beloved Peter smoked and socialized with determination until he died on 13 March 2001. She succumbed to bronchopneumonia on 2 November 2003 at Munny House. Three days later, at her funeral in the little protestant church of Saint Columba's in Tullow, she was mourned by her three tall sons, a numerous extended family, and some of the children of those who had tried -- and failed -- to rid Germany of Adolf Hitler. 


@@@@@


doc= 92901


Bond, Ernest Radcliffe (1919-2003), police officer, was born on 1 March 1919 at 58 John Street, Barrow in Furness, the son of William Edward Bond, shipyard worker, and his wife, Annie Elizabeth, 'nee' Radcliffe. He worked initially as an apprentice French polisher after leaving school. On 16 September 1935 he joined the 2nd battalion, Scots Guards, as a regular soldier. On 29 October, by then a sergeant, he married Mabel Phoebe Isabell Laming, the 23-year-old daughter of Alfred Thomas Laming, dock labourer; they had two sons and two daughters. Bond remained with the 2nd battalion, Scots Guards, through the early days of the Second World War, serving initially in Norway. After volunteering and serving briefly in no. 8 (Guards) commando, he was sent to north Africa with the 2nd Scots Guards. It was there in 1941 that he was recruited into L detachment of the Special Service Brigade (which later became the Special Air Service), set up by Colonel David Stirling to carry out actions behind enemy lines. On his first mission the plane carrying Bond crash-landed near Tripoli and he was captured, spending the rest of the conflict as a prisoner of war. 
After being demobilized in 1946 Bond joined the Metropolitan Police on 25 February 1946 with the warrant number of 128434, fulfilling career plans delayed by the outbreak of war. He embarked on what was to become a very successful career in the service, based first in M division, which covered the Lambeth area of south London. In 1948 Bond was transferred to E division, covering the Holborn area of central London, as a detective. After working in the fraud squad and the flying squad he joined the murder squad as a detective inspector in 1963, and was appointed commander in 1969. 
It was the arrival on the political scene in Britain of the Angry Brigade in 1970 that was to change Bond's career path and bring him into public prominence. The small, loosely knit anarchist organization set off a series of twenty-five bombs, none fatal, aimed at targets such as the Conservative employment secretary Robert Carr's home, police stations, army barracks, and embassies of right-wing regimes. Bond, who was given the codename Commander X by Scotland Yard for security reasons, was put in charge of the newly formed bomb squad, whose aim was to investigate who was behind the explosions. The Angry Brigade was short-lived, five members being gaoled for ten years following two trials at the Old Bailey. In one of them, Bond told the defence barrister, Ian McDonald: 'I regard the Angry Brigade as an idea that anyone can join.' He added in his evidence that if the brigade had not been caught, 'I am quite certain that, sooner or later, we would have had somebody killed' (Carr, 101). One of the defendants later described Bond as 'an old-fashioned plod' ('The Guardian'), which he might well have regarded as a back-handed compliment. It was clear from the court exchanges and Bond's subsequent statements that he was bemused by the motives and lifestyles of the defendants. A conventional and perhaps old-fashioned detective and, like many of his police contemporaries, an active freemason, Bond later described the trial as 'the most disgraceful' of his experience because of the many allegations that his officers had planted evidence ('The Observer', 3 Feb 2002). He was awarded the queen's police medal and promoted deputy assistant commissioner, both in 1972. 
Bond faced a much more serious challenge when the bomb squad had to deal with the IRA, which launched its bombing campaign in London in the 1970s. As the attacks grew in daring and frequency Bond and his colleagues adopted a policy of placing large numbers of undercover officers around potential targets. In December 1975 this strategy led to the pursuit of four IRA men who for the second time had fired shots at Scotts restaurant in Mayfair. The gunmen were pursued and broke into a flat at 22a Balcombe Street in central London, where they took as hostages an elderly couple, John and Sheila Matthews. In what became known as 'the siege of Balcombe Street' Bond played a supervisory role as six days of painstaking negotiation were carried out, leading to the safe release of the couple and the surrender of the IRA men. 
Bond received eleven commendations from the commissioner between 1948 and 1964. These included recognition for his 'courage and initiative' and his 'perseverance' in cases covering larceny, forgery, false pretences, and robbery, as well as for his leadership of the bomb squad. His career was given further recognition when he was appointed OBE in the new year's honours of 1976. He retired in February that year after thirty years of 'exemplary conduct' (Metropolitan Police Archives). After his retirement, he lived quietly and was able to spend time on his interests in decorating and gardening. He remained an active freemason, having joined the Britannic lodge of Madeira in London in 1962 and become master of that lodge in 1969. He was a member of other lodges and achieved the office of past assistant grand sword bearer and past junior grand deacon. He died at his home, 165 Welling Way, Welling, Kent, on 20 November 2003, of prostate cancer. He was survived by his four children, his wife, Mabel, having predeceased him in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 92902


Burke, Patricia Rosa Moore (1916-2003), actress, was born at via Castelmorone 5, Milan, Italy, on 23 March 1916, the daughter of an operatic tenor known as 'the Lancashire Caruso', Thomas Aspinall Burke (1890-1969), and his wife, Marie Rosa, 'nee' Holt, formerly Altfuldisch, the actress Marie Burke (1894-1988), whose distinguished career included a starring role in 'Show Boat'. Privately trained, Burke began her career in her teens, stage-managing at the Q Theatre; she acted in French at the nursery of the avant-garde, Grein's Independent Theatre, and understudied in Shakespeare at Regent's Park. At the age of sixteen, she appeared in the most sophisticated musical of the 1930s, Cole Porter's 'Nymph Errant' at the Adelphi Theatre in 1933, and was spotted by C. B. Cochran. She created the title role in the Chinese fable 'Lady Precious Stream' at the Savoy Theatre in 1936, and worked with major playwrights of the inter-war years, including J. B. Priestley and Lesley Storm. Meanwhile her revue career flourished in vehicles for stars as diverse as Beatrice Lillie and Flanagan and Allen. She also began her love affair with pantomime in this era of long runs and de luxe productions in major venues: she tried everything from the 'goody-goody' heroine in 'Dick Whittington' to a final turn in 1971 as the battleaxe Queen in 'Alice', but excelled as principal boy, where she could exploit her lyric soprano and her athleticism (she played several sports), offering the audience a swashbuckling, attractive Prince Charming or Robin Hood. 
On 14 March 1938 Burke married Michael William Kimpton, a 26-year-old flying instructor, and son of Charles William Kimpton, stationer's manager. There were no children of the marriage. During the Second World War she worked for the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA), touring Burma, Italy, and the Middle East, despite essentially pacifist convictions. Basil Dean recalled her at an Indian football ground where her mother joined her for a concert before Lord Louis Mountbatten and 5000 troops. She played to the Eighth Army in Naples on HMS 'Orion', developing a double act with Gabrielle Brune that Dean considered 'riotous'. They gave a dozen daily concerts and sing-songs for the wounded. Her first real triumph also came during the war, in 1943, with the long-running musical 'The Lisbon Story', playing a French ballerina who collaborates with the Nazis to free an imprisoned scientist, a role reprised in 1946 for the movie with Richard Tauber. It was conceived in broad, sentimental strokes, and gave her a strong curtain as the ballerina went singing to execution. 
Burke's post-war career began with light comedy -- 'Stage Door', an American import, and 'Clutterbuck' with the archetypal Englishman Naunton Wayne. She also made some frothy movies, including in 1946 'The Trojan Brothers' (playing a socialite stalked by the back end of a pantomime horse). She then joined the Old Vic -- already seen as the likely National Theatre -- in 1947 to play Katharina in 'The Taming of the Shrew' at the first ever Edinburgh Festival and later at the New Vic. John Burrell's 'Shrew' was a rare revival of a play then read as farce. He valued lightness and speed: one review likened his 'Shrew' to a Crazy Gang show. Burke and her co-star Trevor Howard emphasized passion over slapstick. Howard's Petruchio slung Burke across his shoulders or held her upside down, but the force that drove this couple was desire; photographs show a fiery, active Burke with a fleeting melancholy. The critics were unanimous in praise. 
The Vic did not fully explore Burke's talents. She took over from another actress as Doll Common in Burrell's lively production of Ben Jonson's 'The Alchemist'; in Shaw's 'St Joan' she had a single, albeit funny, line. The following year she played Rosalind in 'As You Like It' at Worthing, praised for a magic forged in her principal boy roles. In the 1950s she worked with Tyrone Guthrie at the Edinburgh Festival and enjoyed solid opportunities with 'Trilby' (Bedford Theatre, 1950), 'Mrs Dot' (Arts Theatre, 1951), and 'Trelawny of the Wells' (Lyric, Hammersmith, 1952). She returned to revue as the lead in 'Cockles and Champagne' (Saville Theatre, 1954) and to musicals with 'Romance and Candlelight' (Piccadilly, 1955). Meanwhile her wit made her popular on radio and television quiz programmes. By now the British theatre was changing and Burke's intelligence claimed a share of challenging work. She played three times at the Royal Court Theatre: as Adriana in 'The Comedy of Errors' (1952); the sporty Lampito in the money-spinner 'Lysistrata' (1957); and as Kit in Shelagh Delaney's 'The Lion in Love' (1960). The play's unfocused naturalism disappointed the critics, although Burke's market trader Kit, boozy, exuberant, and aggressive, was admired. 
Royal Court actors of the 1960s were at the forefront of unilateralism, and Burke's pacifism led her to prominence in the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament; she and John Osborne were arrested in 1961. There were no more Royal Court roles; she worked in light comedies such as 'The Amorous Prawn' (1963) and played the title role in 'The Killing of Sister George' at Watford before joining in 1968 the long-running but lightweight musical 'Charlie Girl' at the Adelphi, in which she danced the Charleston. Her movie career continued, though her only notable film was the Boulting brothers' 'Soft Beds, Hard Battles' (1973) starring Peter Sellers, in which she played a nun. In the 1970s she retired to become a literary agent, still a lively if underrated presence in British theatre. Her first marriage having ended in divorce, she married Group Captain Duncan C. MacDonald, a test pilot; they had a son and a daughter. After a second divorce she married, on 16 May 1980, John Collingwood, otherwise John Collingwood-Whittick, a mechanical engineer, and son of Thomas Stephen Collingwood, mechanical engineer. She died in Draguignan, France, on 23 November 2003, and was survived by her husband, John, and the son and daughter of her second marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 92903


Birkbeck, William John (1859-1916), ecumenist, was born at High House, Thorpe, Norfolk, on 13 February 1859, the son of William Birkbeck (1832-1897), banker, and his first wife, Elizabeth Margaret (1842-1859), 'nee' Cator, daughter of Albemarle Cator and Elizabeth Blakeney. His mother died less than a month after his birth; his father's subsequent marriage, in 1862, to Susan Maria Hamond, produced Birkbeck's only sibling, a sister, Antonia. Known to his family as Johnny, Birkbeck was educated at Misses Ringer's school, Lowestoft, and Mr Darch's school, Brighton, before enrolment at Eton College in 1872. His 'misfortune to be born with grown up tastes' (R. Adderley in Bibbee, 79) did not prevent his being popular at school; although not good at games, his abilities in drawing and languages won them over. He matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1877, where he read modern history and graduated BA in 1881 and MA in 1884. His religious background was evangelical (his father was a Quaker convert to Anglicanism), but during his time at Eton and Oxford his affinities turned to Anglo-Catholicism. He erected a small oratory in his room, complete with candles, coloured altar hangings, and flowers where he said the daily offices from the 'Book of Common Prayer'. 
After Oxford, Birkbeck went on to study at the Royal College of Music under Sir Walter Parratt from 1883 until 1888. On 4 October 1883 he married Rose Katherine (1860-1947), daughter of Sir Somerville Arthur Gurney KCVO, of North Runcton Hall, Norfolk, a director of the banking firm Barclay & Co. There were two sons and one daughter of the marriage. 
Birkbeck's interest in religious matters remained purely personal until 1888, when Sir Arthur Hardinge, a lifelong friend and second secretary to the embassy at St Petersburg, and John Athelstan Riley suggested Birkbeck as the official representative of the Church of England to the 900th anniversary celebrations of the conversion of St Vladimir to Christianity. The celebrations were intended to gain access for Hardinge to the upper reaches of the pan-Slavist circles of the Russian court and garner favour with Konstantine Pobedonostov, the chief procurator of the Russian holy synod. Hardinge accompanied Birkbeck as he presented a congratulatory letter from the archbishop of Canterbury, Edward White Benson. While the letter was well received and pleased Pobedonostov, the pan-Slavist faction and Pobedonostov in particular were on the decline at the court of Tsar Nicholas II, thus thwarting Hardinge's diplomatic initiative. Birkbeck's interest in Russian Orthodoxy, however, was aroused. 
From 1888 until his death Birkbeck made it his life's mission to understand the Russian people and their church and to promote reunion with the Church of England. His approach to reunion differed greatly from that of his predecessors as he sought to bring about Christian unity by promoting cultural, social, political, and religious understanding instead of purely focusing on the theological differences between the two churches. Birkbeck attempted to recast Russia and her church in a positive light to overturn the negative perceptions of Russia among the majority of the English public. His efforts resulted in numerous publications that addressed themes previously unimportant in ecumenical writings, including social and political controversies in tsarist Russia. He wrote seventeen major pieces on Russia and Russian Orthodoxy, including speeches for the English Church Union and various Church Congresses; additionally he published in 'The Guardian' and 'The Times'. He also edited a collection of the letters and essays of William Palmer and Aleksyei Khomyakov entitled 'Russia and the English Church During the Last Fifty Years'. The bulk of Birkbeck's writings were published in 1917 by Athelstan Riley as 'Birkbeck and the Russian Church'. A collection of Birkbeck's letters was edited by his wife in 1922 as 'Birkbeck and the Russian Church'. 
Basing his speeches and publications on his personal experiences in Russia, Birkbeck moved in the highest political and ecclesiastical circles and even held private meetings with Tsar Nicholas II. Birkbeck utilized his clerical and political connections to provide access and information to high-ranking bishops in the English and American churches and to host Russian church leaders in Britain. He served as guide, facilitator, and translator on visits to Russia by leading Anglican clerics, such as Bishop Creighton and Archbishop Maclagan of York. He also hosted Bishop Antonius of Finland during Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee in 1897, during which the queen afforded him a personal audience to discuss his efforts at Christian unity. In 1912, under the leadership of Bernard Pares, he led a clerical group as part of a parliamentary delegation to visit the new Russian Duma. 
Birkbeck's efforts at Christian unity were not limited to the Russian Orthodox church. He worked closely with Charles Lindley Wood, second Viscount Halifax, on reunion with the Roman Catholic church and travelled with Halifax to Rome in 1896 to meet personally with Pope Leo XIII. He was an editor of the 'English Hymnal' (1906). 
Birkbeck travelled to Russia for Easter 1916, and shortly after his return died of pneumonia at his Norfolk estate, Stratton Strawless Hall, on 9 June 1916. He was buried on the 11th at Stratton Strawless. The St Petersburg correspondent for 'The Times' commented that 'few Englishmen know this country, its people, and language so well' ('The Times', 12 June 1916). His eulogizers praised his devotion to the cause of ecumenism. Birkbeck was indispensable to the Church of England as an adviser and to the Russians as a conduit for the pan-Slavist interpretation of the truth about Orthodoxy. But it was his ecumenical philosophy of promoting mutual understanding, instead of debating theological distinctions, and his personality, that were his most important contributions to the cause of Christian unity. 


@@@@@


doc= 92907


Hardman, Edward Fitzmaurice Chambre (1898-1988), photographer, was born at Fox Rock House, Stillorgan, Rathdown, co. Dublin, on 25 November 1898, the second child and first son of Edward Chambre Hardman (1861-1917), a land agent for several landlords in co. Dublin, and his wife, Gertrude Elizabeth Davies (died 1959). His father was a keen amateur photographer, and Hardman grew up experimenting with his quarter-plate brass and mahogany Lancaster stand camera, processing the exposed glass-plate negatives in the wine cellar and making contact prints in the apple loft. 
After schooling at Earlsford House preparatory school, Dublin, and St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, Hardman joined the Indian army in 1917, obtaining a commission as a regular officer in the 2nd battalion of the 8th brigade of Gurkha rifles, stationed at Lansdowne. He stayed in India until 1922, and despite the dusty conditions produced photographs to send home to his mother and sisters; some of the more dramatic images were processed after his return to England, and exhibited years later. 
During this time Hardman met his fellow officer Kenneth Burrell, and decided to make photography his profession. Burrell became his business partner, and in 1922 they travelled together to Liverpool, and established the photographic studio Burrell and Hardman, based at 51A Bold Street. Burrell was content to be a sleeping partner in the business, and bowed out completely in the 1930s. The studio attracted many important figures, such as the seventeenth earl of Derby, and academic figures including the town planners Patrick Abercrombie and Charles Reilly. As Burrell and Hardman became the fashionable choice for portrait photography in Liverpool, Hardman gained commissions from the Playhouse Theatre to photograph the up-and-coming stars of the time. Ivor Novello, Robert Donat, Michael Redgrave, and Patricia Routledge are some of the more famous sitters. In 1923 Hardman joined the Sandon Studios Society, the social focus of Liverpool's artists. He numbered the popular portrait painter Henry Carr, the sculptor Herbert Tyson Smith, and the architect Francis Xavier Velarde among his friends. 
On 10 August 1932 Hardman married (Ethel) Margaret Mills (1909-1970), daughter of Albert Mills, an accountant. A photographer in her own right, she had started work as an assistant at the studio in 1926 and played a vital role in the business. When asked about her contribution Hardman answered simply, 'I could not have done it without her' (Hagerty, 'Continuity', 13). They had no children. 
By 1938 the business was thriving and a second studio was opened on St Werburgh Street, Chester. Demand rose even further during the war, when portrait photography was a reserved occupation. Countless young men sought a photograph for their families and sweethearts before leaving for the war. In 1948 the Hardmans moved the studio to 59 Rodney Street. It was here that Hardman printed some of his best known work, including 'The Birth of the Ark Royal' (1950). 
Although Hardman worked as a portrait photographer for most of his life, it was his landscape photography that earned him greatest respect among the photographic community. During the 1920s he travelled in Europe, and some of his most acclaimed photographs date from this time, including 'A Memory of Avignon' (1926). He was a regular exhibitor at the London Salon of Photography, where he received several awards. He later became a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society and of the Institute of British Photographers. 
Hardman adopted a 'pictorialist' approach to his work, whether portrait, building, or landscape. He would carefully compose his subject, making the best use of light and arrangement, but would often also improve the image back in the darkroom; 'I have no hesitation', he once wrote, 'in using any means of control, at any stage, which will help to give me the result I want, providing that such control does not conflict with the photographic character of the image' (Hardman, 'Exhibition quality', 230). Alongside images of the countryside Hardman took many photographs of Liverpool, which document the changing face of the city over more than sixty years. 
As home photography became more affordable, and studio photography less fashionable, the portrait business began to slow. In 1958 Hardman decided not to renew the lease on the Chester studio, and in 1966 he officially retired as a professional photographer. When Margaret died in 1970 his world fell apart. Although he continued to take photographs and exhibit his pictures, he had never been a self-publicist, and thus he faded from public view. He died at Sefton General Hospital, Sefton Park, Liverpool, on 2 April 1988, and was cremated on 11 April at Liverpool crematorium. 
Just before Hardman's death a trust was established to ensure the long-term protection of his vast collection of photographs. This trust worked with the collection for more than ten years, holding a hugely successful exhibition at the Walker Art Gallery in 1994. In order to continue this important work and preserve the collection the National Trust became involved, and in 2004 Hardman's former home and studio, 59 Rodney Street, opened to the public; the photographic collection was kept at Liverpool Record Office. 


@@@@@


doc= 92911


Causley, Charles Stanley (1917-2003), poet, was born on 24 August 1917 at Riverside in the parish of St Thomas, Launceston, Cornwall, the only child of Charles Samuel Causley (1885-1924), groom and gardener, and his wife, Laura Jane, 'nee' Bartlett (1888-1971), domestic servant. With characteristically wry precision he was later to note that the day of his birth was 'the 1,117th day of the 'Great War'' ('A kitchen in the morning', 33), and that he had always delighted in the fact that his mother, whose maiden name meant 'little Bartholomew', had shown 'marvellously unconscious prescience' by producing him on St Bartholomew's day (ibid.). His father, who had been a driver in the Army Service Corps on the western front, died from the effects of German gas when Causley was seven, and he was brought up by his mother, to whom he remained particularly close. When she suffered a stroke in 1966 he spent much time with her, talking about her youth, and found himself 'through the simple, clear glass she held up... able to observe, as with new eyes, my own childhood; and I wrote about it in poem after poem' ('The Listener', 17 March 1977, 338). That simple, clear glass is emblematic of Causley's own gift throughout his career, and his immediate, popular appeal owed much to an ability to explore contemporary experience in familiar, traditional forms. 
Causley was educated first at the local elementary school which he described as a 'huge granite and slate Noah's ark of a building' ('A kitchen in the morning', 34) beached only 500 yards from his home, and then at Launceston College where he enjoyed reading and writing poetry -- a teacher '(notably chary of awarding high marks) gave me ten out of ten for a sonnet' (ibid., 37). He left school at the age of sixteen to become a clerk in a builder's office. Several years of entrapment and boredom followed, but on a rare visit to London he bought a copy of Siegfried Sassoon's 'War Poems' and this, giving him his first clear view of his father's world, led him on to read Robert Graves, Edmund Blunden, and Wilfred Owen, whose vivid accounts of conflict and its consequences made a profound impression on him. Then came his own war experience. Registering for service on the outbreak of the Second World War in the autumn of 1939, he chose to enlist in the Royal Navy and was drafted as a coder, later rising to acting petty officer. Although he never really found his sea legs, he relished the opportunity to travel, and wrote up a number of the events which took place on exotic terra firma in his anecdotal prose collection 'Hands to Dance' (1951, revised and enlarged in 1979 as 'Hands to Dance and Skylark'). 
By the time he signed up for the war Causley had published a few plays that hardly attracted notice, but it was the navy life which became the making of him as a poet. As he later wrote: 'I think I became a working poet the day I joined the destroyer 'Eclipse' at Scapa Flow in August, 1940... I knew that at last I had found my first subject, as well as a form. Living and working on the lower-deck meant that if I was to write anything at all, then it would have to be in the kind of shorthand of experience (to use a horrible phrase) poetry happens to be. ('Charles Causley writes', 2)' Horrible phrase or not, that shorthand of experience became the poems that established Causley's reputation, and his first collection, 'Farewell, Aggie Weston', published in 1951 (Aggie Weston was the familiar term used by sailors for the hostels founded in seaports by Dame Agnes Weston), was the work of a poet who had clearly found his working method and distinctive voice. This collection was followed by 'Survivor's Leave' (1953), 'Union Street' (1957), and 'Johnny Alleluia' (1961). The poems in all four collections made vivid use of the traditional ballad form, dealing with wartime experience in imagery that brought together nursery rhyme, folksong, and mess-room vernacular often spoken by or on behalf of the Christ-like figure of a wounded innocent. By turns lyrical and bluntly down-to-earth, as if Walter de la Mare and Rudyard Kipling -- two poets much admired by Causley -- were writing in collaboration, a poem like 'Able Seaman Hodge Remembers Ceylon' was a typical example: '
O the blackthorn and the wild cherry 

And the owl in the rotting oak tree 

Are part of the Cornish landscape 

Which is more than can be said for me. 




O the drum and the coconut fiddle 

And the taste of Arabian tea, 

The Vimto on the veranda 

And the arrack shops on the quay 
('Collected Poems', 29)' On demobilization Causley trained as a teacher at Peterborough Training College and was then back home in Launceston, a part of the Cornish landscape again. He taught for the next thirty years -- until he took early retirement in 1976 -- at the local primary school. Though he made amused reference to landing up in a chalk Siberia, he was by all accounts a much-loved and respected schoolmaster. He discovered early on how a classroom of unruly children could be enchanted by hearing ballads read aloud and it is hardly surprising, given the lyrical and narrative gifts already displayed in his work for adults, that he should have begun to publish poems for children which soon achieved classic status, were widely anthologized, and were gathered from their various individual collections in 1996 into a handsome 'Collected Poems for Children' to celebrate his eightieth birthday. He was a fine anthologist himself; his 'Puffin Book of Magic Verse' (1974) contained a perceptive introduction which addressed the name and nature of poetry with a sense of wonder and mystery which spoke directly to young readers. Perhaps what made him such an excellent writer for children was that unsentimental access to primal insight which led some to compare his work to William Blake's 'Songs of Innocence and Experience' and which, though their poetic voices were very different, placed him alongside Ted Hughes (one of his strongest admirers) as a poet for whom the interplay of childhood and adult experience was a continual source of inspiration. In 1982 Hughes, in company with other distinguished poets including Philip Larkin, Seamus Heaney, and Kathleen Raine, paid tribute to Causley in a celebratory volume, 'Poems for Charles Causley', edited by Michael Hulse. 
Increasingly, as his reputation grew as a poet of international stature, Causley enjoyed a local eminence in Launceston that amounted to the freedom of the parish. Writing in 'The Listener' in 1977 he described a conversation he had with a Canadian expatriate writer he was showing round the town, who suggested that the difference between them was that his host knew where he would be buried. 'He may well be right', Causley observed, 'but what concerns me more is that I should never fall into the trap of thinking life in my parish unchanging' ('The Listener', 22 Sept 1977, 370). His profound sense of place and inheritance placed him firmly among those poets such as his admired John Clare and Thomas Hardy for whom -- in the words of the Irish poet Patrick Kavanagh -- 'parochialism is universal: it deals with the fundamentals'. His collection 'Underneath the Water' (1969), published two years after his mother's stroke, was his finest to date, and very much the work of a writer who had 'come home', though with no inclination to roost. It contained several of the poems for which he became best known, including 'Timothy Winters', 'Ballad of the Bread Man', and 'By St Thomas Water'. 
Though always happiest in Launceston (in 'Who's Who' he gave 'the rediscovery of his native town' as one of his recreations), Causley travelled widely after his retirement from teaching and accepted invitations to be writer-in-residence at the University of Western Australia, the Footscray Institute of Technology, Victoria, and the School of Fine Arts, Banff, Alberta. His later collections -- 'Secret Destinations' (1984), 'A Field of Vision' (1988), and updated 'Collected Poems' in 1992, 1997, and 2000 -- continued to celebrate his locality and, increasingly, his ancestry, often in a discursive, anecdotal vein very different from the balladeering of his most popular work, but also reflected his life as a keenly observant traveller. 
Causley received many honours. He was awarded the queen's gold medal for poetry in 1967, given an honorary doctorate by Exeter University in 1977, appointed CBE in 1986, and, in 2001, elected one of the ten companions of literature by the Royal Society of Literature. There was, however, one honour which he was particularly delighted to receive. As a boy, he had written to Richmal Crompton, the creator of William Brown, asking if he could join William's gang. A letter came back from Crompton's publishers informing him, with regret, that there was at present no vacancy. Having learned of this, friends arranged that on his eighty-fourth birthday he would receive another letter to let him know that there was now indeed a vacancy and that he was duly invited to apply. 
A fine reader of his work (he retained his distinctive Cornish accent), Causley was recorded shortly before his death for the recently established Poetry Archive. The reading showed no sign of infirmity but by this time, following a serious fall, he was unable to live at home and the recording was made at Kernow House, a nursing home in Landlake Road, Launceston, where he died on 4 November 2003. He was buried in St Thomas's Church, Launceston, at which a memorial service was held on 1 December. He never married, and had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92914


Dodson, Sir Derek Sherborne Lindsell (1920-2003), soldier and diplomatist, was born on 20 January 1920 at 25 Grange Road, Cambridge, the eldest son of Charles Sherborne Dodson, a Lincolnshire GP, and his wife, Irene Frances, 'nee' Lindsell. He was educated at Flete House, Westgate-on-Sea (1929-33), Stowe School (1934-6), and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1938-9), where he won 'the saddle' as the best horseman of his year. 
On 3 July 1939 Dodson was commissioned into the Royal Scots fusiliers as a second lieutenant and was posted to join their 1st battalion in India. In 1940, after Dunkirk, he returned with that battalion to England. In 1941 he joined the Special Operations Executive and in 1942 was sent to its headquarters in Cairo, which controlled its operations in south-east Europe. In September 1943, after the Italian armistice, he was flown to an isolated strip near Kardhitsa in Thessaly with orders to report on the Germans' positions, and obtained from General Adolfo Infante, the commander of the Italian Pinerolo division, the complete order of battle of the axis forces in south-eastern Europe. In January 1944 he made his second visit to Greece, being parachuted into Epirus to meet Napoleon Zervas, the main non-communist guerrilla leader, who was being harassed by the pro-communist EAM/ELAS forces. In August 1944, as the German forces pulled out of Greece, Dodson was again parachuted into Thessaly and hitched a ride on a fire engine into Athens, where he was carried shoulder high by an enthusiastic crowd. A few weeks later he followed the Germans north, being the first allied soldier to enter Salonika. In April 1945, as the Germans retreated north in Italy, he called together local Italian guerrilla leaders to plan an attack on Turin. On 26 April he personally led the group which entered the city from the east, and later organized partisan operations against Chivasso and Carmagnola. The citation for the MC which he was awarded for these operations said that he had shown outstanding leadership and courage, and also tact, which had enabled him to gain the confidence of the Italian partisans. In 1945-6 Dodson served as military assistant to the British member of the allied control commission in Bulgaria, where he first met his future wife, Julie Maynard Barnes (1925-1992), the daughter of the American minister Maynard Barnes. Then in 1946-7 he served as a general staff officer (grade 3) in the War Office. 
Bored with the prospect of a peacetime military career, in January 1948 Dodson obtained entry to the foreign service. After a few months in the Foreign Office he was sent to Salonika, where his wartime experience and the knowledge of Greek which he had gained proved useful. He served as vice-consul, and acted as consul-general in 1949 and 1950. In 1951 he was transferred to the embassy in Madrid, first as a second and then from October as a first secretary. In 1952 he married Julie Barnes in Paris; they had two children, Gerald and Caroline. In 1953 he returned to the Foreign Office, first to the personnel department and then in 1955 as private secretary to the minister of state, first Anthony Nutting, whom he supported through the trauma of Suez and Nutting's resignation, and then Allan Noble. In November 1958 he was transferred to Prague as head of chancery and acted as charge d'affaires there in 1959, 1960, 1961, and 1962. In 1962 he was appointed consul in Elisabethville, capital of the copper-rich province of Katanga. He established close relations with Moise Tshombe, then in secession from the central Congo government in Leopoldville, but was coshed and bloodied when he confronted a crowd of Rhodesian protesters stoning the consulate-general. He fainted, and later said that his life was saved by his secretary, who bandaged his head with her petticoat before he was taken to hospital. In 1963 he was appointed CMG and returned to head the Foreign Office's central department, where he dealt with a ferocious workload including difficult relations with Greece and Turkey over the 1963-4 crisis in Cyprus, and between Franco's Spain and the new British Labour government. After that he was happy to enjoy life in Greece from 1966 to 1969 as counsellor and deputy to his friend the ambassador, Sir Michael Stewart, though those years included the seizure of power by the colonels. 
Dodson's first ambassadorial appointment was as ambassador to Hungary from 1970 to 1973, where he and his wife, Julie, were able to exercise their talent for entertaining, their guests including Prince Philip. In September 1973 he was transferred to Brazil, being the first British ambassador to be based in Brasilia, where President Ernesto Geisel required all ministers to reside and British bankers and businessmen came to lobby Brazilian ministers. Export promotion included the British trade fair in Sao Paulo in 1964, opened by Princess Alexandra. In 1975 Dodson accompanied President Geisel on his state visit to Britain and was appointed KCMG and given the Brazilian order of the Southern Cross. Dodson's last embassy was Ankara from 1977 to 1980. Despite internal unrest and financial stringency Turkey was an important member of NATO and CENTO, and Dodson handled relations with the alternating governments of Suleyman Demirel and Bulent Ecevit with skill. 
In retirement Dodson undertook numerous duties, including that of British member of the board of the Benguela Railway Company, plagued by the Angolan civil war, from 1984 to 1992. In November 1992 his first wife, Julie, died of cancer in their London home, and in 1997 he married Rania Massouridis ('nee' Papadam), whom he had known for many years. Thereafter he spent much of his last years happily in their house in Thessaly. Operated on for cancer in 1999, he made a rapid recovery, but the cancer spread and on 22 November 2003 he died in Pelasgia, where he was buried. He was survived by his wife, Rania, two stepsons, and the son and daughter of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 92921


Gifford, (Charles) Henry (1913-2003), literary scholar, was born on 17 June 1913 at 15 Vanbrugh Fields, Blackheath, London, the eldest of three sons of Walter Stanley Gifford (1884-1960), mining engineer, and his wife, Constance Lena, 'nee' Henry (1886-1945). His father was English (distantly related to Thomas Hardy's first wife, Emma Gifford) and his mother Welsh. He was educated at Harrow School and Christ Church, Oxford, where he gained a second class in classical moderations in 1934, then changed to English, graduating with a second-class degree in 1936. He won the chancellor's English essay prize the same year. His first ambition was to make his mark as a writer. He wrote poetry and short stories up to the start of the Second World War, some of which were published privately. 
Gifford's leaving Oxford coincided with the onset of the Spanish Civil War, and the flow of Spanish refugees into Britain. From 1936 to 1938 he worked at a camp set up for them at Arkley, near Barnet, north London. The experience led to his learning the language and a longstanding interest in the various literatures of the Spanish-speaking world. Aboard RMS 'Homeric', on a cruise in the Mediterranean putting in at Monte Carlo, he met (Mary) Rosamond van Ingen (1916-2006), daughter of Eugene Melville van Ingen, businessman. She had been born in Mysore of Anglo-Dutch parents and raised in India. They later worked together at the camp and were married at Chelsea Old Church on 29 July 1938. They had a son, Nick, and a daughter, Anthea. 
Gifford taught for a term at Eton College, but in 1940 was called up for military service. In February 1941 he was enrolled in the officer cadet training unit at Sandhurst, where he distinguished himself, and in June was commissioned into the 11th battalion of the Royal Tank regiment. At first he saw service as a tank commander in Egypt and Palestine. The tanks of that era needed regular servicing, which involved periods of enforced idleness. Gifford, however, had established contact with a veteran of the former Russian imperial guard, and during such interludes could be seen on his tank with a book of Russian grammar in his hands. Six weeks after D-day his tank regiment landed in Normandy, then proceeded through France, Belgium, Holland, and finally arrived in Germany, where he witnessed the demoralization of the Germans. At the end of the war he was employed in military education, instructing soldiers about to be demobilized. Education was to be his future career, and although his military service had revealed a more than competent soldier, on leaving the army in 1946 with the rank of captain he burnt his greatcoat and uniform as a mark of his true attitude to warfare and military life. 
On demobilization Gifford was appointed assistant lecturer in English at the University of Bristol, and in 1963, under the departmental headship of Lionel Knights, became professor of English literature. For Gifford this was too narrow a definition of his role. His wide-ranging interest in other cultures made him a persuasive advocate of comparative literature. He championed the cause of Italian, offered as a subsidiary course to students of English, and in 1963 he was instrumental in setting up a small sub-department of Russian within the English department. Both these subjects went on to flourish when at a later stage a school of modern languages was established at Bristol. On Knights's move to Cambridge in 1967 Gifford was appointed to the Winterstoke chair, but in 1975 took up the specially created chair of English and comparative literature, which more closely reflected his interests. Although he retired the following year (1976) it was a very busy and productive retirement, in which he could indulge more freely in his admiration and interpretation of poets writing in Russian, Italian, Spanish, and modern Greek. From 1980 to 1984 he was general editor of the 'Cambridge Studies in Russian Literature' series. In 1983 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. In 1985 he gave the Clark lectures in Cambridge on 'Poetry in a divided world'. 
It was the Russian novel that first attracted Gifford's attention. In 1950 he published 'The Hero of his Time: a Theme in Russian Literature' and in 1964 'The Novel in Russia', followed by 'Leo Tolstoy: a Critical Anthology' (1971) and a short monograph on Tolstoy in 1982. Poetry, however, was his great love, and his most important work was 'Pasternak: a Critical Study' (1977), an informed and sensitive appreciation of the poet's development, culminating in the novel 'Doctor Zhivago'. He had already collaborated with Charles Tomlinson on 'Versions from Fyodor Tyutchev' (1960), and worked with him on translations of Aleksandr Pushkin and Vladislav Khodasevich as well as the Spanish poetry of Antonio Machado and Cesar Vallejo. He was particularly impressed by the poetry of Osip Mandelstam, as well as the Greek poet George Seferis. His wide reading gave him an insight into comparisons between the literature of diverse cultures. 
Gifford's quick intelligence revealed itself in his lively demeanour, yet he was a sympathetic listener, of whom students always spoke highly. He died of bronchopneumonia and non-Hodgkins lymphoma on 23 November 2003 at Carlton Mansions care home in Apsley Road, Clifton, Bristol. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92922


Gordon, Giles Alexander Esme (1940-2003), literary agent and writer, was born on 23 May 1940 at 11 Randolph Crescent, Edinburgh, the eldest child in the family of two sons and one daughter of Alexander Esme Gordon (1910-1993), architect, and his wife, Betsy Balmont, 'nee' McCurry (1910-1990), a pianist. At the time of his birth his parents were living at 2 Darnaway Street, Edinburgh. His background was that of the provincial upper middle class. His father was the senior partner in a large firm of Edinburgh architects and Gordon was educated at Edinburgh Academy, one of the city's leading schools. It was not a happy experience. 'Weedy and priggish' (Gordon, 'Aren't We Due a Royalty Statement?', 5), he was picked on by masters and boys alike and vowed never to expose his own children to the sort of treatment he received there. But his undistinguished school career may well have quickened his appetite for worldly success, in which he gloried. 'I never see the point of modesty' (ibid., 133), he later wrote, an issue on which he differed from his father, who deprecated the excessive length of his 'Who's Who' entry. 
After two terms studying book design and typography at the Edinburgh School of Art, Gordon joined the Edinburgh publishers Oliver and Boyd as a trainee. Frustrated by the parochialism of Scottish publishing, he set his sights on London and in 1963 became the advertising manager of Secker and Warburg. In 1964 -- the year of his marriage to Margaret Anna Eastoe (died 1989), illustrator; they had a daughter and three sons, one of whom died hours after he was born -- he joined Hutchinson, working as an editor on their 'New Authors' imprint. One of his discoveries was Barry Unsworth, a future Booker prize winner, with whom he would remain associated for forty years. He then spent a year at Penguin, launching their 'Modern Playwrights' series, and in 1967 became editorial director of Victor Gollancz, the job that made his name. Gordon breathed new life into Gollancz, long regarded as a spent force. In the words of his colleague Liz Calder, later to found Bloomsbury Publishing, 'he was an innovator, a rebel and a source of enormous fun' ('The Bookseller', 21 Nov 2003). But he was not amused by the exploitation, as he saw it, of writers by miserly publishers. He resolved to become a literary agent, believing that only with the help of an agent could writers secure a square deal. In 1973 he joined Anthony Sheil Associates (later Sheil Land) and soon became known for his belligerent approach. 
One reason why Gordon was so determined to fight the writer's corner was that he wrote himself. His six novels, written in the 1970s, were too experimental to catch on and he was called 'the enemy of a good read' ('TLS', 30 July 1993). But it was Gordon who, on the strength of a dog-eared radio script, persuaded the hitherto unknown Sue Townsend to write 'The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, Aged 133/4' (1982), which together with its successor, 'The Growing Pains of Adrian Mole' (1984), sold more copies during the 1980s than any two books by anyone else. However it was the huge advances he obtained for his clients that brought Gordon to public notice, beginning with the $650,000 paid to Peter Ackroyd in 1989 for his biographies of Dickens and Blake. Though both books made a profit, Gordon was blamed by some for rigging the market in favour of big name authors at the expense of their less marketable brethren. His defence was that agencies existed to get the best possible deals for their clients, otherwise they would go out of business. The test of a literary agent, he wrote, was the quality of the writers he or she represented. By this reckoning Gordon was in the front rank. In addition to Unsworth, Ackroyd, and Townsend, he represented Fay Weldon, who called him 'the soldier ally at the writer's gate' ('The Bookseller', 21 Nov 2003), Vikram Seth, and John Fowles, to say nothing of the duke of Edinburgh and the prince of Wales, whose question 'Aren't we due a royalty statement?' gave Gordon the title for the jocular, if somewhat breathless, memoir he published in 1993. 
Knowledgeable and opinionated about all aspects of the book trade, Gordon served on the literature panel of the Arts Council, the council of the Royal Society of Literature, and the management committee of the Society of Authors. He also found time to edit several volumes of short stories, lecture about writing to American students in London, and write about theatre for 'The Spectator' and about books for 'The Times'. An avid gossip, he was also the clandestine mainstay of 'Private Eye's' scurrilous 'Bookworm' column. 
In 1995, after an acrimonious dispute with Sheil Land, Gordon joined Curtis Brown, Britain's oldest literary agency, bringing with him the cream of his old clients. In 1998, to the surprise of many, he moved back to Edinburgh, opening a branch of Curtis Brown there. He explained the move by saying that he and his second wife, Margaret Anne (Maggie) McKernan ('b'. 1957), a publisher (and daughter of Francis McKernan, production manager), whom he had married on 5 May 1990, were determined that their three young children (two daughters and a son) should be educated at local Scottish schools. Gordon's first marriage had been blighted by tragedy. As well as the son who died shortly after birth, another committed suicide aged twenty-four. Margaret Eastoe herself died in 1989 of a rare incurable disease shortly before her divorce from Gordon was finalized. 
Of medium height, bespectacled, with thick auburn hair and plenty of attack, Gordon was a familiar figure wherever two or three members of the London literary set were gathered together for lunch. Too outspoken, particularly when flown with wine, to be universally popular, he commanded the loyalty and affection of those who fell under his spell. Recalling the effect he had on his friends, a colleague echoed Sir Kenneth Clark's verdict on Duveen, the art dealer: 'When he was present everyone behaved as if they'd had a couple of drinks' (private knowledge). He died at the Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, on 14 November 2003 of a brain injury, following a fall at his house. He was survived by his second wife, their three children, and by a son and daughter from his first marriage. He was buried at Warriston following a funeral service in St Giles's Cathedral on 21 November. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 17 March 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 92927


Tuckwell, William (1829-1919), schoolmaster, author, and self-styled radical parson, was born in Oxford on 27 November 1829, the eldest son of William Tuckwell (1784-1845), and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Wood (1803/4-1842). His father was a surgeon at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford and was the leading practitioner in the city. Tuckwell attended a preparatory school in Hammersmith before entering Winchester College as a scholar in 1842. He had a notably successful school career; becoming prefect of hall in 1847 and winning both the queen's silver medal for oratory and the gold medal for English composition a year later. He proceeded to New College, Oxford, in 1848. In retrospect Tuckwell realized this was a mistake. 'At that time', he recalled, 'New College absorbed the cream of Winchester and converted it into the thinnest milk' (Tuckwell, 'Corpuscular reminiscences', 78). Sure enough, he graduated in 1852 with a disappointing fourth in 'literae humaniores'. None the less, New College was to be consistently important throughout his life. He held his fellowship there until 1858, and even afterwards was to rely repeatedly on its patronage. 
Between 1853 and 1854 Tuckwell worked as a master at St Columba's College, Rathfarnham, near Dublin. He was then ordained, and served as curate of St Mary Magdalen, Oxford. From 1857 to 1864 he was headmaster of New College School. This was not a particularly challenging role. The school was small and undistinguished. It did, however, allow him time to develop his interest in educational reform and to act as chaplain and precentor to the college between 1858 and 1862. Still more importantly, in 1858 it enabled him to marry Rosa ('b'. 1829/30), eldest daughter of Captain Henry Strong, an Indian army officer; Emilia Frances Dilke was her younger sister. Rosa and William Tuckwell had four children, one son and three daughters. 
In 1864 Tuckwell moved to Taunton, having been appointed to the headmastership of the grammar school there by New College. With the support of Lord Taunton he transformed the place: increasing numbers from 22 on his arrival to 120 eleven years later, erecting new buildings, and -- most significantly -- reforming the curriculum. The Taunton Collegiate School, as Tuckwell reconstituted it, pioneered the teaching of science; a fact which he publicized in papers to the British Association, in articles for 'Nature', and in his evidence to the schools inquiry commission. Nor were his innovations limited to science. His boys were also taught geography and history, French and German, and even English language and literature. By 1877, however, it was clear that Taunton was in trouble. Tuckwell's modern curriculum and his decision to admit Catholics and nonconformists as well as Anglicans to the school had not proved sufficiently popular to be profitable. Despite a staunch defence of his work by 'Nature', Tuckwell resigned as headmaster, apparently condemned to life as a housemaster at Blundell's School, Tiverton. 
Once again New College came to the rescue, appointing him to the living of Stockton, Warwickshire, in 1878. It was here that he became a public figure. Influenced by writers like Henry George and Alfred Russel Wallace, and shocked by the poverty of his parish, Tuckwell set about a programme of practical reform. He established a school board, lectured on English history and geology, founded a choir, and -- in 1886 -- divided his glebe land into allotments for the villagers. Increasingly he was drawn into party politics as well. An invitation in 1884 to address the local Liberal Association started a decade-long campaign of public speaking, which took him through Warwickshire and Wales, and to annual meetings of the National Liberal Federation. At the general election of 1885 he urged the newly enfranchised agricultural labourers to support the Liberals. He wrote voluminously too, advocating land nationalization, the disendowment and disestablishment of the Church of England, universal suffrage, home rule, and a broad swathe of reforms which he characterized as Christian socialism. 
In 1893 Tuckwell left Stockton to take on the living of Waltham in Lincolnshire. The move brought with it a withdrawal from party politics. He turned to writing memoirs and studies of more literary themes. 1893 saw the publication of his 'Ancient Ways: Winchester Fifty Years Ago'. This was followed by 'Reminiscences of Oxford' (1900), 'Reminiscences of a Radical Parson' (1905), and 'Pre-Tractarian Oxford' (1909). Discursive and diverting in equal measure, these proved to be a huge hit with the reading public. Tuckwell had always enjoyed teaching English; indeed he had been a candidate for the Merton chair of English at Oxford in 1885. He now wrote popular accounts of Spencer (1900), Kinglake (1902), Chaucer (1904), and Horace (1905), and produced a scholarly edition of Milton's 'Lycidas' in 1911. Tuckwell retired as rector of Waltham in 1905, and moved to live with his brother-in-law, Sir Charles Dilke, at Pyrford Rough, Pyrford, Surrey. He died there on 1 February 1919. 
William Tuckwell saw himself as the natural inheritor of the broad church tradition within Anglicanism. A belief in the power of education and in the need for a truly national church informed his whole career. Tuckwell's personal philosophy, however, was deeply idiosyncratic: rooted both in incarnationalism and in the idea of the Norman yoke; drawing equally on the ameliorism of Henry George and the arcadianism of William Morris. He was a radical Liberal, yet he never lost his nostalgia for unreformed Oxford. Ultimately Tuckwell's politics limited his prospects. A contemporary concluded that he was 'magnificent; but he'll never be a bishop' (Tuckwell, 'Radical Parson', 208). His ideals were perpetuated by his daughter, Gertrude Tuckwell. It was to her that he dedicated the 'Reminiscences of a Radical Parson' and she who acted as executor after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 92929


Manuel II (1889-1932), king of Portugal, was born on 15 November 1889 at the royal palace of Belem, in Lisbon, the second of the two children of Carlos I (1863-1908), king of Portugal (1889-1908), and his wife, Queen Amelie (1864-1951), daughter of Louis Philippe d'Orleans, count of Paris, and his wife, Marie Isabelle d'Orleans Montpensier, infanta of Spain. His full name was, according to Portuguese court etiquette, a long rosary of names invoking the memory of relatives, or the protection of some favourite saints: Manuel Maria Filipe Carlos Amelia Luis Miguel Rafael Gabriel Gonzaga Xavier Francisco de Assis Eugenio. To these were added the names of four European princely houses: Braganca (from his great-grandmother), Saxe-Coburg-Gotha (from his great-grandfather), Savoy (from his grandmother), and Orleans (from his mother). As the second son of the king, he had the titles of infante and duke of Beja. After an education at home by private tutors, Manuel enrolled at the Lisbon naval school in 1907. Following the tradition of the Portuguese court, he was not expected to perform any public role, but he was to be denied the traditional leisurely life of the infantes in Portugal, when a tragedy put him suddenly on the throne of Portugal. 
On 1 February 1908 Manuel survived the attempt made on the royal family in the square of Terreiro do Paco, in Lisbon, in which his father, King Carlos, and his brother, the crown prince Luis Filipe, were killed by a band of republican militants armed with rifles and pistols. Manuel, who was travelling in the same open carriage as his parents and his brother when they were attacked, was himself shot in the arm, while his mother, Queen Amelie, tried to defend him by hitting one of the assassins with a bouquet of flowers. 
Under the direction of his forceful mother and her chosen advisers, the young Manuel II turned himself into a studious and zealous king. He read government files through the night and made a point of braving the streets of Lisbon on horseback and in an open carriage despite republican threats. He, his mother, and their advisers tried to preserve the old British-style constitutional monarchy as it had existed in the nineteenth century, liberal in its principles, consensual in its methods, and tolerant of its adversaries. These efforts never convinced the republicans, but alienated the conservatives. Thus Manuel's experience was that of increasing isolation. The weakening of the old court nobility and the Catholic church by successive liberal governments during the nineteenth century deprived him of the support of a strong aristocracy or a loyal priesthood. 
In spite of family links with almost all European royal houses, Manuel never managed to find a bride among them. One of the prospective brides was Princess Louise of Battenberg (the future queen of Sweden), who refused Manuel despite Edward VII's admonition to her that she should have 'a more patriotic approach to marriage, as it would be a great thing... if the Queen of Portugal was British' (Brook-Shepherd, 276). This lack of patriotism among the young British royals was taken in Portugal as a sign that the European dynasties saw the Portuguese monarchy as doomed. From Britain the only thing Manuel gained was to be made a knight of the Garter (1909), like most kings of Portugal since Joao I in the fifteenth century. In his isolation Manuel found some solace in the attention of a French actress, Gaby Deslys, whom he met in Paris in November 1909. 
When the republicans tried to subvert the Lisbon garrison on 4 October 1910 Manuel found himself alone, having to flee the royal palace under bombardment. Forced into exile, he arrived in Plymouth on 14 October 1910. The choice of England as a place of refuge may be explained by his family connection with the British royal family, and by a desire somehow to influence the destiny of his former kingdom, given the importance of the British alliance to Portugal. England had also been the traditional place of exile for his Orleans relatives. 
Manuel's first months in exile were not easy. With all his properties in Portugal confiscated, he had to live off the life insurance his father had taken in London. His uncle, the duke of Orleans, put him up in his Wood Norton house, near Evesham, Worcestershire. In January 1911 he moved to Abercorn House, in Richmond, Surrey, rented by his mother, Queen Amelie. In 1913, after the Lisbon government, under British pressure, returned to him the properties of the duchy of Braganca, the greatest territorial estate in Portugal, Manuel was able to acquire Fulwell Park, in Twickenham, Middlesex, which was his residence in England for the rest of his life (his mother had been born in Twickenham, at York House). On 4 September 1913 he married a distant cousin, Auguste Viktoria (1890-1966), daughter of Wilhelm (1864-1927), prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, and his wife, Marie Therese (1867-1909), princess of Bourbon-Sicily. From the very first moment, rumours abounded about the difficult relationship of the couple. They never produced an heir. 
In England Manuel was treated by the British royal family as a guest of honour, and attended many official ceremonies and royal parties. He fitted in well with the British upper class, benefiting from the guidance provided by the marquis of Soveral, the former Portuguese minister in London and an intimate of the late Edward VII. In June 1911 Winston Churchill, secretary of state for the Home Department, met Manuel for a 'long drive and walk'. In a letter to his wife, Churchill described the former king as 'really a vy charming boy -- Full of gravity & conviction, & yet in spite of his sorry plight -- a boy brimful of life & spirits. He has a great air, natural and compulsive. He is extremely clever and accomplished.' Manuel tried to engage Churchill's help in the lobbying for his cause, but Churchill realized that the restoration of the monarchy in Portugal had foundered on 'deeper problems than the inquiring mind of this intelligent, good Master & devout young exile has yet reached' (Churchill, 2.341). 
Apart from his official and political endeavours, Manuel led the life of a gentleman of leisure, supporting local societies (he was the president of the Twickenham Piscatorial Society) and helping to raise funds for good causes. He would travel to London most days, sharing his time between the Marlborough Club, in Pall Mall, and the booksellers Maggs Bros., where he spent a fortune on rare books. Every year he went to Wimbledon for the tennis tournament and to Vichy for treatment at the local spa. When travelling he used the title of count of Ourem. His favourite occupations were playing the piano, reading and cataloguing his collection of fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Portuguese books. The results of his erudite pursuits appeared in three massive volumes, 'Livros antigos portugueses, 1489-1600', published by Cambridge University Press between 1929 and 1935. A flattering review of the first volume in the 'Times Literary Supplement' in 1929 left him ecstatic. He saw his expensive bibliophilia as a patriotic service to Portuguese history and culture, but it reinforced the conviction of many of his remaining partisans in Portugal that he preferred his life as a retired gentleman in a London suburb to that of a pretender fighting for his throne. 
After the disappointing outcome of monarchist insurrections in 1911-12 Manuel's chances of returning were in any case never very high. He remained suspicious of his supporters in Portugal, rejecting the anti-liberal principles which most Portuguese monarchists borrowed from Action Francaise. The First World War exposed the gap separating the exiled king from his followers inside the country. Whereas most of these, blaming Britain for the fall of the monarchy, sympathized with Germany, Manuel insisted that the British alliance was the best way of guaranteeing Portuguese independence. When the republic entered the war on the side of the allies in 1916, he shocked his followers by ordering them to support the republican government. His explanation, that the survival of the nation must take precedence over the restoration of the monarchy, gained him the nickname of King of the Republicans in reactionary circles. When in 1926 a military dictatorship finally expelled the radicals from power, Manuel lobbied the British government to recognize the new conservative republic, and he never ceased to praise its finance minister, Dr Salazar. 
Always a heavy smoker, Manuel died from an oedema of the throat at home, in Fulwell Park, on 2 July 1932. His entourage blamed his death on negligence by his English doctor. After a requiem mass at Westminster Cathedral his body was taken in August 1932 to the royal mausoleum of Sao Vicente de Fora in Lisbon, Salazar having decided to give a state funeral to the former king. Manuel's reputation among non-monarchists increased when it was revealed that he had left his library, art collections, and properties to the nation. 
Life allowed Manuel the rare privilege of reconciling high principles and self-interest. His willingness to put the interests of the nation above those of his dynasty justified him in his decision to remain in England, at ease to pursue with a clear conscience that life of a gentleman of leisure that the tragedy of 1908 almost denied him. 


@@@@@


doc= 92930


Hallward, Bertrand Leslie (1901-2003), classicist, headmaster, and university administrator, was born on 24 May 1901 at 12 Norton Road, Hove, Sussex, the son of Norman Leslie Hallward (died 1934), a member of the Indian education service, and his wife, Evelyn Alice, 'nee' Gurdon, the only daughter of Major-General Evelyn Pulteney Gurdon of the Indian army. On his father's side he was descended from the Irish Leslies. He was educated at Warden House, Deal, and Haileybury College, and won a scholarship to his father's college, King's, at Cambridge, which he entered in 1919. Famous for his good looks, with blond hair and Greek statuesque head, he was helped by the fellows of King's: John Sheppard cast him as Apollo in the 'Oresteia' of Aeschylus; the economist Arthur Pigou pushed him into the Alpine Club, at which his record in Swiss climbs was exceptional; and Frank Adcock pushed his interest into ancient history. He won two first classes and on graduating in 1922 went to the British School in Athens, where he gained a working knowledge of modern Greek. To learn German he spent three months at the University of Vienna. He taught for two terms at Harrow School and then became a fellow of Peterhouse in October 1924. After two years he was a university lecturer and joined a famous team of classicists in contributing to the 'Cambridge Ancient History'. The chapters he wrote on the second and third Punic wars were learned and able. Hannibal became a hero to him. On 2 September 1926 he married (Catherine) Margaret Tait (died 1991), daughter of Canon Arthur James Tait, the principal of Ridley Hall. The marriage was happy and Cambridge found her enchanting. There were four children, all girls. 
In Cambridge Hallward's lectures attracted large classes; a few of his pupils contributed to scholarship in ancient history. He organized a new boathouse and a better sports field, and managed the college garden. He also ran the classical library, and edited the 'Classical Quarterly' for four years. Energy went into tennis, hockey, and real tennis. He was restless, intellectually and physically. Better students found him charismatic and inspiring. Others found his exuberance off-putting. 
A character such as Hallward could not face sitting long hours to write the history of Rome. He applied for the headmastership of Felsted and was rejected. Cambridge dons were astonished when their young star accepted (in the spring of 1939) the headmastership of Clifton College. On 2 December 1940 bombs hit school buildings. He evacuated the school to Bude on the Cornish coast. This cramped and uncomfortable situation produced academic results. Classics were good, and he acquired a Peterhouse undergraduate not fit for military service, Denis Mack Smith, who proved to be a genius at teaching history. To have a head whom it was impossible to depress kept morale high. Old members looked back upon their years at Bude with an amused gratitude. 
The school reopened at Clifton in 1945, by which time Hallward was well known as a headmaster. He applied for the headship of University College, Nottingham, soon to become a university. He was chosen -- a scholar with a record of successful administration under difficult conditions and a person of youthful energy and an appearance which no one could find displeasing. The charter of August 1948 named him as the university's first vice-chancellor. A member of staff later said ruefully that a whirlwind had arrived. Students called him Tigger. Each evening he ran round the university lake. 
Hallward stayed at Nottingham for sixteen and a half years, until March 1965, by which time it was among the top-ranking universities and looked back on him with gratitude as its creator. He had the advantages of a good city college on which to build, the support of the city, an estate provided by Jesse Boot with room to build and yet retain an attractive campus, governments unusually free with money, and a wife whose company everyone enjoyed. He was determined that the university should be in the first rank in both science and arts. He brimmed with ideas, some impracticable and shot down by council, but some creative. They ranged from the design of academic costume to a plan, not achieved in his time, for a medical school. They were good years for finding first-class professors. Hallward interviewed leading candidates individually and gave them a testing confrontation. If an engineer was to be chosen, his desk was piled with books on engineering. One excellent historian applied for the medieval chair but found the interview too trying and withdrew his application. E. A. Thompson, a communist, became professor of ancient history and established the faculty. Hallward attracted Ivor Keys to be professor of music, Alan Richardson to be professor of theology, Harry Pitt to be professor of mathematics, and Brian Tate to be professor of Spanish. There was awkwardness when a board of electors, gathered after difficulty, were told when they met that the vice-chancellor had already offered someone the chair. He usually got away with high-handedness because the people whom he pushed were in the first rank. He tried to fund a new university library. The money was not there during his time, but when a new library was eventually built it was named after him. 
Administrators had a respect for Hallward which sometimes amounted to reverence, and without them he could not have succeeded. They included his secretary, Rosemary David, and the registrar, Alfred Plumb; the chairman of the council, Sir Francis Hill, who pacified vice-chancellor and council when they were in dispute; and above all Sir Keith Murray, chairman of the University Grants Committee. In respect for Hallward, Cecil Cripps and his son Humphrey Cripps funded two new professorships and built a hall of residence. The Cripps foundation offered to build a university chapel on the campus. They were determined that its architecture should be 'traditional'. To frustrate the plan, academics who wanted a chapel but by a modern architect combined with opponents who saw no need for a chapel. Hallward's wife was deeply Christian, though his own religion was Platonic philosophy. The plan for a Cripps-funded chapel fell through, but in a small chapel integrated into another building he and his wife paid for the organ, to which he gave up a fifth of his stipend for six years. 
The contrast between the university in 1948 and when Hallward retired was striking. He retired a year early, from three motives. He had begun to worry about his wife's health. He knew what he wanted to do, to go back to the Greek and Roman world of the Mediterranean. And he disliked the Robbins report, which recommended expansion of universities. He called it 'offering undeserved places to the dimwits of the middle classes' (Winterbottom, 'Hallward', 190). He bought a house at Aldeburgh and had a boat built at Eyemouth for Mediterranean sailing, and for part of the year he gardened and for the other part he sailed from Malta into the islands, after teaching himself navigation. This lasted for ten years until his wife's health failed. In 1980 she had a heart attack and they moved to protected housing at Gretton Court in Cambridge. She died on 1 January 1991. Hallward lived for ten more years, the last in the Cambridge Nursing Centre, 5 High Street, Chesterton, Cambridge, where he died on 17 November 2003, only a few hours after entertaining his two youngest great-grandchildren. He was cremated in Cambridge on 27 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 92931


Harland, (Walter) Brian (1917-2003), geologist, was born on 23 March 1917 at 9 Stepney Road, Scarborough, Yorkshire, the son of Walter Ernest Harland (1880-1947), auctioneer and estate agent, and his wife, Alice Marian, 'nee' Whitfield (1883-1954). His early years were spent in and around Scarborough, and he was educated at Bootham School, York. When he was thirteen his discovery of the skeleton of a large crocodile fossilized in the Jurassic rocks of the north Yorkshire coast created national expert interest. In 1935 he went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. He graduated with double first-class honours in natural sciences (geology) in 1938, and then started PhD work to investigate the deep structure of eastern England, using explosion seismology. During this period Harland met his future wife, Elisabeth Margaret Ethelwyn Lewis ('b'. 1919), a fellow student and daughter of Edward Lewis, solicitor, and became a Quaker, starting a lifelong interest in the relationship between religion, philosophy, and science. 
When the Second World War broke out, Harland abandoned his PhD study and registered as a conscientious objector. Before this a plan to work in China had been developed through a Quaker contact. In 1942 he was able to travel to Chengdu in China to join the teaching staff at West China University to teach geology. He was joined there eventually by Elisabeth, whom he had married, at the Friends Meeting House, Cardiff, on 3 January 1942. They subsequently had three daughters and one son. Various factors led to the return of the Harland family to Cambridge in 1946, where he had been offered a teaching post in the department of geology. Nevertheless Harland maintained contacts with Chinese geologists for the rest of his life. By coincidence, Joseph Needham, also a member of Caius College, Cambridge, visited the Harlands while working in China during the war. In later years Needham became the leading scholar of the history of Chinese science, and Harland became a founder trustee of the Needham Research Institute in Cambridge. 
Harland's teaching in Cambridge was always his first priority, and during his teaching career from 1946 to 1984 he was demonstrator, lecturer, and finally reader in the department of geology (which later became the department of earth sciences), and a fellow of his old college, Gonville and Caius, from 1950 to 1984. He devised and taught many courses at all levels. He was particularly remembered for the delight he showed in the training of students in making observations in the field, and then arguing the meaning of these in the face of all preconceptions. He pioneered the incorporation of fieldwork as a regular part of the Cambridge curriculum, and led some 2000 students, over more than thirty years, on first-year trips to the Isle of Arran. His energy and staying power in the field became legendary, as did the half-mile long crocodiles of students and staff, trailing around the Arran north shore, and living on titbits of information relayed back from Harland. 
Immediately on graduation in the summer of 1938 Harland had joined a geographical summer expedition to Spitsbergen. He became fascinated by the geological potential of this high Arctic island group, where the geological story is particularly rich and varied. After his Chinese years, and on his return to Cambridge, he started to develop in Spitsbergen a remarkable programme that eventually resulted in forty-three summer seasons of expeditionary fieldwork, of which he led twenty-nine. More than 300 undergraduates and about thirty graduate collaborators were involved over the years. From this organization he founded the Cambridge Arctic Shelf Programme (CASP) in 1975. This evolved into a scientific research company with charitable status, which by the time of his death employed some twenty-five staff. Harland's determination to make available high-quality information, and the contribution of his own career to this, were admirably represented by his 'The Geology of Svalbard', published in 1997 as memoir 17 of the Geological Society of London. 
Harland felt great loyalty to his university, department, and college, and shouldered many tasks in their development and administration. For thirty years he edited, with others, the 'Geological Magazine', the international journal based in the department. His belief in the importance of collaborating with others to compile research information was another feature of his career. For seven years, from 1963, he was honorary secretary of the Geological Society of London, and led the plans for the society to become a centre for the publication of research information. From 1964 onwards he was the author, principal contributor, and/or managing editor of numerous volumes published by the society, and continued as the driving force behind other collaborative publications, becoming secretary of the International Geological Correlation Programme. 
Harland's publications covered many fields of research work. His fascination with geological time and his planning and organization of multi-author, worldwide analyses and reviews of the geological timescale led to his international nickname, Timescale Harland. His research involved independent thinking as well as compilation and collaboration. He had a long-term interest in evidence that the earth has suffered ice ages earlier than the one that is still with us. He led aspects of this research into climate change, initiating the idea that the earth may have been totally covered by ice in an episode some six hundred million years ago -- the so-called 'Snow-ball Earth'. He also made original contributions to the analysis of movement patterns during mountain-building episodes. These were encapsulated in his invention of the terms 'transpression' and 'transtension', which came to be used widely to aid understanding of these patterns. He will probably be remembered most for his determination to use all varied information available to work out the movement patterns that have left their marks in the earth's crust. Typical of this was his considered advocacy of continental drift, long before it was accepted to be a result of what became known as plate tectonics. 
Harland retired in 1984, becoming a life fellow of his college, but he remained active, continuing to direct CASP and to publish (including work on scientific philosophy). His last few years were dominated by health problems, which were particularly trying for someone who had led such an active life of arduous field research. He died at his home, 117 Grantchester Meadows, Newnham, Cambridge, on 1 November 2003, of heart failure. He was cremated at Cambridge crematorium on 5 November. He was survived by his wife, Elisabeth, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92933


Henrion, Daphne Hardy (1917-2003), sculptor, was born on 20 October 1917 at Lavender Cottage, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, the second of three daughters of Clive Hardy, a former commercial clerk then serving as a major in the 12th London regiment, and his wife, Julia Dorothea (Judy), 'nee' Bury. In 1923 the family moved to The Hague when her father became a translator at the International Court of Justice, a cause to which Daphne remained dedicated. 
Daphne Hardy's training followed academic tradition. From 1934 to 1937 she attended the Royal Academy Schools in London, where sculptors still learned to model in terracotta and cast in plaster and bronze. These Renaissance techniques she had been using since 1931 when she had studied privately in The Hague with the sculptors Albert Termote and Marian Gobius. Her friends at the Royal Academy included William Scott, the painter, and Ivor Roberts-Jones, the sculptor. In 1937 she won the gold medal and travelling scholarship, and went to France and Italy for two years to study sculpture. Through mutual friends in Paris she met the Hungarian writer Arthur Koestler, with whom, at the outbreak of the Second World War, she was sharing a house in Provence. Their life together was portrayed in his autobiographical novel 'Scum of the Earth' (1941). While they were together Koestler was working on 'Darkness at Noon', his masterpiece, which she translated from German for publication in London in 1940. In 1984 she exhibited a bust of Koestler at the Royal Academy (cast, NPG, 5741), which Lawrence Gowing praised at the time as 'one of the most acute and moving portrait sculptures in years, remembering a great man lately dead, of whom we could hardly have hoped for such a splendid memorial'. 
In 1946 Daphne Hardy showed at the Beaux Arts Gallery, run by Helen Lessore, the most important London dealer to champion figurative art in the 1950s and 1960s. On 3 April 1947 she married the industrial designer (Frederick) Henri Kay Henrion (1914-1990), the son of Max Kohn, lawyer. She retained her maiden name as a middle name. After the birth of her children, Max ('b'. 1950), Paul ('b'. 1951), and Emma ('b'. 1956), solo exhibitions followed at the Artists' International Association Gallery (1956), then at the Old Fire Engine House, Ely (1976), Clare Hall, Cambridge (1987), and Churchill College, Cambridge (1993). Her contributions to group shows indicate her aims and character: she was included in the Unknown Political Prisoner exhibition (New Burlington Galleries), and the Arts Council's touring show Sculpture in the Home, both in 1953. In works for public exhibition, she tackled universal themes with power. During the Second World War she had worked for the Ministry of Information as archivist of war photographs, an experience on which she drew, for example in her dramatic bronze memorial to suffering victims of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp of 1946, and the striking bronze in memory of an Italian Jew, Enzo Sereni, killed at Dachau after parachuting back into his home village in 1944. 
In the 1970s Daphne Hardy Henrion and her husband separated (they divorced in 1980), and she went to live at Pope Mill Farm, Haverhill, Suffolk. In 1981 she moved to Cambridge where she became an important figure in the Cambridge Society of Painters and Sculptors. Starting in the 1950s at the Arts Council Gallery, and later at Kettle's Yard and the Fitzwilliam Museum, the society had mounted impressive annual shows of work by a distinguished group including, besides Daphne Hardy Henrion, Cecil Collins, Elisabeth Vellacott, and Nan Youngman. Daphne Hardy Henrion occasionally showed her quiet drawings -- always portraits, and often of friends. These had a wonderful simplicity, the heads gently and accurately placed in black chalk on white paper. 
Daphne Hardy Henrion was one of a generation of artists whose careers were constrained by the demand for abstraction prevalent in the mid-twentieth century. Her natural vision, based on portraiture, linked her with ancient Roman sculpture as well as the Italian quattrocento terracotta busts which she copied as a girl. Her compositions, with two or three figures in human situations, grew from this sculptural tradition. There are none the less influences from twentieth-century art, especially the elongated figures of Lehmbruck or Giacometti. A recurring image in the 1980s was that of a walking couple, hand in hand, and with the suggestion of a pair walking away from paradise. 
Daphne Hardy Henrion worked on a monumental scale, but it was in her sensitive portraits that she achieved most, especially her terracotta busts of children. Among the famous people she portrayed were Arthur Koestler, her husband F. H. K. Henrion, and the poet Laurie Lee. In these commissioned works, sometimes cast in bronze but often modelled in terracotta, the artist showed a sympathy and understanding usually hidden beneath a stern mask. She could be flinty and laconic in conversation, and yet her work showed the immediate gift of finding the mind's construction in the face. She had an undemonstrative physical presence but was in both senses a sharp individual: an appreciator of people but unable to stomach even a hint of pretension and inclined to Anglo-Saxon outbursts as a means of returning the conversation to a direct level of human communication. She died at her home, 13 Owlstone Road, Cambridge, on 31 October 2003, of heart failure. She was survived by her three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92942


Ortiz, Elisabeth Lambert (1915-2003), writer on cookery and poet, was born on 17 June 1915 in Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex, the second of three daughters of a marine salvage engineer who moved his family to Jamaica when she was eight years old. She was at school for some time there, and in an introduction to 'The Book of Latin American Cooking' (1969) she wrote that it was in Jamaica that she became interested in this subject. Her father moved his business to Australia, and there Elisabeth got a job on a Sydney newspaper as a court reporter, soon adding the theatre and film critics' columns to her portfolio. She also published three volumes of poetry. 
Elisabeth Lambert's first marriage was to (Robert) Patrick Terpening, an Australian artist who became a pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force and was killed on active service while based in Britain in April 1945. She returned to London in 1949, and worked as a journalist for some years, writing a verse drama broadcast by the BBC and publishing, as Elisabeth Lambert, a thriller, 'The Sleeping House Party' (1951), followed in 1954 by a novelized account of her family's time in the West Indies, 'Father Couldn't Juggle'. She had by then moved to New York, where she had accepted a job as a writer for the fledgeling United Nations, and had met and married Cesar Ortiz Tinoco (1915/16-1991), a Mexican diplomat from a distinguished military family, then posted to the UN. An elegant, urbane, civilized man who shared his new wife's love of English literature, poetry, good food, and plentiful drink, Ortiz started her on a career as a food and cookery writer. 'When I first married and we were still in New York,' she wrote in 1998, 'Cesar told me about Mexico's extraordinary contribution to the world's cultivated food.' She then gave a list of foodstuffs of Central American origin: 'chocolate, vanilla, corn (maize), chillies (sweet, pungent and hot), tomatoes, avocados, green beans, the dried beans like kidney beans, pumpkin and the summer squash... papayas (pawpaws), turkeys and others' ('The New Complete Book of Mexican Cooking', 1998, 7). She had a scholarly turn of mind that permeated even her popular journalism, and the lure of this list was irresistible -- for she now realized that the food of the contemporary world from India to Italy depended on these New World ingredients. 
When her husband was transferred to the UN Information Centre in Mexico, Elisabeth's command of Spanish became 'rapid, fluent and grammatically a terror' ('Mexican Cooking', 8). The stallholders of the markets where she bought her food taught her the basics of Mexican cooking, and her mother-in-law taught her food customs. As the couple travelled in Mexico, she learned that, though Mexican cooks were relaxed about quantities (which made collecting recipes difficult), the cuisine itself was strongly regional and almost as diversified as French regional cooking. Like France, Mexico has 'haute cuisine', and from reading history by Spanish writers, she discovered 'descriptions of the markets, the kitchen, the banquet hall, the food of the ordinary people, of soldiers, nobles and the Emperor himself' (ibid., 9). Her husband directed her reading so that she learned what was known about the pre-Columbian diet, and she concluded that 'the Mexican kitchen of today rests very solidly on its Aztec and Mayan foundations' (ibid.). 
Asked to contribute some Mexican recipes to 'House and Garden' magazine, it occurred to Elisabeth that she could have a career as a professional cookery writer. She was taken up by the powerful James Beard, who encouraged her to write an entire book about Mexican cookery, and by Craig Claiborne, the other power-broker in the American food world, who wrote about her in the 'New York Times', with the result that she received a contract for her book before she had finished writing it. 'The Complete Book of Mexican Cooking' (1967), published like all her subsequent work under the name Elisabeth Lambert Ortiz, won awards, and its author became a regular contributor to 'Gourmet' magazine and consultant on the monumental Time-Life 'Foods of the World' series. 
Elisabeth Ortiz and her husband used their UN holidays to travel widely in South America and the Caribbean, and in 1969 she published the first of several editions of 'The Book of Latin American Cooking', which established her as the undisputed English-language expert on the 'enormous cuisine that stretches from the Rio Bravo (Rio Grande) to the Antarctic' ('Book of Latin American Cooking', 1984 edn, 11). In 1973 she published 'The Complete Book of Caribbean Cooking'. In the mid-1970s the UN sent Cesar to the Middle East and Asia, and they made their home in Bangkok. Lizzie (as she was known to her friends) wrote for the English-language paper, while writing a book on Japanese food. On his retirement in 1980, they moved to a house in Ealing, where he helped her with her research on the impact of new archaeological findings on the history of agriculture in the Americas. She revised her books and wrote several more cookery titles, but suffered neglect by newspaper and magazine food editors, who seemed to have forgotten her eminence. They had had a child who had died many years earlier, and, crushed with grief after Cesar's death at the age of seventy-five in 1991, she moved to New York to be near her sister Joyce, who died herself shortly after the move. She remained in New York, and died there on 27 October 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 92949


Segal, Judah Benzion (1912-2003), scholar of Semitic languages, was born on 21 June 1912 at 37 Hawthorn Street, Elswick, Newcastle upon Tyne, the eldest son and second of five children (two girls, three boys) of Moses Hirsch Segal (1875-1968), rabbi and Hebrew scholar, and his wife, Hannah Leah, 'nee' Frumkin (1874-1968). Both parents had been born in Lithuania. He was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford, and St Catharine's College, Cambridge. He graduated with a first-class degree in oriental languages in 1935, having studied all the major Semitic languages. He subsequently went on to study for a research degree at St John's College, Oxford, and was awarded a DPhil there in 1939. His outstanding academic ability won him a series of prizes and scholarships, the most prestigious of which was the Tyrwhitt scholarship for Hebrew at Cambridge. 
On account of his knowledge of Arabic, on the outbreak of the Second World War Segal was posted first as deputy assistant director of public security in the Sudan government, from 1939 to 1941, then to British intelligence in Cairo. In early 1942 he received special training in the identification of enemy tanks and aircraft and was introduced to David Stirling, founder of the Special Air Service. He was then sent by the long range desert group of the British army over a hundred miles behind German lines to Benina in north Africa, with instructions to report on the movements of Rommel's forces and give advance warnings of planned attacks. He spent some three months in secret hideouts together with local Arabs. His regular reports helped save many allied lives. Narrowly avoiding capture on several occasions, he led another operation in November 1942 that resulted in the capture of Derna, the second largest city in Cyrenaica, which proved to be crucial for the advance of General Montgomery's Eighth Army. (The union jack which he hastily assembled for the occasion from rags and handkerchiefs was later given to the Imperial War Museum.) For this distinguished service he was awarded the Military Cross in 1942. In the book 'Long Range Desert Group' by W. B. Kennedy Shaw, published in 1945, Segal was referred to as Captain Seagrim to protect his identity; Seagrim was changed to Segal in a later edition of the book. He remained in north Africa for the rest of the war, and served as education officer in the British administration of Tripolitania from 1944 to 1946. While on leave in Jerusalem towards the end of the war he met Leah Seidemann, at that time a sergeant in the Palestine Auxiliary Territorial Service. They married in 1946, and had two daughters, Naomi and Miriam. 
After the war Segal resumed his academic career, at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London. Starting in 1946 as a lecturer in Hebrew and Aramaic, he was promoted to reader in 1955 and finally to a chair in Semitic languages in 1961, which he held until his retirement in 1979. He served as head of the Near and Middle Eastern department at SOAS from 1961 to 1968, and in the latter year was elected a fellow of the British Academy. 
Segal's research was wide-ranging. Several of his publications concerned the Christian Aramaic dialect known as Syriac and the culture and literature of eastern Christianity. His first book, 'The Diacritical Point and the Accents in Syriac' (1953), was a study of the vowels of Syriac, which was greatly admired by Semitic philologists and often regarded as one of his best works. In 1970 he published 'Edessa: the Blessed City', an erudite, but very accessible, historical study of the city of Edessa, modern Urfa in southern Turkey, where the Syriac language had its origins. In recognition of his research achievement in this book, he was awarded the freedom of the city of Urfa in 1973. He also made major contributions in the field of Hebrew and Jewish history. His book 'The Hebrew Passover from the Earliest Times to AD' 70 (1963) quickly became a standard work. After his retirement he continued his scholarly research with considerable energy. In 1981 he was awarded a Leverhulme emeritus fellowship, which allowed him to conduct research in India on the Jews of Cochin, resulting in the publication in 1993 of his definitive work on the subject, 'A History of the Jews of Cochin'. He also continued to make important contributions to Aramaic studies by his publication of 'Aramaic Texts from North Saqqara, with some Fragments in Phoenician' (1983), and 'Catalogue of the Aramaic and Mandaic Incantation Bowls in the British Museum' (2000, in collaboration with Erica Hunter). 
Segal's public-spiritedness was demonstrated on numerous occasions, especially when from 1982 until 1985 he agreed to become director of the progressive Jewish seminary, Leo Baeck College, in London, and worked resolutely and successfully to save it from imminent closure. He was an active member of the Council of Christians and Jews. From 1985 to 1991 he served as vice-president of the Reform Synagogues of Great Britain. Modest and self-effacing, but also approachable and generous, he enjoyed a warm family life, and long walks. He lived latterly in Edgware; his last years were clouded by Parkinson's disease and other health complications. He died of spindle cell cancer of the leg on 23 October 2003 at Northwick Park Hospital, Brent, London. He was survived by his wife and their two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 92953


Smith, Sir Roland (1928-2003), marketing scholar and businessman, was born on 1 October 1928 at 226 Palmerston Street, Beswick, Manchester, the son of Joshua Smith, police sergeant, and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Hamblet. His father, originally from Bolton, had been a miner before joining the police. Smith was educated at Burnage grammar school, Manchester, and the University of Birmingham, where he studied economics. He then went to the University of Manchester, where he took his doctorate with a thesis on the Lancashire cotton industry. For his national service he became a flying officer in the RAF, and it was while serving that on 26 July 1954 he married a fellow Mancunian, Joan Shaw, secretary, and daughter of Allen Shaw, cycle dealer. They had no children, but theirs was a very strong, close, and lasting relationship, which provided him with the support and stability that made possible his many achievements. On numerous occasions he would say that it is only possible to be successful in any walk of life if you have a happy personal life -- which he did. 
On completing his national service in 1955 Smith joined the Footwear Manufacturers' Federation, ultimately becoming assistant director. But in 1960 he returned to the academic world, becoming a lecturer in economics at the University of Liverpool, and only three years later being made director of Liverpool Business School. He pioneered almost single-handed the academic discipline of marketing in Britain. In 1966 he returned to Manchester as the professor of marketing at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology. He remained there (latterly part-time) until 1988, returning in 1996 as chancellor, a position he held until 2002. He taught in a very individualistic way. A former student of his later recalled how he came to a lecture where Smith sat behind a great pile of 'do it yourself' textbooks on marketing. He rose to begin, and then deliberately sent the books flying to the floor. 'That', he said, 'is how much use these will be in the real world of industry' ('Financial Times'). There were many students of his, such as Terry Leahy (later chief executive of Tesco), Keith Edelman (later chief executive of the Storehouse Group), and Geoffrey Mulcahy (later chief executive of Kingfisher) who took what wisdom Smith had to offer in place of the textbooks, and made successful careers for themselves. 
In parallel with his academic career Smith developed his own business career. He attributed his apprenticeship in large-scale entrepreneurship to his contacts with Val Duncan and Mark Turner, leading lights in the mining conglomerate Rio Tinto Zinc; he later described what he had learned from them as 'an almost priceless experience' ('Daily Telegraph'). At first he acted as a consultant, but in the 1970s he began to take on directorships, for example at Barrow Hepburn, Midland Aluminium, and Senior Engineering. By the mid-1980s such was the demand for his expertise that he was a director of no less than sixteen companies, including half a dozen of which he was chairman. One colleague mischievously suggested: 'A chairmanship is like a pretty girl to him. He sees it and runs after it' ('The Guardian'). 
Smith burst into national prominence in the early 1980s as chairman of the House of Fraser (1981-6), during its takeover battle with Roland (Tiny) Rowland. At one point he famously told Rowland (echoing Harold Wilson's advice to Hugh Scanlon) to 'Get your tanks off my lawn'. Of Rowland himself, formerly a fellow director, he said: 'Whatever I told you, you wouldn't be able to print. If he has a redeeming feature, I never saw one' ('Daily Telegraph'). He subsequently recommended to shareholders that they accept the rival bid from the Fayed brothers, and left after the takeover went through. He returned to the limelight as chairman of British Aerospace (1987-91), masterminding the company's diversification into property and construction, and its $150 million takeover of Rover, the cost of which was largely recouped by the sale of Rover's interest in the Leyland-DAF trucks group. In 1991 he was knighted, and in the same year he took on two further high-profile responsibilities, as a director of the Bank of England (1991-6) and chairman of Manchester United plc (1991-2002). The former epitomized how far he had come: indeed, this working-class man from Manchester found the room where the bank's board meets, and where William Pitt and other great names had made national policy, rather daunting, and so big that after his first meeting he claimed that he could not hear what anybody was saying. The governor of the bank, Sir Edward George, later said of him: 'his advice was always forthright but perceptive, and he made an enormous input to the Bank, both on management and on policy issues' (private information). 
Smith's chairmanship of Manchester United was perhaps the role which gave him the most personal satisfaction. A lifelong supporter of the club, he presided over it during one of its most successful periods, both on and off the pitch. He steered the club through its flotation, and contributed significantly to its marketing success, so that by the time of his retirement it was valued at over $1 billion. Martin Edwards, a former chief executive of Manchester United, said of him: 'Roland's contribution is not just about enhancing the club's financial position, it is also about his personal involvement and enthusiasm' (private information). 
Though well rewarded in some posts, Smith took on others for little remuneration, and his primary motivation was always intellectual interest. Garry Weston, chairman of Associated British Foods, described his particular skill as always 'asking the right questions' ('The Independent'). Another colleague -- a director of Hepworth's, of which Smith was chairman from 1986 to 1997 -- said that 'his grasp of financial data and statistics is mind-blowing. He brought a depth of vision to this company which was previously lacking' (ibid.). His business experience significantly enhanced his teaching, and both combined to take him into more rarefied didactic environments. He was, for instance, only the fourth person and the first Briton to deliver the annual stock exchange lecture (his predecessors being Sheikh Yamani, David Rockefeller, and Harry Oppenheim). He also chaired, for the duke of Edinburgh, the Commonwealth Study Conference in 1992. His numerous teaching and business commitments left little time for other activities, though he enjoyed walking in the Pennines, and was active in support of a number of local charities -- such as the Christie Hospital's appeal for state of the art equipment for the treatment of cancer patients. Subsequently he developed cancer himself, and after a short illness he died at the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, on 20 November 2003. He was survived by his wife, Joan. 


@@@@@


doc= 92954


Taylor, Donald Victor (1936-2003), television director and playwright, was born on 30 June 1936 at Queen Charlotte's Hospital, Hammersmith, London, the only child of George Alfred Taylor (1911-1985), engineer's turner and later works manager, and his wife, Ivy Jessie, 'nee' Donkin (1911-1999). They lived in Chiswick, London, where young Don (as he was always known) attended the local grammar school and in due course won an exhibition to Pembroke College, Oxford. There he read English and nurtured a passion for the theatre. In his second year he contrived to direct a student company in John Osborne's and Anthony Creighton's 'Epitaph for George Dillon' ahead of the official premiere a year later. 
On graduating with a second-class degree in 1958 Taylor was invited to assist the director of the Oxford Playhouse, while also trying his hand at writing for the theatre, initially without success. There was, however, an alternative and, in the end, stronger lure. As early as 1951 his father had painfully assembled a TV set from a do-it-yourself kit, and Taylor had become an ardent viewer. He applied now for a BBC training course and was accepted in 1960. On 30 July the same year he married his Oxford sweetheart, the 21-year-old Ellen Dryden, daughter of Robert Dryden, a local government clerk. She was later herself a noted dramatist. They had a son and a daughter. 
After one or two obligatory chores for popular crime series Taylor soon directed the first television play of his own choosing. For the next thirty years he would be a force of towering purpose in what, for him, was the most beautiful and versatile of all the scenic arts. Television was 'capable of anything and everything the human imagination can conceive. It can be whatever we want it to be' ('Days of Vision', 267). In particular he loved the 'buzz' (as he termed it) of live production, the danger, the spontaneity, the extemporization. Of a number of writers he favoured, the one with whom his name became most closely linked was David Mercer. Both came from working-class backgrounds, though Taylor's father had by then moved to suburban Wallington. Both were ardent, if troubled, socialists. Between 1961 and 1963 Taylor directed three Mercer scripts, 'Where the Difference Begins', 'A Climate of Fear', and 'Birth of a Private Man', which eventually constituted a powerful trilogy exploring the failure of socialism to live up to its ideals, either at home or abroad. 
Another preoccupation of Mercer's stemmed from a nervous breakdown he had suffered. A strand of baffling comedies of madness began with 'A Suitable Case for Treatment' (1962), in which Taylor cast Ian Hendry, Jack May, the beautiful Moira Redmond, and the real-life Guy the gorilla, whose scenes he pre-filmed -- for once -- at London Zoo. Then in 1963 BBC television acquired a new drama supervisor, the Canadian Sydney Newman, and after one or two rebuffs Taylor convinced himself that he was being blacklisted. In fact he continued to direct for the BBC. The difference was that he now began to work for ITV as well, and also to set his sights once more on the theatre. He directed in the West End (a Mercer play, of course) in 1965. His own debut as a playwright followed with 'Grounds for Marriage' at the Traverse Theatre, Edinburgh, in 1967. 
Taylor was fascinated by the seventeenth century, its poets and puritans and rebels. For a spooky BBC anthology series called 'Dead of Night' he wrote and directed 'The Exorcism' (1972), in which a dinner party in a smartened-up country cottage is invaded by the ghostly relict of a martyred Leveller. This was subsequently adapted for the stage. Round the other way, 'The Roses of Eyam', enshrining the plague-stricken Derbyshire villagers who sealed themselves off rather than risk passing it on, was performed first in the theatre (in 1970), then on television. When neither outlet seemed available, he would smuggle plays about Milton or Andrew Marvell or the nature of acting into the BBC arts programme 'Omnibus'. A remaining enthusiasm, to do the Greek classics on the small screen, got off to a rousing start with the Theban trilogy of Sophocles, which Taylor translated anew and directed for the BBC in 1986. But four years later a like trio from Euripides was cancelled after the first instalment, and Taylor turned his back on television for good. 
Taylor's memoir of his television career, 'Days of Vision', was published in 1990. His work in the theatre continued, along with that of his wife, Ellen. They moved to Norfolk and set up an independent production outfit, First Writes, aimed at radio as well as the theatre. Taylor found time to translate Ovid and write a novel about the civil war as well as more plays. His last years were perhaps his happiest. For all the rigour of his professional creed he was, his wife said, a man of enormous joyfulness. He died of cancer on 11 November 2003 at his home, Lime Kiln Cottage, High Starlings, Banham, Norfolk, and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary the Virgin, Banham. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92959


Wollheim, Richard Arthur (1923-2003), philosopher, was born in London on 5 May 1923, the second son of Eric Wollheim (1879-1948), a theatrical impresario (and London agent for Diaghilev's ballets), and his wife, Constance, 'nee' Baker (1891-1983). Although his father was of German Jewish descent, Wollheim was brought up as a Christian, later becoming, like his father, an atheist. His mother, of west-country origins, became a Gaiety showgirl and actress, but retired at the time of her marriage. He was educated at Westminster School, as a king's scholar, and at Balliol College, Oxford. His studies were interrupted by the Second World War; he joined the Inniskilling Fusiliers in 1942, participated in the Normandy landings, and was captured by the Germans in August 1944, but managed to escape within a few days. After the war he returned to Balliol and achieved first-class degrees in history (1946) and philosophy, politics, and economics (1948). He joined the philosophy department at University College, London, in 1949 under the auspices of A. J. Ayer, initially as an assistant lecturer. He was promoted lecturer in 1951, reader in 1960, and Grote professor of the philosophy of mind and logic and head of department in 1963. After retiring from University College in 1982 he moved to the United States, first as professor at Columbia University, from 1982 to 1985, and then as professor at the University of California, Berkeley, until 2002. He was also visiting professor in philosophy and the humanities at the University of California, Davis (1989-96). On 15 August 1950 he married Anne Barbara Denise Toynbee (1920-2004), the daughter of Colonel George Harcourt Powell, army officer, and the former wife of (Theodore) Philip Toynbee, writer. They had twin sons, Bruno and Rupert. The marriage was dissolved in 1967, and two years later he married Mary Day Lanier, a potter, and daughter of Robert S. Lanier, of New York. They had one daughter, Emilia. 
Wollheim's first book was 'F. H. Bradley' (1959); his choice of this neglected idealist philosopher may have seemed odd at the time, given the pre-eminence of logical positivism and ordinary language philosophy, but Bradley's moral philosophy, with its emphasis on moral psychology, must have struck a sympathetic chord with Wollheim's emerging views on the psychological development of the individual. Indeed the closing lines of 'F. H. Bradley' intimate the tenor of future concerns: 'there are some [critics of Bradley] in whose eyes any attempt to relate an intellectual work to the elementary and emotional movements of the psyche is a way of degrading the intellect. On those who are so confident where the emotions end and the intellect begins, it is the pleasure and privilege of the emotions to take their revenge. ('F. H. Bradley', 285)' Wollheim was best-known for his writings on psychoanalysis and art, and his peculiar blend of the two disciplines owed something, as did his literary style, to the influence and friendship of Adrian Stokes. (Also, perhaps, to the fact that during the 1960s he entered into an eight-year Kleinian analysis.) Wollheim greatly admired Stokes's writings on art, a selection of which he edited, as 'The Image in Form' (1972). With the publication of 'Freud' in 1971 Wollheim was established as a formidable interpreter of psychoanalytic theory and, unusually for a non-practitioner, he received honours from the British Psychoanalytic Society (1982), the San Francisco Psychoanalytic Institute (1994), and the International Psychoanalytical Association (1991). Despite the deep influence of psychoanalytic theory on all his thinking, Wollheim did not advocate it, as Freud had, as a method for interpreting works of art. Stokes's writings suggested an alternative approach: less focus on the individual work of art and the kind of information discoverable by psychoanalytic processes, and more on a search for the roots of artistic form, for formal structures of art that might correlate or match more universal psychological structures of the person. Wollheim believed that the understanding of ourselves and the understanding of art depend on the same resources, including both individual and cultural history and an essential role for both the body and the material presence of art. 
Wollheim's 'Art and its Objects', published in 1968, was instrumental in the renewal of analytical aesthetics. This brilliant book showed how a wide range of philosophical expertise and rigour could be brought to bear decisively on the problems and nature of art without sacrificing any sophistication and sensitivity to the arts. He was uncompromising in his attack on reductive tendencies, and admitted to having an impatience 'after a little while with any form of culture that turns its back on history, or complexity, or melancholy' (preface to 'On Art and the Mind', 1973). Pictorial representation and expression were central to his investigations, and in both cases he argued against attempts to anchor meaning exclusively in the object, or in the spectator's perception of it, or in the thoughts or biography of the artist. By the same token he rejected formalist criticism for impoverishing our understanding of artistic endeavour and the appreciation of art, and was critical of positivist trends in art history. He favoured an optimistic yet rigorous view of the possibilities of criticism, which he called retrieval, and likened to archaeology. The aim of criticism, he argued, should be to reconstruct the creative process in the light of our knowledge of history, tradition, and human nature, such understanding not being beyond the reach of imagination when necessary, so that we are able to experience the work of art in a way we would not otherwise achieve. 
The publication in 1960 of E. H. Gombrich's 'Art and Illusion' had reinvigorated philosophical and psychological interest in pictorial art. Wollheim, however, argued persuasively against the illusion theory (whereby a picture represents an object, event, or scene only if the spectator comes to believe, falsely, that he or she is seeing that thing). For all its ancient pedigree the illusion theory, even in Gombrich's sophisticated version, fails to account for our experience of pictorial art because it deprives the medium of a constitutive place in that experience, and distorts the facts of appreciation. Wollheim maintained that the distinctive feature of our experience of pictures is that it has a dual aspect: we are simultaneously aware, though not necessarily to the same degree, of the marked surface and of something (literally absent) in it. As he conceived it, pictorial seeing could range from seeing in the marked surface (minimally) one thing behind or in front of another, to seeing an object or event or scene. Our universal capacity for projection is invoked, but not without constraints: the spectator should respect the artist's intentions (liberally understood as including beliefs, desires, emotions, wishes, and so on) set within practice and tradition, while allowing also for the vicissitudes of the creative process. One advantage of this view of pictorial representation is that most abstract art is accommodated, as well as figurative painting. 
For all its intuitive and phenomenological appeal Wollheim's 'twofold' characterization of 'seeing-in' remained controversial, as did his account of artistic expression, not least because of the indefiniteness of the notion of projection. But he did not give up his approach. This was characteristic of the man: he wanted to enlighten experience as much as to find incontrovertible arguments. Over the years he continued to implement his strategy, refining it and extracting maximum gains. A second edition of 'Art and its Objects', with six supplementary essays, was published in 1980, and many essays were collected in 'On Art and the Mind' (1973) and 'The Mind and its Depths' (1993). His remarkably integrated and fertile philosophy of art and criticism culminated in 'Painting as an Art' (1987), a much elaborated version of the Mellon lectures he gave at the National Gallery, Washington, in 1984. This dense and difficult book, which rewards patient study, was Wollheim's second substantial contribution to the philosophy of art, bringing together his ideas on representation, expression, imagination, the role of the artist/spectator, and individual style, and, in the light of a rich psychology, presenting a number of intriguing studies of individual artists and works of art. His catholic tastes and delicate discriminations, his intellectual courage, versatility, and extensive knowledge of art history -- he delighted in the minutiae of dating and attribution -- were here amply demonstrated, even if at times his idiosyncratic prose, which he jealously guarded from editorial interventions, can seem arduous. 
Wollheim gave many distinguished lecture series, generating, always with much revision and expansion, further books. His William James lectures in philosophy at Harvard in 1982 were published as 'The Thread of Life' (1984). His Ernst Cassirer lectures at Yale in 1991 became his last philosophical book, 'On the Emotions' (1999). He was a prolific writer, and in some ways he belonged to an earlier tradition of letters: unusually for a twentieth-century English-speaking philosopher, even one as cosmopolitan as he, he wrote essays and reviews for many non-philosophical periodicals including, during the 1950s and 1960s, the 'New Statesman', 'The Nation', 'The Spectator', and 'The Listener', and, in the last two decades of his life, for the 'Times Literary Supplement', the 'London Review of Books', the 'New York Review of Books', and 'Modern Painters'. He especially loved to review exhibitions of artists about whom he was passionate -- Poussin, Titian and the Venetians, Monet, Picasso, for example -- devoting hours to the scrutiny of individual works, in the belief that irrelevant babble would gradually fall away from a spectator's thoughts, yielding a truer response and perception of them. In 1969 he published a novel, 'A Family Romance', and shortly before he died he completed a memoir of his childhood, 'Germs', published to great acclaim in 2004, in which he probed the innermost workings of a child's experience. There was nothing of the dilettante in him, his thinking on all subjects being driven by a systematic conception of human nature and the mind. He resisted the seductions of any kind of sectarianism, be it nationalist, religious, or racist, and all his life remained loyal to a socialism that was deeply felt. His intellectual passions frequently went against the trend of mainstream philosophy and yet he enviably succeeded in integrating them into lifelong philosophical projects. 
Wollheim was indefatigable, and his powers of concentration marvellous: he did not seek out quiet, but preferred to work in a hubbub, especially in airport lounges and busy cafes around the world. This may have been the after-effect of a lonely childhood, or perhaps the habitual exercise of a determined will -- he never would countenance feelings of tiredness, and loved to stay up late. He was sociable, humorous, and conversational, but a good listener, tolerant, curious, and very perceptive about people. He inspired affection and even fascination among his students and colleagues, who thrived in a liberal environment where differences were positively encouraged and hierarchies ignored. He was also very funny, not only as a raconteur but in his demeanour. His classes and lectures were often preceded by elaborate little comedies -- concerning the arrangement of furniture, lights, chalk, spectacles, doors, and windows, even the presence of newsprint about which he was phobic -- performances in which he seemed to relish his incompetence and eccentricities, enjoying the amusement he provoked, as if re-enacting childhood memories of the music hall. He died of cancer, after a short illness, at his home, 4 Gemini House, 180-82 Bermondsey Street, Southwark, London, on 4 November 2003. He was survived by his wife, Mary Day, and his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92962


Taylor, (Robert Murray) Ross (1932-2003), surgeon, was born on 10 December 1932 in Calcutta, India, the son of George Ross Taylor, medical practitioner, and his wife, Helen Baillie, 'nee' Murray. There was a family tradition in medicine: his grandfather and three uncles were doctors. He was educated at Coatbridge secondary school, Lanarkshire, and went on to study medicine at Glasgow University, qualifying in 1956. After completing his house jobs in Ayrshire he spent the next two years in national service. He volunteered to join the Parachute regiment and following training he was attached first to the 23rd parachute field ambulance and then to the 2nd battalion of the Parachute regiment, serving with those units in Cyprus during the time of the EOKA insurrection and also in Jordan. On completing his national service he became a registrar in surgery at Bishop Auckland. On 7 January 1959 he married Margaret Rose Cutland, a 24-year-old schoolteacher from Ayrshire, daughter of Albert Henry Cutland, business agent. They had four children -- three daughters, Linda, Jill, and Anne, and a son, William (Bill). 
Soon after his marriage Taylor joined the rotation at the Newcastle teaching hospital. He was not to leave Newcastle for the rest of his career. He became a registrar and a senior registrar in the training programme, but during this time he took a year away as a research fellow in the university department doing research work on transplantation, which gained him a master of surgery degree from the University of Glasgow. In 1964 he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and in 1965 a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England. In 1970 he was appointed as a consultant surgeon and senior lecturer at the Royal Victoria Infirmary, and the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
In 1973 Taylor took over the Newcastle renal (kidney) transplant programme as its director. By the time of his retirement in 1995 he had performed more than 2000 transplant operations, and had built up not only one of the major renal transplant programmes in the UK but a programme that was a leader in clinical and immunological transplantation research. The transplant unit trained a large number of transplant surgeons and Taylor personally supervised some fifteen research fellows, all of whom achieved a higher degree in transplantation research. At the time of his death five of the major transplant units in the UK were led by people he had trained. 
Taylor's involvement in transplantation went beyond running the large clinical programme at Newcastle and encouraging and supervising research programmes. He became a very active fund-raiser for the unit. Always a keen cricketer and golfer, he took up long-distance running at the age of fifty and ran in four marathons, including the London marathon on three occasions, as well as innumerable half marathons, including the Great North Run on thirteen occasions. With sponsorship he raised over $500,000 and this enabled the Northern Counties Kidney Research Fund to endow two clinical lectureships in transplantation at Newcastle. As a result of his enthusiasm for long-distance running he was invited by Brendan Foster to become a trustee of the Great North Run Charity, which allocated funds to projects in northern England both in medicine and in sport. 
Taylor was a founder member of the International Transplantation Society, the British Transplantation Society, and the European Transplantation Society, and he was an outstanding president of the British Transplantation Society from 1986 to 1989. During that time the scandal of organs for sale in London emerged, and Taylor was closely involved with the General Medical Council in uncovering this activity. As a result of this he played a major part in drafting the 'Human Organ Transplant Act' of 1987, which made the sale of human tissues illegal within the United Kingdom. Among his many other contributions outside clinical practice he helped to establish the Transplant Sports Association of Great Britain and chaired that organization for over twelve years. The association was responsible for organizing the Transplant games, in which transplant patients competed in a wide variety of sports and which soon became a well-established part of the public profile of transplantation in the UK. This was only one aspect of Taylor's continual efforts to increase organ donation. He also served as president of the North of England Surgical Society, chairman of the UK Transplant Multi-Organ Sharing Group, and a member of the UK Transplant Management Group. He was also founding chairman of the Transplant Patients' Trust, which provided financial support for families of transplant patients. He was awarded the McKeown gold medal of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1989 and was made a CBE in 1997. 
Ross Taylor was one of the pioneers of organ transplantation in the United Kingdom and during his career he became one of the most respected figures in the field. He was loved and respected by his patients and colleagues both far and wide. He was always considerate of others, advising his students: 'Treat your patients as you would wish members of your own family to be treated, and you will not go far wrong' ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Dec 2003). He died on 24 October 2003 at his home, 17 Apperley Road, Stocksfield, Northumberland, after a short illness, from cancer of the stomach. His funeral, at St George's Church, Jesmond, on 30 October, was attended by over 500 people from all over the country. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 92965


Bates, Sir Alan Arthur (1934-2003), actor, was born at Queen Mary Nursing Home, Derby, on 17 February 1934, the eldest of the three sons of Harold Arthur Bates, an insurance superintendent, and his wife, Florence Mary, 'nee' Wheatcroft. At the time of his birth his parents lived at Farley, Derwent Avenue, Allestree, near Belper in Derbyshire. Both parents played musical instruments, his father the cello and his mother the piano, and a home environment where the arts flourished led Bates to an interest in theatre. While attending Herbert Strutt Grammar School, Belper, he acted in school plays and enjoyed watching productions at the Derby Little Theatre Club, whose leading repertory actors included John Osborne and John Dexter. He also enjoyed films at the local cinema, admiring actors such as James Mason, Marcello Mastroianni, and Spencer Tracy. After winning a scholarship to train at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, where his contemporaries included Albert Finney, Peter O'Toole, and Richard Harris, and doing national service in the RAF, Bates joined the Midland Theatre Company, in Coventry, making his professional stage debut in 'You and Your Wife' (1955). 
After moving to London in 1956, Bates became a founder member of the English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre, which was set up by actor-director George Devine and director Tony Richardson to perform plays neglected by West End managements and as a forum for new writers. His first roles were as Simon Fellowes in Angus Wilson's 'The Mulberry Bush' (1956) and Hopkins in Arthur Miller's 'The Crucible' (1956), but he and the theatre's first major impact came with their third production, John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' (1956), starring Kenneth Haigh as the rebellious anti-hero Jimmy Porter, with Bates as his quiet, sympathetic friend, Cliff Lewis, and Tony Richardson directing. The play was seen to represent a new generation's disillusionment with post-war Britain. Osborne and others of the new school were dubbed 'angry young men', and the 'kitchen sink' drama was born. It was also a launching pad for Bates, who reprised his role in Moscow as part of the World Youth Festival (1957), at the Edinburgh Festival (1958), and for his Broadway debut (Lyceum Theatre, 1957-8, and John Golden Theatre, 1958). He then had success on the West End stage as Edmund Tyrone in Eugene O'Neill's 'Long Day's Journey into Night' (Globe Theatre, 1958), and the extrovert, sadistic brother Mick in Harold Pinter's 'The Caretaker' (Duchess Theatre, 1960, then on Broadway at the Lyceum Theatre, 1961-2). He returned to Broadway to play the title role in Jean Kerr's Greenwich Village comedy, 'Poor Richard' (Helen Hayes Theatre, 1964-5). 
Although he had made his film debut with a small role in the comedy 'It's Never Too Late' (1956), starring Phyllis Calvert, Bates did not go back to the big screen until after this run of stage successes. He appeared as song-and-dance man's son Frank Rice, alongside Laurence Olivier, in the film version (1960) of John Osborne's stage play 'The Entertainer' before starring as a fugitive murderer discovered in a barn and mistaken for Jesus Christ by three children in 'Whistle Down the Wind' (1961), a north-country draughtsman forced into marriage when his girlfriend becomes pregnant in 'A Kind of Loving' (his first picture with the director John Schlesinger, 1962), a quiet adulterer in 'The Running Man' (1963), Mick in the screen adaptation of 'The Caretaker' (1963, retitled 'The Guest' in the USA), a social-climbing clerk in 'Nothing but the Best' (1964), a young English writer in 'Zorba the Greek' (1964), a man swapping his pregnant girlfriend for her flatmate in the 'swinging sixties' comedy 'Georgy Girl' (1966), and the faithful farm labourer Gabriel Oak in 'Far from the Madding Crowd' (with Schlesinger again, 1967). 
Bates made his Hollywood debut as Yakov Bok, the Jewish handyman unjustly imprisoned in tsarist Russia, in 'The Fixer' (1968), for which he was nominated for an Oscar, but he never desired the trappings of stardom and continued to pick his roles carefully. He returned to Britain for 'Women in Love' (1969), director Ken Russell's adaptation of the D. H. Lawrence novel, notable for a nude wrestling scene with his fellow star Oliver Reed, and 'The Go-Between' (1971), reuniting him with his 'Far from the Madding Crowd' co-star Julie Christie as the tenant farmer and the fiancee of a wounded South African War veteran conducting an affair in director Joseph Losey's film based on the Edwardian novel by L. P. Hartley, adapted by Harold Pinter. 
On 9 May 1970 Bates married the thirty-year-old Valerie June Ward, an actress and model under the name Victoria Ward, daughter of Robert Alfred William Wood, printer. Their twin sons, Benedick and Tristan, were born in 1971. Professionally, the 1970s saw Bates continue to switch between stage and screen. He reprised his role as the angry, embittered brother, Andrew Shaw, from playwright David Storey's 'In Celebration' (Royal Court Theatre, 1969) in director Lindsay Anderson's 1975 film version, and the title role of a troubled university lecturer from Simon Gray's comedy 'Butley' (Criterion Theatre, 1971, and Morosco Theatre, New York, 1972-3) in a film directed by Harold Pinter in 1974, before taking it on a tour of American cities the following year. The beginning of his long theatrical association with Gray, usually directed by Pinter, brought him best actor honours in both the London 'Evening Standard' and the Tony awards. The pair continued with 'Otherwise Engaged' (Queen's Theatre, 1975-6), winning Bates a Variety Club award for his portrayal of debonair publisher Simon, and 'Stage Struck' (Vaudeville Theatre, 1979, directed by Stephen Hollis), a thriller in which he played scheming husband Robert. In between these productions, Bates also made an impression as Allott, the disillusioned art teacher, in David Storey's 'Life Class' (Royal Court Theatre and Duke of York's Theatre, both 1974), and supported the opening of the Derby Playhouse in 1976 by starring there as Boris Trigorin in Chekhov's 'The Seagull', a role he also played that year in the West End (Duke of York's Theatre). Although he acted Hamlet at the Nottingham Playhouse (1971) and an impudent Petruchio in 'The Taming of the Shrew' with the Royal Shakespeare Company (Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, 1973), he was usually at his most electric in contemporary works. 
A productive period in television in the late 1970s and early 1980s saw Bates playing Michael Henchard in Dennis Potter's adaptation of the Thomas Hardy novel 'The Mayor of Casterbridge' (1978), John Mortimer in that writer's autobiographical 'A Voyage Round My Father' (1982), and Guy Burgess, the exiled spy in Moscow, in 'An Englishman Abroad' (1983), which teamed director John Schlesinger with writer Alan Bennett and won Bates a British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) best actor award. On stage, he continued to enthrall audiences, as the blackmailed homosexual Austro-Hungarian army colonel Alfred Redl in a revival of John Osborne's 'A Patriot for Me' (Chichester Festival Theatre and Theatre Royal, Haymarket, both 1983, winning him another Variety Club award, then Ahmanson Theatre, Los Angeles, 1984); Nicolas, the interrogator, in Harold Pinter's torture play 'One for the Road' (Lyric Studio, Hammersmith, 1984); Edgar in Strindberg's 'The Dance of Death' (Riverside Studios, 1985); and Benedick in 'Much Ado About Nothing' (Strand Theatre, 1989). 
Still shunning stardom and taking only film roles that appealed to him, often in low-budget, independent pictures, Bates was notable on screen as Saul Kaplan, the romantic artist, in 'An Unmarried Woman' (1977), Serge Diaghilev, mentor and possessive lover of the legendary male ballet dancer, in 'Nijinsky' (1980), H. J. Heidler, the rich Englishman who takes a mistress in 1920s Paris, in 'Quartet' (1981), David Cornwallis, the alcoholic husband of the doomed violinist, in 'Duet for One' (1986), Claudius in director Franco Zeffirelli's 'Hamlet' (1990), the quack doctor Eamon McCree in the Sam Shepard-directed western 'Silent Tongue' (1992), and Jennings, the butler, in director Robert Altman's country-house whodunit 'Gosford Park' (2001). His later television work included playing Josiah Bounderby in 'Hard Times' (1994), the title role of the crossword- and anagram-obsessed former university lecturer in 'Oliver's Travels' (1995), based on Alan Plater's novel, the eccentric Uncle Matthew in 'Love in a Cold Climate' (2001), and George V in 'Bertie and Elizabeth' (2002). 
But Bates's first love remained the theatre. He teamed up with writer David Storey and director Lindsay Anderson again in 'Stages' (National Theatre, 1992), returned to the West End in the title role of Ibsen's 'The Master Builder' (Theatre Royal, Haymarket, 1995), played the travel writer holding imaginary conversations with his comatose wife in Simon Gray's 'Life Support' (Aldwych Theatre, 1997), and starred as Mark Antony, opposite Frances de la Tour's Cleopatra, in a Royal Shakespeare Company production (Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford upon Avon, 1999, Barbican Theatre, 2000). He also returned to New York, performing alongside Eileen Atkins in Yasmina Reza's acclaimed 'The Unexpected Man' (Promenade Theatre, 2000-01), and winning a Tony award for his portrayal on Broadway of the penniless aristocrat Kuzovkin in Ivan Turgenev's 'Fortune's Fool' (Music Box Theatre, 2002). 
As an actor, Bates (who was appointed CBE in 1995 and knighted in 2003) was known for his versatility and sensitivity, able to switch from introversion and vulnerability to menace and manipulation, showing expert timing in both drama and comedy, with irony and understatement as his tools. He was also a private man who never sought the trappings of stardom or the lure of big money, turning down a seven-year Hollywood contract after his original success in 'Look Back in Anger'. 
After twenty years of family life, in the early 1990s Bates faced two tragedies: the death of his son Tristan from an asthma attack in 1990 and that of his wife, Valerie, two years later from a suspected heart attack, following a wasting disease. He said his life was 'cut literally in half, with four becoming two, like a sniper in your garden' ('Daily Telegraph', 29 Dec 2003). In 1994 he established the Tristan Bates Theatre at the Actors Centre, Covent Garden, in his late son's memory. He died of pancreatic cancer at the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, Westminster, on 27 December 2003. He was survived by his son Benedick, who had followed him into acting. 


@@@@@


doc= 92966


Bean, Hugh Cecil (1929-2003), violinist, was born on 22 September 1929 at 80 Croydon Road, Beckenham, Kent, the son of Cecil Walter Claude Bean, naval engineer, and his wife, Gertrude Alice, 'nee' Chapman. At the time of his birth his parents were living at 31 Hampden Road, Beckenham. As the son of an enthusiastic amateur violinist he soon became interested in the instrument that would dominate his life. He was given his first lessons by his father at the age of five. With the advantage of perfect pitch, he progressed quickly and was taken to the renowned British violinist Albert Sammons when he was nine. Bean remained a pupil of Sammons for twenty years and was influenced profoundly by his teacher's approach as a performer and as a pedagogue. Aged fourteen, and still a student at Beckenham grammar school, he won a scholarship to the Royal College of Music. There he was awarded the principal's prize at the age of seventeen and, later, the queen's prize. With the exception of some short periods as a teacher at the Royal Academy of Music, he was connected with the college throughout much of his career and was a professor of violin there between 1954 and 1992. 
In 1949 Bean was the first national serviceman to be admitted to the Grenadier Guards. With the guards he led a string group, continued to study at the Royal College of Music, and was nicknamed the Catgut Grenadier. From 1950 he was engaged as leader of the Harvey Phillips String Orchestra and as leader of a chamber orchestra conducted by the horn-player Dennis Brain. That year he won second prize in the International Carl Flesch competition, and in 1952 he was awarded the Boise Foundation travelling award, which enabled him to study with Andre Gertler at the Brussels Conservatoire, where he won first prize for both solo and chamber playing. 
In 1951 Bean had joined the Philharmonia Orchestra as a member of the second violins. His talent was immediately apparent and he was promoted to co-leader of the orchestra in 1955 and leader in 1957. Having replaced Manoug Parikian at the front desk, he was able to observe many of the world's leading conductors at work. Although he could be cynical about them, he readily acknowledged talent and was prepared to work tirelessly for those he admired. He was particularly impressed by Leopold Stokowski and was concerned that with the death of figures such as Herbert von Karajan, Otto Klemperer, and Sir John Barbirolli the era of the great conductor was nearing its end. After two years with the BBC Symphony Orchestra (1967-9), where he shared the leadership with Eli Goren, and a short period as leader of the London Symphony Orchestra, he embarked on a freelance career, but returned to the front desk of the Philharmonia in 1990, and was appointed leader emeritus of the orchestra in 1994. He went on more than ninety overseas tours with the Philharmonia Orchestra and remarked laconically in 1992 that touring had much in common with army life: 'I play, I travel, and I sleep. That's it. I don't go sightseeing. And I eat when I can' ('Daily Telegraph'). His dry wit was much admired by his colleagues and his authority was always exercised with discretion. 
Although remembered primarily as an orchestral leader, Bean was also a distinguished chamber musician. Having gained some early performing experience by playing at Kenneth Golightley's teatime series for the Overseas League with Alexander Gibson (piano) and Dorothy Browning (cello), he later founded the Boise Trio with the pianist David Parkhouse and the cellist Eileen Croxford. He then went on to establish the Music Group of London in 1966 with Parkhouse, Croxford, the horn-player Alan Civil, and the clarinettist Bernard Walton. With that ensemble he toured regularly for the British Council and performed in both east and west Beirut during the Lebanese civil war, a time when many refused to travel between the two sectors of the city. In the 1980s he visited Denmark each summer, where he taught and took part in a chamber music course with the Music Group of London and, later, the London Music Phoenix, which he founded with Keith Puddy (clarinet), Shelagh Sutherland (piano), and Lionel Handy (cello). 
Blessed with an outstanding technique, Bean seemed destined for a career as a soloist. But from his vantage point at the front desk, he was able to observe the demands placed on touring virtuosi and quickly dismissed the idea of becoming a soloist. Nevertheless he was engaged to play Elgar's violin concerto with Sir Adrian Boult at the Three Choirs festival in 1969, and in 1972 made an acclaimed recording of the work with Charles Groves. Consequently Bean was bombarded with requests to perform as a soloist, and later made a well-received recording of Vaughan Williams's 'The Lark Ascending' with Boult. Although more comfortable as a leader than as a soloist, he made his final public appearance in 2002 as a soloist. That year, he played Bach's concerto for two violins in D minor with his student Jonathan Josephs, in memory of another former student. 
Bean had married Mary Dorothy Harrow, a 29-year-old secretary and daughter of Henry Unwin Harrow, brewer, at St Luke's Catholic Church, Love Lane, Pinner, on 16 April 1963. They had met in the 1950s when she worked for the Philharmonia Orchestra as a string fixer. They had one daughter, Fiona. At their home in Beckenham, Bean pursued his interest in model aeroplanes and model steam engines. He built a 4.5 inch gauge model railway at the end of his garden, and could be regularly found operating it wearing his engine driver's cap. He was made an Hon. ARCM in 1961, FRCM in 1968, and CBE in 1970. He died of heart failure at the Princess Royal University Hospital, Farnborough, on 26 December 2003, and was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 92971


Casson, (Frederick) Michael (1925-2003), potter, was born on 2 April 1925 at 43 Leaside Avenue, Muswell Hill, London, one of four children of William Casson, restaurant proprietor, and his wife, Dorothy Mabel, 'nee' Miller. He showed an early aptitude for art. Despite being born with several vertebrae welded together in his neck, he also became a proficient sportsman, swimmer, and diver, though a deep dive as a youth damaged an eardrum leaving him deafened in one ear, a disability which, like his neck, he rarely mentioned. During the Second World War, excused enlistment, he worked for Oxo and served in the fire service, helping to clear and evacuate damaged buildings. 
With the war over Casson enrolled on an emergency teacher training course at Shoreditch Technical College, specializing in art but also making some pots. After a year teaching he studied for the national diploma in design at Hornsey College of Art in north London, intending to be a painter, but soon abandoned painting in favour of pottery, despite the basic equipment and the unenthusiastic teaching. Casson's innovative, Picasso-inspired jug submitted for the diploma examination was rejected, though a more conventional piece the following year was awarded a distinction. Regardless of the relatively minimal teaching, Casson had found his metier and with his brother took over his uncle's hardware business in Marchmont Street, London, where he not only served in the shop but made pots in the basement. With an eye on early unglazed wares made in Cyprus and Crete he produced lively red earthenware with a white tin glaze, iron speckling from the body adding an extra sparkle. Shapes included bookends, figures, bowls, salad serving dishes, and lidded containers, many of which had a knob in the form of a crisply modelled animal, pieces successfully sold through Liberty's and Heals. 
In the early 1950s Sheila Wilmot ('b'. 1930), a fellow pottery student from Hornsey, came to share the studio; she and Casson married on 2 April 1955, living first in the basement and then above the shop. Together they made a range of tablewares, a collaboration that continued until they concentrated on more individual pieces in the late 1970s. In 1959 the family (which eventually included two daughters and a son) moved to Prestwood, Buckinghamshire, where they converted an old greengrocer's shop into a pottery, producing high-fired stoneware in an electric kiln. Eventually Casson built a gas kiln for reduction-fired tableware, exploring the interaction between body and glaze, covered with rich, but quiet, contemplative colours of pale green celadons, deep black brown temmokus, and matt browns. The well-designed range included teapots, mugs, and casseroles, many with restrained brushwork decoration. 
Feeling that what had been a rural area was becoming increasingly urban, the family moved in 1976 to Wobage Farm, a part-Elizabethan, part-eighteenth-century structure with plenty of outbuildings, near Ross-on-Wye. There they concentrated on individual rather than repetition wares, with Casson devising various stoneware bodies, one of which fired a rich red brown. Helped by Andrew McGarva, he experimented with different kilns that included a 60 cubic foot oil kiln and a smaller one fired with wood -- a renewable resource that made use of off-cuts from the nearby Forest of Dean -- and which became Casson's favourite method of firing. A salt-glaze kiln allowed Casson to investigate the unity of glaze and form in a fresh way. 
In developing his individual pieces Casson concentrated on jugs -- a shape that quickly became seen as his signature form. Derived from medieval pitchers and ewers, these could have a round, full bottom with a strong, flaring neck, or be more slender and architectural, with a subtle, gently swelling belly. A natural decorator, Casson developed a range of incised, wax, and paper resist designs using clay slips. Some were based on the abstracted body of a swimmer, others on more geometrical patterns, while others recall the rhythm of waves and the undulating patterns of landscape. Colours on his individual pots were invariably those of the earth, such as deep matt ochres, saturated dark browns, and creamy whites, or, on salt or soda glazed pieces, inky blues and greys. In Casson's hands shape and decoration formed a harmonious whole. Exhibitions in London at the Craft Potters' Shop and the British Crafts Centre and a retrospective at Rufford Craft Centre consolidated his reputation, as did shows abroad. 
In addition to being a fine potter, Casson worked diligently to nurture the burgeoning studio pottery movement. He was a keen supporter of the Crafts Centre of Great Britain (where he showed work) and in the late 1950s was a founding member of the Craftsmen Potters' Association (later the Craft Potters' Association), a co-operative that acquired a shop and gallery in central London in 1958. Working with the honorary secretary, David Canter, Casson helped put the association on a sound, democratic footing, serving on its council as both member and chair. With the setting up of the Crafts Advisory Committee (later the Crafts Council) in the early 1970s Casson became involved in running committees, giving clear, sensible advice and helping steer the new body with insight and understanding. 
As an educationist, Casson, with Victor Margrie, helped conceive and lead the Harrow studio pottery course (later part of Westminster University), in 1963, devising a practical programme intended to enable students to set up as professional potters. To this end Colin Pearson, a potter trained in workshops rather than art school, came to teach repetition throwing. Despite the often gruelling timetable, the course proved a huge success, graduating students including Janice Tchalenko and Jane Hamlyn. Casson confessed to learning much from the students and members of staff. 
A natural communicator, Casson devised and presented 'The Craft of the Potter' (1975) for the BBC, a ground-breaking series that involved practical demonstration and discussion on the art of the potter. To the BBC's amazement the programmes were a popular hit, the series being repeated many times; a book, issued in 1976 to coincide with the programmes, continued to be reprinted. This was Casson's second book; his first, 'Pottery in Britain Today', was published in 1967. Casson proved a gifted presenter, articulate, witty, and interested, his bearded face fulfilling the popular stereotype of a potter. He was appointed OBE in 1983. 
With increasing age Casson suffered bouts of illness and one of his struggles was to refuse public commitments to allow him time to concentrate on making pots. These continued to be innovative, with subtle variations and earlier forms revisited with a fresh eye, examples of the potter's art that carry a powerful sense of the personality and generosity of their maker. He died on 12 December 2003 at his home, Wobage Farm, Upton Bishop, Herefordshire, of heart failure, and was survived by his wife, Sheila, and their three children. 
Casson's career neatly mirrors the development of studio pottery in the post-war period, starting with red earthenware in the 1950s, then oxidized stoneware in the 1960s, reduction-fired stoneware in the 1970s, followed by wood-firing and finally salt- or soda-fired work in the 1980s and 1990s. Each process he made his own, bringing a sensitive understanding of material and form. Rejecting the orientalism espoused by Bernard Leach, he responded to the more eclectic 'coffee bar culture' of the 1950s and 1960s with early earthenware pieces including shapes modelled in the form of fish or figures, though for his thrown ware he drew on early Mediterranean pots. Just as he pioneered different styles of pottery, so Casson brought to his teaching the same radical attitude, inspiring several generations of potters with his ideas. His progressive approach made him a central figure in nurturing and leading the post-war studio pottery 'movement'. 


@@@@@


doc= 92976


Gildesburgh, Sir John (c.1331-1389), soldier and speaker of the House of Commons, was related to John Gildesburgh (died 1349), a London fishmonger of illegitimate birth, and to Peter Gildesburgh, a prominent official in the employment of Edward, the Black Prince, but his parentage is unknown. After schooling at Oxford, his military service began in the campaign culminating at Crecy in 1346, and continued in the retinue of Bartholomew, third Lord Burghersh (died 1369), whom he accompanied back to France in 1355 in the Black Prince's company. A year later he fought at Poitiers. In 1358 he travelled to Brabant, again with Burghersh, and subsequently took part in Edward III's campaign that ended with the treaty of Bretigny in 1360. Burghersh thought highly of him: he granted him for life a manor in Essex, petitioned Pope Urban V to give him the privilege of plenary remission of sins, and named him as his executor. 
During a respite from service overseas Gildesburgh contracted an opportune marriage to the twice widowed Margery (died 'c'.1365), daughter and coheir of Sir Henry Garnet (died 1345), thereby acquiring Wennington in Essex and a number of other properties, which he retained for life. Now a tenant of Humphrey (IX) de Bohun, seventh earl of Hereford, he entered the earl's service, and having taken part in Bohun's naval expedition of 1371 he was rewarded with a manor in Hertfordshire. In December 1372 the earl appointed him as an executor of his will. He stood surety for the guardian of the Bohun estates during the minority of the earl's two daughters, Eleanor and Mary, and following Eleanor's marriage to Edward III's youngest son, Thomas of Woodstock, earl of Buckingham, he joined the latter's affinity. He was knighted in August 1378, while serving in Woodstock's retinue on a largely futile expedition to Brittany. 
When first returned to parliament by Essex in January 1380 Gildesburgh was aged nearly fifty, and a seasoned veteran of the French wars. His being elected speaker, despite his lack of familiarity with the workings of the Commons, may be attributed to his position as Woodstock's retainer and to the urgent need to send a relief force to Brittany; a major expedition to the duchy had foundered at sea in December, and it was now proposed to send Woodstock with a new army, which would have to be financed by parliament. In Gildesburgh's 'protestation' he asked that anything he said that displeased the king should not be attributed to the Commons, but be put down to his own ignorance. After complaining about heavy taxation and asking for the dissolution of the king's 'continual council' (on the grounds that the thirteen-year-old Richard II was sufficiently mature to select his own advisers) the Commons demanded that a commission should be appointed to investigate the state of the royal household. Gildesburgh was appointed to this body on 2 March, the day before parliament ended. The Commons requested that the proceeds of the subsidies granted should be used exclusively to finance Woodstock's force, and in June Gildesburgh was named among the receivers of the money allocated. 
When another parliament assembled at Northampton on 5 November Gildesburgh was re-elected speaker. As such he asked for a statement of the amount needed for Woodstock's army to winter in Brittany. The sum demanded, $160,000, was deemed 'moelt outrageouse et oultrement importable', but eventually the Commons granted a poll tax of 3 groats ('RotP', 3.89). This infamous triple poll tax triggered off the peasants' revolt, and in view of Gildesburgh's part in its grant, his appointment to a commission to detect tax evasion, and the location of his property in the county where the insurrection began, he did well to escape with his life. He was sent to restore order at Brentwood on 30 May 1381, but three of the clerks accompanying the commissioners were murdered and he himself fled, leaving his manors to be plundered by the rebels. After obtaining from Richard II a licence to recover his stolen goods, 'howsoever he pleased' ('CPR', '1381-5', 24), he probably assisted Woodstock in suppressing the revolt. 
Gildesburgh sat in the Commons again in 1383 and 1385, having in the meantime accompanied Woodstock on John of Gaunt's expedition into Scotland in 1384. Election to his fifth parliament, the Merciless Parliament of 1388, probably owed much to his connection with Woodstock, now duke of Gloucester, who as one of the lords appellant then had control of the government. During the parliamentary recess he was appointed to take oaths in support of the appellants from local notables. His health was now failing, and he made settlements of his estates, naming among his feoffees two other former speakers, Sir Thomas Hungerford and Sir Richard Waldegrave. He died without surviving children at an unknown date between February and October 1389, and was buried with his first wife and their daughters in Wennington church. His second wife, Elizabeth, only child of William Pembridge of Gedding, Suffolk, inherited her father's estates in 1392, and married Sir John Deyncourt (died 1393), steward of the household of John of Gaunt. At her death about 1399 she was buried with Deyncourt in the church of the Greyfriars in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 92977


Doreward, John (d. 1420), speaker of the House of Commons and royal councillor, inherited estates from his parents, William Doreward and Joan, daughter and heir of John Oliver of Stanway. Situated mainly in eastern Essex and focused on Bocking, they were estimated in 1412 to be worth $135 a year. Having trained as a lawyer, from the early 1380s Doreward was engaged on commissions of local government and as a JP, and his reputation led to appointment as steward of the liberties of Bury St Edmunds Abbey. He was married three times: to Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Rochford; to Katherine (died 'c'. 1397), daughter and coheir of Sir Walter Walcot of Gunton, Norfolk; and, in 1399, to Isabel (died 1426), sister of Richard Baynard of Messing (a future speaker), and widow of Walter Bygood of Alfriston. 
Doreward's lifelong friendship with Thomas Coggeshall of Boreham led before 1387 to his entry into the circles of Joan de Bohun, dowager countess of Hereford, and her son-in-law Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester. In February 1395, during the first of the six parliaments in which Doreward represented Essex, he and Coggeshall, his fellow shire knight, were both named by the duke as his attorneys, and the following year the two men witnessed a conveyance by the duke and duchess to their collegiate chapel in Pleshey Castle. Doreward also came to the notice of Countess Joan's brothers, Richard (III) Fitzalan, fourth earl of Arundel (who granted him the manor of High Roding), and Thomas Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury, whose name he included on the bede roll of the chantry he founded in Bocking church in 1397. 
Richard II had good reason to doubt Doreward's loyalty, since he was closely associated with two of the former lords appellant of 1387-8, and had himself benefited from their acts in the 1388 Merciless Parliament by securing lands forfeited by the king's friends. Immediately after the arrest of Gloucester and Arundel in the summer of 1397 Doreward was removed from his office as steward of Bury St Edmunds Abbey, and replaced by Sir John Bussy, one of the king's staunchest supporters. On 28 August he and Coggeshall were required to make loans to the king of 100 marks each, and in December they were appointed to the commission to levy the fine of $2000 imposed on the commonalties of Essex and Hertfordshire for having demonstrated their support for Gloucester and Arundel, now both dead (the one murdered, the other executed). Doreward retained links with the widowed duchess of Gloucester, and his sympathies lay with her brother-in-law, Henry Bolingbroke, whom Richard II had exiled. In August 1399, when Henry seized power, Doreward was temporarily made sheriff of Essex, and he and his friend Coggeshall were returned to the last parliament summoned in Richard's name. At Westminster those elected learned of Richard's abdication on 30 September and then reassembled for Henry IV's first parliament on 6 October. On 15 October Sir John Cheyne was discharged as speaker, most likely because Archbishop Arundel had objected to him as an enemy of the church. Doreward was the Commons' second choice, perhaps because he was of proven orthodox opinions and clearly acceptable to the archbishop. The chief business of the session was to reverse the injustices of Richard II's last years. 
On 1 November 1399, while still MPs, both Doreward and Coggeshall were appointed members of the new king's council, and allocated annual fees of 100 marks each. Henry IV rewarded Doreward's support by granting him for life the estates of the alien priory of West Mersea and the fee farm of Colchester ($35 a year). During his fourth parliament, in 1404, he was one of the king's council formally named to the assembly, and he was summoned from Essex to attend great councils in 1401, 1403, and 1405. Many of his other activities stemmed directly from his position as a councillor: he served on commissions to determine appeals against judgments in the courts of chivalry, and arbitrated in serious disputes. Having made loans to aid royal garrisons in south Wales, in 1405 he negotiated for the submission of the rebels of Usk and Caerleon, and reported personally to the king on the state of affairs in the marches. Yet when the king's council was reconstituted in parliament in May 1406, Doreward and his fellow commoners were excluded. He subsequently agreed to waive the 200 marks owed for his salary in return for licences enabling him to make religious benefactions. 
In May 1413, in the first parliament of Henry V's reign, Doreward led the delegation sent from the Commons to the king to inform him that the speaker, William Stourton, had acted without authorization in agreeing to put their complaints in writing, and when Stourton fell ill he replaced him as speaker, though he officiated for only a few days (3-9 June) before the session ended. He sat in parliament for the last time in April 1414. In 1415 he was named by the king's brother Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, as a trustee of his estates, and acted similarly on behalf of the countess of Hereford, and her granddaughter Anne, countess of Stafford. His last appearance of importance was at a meeting of the council held by the duke of Bedford in January 1418, during Henry V's absence in France. Having made his will on 1 February 1418, Doreward died on 12 November 1420 and was buried at Bocking. He was survived by his wife, Isabel, his son and heir, John, and three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 92978


Sturmy, Sir William (c.1356-1427), diplomat and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son of Geoffrey Sturmy, a younger son of an important Wiltshire family, and an unidentified mother. William came to prominence in 1381 when his uncle, Sir Henry Sturmy, died childless and he inherited extensive property in Hampshire, Devon, and Wiltshire. The bulk of his estates, including his seat at Wolf Hall in Great Bedwyn, were in Wiltshire and in 1412 these were assessed as being worth $91 6's'. 8died annually. Shortly after coming into his inheritance he married Joan Crawthorne (died 1429), the widow of the Devon landowner Sir John Beaumont, who brought him estates worth $40 per annum, and in April 1384 he was elected as one of the knights of the shire for Hampshire, the first of twelve such returns to the Commons. 
Already at this stage in his career it seems probable that Sturmy had connections at the court of Richard II. From the mid-1380s he was appointed to politically sensitive commissions in Wiltshire, Hampshire, Devon, Surrey, and Berkshire and his election to four successive parliaments between January 1390 and 1393 for three different counties indicate the breadth of his interests and his usefulness as a crown servant. Some measure of his standing can be gained by the fact that in 1392 he successfully brought a charge of maintenance against Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon, before the king's council. This may represent an attempt to challenge the regional hegemony of the Courtenays -- at the Winchester parliament of the following year Sturmy was appointed to a commission to investigate the unlawful activities of the earl's uncle, Sir Philip Courtenay of Powderham. In October 1392 he was retained by Richard as a knight of the household with an annuity of $40 and was probably a frequent attender at the royal court. In 1394 he accompanied the king to Ireland and in 1397-8 he undertook his first diplomatic mission, to the courts of the rival popes at Avignon and Rome, in an attempt to end the schism in the church. He also developed close connections to William Wykeham, bishop of Winchester, and one of his daughters married a kinsman of the bishop. 
Despite Sturmy's close association with Richard he suffered no loss of influence on the latter's deposition. He sat for Wiltshire in the parliament of 1399, which legitimated Richard's deposition, and by March 1401 his annuity had been confirmed and he had become a member of Henry IV's council. For the next sixteen months he was employed on diplomatic missions, mainly in the empire. These resulted in the marriage of Henry's daughter Blanche to Ludwig, the heir presumptive to the king of the Romans, and in the months before the marriage Sturmy served as steward of her household. On his return to England he served with the king against the Welsh rebels, then, when a parliament was summoned to Coventry in October 1404, he was chosen as speaker of the House of Commons. His appointment was probably due to his diplomatic experience in Germany. At the end of the session, which lasted little more than a month, Sturmy was authorized by parliament to treat with the grand master of the Teutonic order for the removal of the embargo placed on imports of English cloth, and in 1405, and again in 1407, he made lengthy visits to the Baltic. When he made his final report before the Gloucester parliament of autumn 1407 he was owed diplomatic wages of over $100. Probably in 1404 Sturmy had received another important office, that of chief steward of the dower lands of Queen Joan of Navarre, a position that increased his regional power by allowing him to take out leases on some of her estates at favourable rates. The influence that the stewardship gave him in Wiltshire is evident from the large number of his associates and servants who were returned to parliament for the Wiltshire boroughs of Great Bedwyn and Marlborough in these years. In November 1419 he was pricked for the first and only time as sheriff of Wiltshire. 
Sturmy continued to act as steward after Henry IV's death and survived Queen Joan's disgrace in 1419 for allegedly plotting Henry V's death by necromancy. He was elected to the parliaments of May 1413, November 1414, and November 1417 as knight of the shire for Wiltshire. Sturmy's annuity, too, was renewed by the new king, and further diplomatic missions followed, notably in 1418 when he was one of the negotiators for the proposed marriage of John, duke of Bedford, to Jacqueline of Hainault. His influence with Henry V was probably not as great as he had previously enjoyed, however, and in 1417 Duke Humphrey of Gloucester, as warden of the royal forests south of the Trent, dispossessed him of his family's hereditary wardenship of Savernake Forest in Wiltshire. It took three years of hard bargaining before Gloucester was compelled to reinstate him. In 1422 Sturmy was elected to his last parliament (to which he also secured the election for Wiltshire boroughs of his illegitimate son, his grandson, and a cousin). Sturmy was already in his sixties, and this first parliament of Henry VI was the last act of his public career. Although he continued to serve as a justice of the peace for his native county until 1425 he did not serve on any more 'ad hoc' commissions. 
Sturmy made his will in London on 19 March 1427. He asked to be buried at the Trinitarian priory of Easton Royal near Wolf Hall and he made small bequests to Salisbury Cathedral and to repair the bells at Elvetham church in Hampshire. He left a small library, including two volumes of Higden's 'Polychronicon', and made personal bequests, mainly of arms and plate, to Sir Robert Shotesbrooke and his wife's son-in-law, Sir Hugh Luttrell. Sturmy died at Elvetham at about eight o'clock in the evening of 21 March. His heirs were his daughter Agnes, and his grandson John Seymour, the son of his daughter Maud. After his death the family quarrelled over possession of the manors of Crofton and Wolf Hall. The dispute revolved around a deathbed enfeoffment he was supposed to have made and an alleged fraud by his illegitimate son, John. The dispute dragged on into the 1450s, but the final outcome is not clear. 


@@@@@


doc= 92979


Baynard, Richard (1371-1434), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, was born on 2 February 1371, the fourth son of Thomas Baynard (died 1375) of Messing, Essex, the family home since the twelfth century. He inherited Messing, Birch Hall, and Le Castle at the age of four, his wardship and marriage being sold for 125 marks ($83 6's'. 8died) to Sir Robert Tey, who may well have married him to his own daughter. Full possession of his patrimony was not to come for many years, for the bulk of the estate was held for life by his mother, Katherine, who married John Hende, the wealthy London draper. Baynard paid the Hendes $44 p.a. to lease two family manors from them, but augmented his income through his marriages. The second and third of these, to Joyce Vyne and Joan Sandherst, both heiresses of Londoners, brought him several properties in the City, while the fourth, to Grace Peyton, 'nee' Burgoyne (died 1439), added the manor of Easthorpe and the hundred of Lexden to his holdings in Essex, these constituting Grace's dower from her former husband, John Peyton. Baynard's income was said to be $46 13's'. 4died in 1412, and $80 in 1436, but neither assessment took account of his London property. 
As an able lawyer, with expertise in the spheres of finance and land, Baynard's services were in demand among the gentry of Essex and the citizens of London. Initially, his most important client was Walter, fourth Baron Fitzwalter (died 1406), who supported the usurpation of Henry Bolingbroke, and perhaps this connection led to Baynard's appointment as the first escheator of Henry IV's reign in Essex and Hertfordshire. However, in a will made in 1400 he left $5 for prayers for the souls of John Holland, earl of Huntingdon, and Sir Thomas Shelley, both executed for treason in January that year. Shortly afterwards he succeeded his brother-in-law John Doreward as steward of the local estates of the king's uncle, Edward, duke of York, who had married Fitzwalter's stepmother. Elected to parliament in 1406 for the first of six times as a knight of the shire for Essex, he made an impression in the Commons, being one of the dozen members assigned to represent the house at the engrossment of the parliament roll. His involvement in the business dealings of his stepfather, Hende, one of the foremost of Henry IV's financial backers, secured for him the controllership of the customs at Ipswich in 1407, while his knowledge of the law led to regular inclusion on the quorum of peace commissions. From 1412 to 1415 he belonged to a syndicate possessed of estates of Richard de Vere, eleventh earl of Oxford, and he later acted in transactions on behalf of Thomas, Baron Morley, a member of Henry V's council. Despite such connections, his election as speaker in the parliament of December 1421 (held by the duke of Bedford in the king's absence) is surprising, since he then held no crown office. Nor did his speakership lead to royal preferment. During his fourth parliament, in 1423, he acted as the spokesman of a deputation to the Lords regarding negotiations for the liberation of James I of Scotland, and in his fifth, in 1427, he led a similar deputation to announce the election as speaker of his friend John Tyrell. His legal services continued to be sought, notably by Walter, fifth Baron Fitzwalter, and the young John de Vere, twelfth earl of Oxford. 
Baynard drafted several wills, of which those dated 1400, 1420, 1426, 1427, and 1433 survive. In the last, made on 7 March 1433, he requested burial in the chancel of St John's Abbey, Colchester, and asked Tyrell, then treasurer of the king's household, to be an overseer. He sat with Tyrell in the parliament that assembled in July, but died on 7 January 1434, less than three weeks after its dissolution. Baynard had been caught up in the bitter quarrel over the inheritance of the Brokholes family, in which he sided with the daughters of John Sumpter of Colchester against the Armburghs, so earning the latters' enmity. They asserted that God punished him for his partiality so that he suddenly 'felle downe and dyed with owte howsill and shrifte' while out hunting with Lady Abergavenny, and that his troubled ghost wandered the countryside causing 'moche harme' (Carpenter, 62). 


@@@@@


doc= 92980


Allington, William (d. 1446), administrator and speaker of the House of Commons, moved from Cornwall to Horseheath in Cambridgeshire in the 1390s. Probably the son of William Allington and Denise Malet, and a relation of Master Robert Allington, chancellor of Oxford University (1393-5), he first came to the court of Richard II as a member of the retinue of John Holland, successively earl of Huntingdon and duke of Exeter, the king's half-brother, under whom he served as receiver of the English garrison at Brest in 1397 and as treasurer of Calais in 1398. When Holland accompanied the king to Ireland in April 1399 Allington looked after his affairs at home. Nevertheless he had little trouble in accommodating himself to the deposition of Richard II and avoided implication in Holland's treason against Henry IV in January 1400. A king's esquire by November 1399, Allington was soon employed in the administration of Cambridgeshire, as an escheator and JP, and achieved an assured position in the royal service by joining the household of the king's second son, Thomas (later duke of Clarence). In 1403-4 he was treasurer of the exchequer of Ireland during the prince's lieutenancy, going on to hold the office again from 1406 until 1413, although mainly discharging his duties by deputy. Allington's connection with Prince Thomas remained close, and when an MP in 1410, representing Cambridgeshire, he perhaps helped to provide a counterbalance to the then predominant party led by the prince of Wales. 
While Clarence was overseas in 1412-13 and accompanying Henry V's invasions of France in 1415 and 1417, Allington organized the dispatch of supplies to his army, supervised his affairs, and acted as a trustee of his estates. Probably on Clarence's recommendation he became a member of the council that assisted the duke of Bedford in the government of England during the king's absence. Allington was called to Normandy for diplomatic and administrative rather than military employment in July 1418, and was named that October and again in January 1419 as an envoy to treat with the French for peace. In May 1419, three months after the fall of Rouen, he was put in charge of the finances of the Norman duchy as treasurer and receiver-general, his authority being extended subsequently to keep pace with fresh acquisitions of territory. His exacting office earned him a salary of 12's'. a day, and royal grants of houses at Harfleur and Honfleur, land in the 'vicomte' of Caen, and a handsome annuity of $100. To this Clarence added a gift of estates in the vicomte of Pont Audemer. Allington's role also involved him in diplomatic business, notably in revising the conditions of the truce with Brittany. He was retained in office after Clarence was killed at Bauge on 22 March 1421 (then being made custodian of the castle and town of Caen, his own financial headquarters), but was dismissed after Henry V's death on 31 August 1422. 
Allington continued to be busy over the next few years as Clarence's feoffee and executor. Henry VI's minority council appointed him sheriff of Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire in 1423 and in January 1424 formally co-opted him into its ranks, with an annual fee of $40, a promotion perhaps owed to Bishop Henry Beaufort and Ralph, Baron Cromwell. He also retained links with the family of his first patron, subscribing 200 marks towards the ransom of John Holland's son and namesake. Following Allington's election to parliament for Cambridgeshire for the third time in 1429 (he had also sat in the brief autumn parliament of 1416), the Commons chose him as speaker, a choice no doubt inspired by his position as former head of the financial administration of the English conquest in France, since the defence and financing of English interests overseas were matters of great concern. While the parliament was in session Henry VI was crowned at Westminster Abbey, and it was decided that he should cross to France to be crowned there as well. 
Allington married Joan (died 1446), whose maiden name was probably Burgh; in the 1420s he arranged lucrative matches for his sons, William and Robert, who married two sisters, the granddaughters and coheirs of the wealthy Sir William Argentine of Great Wymondley, Hertfordshire. Whereas his own landed acquisitions had given him an annual profit of at least $40, these marriages provided his family with estates worth $170 p.a. or more. He retired from local administration in 1439, and, having made a will on 20 September 1446, died on 19 October. The inscription on his monumental brass in Horseheath church described him as sometime treasurer of Ireland and Normandy. His son William also sat in parliament three times for Cambridgeshire, and his grandson, another William Allington, emulated him by acting as speaker in 1472 and 1478. 


@@@@@


doc= 92981


Bowes, John (c.1383-1444), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, came from a minor gentry family established by 1200 at Costock in south Nottinghamshire. The son of John Bowes (died in or before 1404) and an unknown mother, he was the first of the family to enjoy a career of any distinction, probably owing his early advancement to his neighbour Sir Thomas Rempston (died 1406), in whose wardship he was brought up. Nothing can be said of his early years except that he trained as a lawyer, and that his career began in earnest in 1422, when he was added to the quorum of the peace in his native shire, a position he retained (with one short interval) until his death. He soon numbered among his professional clients members of several of the leading gentry families of both Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire, and in the latter county acquired a small estate at Frisby on the Wreak through his marriage to Margaret Friseby (died 1444/5). 
Bowes served as royal escheator for Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire from November 1428 to February 1430, was occasionally appointed to commissions, and was four times returned to parliament as a knight of the shire for Nottinghamshire, in 1429, 1432, 1435, and 1439. His third election brought him to the high point of his career, when he was chosen to be speaker of the Commons. To outward appearances an unlikely candidate for this office, he may have benefited from a general predisposition in favour of lawyers (he was one of eight to become speaker in successive parliaments between 1432 and 1447), from contacts with such powerful figures as William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk, and Ralph, Baron Cromwell, and from the agitation that was then surrounding the payment of the ransom of Sir Thomas Rempston (died 1458), son of Bowes's early patron and one of the leading English commanders in the last phase of the Hundred Years' War. Bowes had already been involved in an unsuccessful attempt to raise the ransom, and it is likely that, as speaker, he was the sponsor of petitions presented in this parliament on Sir Thomas's behalf. But if those petitions help to explain his appointment, Bowes's work as speaker also found favour with the king's council: on 16 December 1435, a week before the dissolution, he was paid $13 13's'. 4died as reward for expediting royal business, probably the satisfactory grant of taxation made by this parliament. This is the earliest known example of a payment by the crown to the speaker specifically in return for his services in that office, and no more were made until after the accession of Edward IV, when they became common practice. 
Thereafter Bowes continued to practise as a lawyer, and his career prospered to the extent that on 13 July 1440 the corporation of London chose him as its recorder -- the city's principal legal officer. It was as recorder that two years later he served as one of the city's MPs. But just as his hitherto only modestly successful career might have been about to bring him greater rewards, he appears to have been afflicted by a sudden illness. On 20 June 1442 he made his will, and on 14 July he was replaced as recorder by Robert Danvers, on the grounds of infirmity. By way of compensation the London authorities granted Bowes a pension of 20 marks ($13 6's'. 8died). He was still alive on 26 July 1444, when he witnessed an important deed, but had died by 4 August following, when his will was proved at York. 
Bowes's will is unrevealing, and does not even specify a place of burial. It does not suggest that he had profited greatly from his work as a lawyer, perhaps because significant promotion came only very late in a career that had been slow to develop. In the income tax returns of 1436 he was assessed on an annual income of only $26, and given the meagreness of his patrimony and of his wife's inheritance, it is likely that a significant part of this income came from annuities. He had no recorded children, and his estates passed to his brother William. 


@@@@@


doc= 92982


Charlton, Sir Thomas (c.1417-1465), landowner and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son and heir of Sir Thomas Charlton of Hillingdon (died 1445), landowner and MP, and his wife, Elizabeth Fraunceys (died 1451). Through his mother's aunt Maud, the wife of John Montagu, third earl of Salisbury, Charlton was related to the latter's granddaughter Alice, who in 1422 married Richard Neville, fifth earl of Salisbury, and thus also to her son, Richard Neville, sixteenth earl of Warwick; it was a connection in which the Charlton family took considerable pride. 
By Michaelmas 1441 the younger Thomas Charlton had entered Henry VI's household as one of the esquires of the hall and chamber, and the following January he was elected to the first of the six parliaments in which he represented his native county of Middlesex. On 21 January 1442, a few days before parliament assembled, he married Benedicta, a daughter of the midland landowner and former speaker of the Commons Sir Richard Vernon (1389/90-1451) ['see under 'Vernon family]. They had two sons and three daughters. 
The deaths of Charlton's father and mother in 1445 and 1451 respectively gave him control of his family's extensive estates in Middlesex, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, London, and Essex, and allowed him to assume a leading position in local society. He represented Middlesex in the parliaments of 1447 and 1449-50, served on the county bench, and received occasional appointments to 'ad hoc' commissions. It may have been in recognition of his new status as the wealthiest lay landowner in Middlesex that he was knighted not long after, possibly at the ceremony held on 5 January 1453 for the dubbing of Henry VI's half-brothers, the newly created earls of Pembroke and Richmond. 
In February 1453 Charlton was once more elected to represent Middlesex in parliament. The first two sessions, in March and April, were comparatively uneventful, but during the summer prorogation Henry VI lost his mental and physical faculties, a condition probably brought about by the news of the final English defeat at Castillon in Gascony on 17 July. The king's collapse provided an opportunity for Richard, duke of York, to stake his claim to assume control of the government. In the late autumn the speaker of the Commons, Thomas Thorpe, was arrested at York's behest, and on 16 February 1454 Charlton was elected in his stead. He may well have been something of a compromise candidate for the office, since, as well as being a member of the royal household, Charlton was connected with York through his Neville kinsmen. Nevertheless, Abbot John Whethamstede of St Albans, who was then engaged in a dispute with Charlton over the Hertfordshire manor of Burston, maintained that Sir Thomas had deliberately sought the speakership in order to promote a bill that would allow him to recover that manor, which his father had granted away. 
The duke of York's second protectorate in 1455-6 gave Charlton an opportunity to renew his claim to Burston. He was by now firmly associated with the Yorkist cause, and in December 1455 was appointed sheriff of Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire. Yet at the same time his continued membership of the royal household allowed him to remain on good terms with the court party, and consequently he was not only returned to the Lancastrian-dominated 'parliament of devils' held at Coventry in November 1459, but a month later headed the commissioners appointed to array the men of Middlesex to resist an anticipated invasion by the exiled Yorkist lords from Calais. 
When the invasion came in the summer of 1460, Charlton rapidly rejoined the Yorkist side. After the earl of Warwick's victory at Northampton on 10 July he was among the judges who tried the Lancastrian defenders of the Tower of London. A few weeks later, he was elected to the parliament summoned to undo the measures of the previous year's partisan assembly, and about the same time he was made comptroller of the household. In that capacity Charlton accompanied Henry VI to the second battle of St Albans on 17 February 1461. He was taken prisoner by Queen Margaret's victorious forces, and taken to York in the queen's train, but regained his freedom after Edward IV's victory at Towton on 29 March. 
Charlton's apparent commitment to the Yorkist cause was not matched by commensurate appointments to crown offices after Edward IV's accession. Although a valuable collar of the new king's livery of suns and roses was among his possessions at his death, he received only a single royal commission in the first four years of the new reign, and is not known to have held any other office. Early in 1465 his life was suddenly cut short, presumably by illness, and he died on 26 February, having made a short will earlier that day, in which he requested burial on the north side of the high altar in All Saints' Church, Edmonton. His wife had predeceased him, having died some time before May 1463. 
John Whethamstede had earlier characterized Sir Thomas as a young and factious knight, describing him as 'sly... cunning, and subtle', like a fox (Riley, 2.136). The abbot certainly did not intend to flatter a local rival and adversary. But his acerbic words can still be regarded as constituting a backhanded compliment to Charlton's political skills, which almost to the end of the 1450s enabled him to maintain good relations with both the court and the increasingly disaffected Yorkist lords, as England slipped into civil war. 


@@@@@


doc= 92983


Green, John (d. 1473), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son and heir of John Green of Widdington, Essex, and his wife, Agnes Duke. Having inherited no more than a small estate in north Essex, he advanced himself through his profession and by marriage. It is said that he was raised in the household of Thomas Rolfe (died 1440), a serjeant-at-law of that county who perhaps sponsored his entry to Gray's Inn. In the late 1440s he began serving as a JP and commissioner in Essex, and between mid-1450 and the following spring he married Edith (died 1497), the elder of Rolfe's two daughters and heirs. Born about 1416 and the widow of John Helion (d. 1449) ['see under 'Helion family], she brought him an estate in north-west Essex, including Gosfield, the manor where she and Green took up residence. As Helion's widow, Edith also possessed a temporary interest in lands in Essex, Derbyshire, and Suffolk, but the heirs to these were the two daughters of her first marriage. 
Like Helion, Green was a tenant and follower of Henry Bourchier, Viscount Bourchier, whom he served as a legal adviser and feoffee. He also performed similar services for prominent gentry from Essex and elsewhere, and he was retained for his counsel by the duchy of Lancaster, the corporation of London, and Thomas Kemp, bishop of London. It is likely that Bourchier supported Green's election to the parliament of 1455 as one of the knights of the shire for Essex. The parliament met after the Yorkist victory at the battle of St Albans, although Bourchier, the newly appointed treasurer of England, had yet to commit himself to the duke of York's cause. During the later 1450s Green continued to serve the Lancastrian crown in local government, and in the same period his brother William was a member of Henry VI's household. Bourchier finally threw in his lot with York after two of his sons were attainted with the duke in the parliament of 1459. He fought for the Yorkists at Northampton on 10 July 1460, and he was again appointed treasurer immediately afterwards. Following his patron's lead, Green also went over to the Yorkists, and in the autumn of the same year he was elected an MP for Essex for the second time. His election as speaker in the parliament of 1460 probably owed much to Bourchier's influence, since he was one of the least distinguished men to hold the office in the fifteenth century. He was nevertheless speaker in a particularly momentous parliament, for the assembly recognized York as the king's heir. During the parliament he and Bourchier were appointed to the committee that held various duchy of Lancaster estates to the use of Henry VI's will. 
After Edward IV's accession Bourchier was created earl of Essex, and Green also flourished under the first Yorkist king. In early 1462 he and his brother were granted the stewardship of the estates that John de Vere, twelfth earl of Oxford, recently executed for treason, had held in Essex, Cambridgeshire, and Suffolk. Six years later, in February 1467, he attended a meeting of the king's council, and in 1469 he was appointed deputy to the chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster, Richard Neville, sixteenth earl of Warwick. Bourchier was briefly placed under arrest when Henry VI was restored to the throne in late 1470, but the pliable Green remained a JP, just as he did after Edward IV returned from exile in the following spring. 
Green died on 1 May 1473. He was buried in the parish church at Gosfield, where a matrix of his brass remains. His widow, who survived until 1 June 1497, was buried beside her first husband in the church of Leighs Priory, Essex. Green's heirs were his daughters Agnes and Margaret, who respectively married the Essex landowners Sir William Fynderne and Sir Henry Tey. A third daughter became abbess of Dartford, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 92984


Allington, Sir William (d. 1479), speaker of the House of Commons, was the younger son and second of three children of William Allington (died 1459) of Horseheath in Cambridgeshire and his first wife, Elizabeth (1410/11-1445), elder daughter of John Argentine. His mother was granddaughter and eventual sole heir of Sir William Argentine of Great Wymondley in Hertfordshire. The Allington family had been well-to-do Cambridgeshire gentry since the early fifteenth century. Beginning in the 1390s William Allington (d. 1446) had risen through the 'cursus honorum' of Lancastrian service, culminating in his election as speaker of the House of Commons in 1429-30. The family's combined annual income in 1436 was about $200. William Allington of Horseheath added to the family fortune, remarrying twice: by 1447 he was married to Mary, widow of Henry Hayward of Boxted in Essex, and by 1454 to Elizabeth (died after 1472), widow of Sir John Heveningham (died 1453) of Heveningham in Suffolk. This made it possible for him to bestow Bottisham in Cambridgeshire on his younger son, William, while his heir, John (died 1480), inherited the bulk of the family property in Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire, Hertfordshire, and Suffolk. In 1452 John was implicated in rebellion at Babraham in Cambridgeshire, and by mid-1455 he was a prominent supporter of Richard, third duke of York, becoming his retainer in January 1456. He married well, however, settled down as one of the principal gentlemen of Cambridgeshire, and was counted among the Paston family's close friends. 
On 9 January 1457 William Allington obtained a licence to marry Joan (died 1493), daughter of John Anstey the elder of Stow-cum-Quy in Cambridgeshire and his wife, Joan. They were married in the chapel of Holme Hall nearby. William was a lawyer, and in July 1457 joined his father as a JP for Cambridgeshire and for Cambridge, later also becoming a JP for Huntingdonshire (1464-70). He was added to the quorum for Cambridgeshire in August 1460, and apart from a few brief absences, notably during the Lancastrian purge of 1470-71, remained on the bench until his death. Allington emerged as a committed Yorkist after the battle of Northampton (10 July 1460). In the years that followed his career was perhaps advanced by William Grey, bishop of Ely, for whom he carried out various kinds of legal business. He was MP for Plympton in Devon in 1467-8. On 5 June 1470 Edmund Grey, first earl of Kent, made him a feoffee to uses of Saxthorpe in Norfolk, and it may have been through Grey that Allington became associated with the Woodvilles, the kinsmen of the queen. J. S. Roskell speculated that Allington joined Edward IV in exile during the Lancastrian readeption, which would explain why he became so prominent on the king's restoration. 
Returned as knight of the shire for Cambridge on 10 September 1472, Allington was elected speaker of the House of Commons on 7 October. This was the first parliament since the crises of 1469-71, and his speech opening the session praised the steadfastness of the Yorkists, and particularly the queen, in recent years. The birth of an heir, the future Edward V, was the 'grete joy and suerty of this... londe' (Roskell, 'William Allington', 48). Parliament supported the king's alliance with Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy, but only voted a tenth towards an army to recover Normandy, Aquitaine, and the French crown, and that with restrictions. In February 1473 Allington was one of the twenty-five men appointed to act as tutors and councillors to the prince of Wales during the latter's minority (a group dominated by the Woodvilles), took part in the king's progress through the midlands and Welsh marches between May and September that year, and was on and off the commissions of the peace in Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Shropshire, and Worcestershire from 1473 to 1475. As the king's military plans developed, Allington's parliamentary management during the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh sessions (January 1474 to March 1475) was crucial in securing the cancellation of the original tenth and the grant of a new tenth and fifteenth and of three-quarters of a subsidy. This enabled Edward to mount a serious invasion of France in 1475, culminating in the highly lucrative treaty of Picquigny (29 August). During this campaign Allington was appointed to the regency council and perhaps became a royal councillor. The parliament of 1472-5 was the longest yet held. Allington received various rewards for his services from the king and the Woodvilles, including $200 for 'his true and due diligence in awaityng and attending upon our... parlement' (TNA: PRO, E 404/75/4, no. 29). 
Allington was returned again for Cambridgeshire and re-elected speaker three days after a new parliament met on 16 January 1478. He played a significant part in proceedings against George, duke of Clarence, Edward IV's brother. The king's bill of attainder was passed and the lord high steward gave sentence of death on 7 February, but no action followed until, as the second Crowland continuator states, Allington 'came with his fellows into the upper chamber and made a fresh request for the business to be completed; consequently... the execution... was carried out' (Pronay and Cox, 147). This business dispatched, parliament was dissolved before the month was out. By July Allington had been knighted and further reward followed -- including appointment for life to the king's council on 11 August, the chancellorship of the duchy of Cornwall, and a life grant of a third of the issues of Bassingbourne in Cambridgeshire and of lands in that county formerly held by Clarence. 
Allington died childless on 16 May 1479, leaving his brother, John, as his heir. As early as March 1474 he had provided for a chantry chapel at Bottisham with prayers to be offered by a monk from nearby Anglesey Priory for the good estate, in life and death, of the king and queen and of Allington and his wife. It is assumed that the indent on an altar tomb at Holy Trinity in Bottisham, depicting a knight in armour, represents Sir William (although he was probably interred at Anglesey Priory). Lady Allington married a man called Huddleston and died, again widowed, on 6 March 1493, by when the Allingtons were becoming loyal Tudor subjects. 


@@@@@


doc= 92985


Fitzwilliam, Sir Thomas (d. 1497), lawyer and speaker of the House of Commons, was born into a Lincolnshire gentry family, the son of Thomas Fitzwilliam of Mablethorpe (died 1479) and his wife, Margaret Dymmok (died 1463). He was educated at the Inner Temple, where he was twice reader in the 1460s. By then he was already launched on his professional career, having been appointed to the quorum of the Lindsey bench in 1458 and elected to parliament for Lincoln in the following year, perhaps because he was the city's recorder. His being returned again to parliament in 1467, this time for the Devon borough of Plympton Erle, whose representation was then in the hands of the crown, suggests that he had adapted easily to the political changes of the 1460s, as Lancaster gave way to York. But his Yorkist allegiance seems to have been less than wholehearted, for he and his father were implicated in the rebellion of 1470 against Edward IV of their Lincolnshire neighbours, the seventh Baron Welles and his son, and not until the mid-1470s did the younger Thomas recover his place in county affairs. When he did so, however, it was as a figure of importance. On 26 February 1478, the last day of a parliament in which he again sat for Lincoln, the crown granted Fitzwilliam a life annuity of 5 marks 'for his counsel', and on 12 November following his place in the king's service was confirmed by his appointment as one of the duchy of Lancaster's serjeants-at-law. 
Further recognition of Fitzwilliam's legal talents came on 19 June 1483, when the common council of London elected him recorder of the city; perhaps it was at this time that he acquired a house in Stepney. His promotion came at a time of acute political dislocation, and he was soon called upon to play his part in a national crisis. On 24 June, according to Sir Thomas More, Henry Stafford, second duke of Buckingham, made a speech to an unenthusiastic audience in the London Guildhall supporting the claim to the throne of Richard, duke of Gloucester. Fitzwilliam, called upon to second it, so tempered 'his tale, that he shewed every thing as the dukes wordes and no part his owne' (More, 75). But however lukewarm he may have been in upholding Richard's claim, he became active in the affairs of the new reign and benefited from royal patronage. On 5 July 1483, as Richard III's coronation procession moved through Cheapside, Fitzwilliam, as recorder, presented $1000 to the king and queen as the city's contribution to the costs of the occasion, and early in 1484 he was granted an annuity of 20 marks and a renewal of his lease of the duchy of Lancaster manor of Saltfleetby, near Mablethorpe, which he had held since 1467. 
Such rewards seem to have been insufficient to retain Fitzwilliam's services, which were probably reluctantly given. He was among those present at Shoreditch on 3 September 1485 to welcome Henry Tudor to London after his victory at Bosworth, and thereafter became yet more active in government. On 25 October that year he was elected to represent London in the first parliament of the new reign, and was responsible for informing his fellow MPs how notice of the speaker's election was customarily given to the chancellor. He was knighted during the course of the parliament (in 1486), and when it ended received royal grants that largely confirmed the gains he had made under Richard III: he was given a seven-year lease of Saltfleetby and a $10 annuity 'for his advice to the king', exchanging both in 1488 for a life interest in Saltfleetby at a nominal rent. The recorder of London had clearly found favour with Henry VII, which explains why on 14 January 1489, at the opening of the third parliament of the reign, the Commons elected Fitzwilliam as their speaker. Probably they were merely confirming a royal nomination. Although he had been returned for London on 2 December 1488, he secured election for Lincolnshire before parliament opened; he had probably received notice that the king intended him for the speakership, for which he required a county rather than a borough seat. On his election as speaker he was voted 10 marks by the chamber of London, and at the end of what proved to be a lengthy and fraught parliament of three sessions he received the customary reward of $100 from the crown. 
Following the 1489-90 parliament Fitzwilliam's involvement in public affairs declined. He must already have been in his early sixties when he became speaker, and though he continued to be appointed to local commissions as late as July 1496, he last occurs as recorder of London in October 1494, and had been replaced in that office by Robert Sheffield, another Lincolnshire man, by the following September. He drew up a lengthy will on 25 June 1494, requesting burial in the Premonstratensian abbey of Hagnaby, a few miles from Mablethorpe, should he die in Lincolnshire or within 40 miles of that county. Like many other lawyers, he showed a lively concern for the health of his soul; in 1476 he had been licensed to found a chantry in Alford church, a few miles south-west of Mablethorpe, and in his will he directed that 1500 memorial masses be said for him within eight weeks of his death. He died on 4 March 1497, and was buried not in Hagnaby Abbey but in Mablethorpe church, where what is believed to be his tomb chest survives. With his wife, Margaret Harrington (died 1498), he had at least three sons, John, George, and William. John predeceased him, and when Thomas died his heir was John's son, another Thomas. Neither his widow nor the younger Thomas long survived him, and in 1502 his estates passed to his second son, George. 


@@@@@


doc= 92986


Pelham, Henry (bap. 1597, d. in or after 1660), lawyer and politician, was baptized on 9 June 1597, the third son of Sir William Pelham (1567-1629) of Brocklesby, Lincolnshire, and Anne, daughter of Charles Willoughby, second Baron Willoughby of Parham. Pelham's family was a cadet branch of the Pelhams of Laughton, Sussex. His grandfather Sir William Pelham (d. 1587) acquired a substantial estate in Lincolnshire, establishing his principal residence at Brocklesby, near Great Grimsby. By 1597, when Pelham's father was elected MP for Lincolnshire, the Brocklesby Pelhams were one of the county's leading families. Pelham was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in Easter term 1615, and to Gray's Inn on 6 November 1616, and although never called to the bar became a lawyer of some renown. His failure to become a barrister was probably linked to his decision in 1620, while reading for the bar, to accompany his kinsman Sir Edward Conway on his diplomatic mission to the continent. He was still abroad when he was returned for Great Grimsby to the parliament of 1621. Pelham represented Grimsby in the four succeeding parliaments, although it was only in that of 1628-9 that he made any appreciable impact, speaking in support of establishing parliamentary control of taxation before granting supply. His contribution to a debate on religion in May 1628, in which he urged that the only test of clerical conformity should be the articles prescribed in the Elizabethan act of 1571, suggests that he favoured a latitudinarian protestant church, and that he may have sympathized with the plight of puritan ministers who had fallen foul of the church authorities. His kinswoman the godly Lady Brilliana Harley, whose sister Frances married Pelham's brother, was cautiously approving of Henry's piety, finding him 'to savour more of religion than his brother Herbert' ('Letters', 114). 
Pelham seems never to have married -- reports that he wedded a daughter of Sir Thomas Pelham of Laughton are probably erroneous -- devoting himself entirely to his legal career. Before the civil war he apparently divided his time between his chambers at Gray's Inn and a residence at or near Belvoir Castle, the seat of his kinsman George Manners, seventh earl of Rutland. Pelham was legal adviser to Rutland, who secured his appointment as deputy recorder of the nearby borough of Grantham. Pelham was also legal or business agent for his friend and second cousin Sir Thomas Pelham, and for the Lincolnshire peers Robert Bertie, earl of Lindsey, and (Pelham's first cousin) Francis Willoughby, fifth Baron Willoughby of Parham. In the elections to the Short Parliament in 1640 he was returned for Grantham on Rutland's interest. His most revealing contribution in debate was on 24 April, when he supported the godly Lincolnshire knight Sir Edward Ayscoghe in his unsuccessful attempt to unseat his rival for one of the county seats, the future royalist Sir Edward Hussey. Pelham was returned for Grantham again in the autumn, and although one of Lincolnshire's most active MPs, the failure of the clerk of the Commons to distinguish between Pelham and his second cousin Peregrine Pelham makes it difficult to form a precise picture of his career in the Long Parliament. But given his parliamentary experience and legal expertise it seems likely that the majority of references to 'Mr Pelham' in the 'Journals' and parliamentary diaries relate to him, particularly during the early 1640s. He clearly supported the Long Parliament's attack upon the ecclesiastical policies of Archbishop William Laud. When the impeachment of the bishops was debated on 8 August 1641, he declared that they had acted against the royal prerogative, the rights of parliament, and in manner 'tending to sedition', and were thus guilty of treason (BL, Harley MS 479, fol. 133'v'). A month later, after the Westminster godly had suffered several set-backs in their efforts to purge the church of its 'popish' accretions, Pelham reported that the Laudian bishop of Ely and dean of Peterborough had made a triumphalist return to their counties 'as if now all hope of reformation in the church were past' (BL, Harley MS 164, fol. 99). In 1644 he was one of the Commons' lawyers appointed to marshal the evidence against Laud at the archbishop's trial. Pelham's committee appointments suggest that he was also keen to reform the civil 'abuses' of Charles I's personal rule; in debate he argued that those judges who had supported the imposition of ship money on inland counties were guilty of high treason. 
Pelham remained at Westminster during the summer of 1642, pledging $100 in June for the defence of parliament. In September he declared his willingness to assist Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, with his life and fortune. From the autumn of 1642 he was named to a string of committees for advancing and regulating the parliamentarian war effort, and was rewarded in December with the recordership of Lincoln following parliament's removal of the previous 'ill-affected' incumbent. His most important appointment during the first year of the civil war was his addition, probably on 2 June 1643, to the committee for sequestrations. Pelham emerged as a leading member of this committee and, according to one (hostile) commentator, he 'did usually for fees (or rather bribes) advise and assist delinquents in getting off their sequestrations; he drew their petitions and countenanced their causes for his own private lucre and advantage' (Wilbee, 4). He was also a key figure on the eastern association committee, and was active in promoting a godly preaching ministry within the association -- and indeed nationally, if his committee appointments are any guide. 
Pelham's factional alignment at Westminster, if he had one, is impossible to determine until the summer of 1647. In the wake of the presbyterian 'coup' of 26 July, and with William Lenthall and many political Independents of both houses having fled to the army, Pelham was chosen speaker of the Commons on 30 July. The next day he and the new speaker for the Lords, Lord John Hunsdon, signed letters to Sir Thomas Fairfax advising him of parliament's decision to invite the king to London for a personal treaty, and warning the army not to advance any nearer to the capital. Fairfax ignored this warning, and on 6 August the army entered London and restored Lenthall and the other fugitive members to their places. No reprisals were taken against Pelham for his part in the July coup, and he remained aligned with the presbyterians in desiring a settlement with the king. Thus on 6 November 1647 he was a teller with the political presbyterian Sir Walter Erle against including a clause in the Hampton Court peace propositions that the king was duty-bound to assent to parliament's terms. Most of Pelham's appointments in 1648 were of an unexceptional, non-partisan nature. However, his nomination to the 27 October committee for converting those of the Newport peace propositions to which the king had assented into bills suggests that he remained committed to a negotiated settlement with Charles. Pelham's acceptance of the speakership during Lenthall's absence in 1647 had evidently left him a marked man in the eyes of the army, and at Pride's Purge he was among those members who were arrested and held in custody. Fortunately for Pelham he was on close terms with the influential Sir Thomas Widdrington (a fellow Gray's Inn lawyer), who managed to secure his release on parole on 9 December. 
Thereafter Pelham withdrew from public life, spending most of his time either at Gray's Inn or at Hollingbourne, Kent, where he had purchased an estate. His only known appointments after 1648 were to successive Lincolnshire sewers commissions during the 1650s. Following the readmission of the secluded members on 22 February 1660 he was listed among those who had returned to the house, but there is no evidence that he resumed his seat. Pelham disappears into obscurity after the Restoration, and his date of death and place of burial remain unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 92988


Maude, Francis Cornwallis (1828-1900), army officer and entrepreneur, was born on 28 October 1828 at Sussex Place, Regent's Park, London, the eldest son of Francis Maude (1798-1886), a captain in the Royal Navy and the youngest son of Cornwallis Maude, first Viscount Hawarden in the Irish peerage, and his first wife, Frances (died 1832), second daughter of A. Holdsworth Brooking, collector of customs at St John's, Newfoundland. Maude was a cousin of General Sir Frederick Francis Maude (1821-1897), who won the VC in September 1855 at Sevastopol, Crimea. After attending Blackheath proprietary school, an army crammer, and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich (1844-7), he was commissioned second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, in October 1847 (lieutenant, June 1848), and served at Woolwich and in Ireland. In 1854, on sick leave, he travelled for ten months and visited India. Promoted second captain in December 1854, in 1855 he was sent in command of his battery to Trincomalee, Ceylon. 
In June 1857 came the news of the Indian mutiny, and Maude's battery sailed to Calcutta. At Allahabad they joined Henry Havelock's force -- intended to relieve the British garrison besieged at Lucknow -- which left in early July. Maude's battery had 9-pounder smooth-bores, drawn by bullocks, and was repeatedly in action. Havelock's column defeated the rebels and on 17 July occupied Cawnpore. The artillery's role was largely counter-battery fire, engaging and silencing mutineer artillery. Ordered by Havelock, Maude once executed an alleged spy by blowing him from a gun. 
On 25 September 1857 Havelock's force fought through into the Lucknow residency, suffering heavy casualties. Maude and his artillery were prominent in the attack. Reportedly Maude bore down the desperate opposition of the enemy, though with the loss of one third of his artillerymen, and but for his nerve and coolness the army could not have advanced. Havelock's force was too small to relieve the Lucknow garrison and the siege continued, with Maude commanding the artillery. Thrice recommended for the Victoria Cross -- when balloted his battery voted for him to receive it -- Maude was awarded it (gazetted June 1858) for his conduct on 25 September: one of eleven awarded for that day, with seven for the next day (182 VCs were awarded for the mutiny, the same number as for the Second World War). Following the arrival of Colin Campbell's relief force (17 November) the British withdrew from Lucknow (22-3 November). Maude commanded a battery in James Outram's force in Oudh, then in March 1858 took part in Campbell's recapture of Lucknow. After the summer of 1858 Maude was sent north to Campbell's 'cold weather' campaign, with a battery of long 18-pounder iron guns drawn by elephants. 
During the mutiny Maude gained promotion to major (January 1858) and lieutenant colonel (July 1858) in the army (his regimental rank was still second captain); he was appointed CB in March 1858. However, the auditor-general disallowed payments made by Maude, who later complained that the Indian campaign had ruined him financially (Maude and Sherer, 'Memories of the Mutiny', 2.480-01). 
At Colombo, Ceylon, on 24 January 1860 Maude married Paulina Susannah (died 1916), only daughter of Paul Ivy Sterling, acting chief justice of Ceylon; they had one son and three daughters. Promoted full captain, Royal Artillery, in April 1860, Maude was appointed to a garrison artillery battery at Plymouth. From 1861 to 1864 he served on Corfu. He served two years on Malta and suffered from Malta fever (brucellosis). Promoted to colonel (20 July 1866) he retired in August 1866 on half pay, which he commuted in June 1870, presumably to raise capital to invest. 
After leaving the army Maude was involved in various enterprises in Britain and overseas. He invested in patent ice-making machinery and became the proprietor of the Malta Ice Works. Back in England, in 1867 he founded and became honorary secretary of the Free Labour Registration Society. An anti-trade-union, 'blackleg' organization, pledged to the 'total abolishment of Trades' Unions' (Curthoys, 81), its strike-breaking activities were particularly vigorous in Lancashire. Maude claimed to have fought twenty-six pitched battles with trade unions over a period of eighteen months. In December 1867 he was reported bankrupt. He was among the promoters of the Charity Organization Society (1869). In 1869 he started the Emigrant and Colonists' Aid Corporation. He was secretary, the duke of Manchester was chairman, peers and 'substantial City men' were on the board, and the company secured land in New Zealand. Maude employed as a clerk at the company a mutiny veteran, Major 'Brown' Holland, and had him wrongly imprisoned in March 1870 for allegedly misappropriating a cheque. Maude had to pay damages and costs, and the episode cost him 'a good deal over $250' (Maude and Sherer, 'Memories of the Mutiny', 2.464). In 1870 Maude purchased some 600 acres of free grant land in Canada, where for three years he cleared forest and farmed. He farmed in southern England for another three years. He lived at Southsea and was chairman of the co-operative stores there. In 1875 and 1876 he lived in France. From 1876 to 1886 he was consul-general at Warsaw, and he also grew sugar beet in Poland. In March 1886 he retired from being consul-general on a pension, which he commuted that May. 
In February 1888 Maude went to Madagascar for the Madagascar Timber Company, which was granted a monopoly timber-felling concession within north-east Madagascar. He negotiated with the prime minister over the company's concession, participated in its timber business, and on a small experimental plantation grew vanilla, coffee, and other crops. He wrote to the British press extolling Madagascar as a field for British emigration and enterprise, including coffee-growing, and offered to board visitors for a dollar a day. He was employed by the Malagasy government as a military and political adviser for nearly a year, but had difficulty in obtaining his arrears of salary. Shortly after resigning this post, in 1892 he founded, edited, and wrote his short-lived English-language paper 'The Madagascar World'. He contributed articles on Madagascar to the 'Fortnightly Review', from 1891 to 1895, and in 1895, following the French invasion of the island, published 'Five Years in Madagascar: with Notes on the Military Situation'. He criticized the Malagasy government as 'a tyrannous and rapacious Oligarchy' (Maude, 'Five Years', 184), and favoured French control of Madagascar to 'throw open its resources' (ibid., 273). 
Maude returned to England in February 1893, and published his 'Memories of the Mutiny' (2 vols., 1894), which described his experiences, criticized British generalship, justified the executions of mutineers, and asserted the beneficence of British rule in India. 'Memories' incorporated, with acknowledgement, the 'personal narrative' of John Walter Sherer (1823-1911) of the Indian Civil Service. 
Troubled by financial difficulties during much of his later life, Maude was in 1895 appointed by Queen Victoria a military knight of Windsor, an establishment which was reserved for retired officers in needy circumstances and which brought with it quarters in Windsor Castle. A freemason (he had been initiated in an Irish lodge and joined Pythagoras Lodge, Corcyra, Corfu, in November 1861) and a Conservative, Maude was a 'Baconian' who claimed Francis Bacon wrote Shakespeare's plays: in 1895 he published his shilling pamphlet 'Bacon or Shakspere?'. Maude died suddenly of angina pectoris near the Garter House, Windsor Castle, on 19 October 1900, and was buried in Windsor cemetery four days later. His Royal Artillery battery, 76, celebrated Maude's day each 25 September, the anniversary of the deed for which he was awarded the Victoria Cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 92989


Brugha, Caitlin (1879-1959), company director and politician, was born Catherine Mary Kingston, at Birr (or Parsonstown), co. Offaly, on 9 December 1879, the daughter of William Kingston, shopkeeper, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Roche. She was educated at the Sacred Heart convent in Roscrea. In 1910 she moved to Dublin with her family. She had been a Gaelic League organizer in Birr and rejoined the organization in Dublin, becoming an active and committed member. She met her husband, Cathal Brugha (1874-1922), formerly Charles William St John Burgess, through the Gaelic League, and they were married on 8 February 1912. Cathal Brugha was a partner in the Lalor brothers' company, a candle manufacturer, but his time was increasingly taken up with political activities through his membership of the Irish Republican Brotherhood and the Irish Volunteers. He was supported strongly by his wife, who held similarly staunch republican views. She played an active role in supporting the volunteers during the 1916 rising, in which her husband was involved. 
Like her husband, Caitlin Brugha was deeply opposed to the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921. He was killed in an ambush as he fought on the republican side during the Irish civil war on 7 July 1922. At the request of his widow, republican women alone acted as chief mourners, forming a guard of honour at his funeral. Brugha described her request as a protest against the 'immediate and terrible' civil war which had been forced upon republicans. She was left with six young children to care for, one of whom was the future TD Ruaidhri Brugha. 
Caitlin Brugha succeeded her husband as Sinn Fein representative for Waterford in 1923 and 1927. In common with the other members of her party, she abstained from the Dail in protest against the oath of allegiance. She resigned from the Dail in 1927, having served on the executive of Sinn Fein. She then devoted her time to her family and to her drapery business, Kingston's Ltd, which she had established in 1924. She did, however, continue to court controversy at times and she and her family remained renowned for their anti-Britishness. This was most famously manifested in 1941 when she allegedly harboured a German spy who parachuted into Wexford. Caitlin Brugha died in Dublin on 1 December 1959 and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 92990


Redmond, Bridget Mary (1904-1952), landowner and politician, was born at The Curragh, co. Kildare, on 13 October 1904, the eldest daughter of John Mallick, hotel proprietor, and his wife, Bridget Mary. John Mallick was a well-known judge of horses and his racing colours were familiar at meetings in Ireland and England. His daughter inherited from him a love of horses and riding to hounds. She was educated at the Ursuline convent in Waterford. On 18 November 1930 she married William Archer Redmond (1886-1932), the heir of the Redmond family's dwindling political dynasty. He had attempted to represent the remnants of his father's Irish Parliamentary Party during the 1920s, before finally joining Cumann na nGaedheal in 1931. 
After her husband's death Bridget Redmond took on political life in earnest, being returned to her husband's former seat of Waterford in 1933. She initially stood as a Cumann na nGaedheal candidate, but became a member of Fine Gael when it was launched after a merger of Cumann na nGaedheal and several smaller organizations. In representing Waterford she maintained the Redmonds' connection with the city as the constituency had been represented by a member of that family continuously since 1891. She retained the seat at each subsequent election until her death. 
Bridget Redmond played a comparatively active role in parliamentary politics and was especially interested in housing and social conditions. She also spoke on issues which directly affected Waterford. Little has been written about her political career and she is often lumped into the general category of women who entered Irish political life in the shadow of dead male relatives. She has been belittled as one of the 'silent sisters', a reference to some of the women in post-independence Irish parliamentary politics who contributed little to debates. This is a harsh assessment of Redmond, who made at least two rather interesting contributions to parliamentary debate. She was one of the few public figures to object to the teaching of all subjects through the medium of the Irish language, describing in 1936 the attempt to introduce such a measure as part of a 'wave of insanity' which had swept over the country. She also objected to controversial clauses relating to the position of Irish women in the 1937 constitution. She did not present her objections with real vigour, but she was one of the very few female politicians who objected at all. She died of pulmonary tuberculosis at The Curragh, co. Kildare, on 3 May 1952. 


@@@@@


doc= 92993


Concannon, John Dennis (1930-2003), politician, was born on 16 May 1930 at 6 Aberconway Crescent, Rossington, near Doncaster, Yorkshire, the son of James Dennis Concannon, miner, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Spencer. He was educated at Rossington secondary school and subsequently at Doncaster Technical College. He joined the Coldstream Guards in 1947, and served in Palestine, Libya, and on ceremonial duties in London. His time in Libya introduced him to basketball, in which his height (6 ft 4 in.) was an asset. He represented the guards and subsequently Nottinghamshire, and was an England trialist. In 1953 he left the army, went down the pit at Rufford colliery near Mansfield, and on 20 June married Iris May Wilson, a 21-year-old shoe operative from Mansfield, and daughter of Charles Richard Wilson, miner. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Concannon soon became prominent in the Rufford branch of the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM). Active also within the Mansfield Labour Party, he became a town councillor. Late in 1965 he joined the NUM's parliamentary panel and could seek a candidacy with the union's financial backing. When Harold Wilson announced an election in February 1966 Mansfield lacked a Labour candidate, the veteran NUM-sponsored member having announced his retirement. NUM branches were strongly represented at the subsequent selection conference, and Concannon was chosen. Aged thirty-five, he had secured a safe Labour seat which he held with a majority of over 18,000 in the election of March 1966. Within the rule-governed politics of the NUM such a rapid journey from pitface to parliament was unusual. 
Sense of duty to the party, trade union background, and military bearing made Concannon an ideal recruit to the whips' office. Appointed in 1968, he served through the 1969 trauma over industrial relations reform and the opposition years of the early 1970s. His own union played a notable part in the industrial struggles that challenged the policies of the Heath government. During the 1960s miners had endured pit closures and meagre pay settlements. From 1966 the development of uniform wage payments under the National Power Loading Agreement had meant that higher-earning coalfields such as Nottinghamshire had been held back to facilitate wage standardization. The consequential discontent strengthened local support for successful national strikes in 1972 and 1974. Concannon unambiguously backed his union and ridiculed any suggestion that Nottinghamshire would prove a weak link, as had been the case in the 1926 dispute. 
When the 1974 strike precipitated a general election and an unexpected Labour victory, Concannon was appointed vice-chamberlain of the royal household. This required him to write out a daily summary of Commons events for the queen. This appropriate responsibility for an ex-guardsman proved brief. The collapse of the power-sharing executive in Northern Ireland meant an increase in ministerial strength at the Northern Ireland Office. Concannon was appointed a parliamentary under-secretary under Merlyn Rees in June 1974, and then from April 1976 (in the Callaghan government) minister of state under Rees and then under another NUM-sponsored parliamentarian, Roy Mason. He had responsibility for industrial development and security. He strongly backed government support for the DeLorean car factory project, in the expectation that this would bring much-needed jobs to west Belfast. The promoters' assurances proved bogus. The cost to the government was $53 million. Security policy was more immediately controversial. Concannon defended the Royal Ulster Constabulary against persistent and well-founded allegations of brutal interrogation techniques at the Castlereagh centre in Belfast. He was criticized by all shades of nationalist opinion, who were also unhappy about the government seeking to protect their uncertain parliamentary position by courting the votes of Unionist MPs. Concannon was a sociable and assiduous minister. He recalled how his weekend socializing had included both the Republican MP and publican Frank Maguire and the predominantly Unionist workers of the Harland and Wolff shipyard. 
The election defeat of May 1979 brought Concannon onto the opposition front bench, initially with responsibility for defence, but under Michael Foot's leadership from November 1980 he reverted to the Northern Ireland brief. During his time in Belfast, Republican prisoners in the H blocks at the Maze prison had campaigned for political status. Mason and Concannon had opposed this demand, which became symbolized in the so-called dirty protest. By early 1981 some protesters were on hunger strike. One hunger striker, Bobby Sands, was successful in the Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election in April. With Sands's death imminent, Concannon visited him and insisted that the Labour Party would not support the hunger strikers' campaign. The intervention had Foot's support. It was condemned by John Hume, the leader of the constitutional nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party, who was aware of the volatility of nationalist opinion. Although Concannon was involved in a Labour Party study group that developed a policy of seeking Irish unification through consent, the Sands visit and his tough line on security began to marginalize Concannon within a party that was shifting to the left. At the 1982 party conference he defended the use of plastic bullets. A year later, following the election of Gerry Adams as a Sinn Fein MP, he opposed any talks with 'Sinn Fein/IRA'. Such unwillingness to adjust to changing moods weakened his position within the parliamentary party. Under Neil Kinnock's leadership from October 1983 he no longer sat on the opposition front bench. 
The miners' solidarity of the early 1970s had meanwhile weakened, not least because of the introduction of area productivity schemes. Nottinghamshire miners earned relatively high wages and felt that their jobs were secure. Old identities weakened. In the 1983 election Concannon's majority fell to little over 2000. In contrast, with the election of Arthur Scargill as national president in 1981 and his succession to Joe Gormley the following year, the left controlled the institutions of the NUM. When a strike over colliery closures began in March 1984, Nottinghamshire miners voted decisively to work on. In the absence of a national ballot most went to work protected by police against pickets from other coalfields. Concannon backed the Nottinghamshire majority against the national policy of his own union. One left-wing Labour MP called him 'a copper's nark', another referred to his constituents as 'scabs' ('The Times', 18 Dec 2003). In the bitter aftermath of the strike the majority of Nottinghamshire miners voted to leave the NUM. They formed the core of the Union of Democratic Mineworkers (UDM), a body denied affiliation by both the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party. Concannon's support for the UDM meant the end of his NUM sponsorship and threatened his position as an MP. His determination to resist was ended by a serious car accident in October 1985. His final Commons speech a year later was a requiem for the political and trade-union world that had brought him into parliament. The Mansfield Labour Party chose a pro-strike candidate. Concannon opposed his selection. In the 1987 election he backed a UDM official running as a moderate Labour candidate. Despite this breach of party rules he was never expelled from the Labour Party. 
During his retirement Concannon served for eight years as a member of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. He died of cancer at the John Eastwood Hospice, Sutton-in-Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, on 14 December 2003, and was survived by his widow and four children. He was buried at St Peter's Church, Mansfield, on 19 December. Genial, straightforward, and patriotic, he was a loyal trade-union MP who offered reassurance to party leaders. Yet his career saw the erosion from both left and right of a familiar Labour culture. In Concannon's case, hunger strikers and a bitterly divided coalfield were sombre images of disintegration. 


@@@@@


doc= 92995


Davidson, Alan Eaton (1924-2003), diplomatist and food historian, was born on 30 March 1924 at Garden City, Londonderry, Northern Ireland, the only son and elder child of William John Davidson (1899-1959), inspector of taxes, and his wife, Constance, 'nee' Eaton (1889-1974). His father was Scottish, which Davidson regarded himself as being, though he was brought up in the north of England and educated at Leeds grammar school and Queen's College, Oxford, where he gained a first class in classical moderations in 1942. He joined the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in 1943, first as an ordinary seaman, before becoming a lieutenant and serving in the Mediterranean, north Atlantic, and Pacific until 1946. After demobilization he returned to Oxford to complete his degree, graduating with a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1948. 
On leaving Oxford Davidson joined the foreign service. His first overseas posting, from 1950 to 1953, was in Washington, where he met and in 1951 married Jane Emmett Macatee, the daughter of an American diplomat. She had been brought up in London and in the Middle East before taking a degree in Russian and German at Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania. They had three daughters, Caroline, Pamela, and Jennifer. 
Davidson's next posting after Washington was as a second secretary at The Hague until 1955 when he had four years in London at the Foreign Office. In Cairo from 1959 to 1961, he was first secretary, British property commission, dealing with complicated problems of restoring British property seized after Suez, and later head of chancery, charged with overall co-ordination of the operation of the embassy. Now recognized as a high flyer, he occupied this same post at Tunis from 1962 to 1964, where he was also consul. He enjoyed this posting, where he began his second career as a food writer. His wife had encountered difficulty in buying fish from the wealth of it available in the local markets -- the familiar fish had unfamiliar names, and no one could tell them how to cook the many exotic species that lived along the lengthy Tunisian coastline. In 1963 he produced a mimeographed pamphlet, 'Seafish of Tunisia and the Central Mediterranean', and the next year a similar one on 'Snakes and Scorpions in the Land of Tunisia'. 
Davidson's next posting was as head of the central department which was concerned with those countries that were members neither of NATO nor the Warsaw pact. David Colvin, a junior colleague there, later recalled that he was 'exciting, even dangerous to work with', because though he worked at a rapid pace, he was a stickler for detail, and was said to have a short temper ('The Times', 9 January 2004). From 1968 to 1971 Davidson was head of chancery in the British delegation to NATO in Brussels. One result of this was an anonymous, imprintless, and undated, slightly subversive, satirical thriller, 'Something Quite Big' (not published in Britain until 1993), about the kidnapping of sixteen senior NATO officials, showing how poor NATO security was. It was first printed in south-east Asia by a non-English-reading Roman Catholic priest and typesetter. As head of the Foreign Office's defence department from 1972 to 1973, Davidson published 'The Role of the Uncommitted European Countries in East-West Relations' (1972), the outcome of his experience at the central department and a visiting fellowship at Sussex University in 1971-2. In 1973 he was appointed ambassador in Vientiane, and stayed in Laos for two years, at a crucial juncture in the Vietnam War. He then retired from the foreign service, aged only fifty-one. Perhaps he had an inkling that his meticulousness was no longer appreciated; two years after his resignation the Berrill report on overseas representation notoriously remarked that 'much of the work' of the Foreign Office was 'done to an unjustifiably high standard'. He was appointed CMG in 1975, though he later wished he had refused it, as he did all subsequent offers of official honours, and he deleted mention of it from his 'Who's Who' entry. 
Davidson's Tunisian fish book had been sent to Elizabeth David who reviewed it favourably in 'The Spectator'. She introduced him to Jill Norman, her editor at Penguin, and in 1972 the firm published his 'Mediterranean Seafood', a revolutionary combination of scientific taxonomy along with the vernacular names of the fish, visual illustrations of them, and recipes for cooking them. The book became a necessity for serious cooks, as more and more exotic species made their way to the few remaining fishmongers' slabs in Britain. The same perfect formula was applied in 'Fish and Fish Dishes of Laos' (1975), 'Seafood of South-East Asia' (1976), and 'North Atlantic Seafood' (1979), all of which went through several editions. Much of the information they contained was supplied by Davidson's diplomatic contacts. 
While ambassador to Laos, Davidson had attempted to teach himself to cook in preparation for his new career -- efforts often thwarted by the embassy cook. It cannot be said that he ever mastered the craft. But he loved the people of Laos, and was regarded by the small Lao community in Britain as their much-loved patron -- as was shown by the fraying string bracelets that always festooned his wrists. Tokens of a Lao religio-magic ceremony called a 'basi', it was forbidden to cut them, and they had to be allowed to disintegrate naturally. Even his eccentric dress reflected his love for south-east Asia, and included a black Nehru-collar tunic created from diplomatic court dress and a silver necklace from which was suspended a medallion with the likeness of the (President Eisenhower-lookalike) chief Buddhist of Laos. 
After his retirement from the foreign service Davidson and his family lived in an 1880s house in the World's End district of Chelsea. In 1978 he contracted with Oxford University Press to write his 'magnum opus', 'The Oxford Companion to Food', and the house became a research centre, with the two basement rooms stacked floor-to-ceiling with cookery books and reference works in all of the several languages he, Jane, or their daughters could read. The same year he and his wife edited and translated a redaction of Alexandre Dumas's great dictionary of food, published as 'Dumas on Food'. 
In 1979 Davidson and his wife set up a publishing company, Prospect Books (subsequently sold to Tom Jaine), initially to publish the texts of rare cookery books, though they did once have a best-selling original cookery book, Patience Gray's 'Honey from a Weed' (1986). They also started a small magazine, 'Petits Propos Culinaires'. This very Davidsonian enterprise had its origins in a bizarre requirement by Time-Life publishers, who had hired Richard Olney to write their twenty-four-volume 'Good Cook' series (with Davidson as a consultant), that no unpublished recipes could be included. Olney happened to be one of the few cooks in history who invented totally new recipes (a claim substantiated by a legal action), but this fiat prevented him from using his own recipes. So 'Petits Propos Culinaires' was printed in an initial run of 500 in order to publish Olney's recipes under a set of whimsical 'noms de plume', including Nathan d'Aulnay and Tante Ursule. It also contained an essay by Elizabeth David, devoting much learned effort to showing that a charming but obscure seventeenth-century cookery book was 'not' written by the countess of Kent. Thus was born the first serious periodical dealing with food history. 
During the academic year 1978-9 Davidson held an Alistair Horne fellowship at St Antony's College, Oxford, studying 'Food and cookery: the impact of science in the kitchen'. (The fellowship, sponsored by Theodore Zeldin, the historian of France, had been awarded against a background of official scepticism, and even outright opposition to the idea that food was a suitable field for academic research.) In May 1979 he and Zeldin gave three seminars at St Antony's based on his research. Twenty-one people, from disciplines as various as the history of medicine to mathematics and French literature, turned up to the first seminar to discuss the historical connections between science and cookery (and indeed the fact that, though there was a long-standing connection made between writing on food and medical matters, it took a very long time for any connection to be made between cookery and physics and chemistry). Among the participants were Nicholas Kurti (the physicist who invented the term and the concept of molecular gastronomy), Elizabeth David, Jill Norman, Richard Olney, Anne Willan and her husband Mark Cherniavsky of the La Varenne cookery school in Paris, and Paul Levy. Among later participants were Claudia Roden, Jane Grigson, Elisabeth Lambert Ortiz, and Sri Owen, along with two Dutch scholars who had come expressly for the seminar. Both the increase in the number of participants and the increasingly less specialized questions addressed by the seminars illustrated their creeping success; and showed there was a good deal of interest in food history and the history of cookery, with no obvious outlet for this enthusiasm. So clear was the demand that Davidson and Zeldin decided to expand the seminars into annual symposia, with themselves as co-chairmen, starting in 1981. 
In the course of his massive research for the 'Oxford Companion' Davidson travelled a great deal. In 1980 he, the publisher Caroline Hobhouse, and Paul Levy went to China. Giving the slip to their official guides, they found their way to the offices of the several publishing houses that the guides had assured them were closed for their holidays, and came back with hundreds of Chinese cookery and botanical texts. Books of recipes were a new phenomenon, for the Chinese cookery tradition had been oral; but having recalled their master chefs from their banishment working as peasants in the fields, it was now necessary for the Chinese government to record their recipes in order to train a new generation of chefs. On the same trip, at a restaurant on the Mekong, in northern Thailand, Davidson and Levy discovered that the sole decoration was framed photocopies of pages of his 'Fish and Fish Dishes of Laos' and that they, the sole guests, were being served the giant catfish of the Mekong, whose extinction Davidson had only recently proclaimed. 
In 1999, after twenty years' gestation, the million-word 'Oxford Companion' (most of it written by Davidson himself, assisted ably in its production by Helen Saberi) appeared to unanimous, loud acclaim and won many prizes. The final authority on nearly every question on which it touched, it was a monument to one man's labour and scholarship -- and wit, for many of the entries are very funny. In 2003 Davidson received the Erasmus prize (an honour previously bestowed upon Charlie Chaplin, Ingmar Bergman, Marc Chagall, and Isaiah Berlin) from a beaming Queen Beatrix in Amsterdam. The award was for establishing the Oxford symposium on food and cookery and for writing the 'Oxford Companion', and he was cited as the founding father of food history. Davidson, though, had already begun research for his next project, a history of 1930s Hollywood 'screwball' comedies. He was among the last absolutely genuine, unselfconscious English eccentrics. His scholarship was impeccable, his arguments good and always logical, his conclusions reliable, and his generosity in sharing his knowledge unbounded. He died on 2 December 2003 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, of heart failure, and was survived by his wife, Jane, and their three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 93001


Rubinstein, Patricia Giulia Caulfield Kate (1915-2003), writer, was born on 26 May 1915 at 142 Fellows Road, Hampstead, London, the only child of Ernest Bernard Rubinstein, trimming and millinery warehouseman, and later textile wholesaler, and his wife, Anna Madeleine Caulfield (Madge), 'nee' Campbell, dressmaker. She and her mother lived with an aunt in Bournemouth during the First World War; in 1918 they rejoined her father in Hampstead, where she spent a happy childhood within a large extended family. She grew up in the Reform Judaism of her father's family who had emigrated from Russia (her mother was of Ulster protestant descent), but became a Roman Catholic in 1946; her love of Catholic tradition flavoured her writing at a time when religious belief was an unfashionable ingredient in children's fiction. 
Rubinstein attended South Hampstead high school (1921-33) and University College, London (1934-6), where she took a diploma in journalism, though writing novels was always her ambition. Her first job was in the 'Times' library. Just before the Second World War the family moved permanently to Bournemouth to the house owned by Rubinstein's aunt; this was to be her home for the rest of her life. During the war she served as a civilian clerk in the army pay office. 
After the war Rubinstein's determination to be a writer resurfaced; two adult novels were rejected by a publisher, so she tried her hand at a children's book. The result was 'Autumn Term' (1948), the first of her ten-volume series about the Marlow family, all written under the pseudonym Antonia Forest. Superficially, 'Autumn Term' was a traditional boarding-school story. Forest's genius was in transcending what was by then a tired genre; she concentrated on character, using the commonplace events of school life as vehicles to explore relationships and moral dilemmas. Nicola and Lawrie, twin sisters and the youngest of a family of eight, start school with expectations of following the successes of their older sisters; but in this realistic portrait of a school community there are no tidy endings, and self-knowledge and maturity develop through episodes of failure or disappointment, and through precarious, shifting friendships. Forest subverted another traditional theme in 'The Marlows and the Traitor' (1953). Ostensibly this is a holiday adventure story where the children discover that an adult friend is really a spy, but Forest paints cowardice and heroism, loyalty and treachery, in shades of moral grey rather than the black and white certainties more usual in 1950s children's fiction. 
Writing as Forest, Rubinstein brought the same confident, subtle approach to later books of the series; her portrayal of the Marlows' complex family and friendship dynamics is utterly convincing and in this she was aided by a keen ear for precisely focused language. Her naturalistic dialogue, carefully differentiated between her characters, is a key to their personalities, from Rowan's elliptical phrasing which conceals her emotions, to Peter's assumption of a mock-rural accent in order to annoy. Forest also expertly offers literary allusion, comparison, and intertextuality as indicators of characters' inner lives. In 'The Ready-Made Family' (1967) she uses Jane Austen's 'Persuasion' as a mirror for family change and tension when a Marlow daughter marries. In 'Peter's Room' (1961) the imaginative world of the Bronte children counterpoints the attractions and dangers of the role-play fantasy games which enliven the Marlows' Christmas holiday. She also wrote two children's historical novels, about Elizabethan Marlow ancestors, and 'The Thursday Kidnapping' (1963), a contemporary story set in Hampstead, both again published under the pseudonym Antonia Forest. 
Forest's intelligent, convincing accounts of the upper-middle-class Marlows were sometimes too easily dismissed as elitist. Her writing was unfashionably demanding in an age when many children's books were aimed at a less literary readership, and the clash of expectations between the conventional settings of her stories and the startling immediacy of her characterization made categorization difficult. Sales dwindled and her books went out of print by the late 1980s. However, her work always appealed to a discerning minority of bookish children and, later, adult readers, and her books were keenly sought on the second-hand market. Towards the end of her life reassessment of Forest as a neglected author began to redress the balance of critical attention. Victor Watson in 'Reading Series Fiction' (2000) described her as 'at least one of the best writers for children in English' (p. 174), and suggested that Forest deserves to occupy the same literary space, in terms of children's books, that Jane Austen inhabits in writing for adults. Certainly Forest's talent for sharp, witty social observation in a restricted environment, and her exploration of character in an imperfect world, have a persuasive and timeless appeal. The combination of serious critical reassessment, and the renewed availability of her books through a small independent publisher from 2003 onwards, ensured Forest a belated recognition among a discriminating adult readership. 
Rubinstein was a very private person who kept her writing separate from her personal life; she replied generously to readers' letters but always under her pseudonym, and rarely gave interviews. She never married, and lived alone in retirement. Her last book was published in 1982; unassuming about her own work, she was surprised but quietly pleased by the revival of interest during the last few years of her life. She died at her home, 11 Roslin Road, Talbot Woods, Bournemouth, on 29 November 2003, of pneumonia, and was buried at Wimborne Road cemetery, Bournemouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 93009


Hemmings, David Leslie Edward (1941-2003), actor, director, and producer, was born on 18 November 1941 at Mount Alvernia maternity home, Harvey Road, Guildford, Surrey, the son of Arthur Percy Charles Hemmings, a grocer's salesman then serving as a corporal in the Royal Air Force, and his wife, Kathleen Lilian, 'nee' Wharf. At the time of his birth his parents were living at 16 Gravetts Lane, Worplesdon, Surrey. He was educated at Glyn College, Epsom, but his formal education was interrupted by his illustrious career as a boy soprano. He spent five years, from the age of nine, touring Europe with the English Opera Group; his stage debut was in the role of Miles in the premiere of Benjamin Britten's opera 'The Turn of the Screw' (Teatro La Fenice, Venice, 14 September 1954). Hemmings's singing career came to an abrupt, if unsurprising, end when his voice broke during a performance in Paris. He declined an offer to study to be a tenor, preferring to attend Epsom Art College, where he showed considerable aptitude for painting, having an exhibition of watercolours when he was fifteen. 
Temperamentally restless, Hemmings left to pursue an acting career, touring in repertory, having a season at the Royal Court Theatre, and appearing in numerous radio and television series including 'Dixon of Dock Green'. His first feature film, 'Five Clues to Fortune', made for the Children's Film Foundation in 1956, was followed by more substantial roles and the lead in two rather anodyne 'youth' films, 'Live It Up' (1963) and 'Be My Guest' (1965), but stardom eluded him until 'Blow-Up' (1966). Moulding his performance to Michelangelo Antonioni's directorial vision, Hemmings's fashion photographer (widely assumed to be a portrait of David Bailey) was profoundly ambivalent, arrogantly hedonistic, but uncertain as to the meaning and purpose of his life. Provocatively enigmatic, 'Blow-Up' became one of the most widely acclaimed films of the 1960s, symbolizing swinging London and counter-cultural rebellion. With his blond, blue-eyed good looks that suggested something darker within, a fascinating combination of earthiness and ethereality, Hemmings became an iconic figure, one of a new breed of English actors who were young, sexy, and 'liberated', both on- and off-screen. 
Hemmings married, on 25 March 1961, Genista Mary Ouvry (Jenny Lewes), a 21-year-old actress and daughter of Romilly Ouvry, a wealthy solicitor. They had met when they were both working in repertory in Leicester. They had a daughter, Deborah Jane, but divorced in 1964. After becoming a star Hemmings enjoyed a celebrity lifestyle and numerous affairs, moving to Hollywood and marrying, amid much fanfare, the Texan-born actress Gayle Hunnicutt in Los Angeles on 16 November 1968. They had one son, Nolan, who bore a striking resemblance to his father and also became an actor. 
Now an international star playing one of the cameo roles in 'Barbarella' (1968), Hemmings's strongest performances were as ambivalent, divided characters: the idealistic but ill-fated Captain Nolan in 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' (1968), the stranded paratrooper in 'The Long Day's Dying' (1968), King Alfred in 'Alfred the Great' (1969), inclined to spiritual contemplation but forced to defend his kingdom against the viking invaders, and attractive but flawed anti-heroes in three psychological thrillers: 'The Walking Stick' (1970), 'Fragment of Fear' (1971), and 'Unman, Wittering and Zigo' (1971). 
Despite his success Hemmings regarded acting as rather limited -- 'as an actor you're really just a tool' -- whereas directing was both 'much more creative' and 'the only way you can have full artistic control' ('TV Times', 16 Aug 1973). His debut film as director, 'Running Scared' (1972), starring his wife, Gayle Hunnicutt, and Robert Powell, was an ambitious melodrama, strongly influenced by Antonioni in its cool objectivity and elliptical narrative. Although critically admired, it was not a commercial success. 'The 14' (1973), an unsentimental depiction of slum children trying to survive after their mother's death, fared better, but 'Just a Gigolo' (1979), starring David Bowie and Marlene Dietrich, was an ambitious misfire. Concurrently Hemmings worked as a producer both in Britain and abroad. An able and astute businessman, Hemmings, with John Daly, founded Hemdale Corporation in June 1967, a group of fourteen interlocking companies that allowed stars to exchange higher taxed income for lower taxed capital investment, as well as offering an attractive package of financial, legal, and publicity services. After several well-publicized boardroom battles Hemmings left the company in 1970. 
After Hemmings's marriage to Gayle Hunnicutt was dissolved in 1975, he moved to Chelsea and married Prudence Jane de Casembroot, who had been his secretary for five years, on 19 March 1976. She was the daughter of Stuart Edward Lear de Casembroot, boat builder. They had four children, George, Edward, Charlotte, and William. They divorced in 1997, and Hemmings moved to Calne in Wiltshire with Lucy Anne Williams, a design consultant, whom he married on 18 October 2002. She was the daughter of Geoffrey Bretton, chartered surveyor. 
Although Hemmings continued to appear occasionally on British television in the 1980s, notably as a seedy intelligence agent in 'Charlie Muffin' (1983), his principal activity was as a prolific director of American television series, including 'Magnum P.I.'; 'Murder, She Wrote'; and, for four years, 'The A-Team'. His acting career and public profile revived when he played the manipulative Cassius in 'Gladiator' (2000). Portly and pasty-faced but still vibrant, Hemmings sported a pink wig and eyebrows that matched the epic grandeur of the Colosseum. He was delighted with the frequent offers of film parts that followed, judging, 'I can be a different sort of actor. I can be fresh again -- which I love' ('Independent on Sunday', 15 Dec 2002). The best of these later films was 'Last Orders' (2001), in which four south Londoners embark on a day trip to Margate to scatter the ashes of a dead friend. Hemmings gave a brave, unsentimental performance as Lenny, the insecure, abrasive outsider. 
In 1974 Hemmings had remarked, 'I'll be very surprised to reach 65' (biography, United Artists Company) -- a prediction that proved to be poignantly correct when his febrile lifestyle, coupled with heavy smoking and drinking, led to a fatal heart attack in his dressing room on 3 December 2003 while filming the horror picture 'Samantha's Child' (released posthumously as 'Blessed', 2004) in Bucharest, Romania. A memorial service was held at St Mary's Church, Paddington Green, on 24 March 2004. He was survived by his wife, Lucy, and his six children. 
Hemmings was precocious and multi-talented -- he was even a skilled magician -- but his career had been kaleidoscopic rather than substantial. But if his achievements did not quite match his potential, he remains one of the most celebrated embodiments of the 1960s, of a generation that believed that 'whatever you want you can have', as he put it himself ('The Observer', 3 June 1968). 


