@@@@@


doc= 93021


Metcalf, Dame Helen (1946-2003), headteacher, was born on 7 October 1946 at North Middlesex County Hospital, Edmonton, London, the only daughter of Thomas Ralph Pitt, a public works engineer, and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Nicholas. When she was four the family, which included a brother, emigrated to Rhodesia, but her father died soon after of lung cancer, so they returned. Her mother remarried a painter and decorator who had a son of his own and the couple went on to have a son themselves. The family was poor -- there was sometimes no food in the house as wage day approached -- but Metcalf was bright, attended Enfield county school, a grammar school, and studied modern history with economics and politics at the University of Manchester, graduating with an upper second-class degree in 1968. While a student there she met her future husband, David Henry Metcalf ('b'. 1942), who was canvassing for the Labour Party during the general election of 1966. He was the son of Geoffrey Metcalf, security officer, and by the time of their marriage on 20 July 1968 was a lecturer in economics at the London School of Economics (where he was professor of industrial relations from 1985). 
Metcalf -- as she said later -- drifted into education. She took a teaching diploma at Roehampton Institute (and later a masters' degree in economic history at the London School of Economics). Her first job in 1969 was at Southgate Technical College, trying to interest young day-release apprentices in culture and citizenship. She relished the challenge. In 1971 she moved to Dame Alice Owens School, then a grammar school, in Islington, north London, and in the same year began a seven-year stint as a Labour councillor. As vice-chairman of housing and planning committees for Islington she became intimately involved in a huge programme of slum clearance. She had the stamina which saw her still arguing in committee at 3 a.m. over detail -- the need not to economize on double glazing, for instance. She believed housing quality had a direct impact on educational outcomes. Political colleagues and friends in the Labour Party included Jack Straw and Margaret Hodge, who both went on to high government office. If she had chosen national politics she could have been assured of a safe seat. But she knew the difficulties involved in juggling family life with a career in parliament and she chose to stay in education. She also felt that was where she could make the greatest impact on individual lives. 
Metcalf left Dame Alice Owens in 1974 for a sabbatical year in the United States with her husband, David. On her return she was recruited to teach history at Islington Green School, then a tough, low performing, inner city comprehensive. In 1980 her only son, Tom, was born. In 1982 she became deputy head of Acland Burghley, another north London comprehensive. 
In 1988 Metcalf was appointed head of Chiswick community school, which had a bad reputation because of poor results and even poorer discipline. She provided strong leadership, surrounding herself with a new team of deputies. She had little time for the view that you could not expect much of disadvantaged children -- she knew that from her own background. She insisted that lessons had to be interesting and challenging if behaviour was to be good. Breast cancer was diagnosed in 1991, the beginning of a long, gruelling, and ultimately unsuccessful battle, but she had treatment and was brave and unsentimental about her fate. She remained a hands-on headteacher, leading by example; once she played the recorder, which she was learning with her son, in a school assembly to encourage pupils to try music lessons. She was a highly visible presence in the corridors and would wade in to sort out trouble. Pupils knew they had her support, and so did her staff; she was concerned about teachers' pay, conditions, and career development, and many colleagues became lifelong friends, along with cleaners and cabinet ministers. Within ten years examination results at the school were in the top 5 per cent for schools with comparable intakes. 
Metcalf was New Labour even before the term was introduced, and the new Labour government in 1997 turned to her to test ideas. In 1998 she was appointed DBE for services to education, and later that year Chiswick community school was the launch pad for the government's performance-related pay scheme. Metcalf shared a platform with Tony Blair, the prime minister, David Blunkett, the education secretary, and Estelle Morris, the school standards minister. Increasing health problems forced her to resign her post in 2001 but she lived long enough to see her beloved son graduate with a first in geography from Bristol University. She died of cancer at her home, 18 St Georges Avenue, Islington, on 3 December 2003. She was survived by her husband, David, and son, Tom. Feisty, charismatic, and emotionally intelligent, Metcalf had a combination of strategic vision and the practical application to get it realized. Humble origins, a disrupted childhood, and an excellent education produced a woman determined to see that others got fair chances. She was committed to state education and turned her vision of high standards into a reality. 


@@@@@


doc= 93022


Monkhouse, Robert Alan (1928-2003), entertainer and comedian, was born at 168 Bromley Road, Beckenham, Kent, on 1 June 1928, the younger son of Wilfred Adrian Monkhouse (died 1957), a company head accountant, and his wife, Dorothy Muriel, 'nee' Hansard (died 1969). His relationship with both parents was what would later be described as a dysfunctional one: a lonely, fat child, he later recalled his mother embracing him only once, on the occasion of a wartime bomb landing near the Morrison shelter in which they had taken refuge. What little affection he received came mainly from his paternal grandfather, who was the head of Monk and Glass custard powder manufacturers in Birmingham. His death when Monkhouse was aged nine affected the latter so deeply that he was unable to speak for three months and developed a pronounced stutter. None the less he was determined to strike out on his own, a reaction to what he later described as an 'atmosphere of 'Some day, son, all this custard will be yours'' ('Daily Telegraph', 30 Dec 2003). 
Monkhouse attended Dulwich College, where his natural predilection for writing jokes and quips combined with his father's facility for diligence and systematic record keeping soon resulted in his regularly contributing gags and cartoons to children's comics like 'The Beano' and 'The Dandy'. From this he graduated to writing racy pornographic novels for the troops under a variety of fictional names such as Ramon Le Croix. He later claimed to have written a million words while at the college under ten aliases, and it was there too that he linked up with his first writing partner, Denis Goodwin, with whom as well as writing gags he also later persuaded their secretary to pose nude so they could subsequently sell the prints in Oxford Street. By then Monkhouse had left school, aged seventeen, to work as a cartoon film animator with Gaumont British, followed by national service in the RAF. 
Monkhouse's mother told him she would not have him in the house if he pursued a career in showbusiness, but Monkhouse defied her, writing jokes for an impressive list of stars including Bob Hope, Ted Ray, and Jimmy Edwards. On 5 November 1949 he further provoked his parents' ire by marrying Elizabeth Thompson, whom he had met while in the RAF. She was the daughter of Thomas James Thompson, cabinet maker, and was a year older than Monkhouse. His mother so strongly disapproved of the union that she attended the wedding in black, and despite Monkhouse and his new wife suffering four premature births and the birth of a son, Gary, with cerebral palsy, neither of his parents spoke to him for the next seventeen years. Monkhouse and his wife had another son, Simon, and adopted a daughter, Abigail. 
Monkhouse's partnership with Goodwin was enormously prolific, and led to their securing their own series, 'Fast and Loose', in 1954. Unlike many programmes of the day the humour was character-driven rather than derived from well-trodden comic routines. In 1957 Monkhouse made his first appearance in a quiz show, 'What's My Line?', a genre that he ultimately made his own. In 1958 he made the first of twelve film appearances, in 'Carry On Sergeant'. He made occasional forays onto the West End stage, and in 1960 was the host of 'Candid Camera', a forerunner of many 'gotcha' shows in which unsuspecting members of the public were the victims of ornate practical jokes. 
Despite a ferocious work rate, by 1967 Monkhouse's career had stalled. But when he was booked to compere a single edition of the long-running TV show 'Sunday Night at the London Palladium' his enthusiastic presence and polished delivery revived the ailing show and led to his best-known role, as host of 'The Golden Shot' (1967-71 and 1974-5), a ludicrous but hugely popular series (attracting audiences of up to 17 million) in which contestants directed by telephone a blindfolded crossbowman to hit a target for cash. Monkhouse's talent for ad-libbing was frequently called upon, as was his skill as a cartoonist. (He drew many of the cartoon targets himself.) From then on Monkhouse became associated with the successful piloting of a whole string of popular family quiz shows including 'Celebrity Squares' (1975-9) and 'Family Fortunes' (1979-83). Although his smug, oleaginous persona and 'perma-tan' complexion were often ridiculed (in fact the tan was not through vanity but to disguise vitiligo, a severe pigmentation disorder), he remained among the highest-paid television entertainers into the mid-1990s, ensuring a career at the top of showbusiness for five decades. As he once said with typical wit and self-deprecation, 'They laughed when I told them I wanted to become a comedian: they're not laughing now' ('Daily Telegraph', 30 Dec 2003). 
Yet beneath the outward success Monkhouse's private life saw much unhappiness. His first marriage was dissolved in 1971. His elder son, Gary, died in 1993, and Simon, with whom he had not spoken for thirteen years, died from a heroin overdose in 2001. By then, however, Monkhouse had found a measure of stability and happiness in his marriage to his former secretary, Jacqueline (Jackie) Harding, daughter of William Henry Harding, electrical engineer; they married on 4 October 1973, when she was aged thirty-seven. There were no children of this second marriage. 
Even at the end of his life Monkhouse still maintained both a vigorous work ethic (he was a frequent live entertainer and after-dinner speaker, and did much work for charity) and a prodigious rate of alcohol consumption. He published two volumes of autobiography interspersed with thoughtful reflections on the art of comedy, 'Crying with Laughter' in 1993 and 'Over the Limit' in 1998. Among other interests he was a voracious collector of matchbooks, comic strips, and early films (amassing what was reputed to be the best private collection of early films in the country). 'I still enjoy sex at 74', he once said; 'I live at 75, so it's no distance' ('The Times', 30 Dec 2003). Only in his last years did he become universally recognized by generations young and old as a giant of entertainment. He was appointed OBE in 1993. His final two and a half years were spent battling against prostate cancer. He died on 29 December 2003 at his home, Claridges, Eggington, Bedfordshire, and was survived by his wife, Jackie, and daughter, Abigail. On the prospect of his own death he once commented 'I want to die like my father, peacefully in his sleep, not screaming and terrified, like his passengers' (ibid.). 


@@@@@


doc= 93024


Rees, Jeremy Martin (1937-2003), arts administrator, was born on 8 May 1937 at Mary Stanley Nursing Home, Bridgwater, Somerset, the only son and eldest child of Glyndwr Rees (1905-2001), woodwork and music teacher, and his wife, (Ella) Jean, 'nee' Lamb (1914-2004), artist. At the time of his birth his parents were living at Damory, Wembdon Hill, Bridgwater. He was sent away to Taunton School in 1946, aged nine. It was his own decision to leave at sixteen and become apprenticed at Allen Davies, printers, of Bristol, in 1954. He had been very influenced by an art master at school but believed that staying on would be money wasted. He had never been allowed to 'do nothing' during school holidays and was often sent to find spares for his father's mechanical hobbies. His parents had also interested him in all manner of culture, becoming members of the Bridgwater Art Centre and its film club. 
Rees's firm paid for him to train for a management post at the London School of Printing and Graphic Arts from 1955 to 1958. He kept up his interest in films, saw plays at the Royal Court Theatre, and was particularly inspired by the Institute for Contemporary Arts in Dover Street. He later regretted that he had not gone on to higher education but said that those early years in London had been his university. The influence of his art teacher had led Rees to acquire a huge printing press which was initially housed with friends in Bridgwater. Although he was leaning towards a commercial career, as soon as he moved to London he founded a private printing press. His first publication was 'The Inchcape Rock' by Robert Southey, followed, in 1958, by 'Dawn Noon Night' by Marek Zulawski. The press needed a name and, on a visit to the National Gallery, he had an instant response to Jan van Eyck's famous portrait 'The Arnolfini Marriage', and created the Jan Arnolfini Press. 
While in London, Rees lived in a flat in Notting Hill, where he hung a textile bought from the Edinburgh Weavers' Company. This was noticed by (Margaret) Annabel Lawson ('b'. 1938), to whom he was introduced at a party in 1957. She was the daughter of Neil Lawson, barrister, and was, like Rees's mother, a textile artist, and had studied at the Central School of Art. In 1958 Rees was one of the last to be called up for national service and, determined not to serve in Germany, chose instead to go to Sierra Leone as a second lieutenant, developing a lifelong concern for third world poverty. He wrote at length to Annabel and, after he had returned to Bristol in 1960, they married on 16 September 1961. They had two daughters, Natasha ('b'. 1965) and Justine ('b'. 1966). 
Rees had long dreamed of running an art gallery, and in March 1961 he and Annabel, in partnership with the painter John Orsborn, created a gallery called Arnolfini above a bookshop in Triangle West, Clifton, with funds from Annabel's father. The press disappeared but the name lived on. For the first few years the gallery was staffed by Annabel Rees and Jenny Orsborn, without pay, while Rees became the unpaid, part-time director. He was meanwhile employed by Allen Davies until 1963, then worked for Ron Ford, a typographic designer, until 1965. From then until 1968 he taught typographic design at Bath Academy of Art, Corsham, meeting artists whose work he would show at the Arnolfini. He was particularly encouraged by two London art dealers, Annely Juda and Leslie Waddington, who suggested that he contact a client, Peter Barker-Mill. He and his wife Caroline agreed to invest money in the Arnolfini Trust and, with Arts Council grants too, Rees was in 1968 able to give up teaching and devote himself to developing the Arnolfini. Having moved from Triangle West to Queen Square, Bristol, and then to Canon's Road (where the facilities included a cinema, restaurant, and bar), the Arnolfini moved in 1975 to the Bush warehouse in the Bristol docks, where it soon established itself as one of Britain's major centres for contemporary art, dance, music, film, and jewellery. Rees was a pioneer in developing business sponsorship, gallery sales, educational activities, and outreach schemes, and a generation of significant curators trained under him. One of his staff later said, 'He asked his staff to give 200 per cent, but was always very much a hands-on leader who gave 210 per cent himself, so you were carried along on the wave of his enthusiasm' ('Western Daily Press', 13 Dec 2003). 
By 1989 (by which time the Arnolfini was attracting 285,000 visitors a year) Rees felt he had stayed at the Arnolfini too long and moved to 24 Lots Road, Chelsea, where he worked as a consultant in multimedia and copyright. In 1986 he had become a founder trustee for a sculpture park in the Forest of Dean, and developed its website using computer expertise refined since the early 1980s. Other projects included an interactive multimedia resource on the life and work of Brancusi and, with characteristic ambition but sadly unfulfilled, a European centre for the visual arts in Ipswich and an artists' commissioning project for the millennium. His last years were largely spent writing and speaking all over the world as an expert on information technology in the services of culture. He was director of the International Visual Arts Information Network and editor of the 'Image Technologies in Museums and Art Galleries' international database. He was also a trustee of the Contemporary Art Society from 1982 to 1995 and vice-chairman in 1990-95. 
Rees was a modest, melancholic, and romantic man, somewhat disillusioned towards the end of his life because his ideas continued to be ahead of their time or out of step with public funding. He had an explosive laugh and a stylish penchant for orange shirts, colourful socks, and distinctive ties. He said he wanted a sign above the Arnolfini entrance: 'Enjoy Yourself'. He died as the result of a traffic accident in London on 11 December 2003, and was survived by his wife, Annabel, and their two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 93025


Reeves, Marjorie Ethel (1905-2003), historian and educationist, was born on 17 July 1905 at Bratton, near Westbury, Wiltshire, in the family of three daughters and one son of Robert John Ward Reeves, manufacturer of agricultural implements, and his wife, Edith Saffery, 'nee' Whitaker. Her parents were Baptists. She was educated at the High School for Girls, Trowbridge, Wiltshire, where she was inspired by her historian headteacher to go on to study history at St Hugh's College, Oxford. Graduating with a first-class degree in 1926, she went on to take her diploma in education at the university's department of educational studies the following year. She then taught at the Roan School for Girls in Greenwich for two years before taking up a research fellowship at Westfield College, London, in 1929. 
In the late 1920s Reeves had discovered, in the library of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, the work of Joachim of Fiore, the medieval visionary mystic. She decided to pursue her doctoral studies at Westfield College on Joachim, despite the scornful reaction of one of her contemporaries: 'that outlandish subject won't assist your career. You should have chosen something like the wardrobe under Edward II' (B. McGinn, 'Memorial remarks for Marjorie E. Reeves', in 'Tributes to Marjorie Reeves'). But not only did she make the substance of her doctorate (obtained in 1932) her seminal work (finally published in 1969 as 'The Influence of Prophecy in the Later Middle Ages: a Study in Joachimism'), she created something of an international renaissance of interest in the mystic, reflected in frequent congresses, numerous publications, and in the late 1970s the foundation of the Centro Internazionale di Studi Gioachimiti, in San Giovanni, Fiore. Among her own further publications on Joachim were (with Beatrice Hirsch-Reich) an edition of 'The Figurae of Joachim of Fiore' (1972), and, four years later, 'Joachim of Fiore and the Prophetic Future'. A volume of essays in her honour, edited by Ann Williams and entitled 'Prophecy and Millenarianism', was published in 1980, and she was made an honorary citizen of the commune of San Giovanni, Fiore, in 1994. According to Sir Richard Southern, Reeves broke radically with prevailing views of what medieval historians should do through her work on Joachim and his followers. 
In 1931 Reeves took up a post as lecturer in history at St Gabriel's Teacher Training College in Camberwell, where she inspired future teachers with her vision of education. That vision was influenced by the philosopher John Macmurray, and his seminal work on the primacy of the personal in the reconstruction of the future, developed in his lectures at University College, London, which she attended. Returning to Oxford in 1938 she became a tutor for the Society of Oxford Home Students (which became the St Anne's Society in 1942 and St Anne's College ten years later). During the Second World War the society occupied 13 Norham Gardens, where she lived in the former study of the regius professor of medicine, Sir William Osler. As air raid warden for Norham Gardens she was the university's last line of defence against the might of the Luftwaffe. Their threat she took seriously, and when it was rumoured that the Germans were about to be parachuted onto Salisbury Plain she made the difficult train journey home to Wiltshire to hide her left-wing literature in the rafters, to protect her mother and sister. 
Although a medieval scholar of international renown, Reeves never lost her practical involvement with schools or her interest in history teaching. When training teachers at St Gabriel's in the 1930s she devised a history syllabus for aspiring hairdressers in which, among other things, they imitated the hair styles of ancient Egypt -- a surprising sight at that time in Camberwell. She produced, from the 1950s, history books for schools which revolutionized the teaching of history. The 'Then and There' series (of which she was general editor, and to which she contributed twelve volumes, with titles like 'The Medieval Village', 1954, 'The Medieval Castle', 1960, and 'The Elizabethan Country House', 1984) enabled pupils to make sense of the lives of people in other places and times. It is a tribute to Reeves's brilliance as a teacher that the earliest of these books were still being used half a century later. She received the Medlicott medal of the Historical Association in 1993 for her contribution to history education. 
When invited to join the Central Advisory Council for Education in 1947 Reeves asked the permanent secretary at the Ministry of Education, Sir John Maud, what was the main responsibility of its members. She relished his response: 'it is to be prepared to die at the first ditch as soon as politicians get their hands on education' (personal knowledge). She remained on the Central Advisory Council until 1961, and contributed to what became known (after the chairman of the council, Sir Geoffrey Crowther) as the Crowther report of 1959, which recommended the raising of the school-leaving age to 16. In the 1940s she also served on the education and training committee of the National Coal Board. Indeed, it was during the Second World War that her educational ideals -- the primacy of the personal, the location of the self within a wider community, openness to argument leading to commitment -- expressed themselves most clearly in action. She was a founding member of the Moot, which met regularly for ten years after the Oxford conference in 1937, looking beyond the war to the new social order which would need to be constructed. It was through this group that she worked with J. H. Oldham, Sir Walter Moberly, Karl Mannheim, Sir Fred Clarke, Archbishop William Temple, T. S. Eliot, R. H. Tawney, Michael Polanyi, and many others; their discussions -- exciting, committed, inspiring, idealistic -- were an important influence on the reforms of the 1944 'Education Act'. Closely connected with the Moot in the 1940s was the Student Christian Movement, of which she was an active member. She edited in 1999 the history of that organization and its connections with the Moot, under the beguiling title 'Christian Thinking and Social Order: Conviction Politics from the 1930s to the Present Day'. In this work she chronicled the bringing together of the best within the Christian tradition to which she belonged, the deliberations of some of the most distinguished social and political thinkers of the time, and a commitment to the creation of a just and fair reconstruction of society, reflecting (as highlighted by Reinhold Niebuhr in his contribution to the meeting of the Student Christian Movement in 1939) 'the tension of holding together a sense of eternal perspective and a passion for righteousness on earth' (M. Reeves, ed., 'Christian Thinking and the Social Order', 1999, 15). 
Reeves remained a fellow and tutor at St Anne's College until her retirement in 1972 (serving as vice-principal from 1951 to 1962 and again from 1964 to 1967); thereafter she was an honorary fellow. She remained active intellectually to the end. At ninety-eight, despite physical frailty, she was planning her next book on the teaching of history. She was also preparing her contribution to the 'Oxford Review of Education''s special issue on Oxford University's contribution to education in the twentieth century. Her piece was to be on the contribution of women dons, most of whom she had known. However, it is appropriate that her final book should have been a history of the University Church of St Mary (2003). For it was to this community, present and past, that she belonged. She died at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 27 November 2003, of bronchopneumonia. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 93027


Roc, Patricia (1915-2003), film actress, was born on 7 June 1915 at 75 Lissenden Mansions, Hampstead, London, the daughter of Felix Herold, a paper merchant, and his wife, Miriam Muriel, 'nee' Angell. Adopted while an infant by a Dutch stockbroker, Andre Magnus Riese, and his wife, she became known as Felicia Riese and only discovered her adoption in her thirties. She was brought up as the eldest of three Riese daughters; the middle sister Barbara (Bobby) married the tennis champion Fred Perry. She was educated at Francis Holland School, Regent's Park, then at Bartram Gables boarding school, Broadstairs, Kent, where she became head girl. With an aptitude for the arts she expressed an interest in acting and, after a year at a Paris finishing school in 1933-4, returned to England to study at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA). 
Extremely pretty, slim, and dark-haired, with brilliant blue eyes, a winning smile, and natural manner, Felicia Riese (who adopted the stage name Patricia Roc) appeared in 1938 in the Guy Bolton revue, 'Nuts in May', at the Ambassadors Theatre, where she caught the attention of one of Alexander Korda's casting directors. She appeared first as an extra in 'The Divorce of Lady X' (1938) before Korda cast her as the princess in 'The Rebel Son' (1939). A period of good supporting roles quickly followed, where she honed her craft, with a notable appearance in 'A Window in London' (1939). On 16 September 1939 she married a Canadian osteopath twelve years her senior, Murray Russell Laing, the son of William John Laing, businessman. The marriage quickly faltered when Roc fell in love with the actor Michael Wilding, with whom she was filming 'The Farmer's Wife' (1940). She later recalled: 'There was nothing to be done about it. We were both married. It was a mess' ('The Independent'). Laing divorced her in 1944, citing the actor Ralph Michael (then married to the actress Fay Compton) as co-respondent. 
Roc's breakthrough role came as Celia Crawson in Gainsborough's 'home front' movie 'Millions Like Us' (1943), written and directed by Frank Launder and Sidney Gilliat. She was cast as the 'ingenue' conscripted to factory work where she falls in love with a young airman (Gordon Jackson) and learns the values of stoicism upon his untimely death. The film, popular with wartime audiences, attracted considerable critical acclaim. Roc's career then flourished between 1943 and 1949 and she was quickly established as one of Britain's leading female stars, alongside Margaret Lockwood and Phyllis Calvert. Key roles followed in numerous Gainsborough melodramas such as '2,000 Women' (1944), 'Love Story' (1944), 'Madonna of the Seven Moons' (1945), and 'The Wicked Lady' (1945), where the cleavages displayed by Roc and her co-star Margaret Lockwood caused considerable headaches for the American censors. 
Roc was the first British artist to travel to Hollywood under Rank's lend-lease agreement, to make 'Canyon Passage' in 1946, and further fostered Anglo-American relations by her affair with Ronald Reagan. Her Hollywood experience was short-lived, however, and she returned to Britain and made 'The Brothers' (1947), 'Jassy' (1947), and 'When the Bough Breaks' (1948), which earned her top billing for the role of an unmarried mother who reluctantly gives up her child for adoption. In 1949 she married the French director of photography Andre Thomas (died 1954). Her film 'The Perfect Woman' (1949) was the last under her existing Rank contract and she moved to Paris with Thomas. She returned to Britain in 1952 to star opposite Rank's 'Mr Beefcake', Anthony Steel, in 'Something Money Can't Buy'. Her husband was unable to give her the children she desired but her affair with Steel resulted in the birth of her son Michael, for whom Thomas knowingly accepted paternity until his death in 1954. By this point Roc's career had waned and she made few films in the 1950s, her final feature being 'Bluebeard's Ten Honeymoons' (1960). She had occasional television parts, most notably in 'The Saint' with Roger Moore in 1962, but retired in 1964 after her marriage to the Viennese businessman and millionaire Walter Matias Reif (1911-1986), son of Hermann Reif, grain merchant, on 25 September that year. She briefly attracted press publicity in 1975 when she was arrested for shoplifting in Oxford Street, an event she attributed to forgetfulness. After this she and Reif moved to Switzerland. Suffering from kidney failure, she died in Locarno, Switzerland, on 30 December 2003. Her son, Michael Thomas, survived her. 
Roc's success coincided with a period when a confident British film industry flourished. At the height of her fame her fan club supported 'The International Patricia Roc Fan Club Magazine' and received 5000 letters each week. She was well liked within the industry: Noel Coward famously called her 'a phenomenon, an unspoiled actress who can act', while for her employer, J. Arthur Rank, she was the 'Goddess of the Odeons' ('The Scotsman'). More privately she was known as 'bedrock' for the sexual desire she inculcated in the male workforce at Rank (private information). Her description of herself as the 'bouncy sexy girl next door' ('The Times') illustrates her awareness of her own star image, although she occasionally expressed impatience with her 'good girl' persona. Of her famous role as Caroline in 'The Wicked Lady' she later recalled that 'the character infuriated me. She was a saccharine-sweet little ninny' ('The Independent'). Dilys Powell's assessment of her as 'a trifle ritzy' for the part of Celia in 'Millions' (Powell, 39) suggests an alternative side to Roc that was only very occasionally developed, and some of her best performances were where she played more recalcitrant females. Her confident sparring with Margaret Lockwood in 'Love Story' exploited the 'rude feminine energy' that Durgnat identifies as a feature of Roc and her Gainsborough peers (Durgnat, 185). Her role as a servant girl in 'The Brothers' (her personal favourite) was her strongest and hints at a more complex personality: her character inspires sexual jealousy between two brothers and the film is tense and atmospheric. (Roc's sensual nude bathing scene in this film had to be cut for the American market.) Roc's failure to find continued success in the 1950s was in part due to changes in audience demographics that meant that female-orientated melodramas ceased production. New actresses such as Diana Dors emerged and Roc, now approaching forty, hadn't developed sufficiently as an actress to allow her to secure different and alternative roles. She was, however, one of the leading stars of British cinema in the 1940s, and the programme of her films at the National Film Theatre in 1999 is testimony to her central position in British film culture. 


@@@@@


doc= 93030


Ruck, Peter Frederick Carter- (1914-2003), solicitor, was born on 26 February 1914 at 14 Goldstone Villas, Hove, the only son of Frederick Henry Carter Ruck, surveyor and property dealer, and his wife, Nellie Mabel, 'nee' Allen. He was educated at St Edward's School, Oxford. Articled straight from school, he qualified as a solicitor in 1937, and joined the small legal firm of Oswald Hickson, Collier & Co. During the Second World War he served in the Royal Artillery as an anti-aircraft gunner, based mainly in Scotland, then as an instructor in gunnery. He was demobilized in 1944 with the rank of captain. Meanwhile, on 6 July 1940 he had married (Pamela) Ann Maxwell, the nineteen-year-old daughter of Group Captain Reginald Stuart Maxwell, RAF officer. (By the time of his marriage he and his parents had adopted a hyphenated surname; and his mother was now known as Nell.) They had a son, Brian, and a daughter, Julie. 
Following his demobilization Carter-Ruck returned to the firm of Oswald Hickson, of which he was (following Hickson's death) senior partner from 1945 to 1981. After disagreements and litigation with his partners he established, with characteristic resolution in the same building and in competition with his former partners, his own firm of Peter Carter-Ruck and Partners, of which he was senior partner from 1981 to 1998. He was the defamation specialist member of the Law Society from 1971 to 1984, and wrote a number of books in this field, including 'Libel and Slander' (1953), which ran to five editions, and 'Copyright, Modern Law and Practice' (1965). In 1990 he published his autobiography, 'Memoirs of a Libel Lawyer'. 
For over five decades Carter-Ruck was Britain's best-known libel lawyer. It was no coincidence that his telex answerback was Libel-G and that he chose to use the personalized number plate L1BEL for his Rolls-Royce Silver Shadow. Increasingly, he became the man to whom aggrieved politicians and celebrities turned when they felt they had been libelled. His soft-spoken, polite manner masked a steely determination and tenacity. Fleet Street editors came to recognize the yellow solicitors' notepaper which complained, often with tortured syntax, of libels of the utmost gravity and demanded aggravated damages to compensate Carter-Ruck's clients for the harm he said the libel was calculated to cause them. Carter-Ruck's practice was to issue a writ even before sending the letter of complaint, the better, he claimed, to focus the libeller's mind on the need to resolve the matter. Cynics claimed this was a tactic to increase legal costs. At the end of the list of demands in such letters was his requirement that all his legal costs were to be paid by the offending publication. So long as he won cases for his renowned clientele ranging from Randolph Churchill to Harold Wilson, and from Lucian Freud to Sir James Goldsmith to Princess Elizabeth of Toro, the level of these costs was of no concern to his clients, as Carter-Ruck would successfully ensure their swift vindication and receipt of libel damages, and would recover his sizeable legal costs from the erring publication. 
Carter-Ruck enjoyed a high level of success in his cases. In the libel field this was exemplified by the $50,000 damages obtained in 1972 by the pilot Edward Prchal who was falsely accused in Rolf Hochhuth's play 'The Soldiers' of being involved in a plot to kill the Polish leader General Sikorski in 1943 in a plane crash off Gibraltar. The playwright appeared to believe all participants in this wartime tragedy were dead. Prchal, however, had survived, and was living in California. Carter-Ruck was able to discredit Hochhuth's thesis and by this route to vindicate even the reputation of those who died in the plane crash and who would not have been able to bring a libel action to vindicate their reputation. In the copyright field one of his notable triumphs was to secure in a series of cases in the 1960s and 1970s the rights of the screenwriter Kevin McClory not only in what was to have been the original James Bond film, 'Thunderball', but also in a sequel, 'Never Say Never Again'. He also advised on the successful publication of Vladimir Nabokov's 'Lolita' in the teeth of threats of an obscenity prosecution. In such a high-profile field the relatively rare failures were gleefully publicized, notably by the satirical magazine 'Private Eye' which had nearly been put out of business at its birth by Carter-Ruck's aggressive tactics on behalf of Randolph Churchill -- he used to retain every QC to prevent them advising 'Private Eye'. 'Private Eye' responded by an all too deliberate misspelling of his surname. 
In the latter part of Carter-Ruck's career he departed from his own rule of persuading clients not to sue unless they had an 80 per cent chance of success, and the last few years of his practice saw some uncharacteristic failures in cases which perhaps need not have been brought. Jani Allen, a South African journalist, failed to prove that she had been libelled when accused of an affair with an extreme right-wing politician. The journalist Derek Jameson failed in his complaint against a satirical radio programme on the BBC that had poked gentle fun at him. Jameson's case ended in considerable acrimony, with Jameson complaining of Carter-Ruck's over-optimistic advice and of his concealment of the barrister's more gloomy but realistic assessment of the case. There was also an acrimonious dispute about the fees Carter-Ruck was charging. Carter-Ruck found himself once more in dispute with the partners of his eponymous firm, but with the tenacity that characterized his sixty years in the law he joined another law firm, Pellys, in Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, at the age of eighty-six, while the firm he had founded proceeded without him. 
While exploiting the plaintiff-friendly English libel laws for his clients, Carter-Ruck advocated reform of those laws in order to strike a fairer balance in favour of freedom of speech. He also argued that legal aid should be available for libel and slander cases; and that the Court of Appeal should have the right to vary libel damages. He served on the council of Justice from 1968, and on the Law Society's law reform committee from 1980 to 1983. Outside the law he was a distinguished ocean yachtsman with a series of boats called 'Fair Judgment'. He personally restored a ruined croft in Ardnamurchan and owned properties in London, Hertfordshire, and Marbella. His interests included cinematography, woodturning, and water-divining. He remained active until shortly before his death, on 19 December 2003, at his home, Latchmore Cottage, Latchmore Bank, Little Hallingbury, Essex, of bronchial cancer. He was survived by his daughter, Julie (also a libel lawyer); his wife, Ann, had died earlier that year, and his son, Brian, had died in 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 93035


Terraine, John Alfred (1921-2003), historian, was born on 15 January 1921 at 128 Stondon Park, Forest Hill, Lewisham, London, the son of Charles William Terraine, woollen goods salesman and wartime army officer, and his wife, Eveline, 'nee' Holmes. He was educated at Stamford School and Keble College, Oxford, matriculating in 1939. As a wartime undergraduate Jack Terraine (later in life he reverted to John) was known as a poet and had pronounced left-wing sympathies -- a rather different persona from that of his later life. He suffered much ill health during this time and left Oxford in 1943 without taking a degree. He twice volunteered for military service, but on both occasions was rejected on grounds of his ill health. Instead he joined the BBC, at first as a recorded programmes assistant. On 27 November 1945 he married Joyce Elizabeth Waite, the 24-year-old daughter of Harold Dudden Waite, electrical engineer. They had one daughter, Carola. At the BBC Terraine was Pacific and southern African programme organizer for ten years from 1953, then from 1963 to 1964 associate producer and chief scriptwriter of the BBC series 'The Great War', widely recognized as a landmark in presenting history on television, and the fruit of Terraine's by now well-established interest in the First World War. In 1964 he left the BBC to become a freelance historian. 
By the late 1950s, after much reading and thinking, Terraine had become dissatisfied with the simplistic but dominant view that the First World War was futile and British generalship incompetent. His campaign against these beliefs led to his becoming one of the most controversial and influential British military historians of the century. Terraine's thesis (first enunciated in book form in 'Mons: the Retreat to Victory', 1960) flew in the face of much received wisdom. He argued that the conditions on the western front meant that there could be no short cuts to victory. Industrialized warfare, the strength of the German army, and the lack of flanks to turn made an attritional strategy inevitable. The British army laboured under a number of handicaps. They were the junior partners in a coalition dominated by the French; the army of 1914 was small, focused on colonial warfare, and ill equipped; and a mass army had to be created and trained while participating in large-scale offensives. Yet in 1918 this army, under Haig's command, took the lead in defeating the Germans. In Terraine's view the attritional campaigns of 1916-17, which wore down the German army, made this victory possible. Terraine had no doubt that Haig was a 'great captain'. He pursued this basic theme, with variations, in more than half a dozen books and numerous articles, for more than thirty years. His most important book was 'Douglas Haig: the Educated Soldier' (1963), a robust, well-argued, and (in contrast to some of his later writings) moderately phrased defence of the senior British commander on the western front. Other key texts included 'The Road to Passchendaele' (1977) and 'The Smoke and the Fire' (1980). 
In spite of many challenges Terraine's thesis was never satisfactorily rebutted in his own lifetime. Many younger historians willingly acknowledged Terraine's influence on their thinking, and a modified version of his thesis underpinned the ideas of an increasingly influential revisionist school of military historians. However, there was general agreement among military historians that Terraine had claimed too much for the generalship of Douglas Haig. Terraine's importance lay also in the fact that he set out his ideas in popular and widely read books and articles and in television scripts, rather than in the obscurity of the monograph and seminar room, ensuring that in the field of public history there was an alternative to the dominant 'lions led by donkeys' view of the First World War epitomized by Joan Littlewood's play 'Oh What a Lovely War' and Alan Clark's book 'The Donkeys'. His role as founder president of the Western Front Association (1980-97), an organization with thousands of members, further spread his influence. 
Inevitably Terraine's books on the First World War overshadowed the rest of his literary output, but he also wrote books on subjects as diverse as the battle of Trafalgar and Lord Mountbatten, and his articles ranged wider still. Many readers considered his work on the RAF in the Second World War, 'The Right of the Line' (1985), to be his finest book. He also continued his distinguished broadcasting career. He was a skilled scriptwriter who understood both radio and television. Among other series and programmes he was scriptwriter of 'The Life and Times of Lord Mountbatten' (Rediffusion/Thames TV, 1966-8) and 'The Mighty Continent' (BBC, 1974-5), an acclaimed television history of twentieth-century Europe. For the former he interviewed Mountbatten many times, and was struck by his 'curious mix of boastfulness and diffidence' ('Daily Telegraph'). 
Terraine was sensitive to unfriendly reviews and personal criticism but he doggedly stuck to what he believed to be true, despite the unfashionable nature of his cause, and the hostility he aroused. He was essentially an outsider, never part of the military history establishment, although in 1986 he became an honorary fellow of Keble College, Oxford. His long association with the Royal United Services Institute, of which he was a council member (1976-84), and whose Chesney gold medal he received in 1982, was in some respects a substitute. He rather uneasily straddled the divide between 'academic' and 'popular' history, although in the last decades of his life he was touched by the admiration of a younger generation of academic historians. He could appear prickly and dogmatic in public, but he was a kind man with many friends. In 'Who's Who' he listed his recreation as 'convivial and congenial conversation'. Often this took place in a pub. He and his wife, Joyce, separated in the late 1960s, but in later years he found a devoted partner in Katherine Rose (Kathy) Stevenson, who helped him organize the Western Front Association, and who nursed him through a long illness. He died on 28 December 2003 at St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, Westminster, of pneumonia. He was survived by Kathy Stevenson and by his daughter, Carola, also a historian. He had been a keen birdwatcher, and his ashes were scattered at Pagham harbour nature reserve. 


@@@@@


doc= 93047


Janousek, Karel (1893-1971), officer in the Czech air force, was born in Prerov, Moravia, on 30 October 1893, the son of Karel Janousek and his wife, Adelheid. During his national service with the Austrian army he fought in Italy in the First World War, but then joined the renegade Czech Legion, fighting alongside the Russians and against the Austrians, on the eastern front. When Czechoslovakia gained independence in October 1918 Janousek committed himself to a military career, graduating from the army academy in Prague in 1923. He joined the Czechoslovak air force in 1924, and by 1937 he had risen to the rank of brigadier-general. In 1939, shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War, he was awarded his doctorate in sciences by Charles University. 
From the outset of the German invasion of Czechoslovakia in March 1939 Janousek had quietly assisted the escape of many Czech and Slovak servicemen, but when Poland was invaded in September, and the German occupation became more oppressive, he along with most of the officer corps knew that they must save their own lives. Most of the Czechoslovak government and high command fled to France, and from there to England in June 1940. On their arrival there was in effect a mutiny in the ranks, which ultimately led to Janousek replacing Brigadier-General Josef Slezak as head of the exiled air force. It proved to be a good choice, and for the next five years Janousek worked tirelessly for his men in their efforts to defeat the axis powers and liberate their homes and families. He supervised the creation of 310 (Czechoslovak) fighter squadron in July 1940 which, together with 312 Squadron formed in August, rendered distinguished service in the battle of Britain. In total, eighty-eight Czech and Slovak pilots flew in that great struggle, eight of them losing their lives in action. 
As inspector-general of the Czechoslovak air force, Janousek was a man of influence but no real power. His was a difficult task indeed. The government he served under President Edvard Benes was riven with internal rivalries and volatile personalities. A small army group of some 4000 men was largely inactive between 1940 and 1944, but the air force -- three fighter squadrons and one bomber squadron -- was frequently in the heat of battle. For its part the British Air Ministry saw no need for a fully independent Czechoslovak air force. The official reason was that the contingent was too small to function effectively without considerable numbers of British ground crew and maintenance specialists. In itself this was perfectly true, but the British also deeply distrusted the political agenda of the Czechsolovak government-in-exile, fearing that independence would fuel the demands of Benes for an exaggerated status in the post-war peace settlement. Thus the 1600 officers and other ranks were classified as volunteers within the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. This stung the pride of some of the Czech leadership who saw no reason why they should not have an independent national unit such as the Polish enjoyed. Janousek soothed passions by patiently arguing that the British would not yield on this matter, and that to press the issue ran the risk of the dismemberment of the force and the scattering of its best pilots throughout the RAF. 
Janousek was also involved in fierce disputes concerning poor recruitment and the replacement of combat losses. Much of his energy was spent arguing with his superior, General Sergei Ingr, at the headquarters of the exiled government at Wingrave Manor in Buckinghamshire. Ingr consistently refused to transfer men from the dormant army group into the air force units, but Janousek kept battering away at the political and personal obstacles to keep his men in the air. He won and lost many arguments at the cabinet table, but his air force did not wither. In 1941, a grateful Air Ministry promoted him to the rank of air vice-marshal, and King George VI conferred on him the Order of the Bath (KCB) in recognition of his military service as a foreign national. Janousek was trusted by the British. Knowing exactly what he could ask for, and how to ask for it, he occupied an unenviable position as the intermediary between the RAF -- who wanted only stability and calm -- and his political and military masters, most of whom were hungry for prestige and personal advancement. But although he had made several enemies within his own government, the officers and men of the Czechoslovak air force recognized him for the leader that he was. 
In 1945, at the war's end, Janousek was promoted to air marshal for the services he and his men had rendered Britain and her allies. Over 530 Czech and Slovak personnel had died for their cause, but Janousek and his superiors knew that their struggles were not yet behind them. The Red Army now occupied Prague, and a triumphant return of the Czechoslovak forces, including a magnificent flypast across the capital, was soon overshadowed by political machinations at the heart of government. Within weeks of the return Janousek had been replaced by his old adversary, Josef Slezak, and one by one the Western commanders were forced into retirement or exile by officers more sympathetic to the Communists. Janousek's last mission was to return to England in the spring of 1946 formally to sever the links between his force and the RAF. He was offered several staff posts in the Air Ministry, all of which he refused, and he returned to Prague to meet his fate and look after his men as their units were disbanded. 
In 1948, when the Communist 'coup d'etat' displaced the government of Edvard Benes, Janousek was arrested and tried as 'an enemy of the people'. He was sentenced to nineteen years. On appeal this was extended to life imprisonment, but he was released in 1960 as part of a general amnesty for officers who had served in the West. Stripped of his rank and his decorations, he lived as a private citizen, working in an engineering factory until he was pardoned in 1968. He died in Prague on 27 October 1971. In 1990 all his former laurels were restored after the 'velvet revolution', and in 1991 he was posthumously promoted to the rank of full general 'in memoriam'. 


@@@@@


doc= 93049


Gaevernitz, Gerhart von Schulze- (1864-1943), political economist and commentator on Britain, was born in Breslau on 25 July 1864, the only son of Hermann von Schulze-Gaevernitz (1824-1888), constitutional lawyer and academic, who in 1853 had published a book on the English economy, and his wife, Luise, the daughter of the industrialist and liberal politician Karl August Milde (1805-1861). Schulze-Gaevernitz's maternal grandfather, who was president of the Prussian national assembly in 1848, owned a cotton and calico-printing business, and had served an apprenticeship in Manchester, where he came under the influence of Richard Cobden. 
Schulze-Gaevernitz was brought up until the age of fourteen on his maternal grandparents' estate in an intellectual and liberal Catholic milieu. In 1878 the family moved to Heidelberg, where Schulze-Gaevernitz attended the local Gymnasium. He studied jurisprudence in Heidelberg, Berlin, Leipzig, and Gottingen. In 1886 he passed the exam for the higher civil service, before obtaining his doctorate from Gottingen. Over the next five years he travelled widely, visiting England, Belgium, France, and Italy. He visited Lancashire, and lived in the East End of London, witnessing the London dockers' strike during the summer of 1889. 
Schulze-Gaevernitz resumed his civil service career in Strasbourg, where he attended the lectures of the left-liberal economist Lujo Brentano, whose influence was apparent in Schulze-Gaevernitz's first book, 'Zum socialen Frieden', published in 1890. His progressive views and liberal background were ill suited to a career in the Prussian civil service and in 1890 he left to focus on academia, completing his 'Habilitation' on Thomas Carlyle in 1891. After travelling and studying in Russia he taught economics at the University of Freiburg im Breisgau, where in 1896 he was appointed to a full professorship. Soon after, he married Johanna Hirsch, the cultivated daughter of a well-known merchant, Emil Hirsch, and his social activist wife, Berta, from Mannheim. The marriage produced two daughters and one son. 
In 1912 Schulze-Gaevernitz was elected to the Reichstag to represent Freiburg-Breisgau for the Progressive People's Party. After 1918 he represented the same part of Baden in the national assembly of the Weimar republic as a member of the German Democratic Party. As a serving officer during the First World War he opposed unrestricted aerial bombardment and U-boat warfare, publicizing his views in the American press, for which he was much criticized in Germany. In mid-life he became a Quaker. After the war he was a visiting professor in England and the United States, lecturing at Cornell, Columbia, and the University of Wisconsin in Madison. In 1925 he was appointed head of the department for bibliography and scientific relations at the League of Nations International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation in Paris. His last years, spent in retirement in Silesia, were devoted primarily to religious concerns. He died at Crainsdorf, near Neurode in Silesia, on 10 July 1943. 
Schulze-Gaevernitz was a frequent visitor to and commentator on Britain: like other German writers, he viewed British industry as inaugurating a new economic era, destined to be followed throughout the capitalist world. It was therefore an important laboratory for the social investigator. In his early research into Lancashire he was aided by his acquaintance with the employers' secretaries, Samuel Andrew and Joshua Rawlinson. His contacts in Britain included Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Graham Wallas, Gilbert Murray, and the Liberal politician and journalist G. P. Gooch. His first book, 'Social Peace', was translated into English by C. M. Wicksteed, with an introduction by Wallas, in 1893. The German original was a sizeable intellectual and institutional study of the British labour movement, which was truncated in a translation that omitted the extensive consideration of Carlyle and Christian socialism. 
Schulze-Gaevernitz stressed the value of a moralized conception of society, which he contrasted with atomistic individualism and sectional conflict. His left-liberal politics owed much to his Kantianism, apparent in his sympathetic examination of idealist aspects of British political thought in the nineteenth century. His work was principally addressed to contemporary German concerns, and sought to reveal and recommend to a German audience the British route to social peace through the development of the factory system, trade unions, and a high-wage economy. Britain, it appeared, had achieved lasting social stability at the same time as developing a highly productive economy. He elaborated his defence of the link between enhanced wages and rising productivity in an analysis of the cotton industry in Britain, translated into English in 1895. Reviewed in both economic and more general periodicals, his writings on British industry contributed to the debate about the impact of trade unions upon the economy. His account of the Lancashire cotton industry became a respected source, footnoted by Alfred Marshall and the Webbs, and translated into several languages. 
During the 1900s Schulze-Gaevernitz's understanding of the lessons of British history for Germany changed, as his views became more nationalist. In 1906 he published a study of British imperialism in the nineteenth century, which explained British expansionism in ethical and religious terms and argued that protectionism would supplant free trade as its economic creed. His work in the 1900s had affinities with that of Weber, with whom he taught at Freiburg, and his advocacy of social reform and a reduction in junker power in Germany also paralleled Weber's political prescriptions. This work, however, received less notice in Britain, and was not translated into English. His most significant post-war work was perhaps his study of the role of banking in German economic development. His last book, based on his Swarthmore lectures delivered in London in 1929, returned to the history of Britain, and assessed the relationship between Quakerism and democracy. It was, however, his early work on the labour question that inspired most interest in Britain, and to which historians of Britain have paid greatest attention. 


@@@@@


doc= 93052


Roberts, Dame Jean Barr McDonald (1895-1988), local politician, was born at 36 Avenue Road, Springburn, Glasgow, on 20 December 1895, the daughter of Walter Weir (1867-1926), foreman locomotive engine fitter, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Nevin (1871-1919), both of whom were Glasgow-born. Springburn was an industrial district dominated by extensive railway workshops; its largest trading concern was the Cowlairs Co-operative Society, founded by railway workers in 1881. Jean's father was strongly influenced by the co-operative ethos, which led him into socialism and support of the Independent Labour Party (ILP). She, in turn, absorbed her father's politics. 
Jean Weir attended Albert School, Springburn, and then Whitehill School, Dennistoun, the most successful higher-grade institution run by Glasgow school board. She was an able scholar but her parents decided against sending her to university, because of the cost and the likelihood that she would eventually marry. Instead, in 1914, she enrolled at Dundas Vale Teacher Training College, Glasgow. She qualified as a primary school teacher in 1916 and worked in Bishop Street elementary school and then in a special school for children with disabilities. On 1 July 1922 she married Cameron Roberts (1889-1964), son of William Roberts, life assurance agent. Her husband, a mathematics teacher, later became headmaster of Albert senior secondary school in Springburn. The couple had one daughter. 
Scottish women teachers in state education faced a marriage bar, which meant that Jean Roberts had to leave the profession in 1922. However, she used other outlets for her teaching skills, notably as a lecturer with the co-operative movement. Along with her husband she was also prominent in the ILP and in 1929 stood as a town councillor for the Kingston ward of Glasgow corporation. Although her own religious background was presbyterian, she appealed to Catholic voters, who were a significant element of the electorate: she had previously spoken out against ILP support for birth control, claiming that the issue was politically divisive, and she backed the continuing maintenance of denominational schools under the terms of the 1918 'Education (Scotland) Act'. Although elected by only a narrow margin in November 1929, she was never thereafter seriously challenged in the Kingston ward, and served uninterrupted as a councillor until 1966. 
In 1933 the Labour group won a majority on the corporation for the first time, as a result of mainstream Labour councillors collaborating with eleven ILP members to take control from the ruling anti-socialist coalition. Roberts, whose politics were orthodox Labour, became a bailie (magistrate) in 1934. Two years later she was the first Labour woman to serve as senior magistrate, effectively as deputy for the lord provost. Labour's electoral grip on Glasgow was consolidated after 1933, until the Conservative-dominated Progressive group briefly gained power in 1949. Roberts's committee record suggests that she was a reliable representative with a good grasp of administration. 
In May 1952, when the Labour Party regained control of the corporation, Roberts was elected city treasurer, a prestigious responsibility, that had never previously been undertaken by a woman. After facing an onslaught from the political opposition against Glasgow's high level of public expenditure to fund an intensive programme of school- and house-building, she countered her critics by limiting rate increases and calling on the Conservative government to re-examine the local taxation system, on the basis that Scotland was receiving unfavourable treatment through the exchequer equalization grant. Her most memorable recollection of her three years as treasurer was of being received in the headquarters of the Bank of England, as the first woman to go there in an important official capacity ('The Scotsman', 5 May 1960). 
A term as city treasurer was regarded as a direct stepping-stone to becoming lord provost of the city, but although Roberts was nominated in 1955, and again in 1958, the Labour group chose men to fill the office. She was eventually successful in May 1960, and her election received considerable publicity. Roberts was not only Glasgow's first woman lord provost, she was also the first in Scotland, and there were consequently questions of protocol to be addressed. The title of lord provost had masculine connotations, although Roberts determinedly retained the traditional designation, as well as that of lord lieutenant of the county of the city of Glasgow. Certain conventions came to be viewed in a new light with a woman in office, notably attendance at all-male functions, such as the annual dinner of Glasgow's trade incorporations. Roberts said that she broke the tradition to maintain the tradition that the lord provost should always represent the city on such occasions ('Glasgow Herald', 18 May 1962). 
Roberts's three-year term as civic leader coincided with major changes in Glasgow's urban landscape, as many of the older communities were cleared and redeveloped under the corporation's ambitious planning programme. Yet Roberts had mixed reactions to Glasgow's structural regeneration and she was ahead of her time in arguing for the conservation of architecturally distinguished buildings. She also expressed strong reservations about multi-storey apartment blocks and saw new towns as a healthier solution to Glasgow's overcrowding problems. She was a vocal champion of public transport: an official corporation visit to the United States in 1961 convinced her of the need to restrict the use of private motor vehicles in urban centres. 
Physically a small woman, Roberts described herself in a 'Glasgow Herald' interview as 'no mannequin' (18 May 1962), but she was conscious of her appearance and cultivated a look of sober stylishness. She also had a reputation of being 'teacherly' in her demeanour, abhorring stereotypical images of the city as hard-drinking, violent, and uncouth. She ardently promoted its cultural assets, especially classical music. From 1952 she was a director of the Glasgow-based Scottish National Orchestra and served as its chairman from 1970 to 1975. She was also a member of the Scottish Arts Council and the Arts Council of Great Britain. After her retirement from municipal politics in 1966 she remained active in public affairs, notably as chairman of Cumbernauld New Town Development Corporation up to 1972. In June 1962 she was made a dame commander in the Order of the British Empire and on 22 June 1977 she was made an honorary LLD by Glasgow University. 
Roberts was regarded as politically cautious, but her efforts to reconcile the traditional elements of the provostship with her socialism and gender meant that she had to make compromises. In her pronouncements she avoided identification with any particular wing of the Labour Party, although her stance over the years indicated loyalty to the national leadership. Her abilities were concentrated in the sphere of municipal rather than parliamentary politics and she unquestionably enhanced the status of women in Scottish local government. Glaswegians still remembered her name long after she ceased to be lord provost. Roberts died on 26 March 1988 at Gartnavel Royal Hospital, 1055 Great Western Road, Glasgow, of a pulmonary-related illness. She was cremated at Maryhill crematorium, Glasgow, on 31 March 1988. She did not live to see the election of the city's second female lord provost, Susan Baird, in May 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 93053


Marsh, Irene Mabel (1875-1938), promoter of women's physical education, was born at 13 Grey Road, Walton, Lancashire, on 3 December 1875, the second daughter and the third in the family of ten children of Peter Walter Marsh, and his wife, Anne Caroline, 'nee' Fowler. Her father, a well-established sack merchant in Liverpool, was a staunch churchman, town councillor, member of the Band of Hope, and cricketer. Her mother was extravagant and good natured. The garden of the family home, Courtenay House, Waterloo, Liverpool, backed onto the sea and contained a trapeze and parallel bars. She was educated privately by a governess until she was sixteen years old and attended the gymnasium in Clive Road directed by Miss Davies. She was an outstanding athlete, tennis player, and fencer and a very strong swimmer. Much of her swimming was learnt in Bootle Baths, where she showed a flair for organizing and teaching children to swim. 
In 1893 Marsh entered Southport Physical Training College and Gymnasium to train for two years under Alexander and Emily Alexander. Her first teaching post, at Freshfield School, was part-time. Simultaneously she ran classes near her home and became director of Bootle Gymnasium, after which she was appointed director of the YMCA gymnasium in Myrtle Street, Liverpool, a post she retained until her death. By living at home and walking to work instead of travelling by tram she saved $100, which enabled her to rent 110 Bedford Street, Liverpool, as premises for her own institution. 
Marsh was the founder and first principal of Liverpool Physical Training College, whose establishment in 1900 arose from Marsh's belief in the need to offer opportunities in the north of England for girls to train as teachers of physical education, a relatively new profession for women. Her first pupil was her sister, Salome, followed by a cousin, Muriel Pert, and Pearl Taverner, who all qualified in 1902. In 1901 she recruited Carrie Walford and E. D. Browne, and in 1902 Bertha Knowles, Nancy Black, and Amy Carpenter; the two groups qualified in 1903 and 1904 respectively. By 1919 there were 120 students in training. Gradually resident and visiting staff were appointed and by 1908 there were seven full-time staff in addition to Marsh herself. She was encouraged in her enterprise by the bishop and archdeacon of Liverpool (F. J. Chavasse and T. J. Madden) and the eminent Liverpool orthopaedic surgeon Robert Jones. 
By 1920 Marsh had moved the junior part of her college to Barkhill House, 4 miles south-east of the city centre, which she had purchased in 1919. The senior college remained in the centre of Liverpool until 1939. Barkhill offered 18 acres of land for playing fields and further development with buildings facing south overlooking the Mersey to the Wirral and Welsh hills. No longer did first-year students have to travel by bicycle 5 miles to play games in Sandown, Wavertree, or Sefton parks, or cycle to the pier head for the 2 p.m. ferry from Birkenhead to Chester to row to the Iron Bridge before catching the 9 p.m. ferry home. Students swam in Cornwallis Street and Guinea Gap baths, went horse-riding in Sefton Park or 'Henglers', and rowed on Southport Lake or the River Dee. The Myrtle gymnasium was used for practical work, lectures, and Thursday evening classes when local working girls participated in recreational activities. Students attended the technical college for lectures in hygiene and physiology and Liverpool University for anatomy demonstrations. Determined that students should be eligible to sit the examinations for the London University diploma in the theory and practice of physical education, inaugurated in 1930-31, Marsh built a new laboratory at a cost of $1000. In May 1936 three third-year students were awarded this diploma. 
The development of a student's personality and creative ability was just as important to Marsh as the development of physical prowess. She quickly formed an insight into the ability and character of her students. The Victorian family atmosphere in which she had grown up was replicated in her college. Desirable qualities for entrants to the Liverpool Physical Training College were specified in 1917: intending students should be gentlewomen, of good social position, refined, with ease and charm of manner, a nice appearance, good taste in dress, a pleasant speaking voice with no trace of accent, educated at a high class public or private school, with an attainment of senior Oxford or Cambridge examinations or equivalent. 
Direct in speech, but known for making fair judgements, Marsh shunned publicity. Nevertheless, through her vision and inspiration, and the continuous development of her understanding of physical education, the curriculum was steadily developed and the standing of the Liverpool college nationally recognized. She was an educationist in the widest sense of that word, whose generosity, charitable outlook, and strength of purpose made her one of the pioneers and leaders of women's physical education in the early twentieth century. During and after the First World War she was a district commissioner for the Girl Guides. She died, unmarried, at her home, 66 Barkhill Road, Aigburth, Liverpool, on 3 April 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 93055


FitzRoy, Charles, second duke of Grafton (1683-1757), courtier and politician, was born at Arlington House, London, on 25 October 1683 and was baptized there on 30 October, the only child of Henry FitzRoy, first duke of Grafton (1663-1690), and his wife, Isabella (1667/8-1723), the only daughter and sole heir of Charles II's former secretary of state Henry Bennet, first earl of Arlington. His father was the king's third child and second son from his liaison with Barbara Palmer, countess of Castlemaine, later duchess of Cleveland. From his birth and until his succession to the dukedom in 1690 young Charles FitzRoy was styled by his father's second title, earl of Euston. He eventually succeeded to his mother's Arlington titles in February 1723. His position as a member of Charles II's unofficial royal family was confirmed by the line-up of godparents at his christening -- the king himself, Prince William of Orange, and Princess Anne of Denmark. Grafton always thought himself as of royal blood, and the courtly environment into which he had been born remained central to him throughout his life. 
In March 1698, at the age of fourteen, he was appointed master of the horse to the young William, duke of Gloucester, the only surviving child of William III's sister-in-law and heir, Princess Anne. Later that year he embarked on a grand tour. In the autumn of 1702 negotiations were under way for his marriage to a daughter of Colonel Charles Godfrey, whose wife was the elder sister of John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough. Although the marriage plan was dropped, it did lead in April 1703 to Grafton's acceptance of a commission as a volunteer member of Marlborough's retinue during the seige of Bonn with the rank of captain of horse. On returning to England afterwards he was to have executed a commission to raise a regiment of dragoons, but in January 1704 Marlborough curtly minuted that Grafton had given orders for the sale of his equipage and evidently had no further thoughts of soldiering. 
On 25 October 1704, the day on which he came of age, Grafton took his seat in the House of Lords. His whiggish sympathies were quickly registered by the Godolphin ministry and in February 1705, with a general election approaching, he was appointed lord lieutenant of Suffolk. It was here, to the north of the county, around Euston, that the family estates were situated. However, Grafton's standing as the county's leading whig was retarded by the fact that control of the Euston Hall interest in county elections lay not with himself but with his stepfather, Sir Thomas Hanmer, fourth baronet (1677-1746), an active and influential Suffolk tory whom his mother, the dowager duchess, had married in 1698 having previously inherited Euston and its lands from her father, Lord Arlington. Grafton gave enthusiastic support to the Suffolk whigs at the 1705 election, but their defeat only inaugurated what was to be a long unbroken period of tory monopoly over the county seats that lasted until 1747, with Hanmer for many years one of the MPs. In the election of 1708, however, Grafton did show a determined hand at Thetford, a short distance from Euston, and, ignoring pleas not to breach family unity, procured the defeat of the sitting tories, one of whom was his stepfather. Grafton's interest in the borough's elections waned after this, but revived in the early 1720s when he finally assumed control of the Euston estate. 
Aside from these youthful forays into politics Grafton indulged himself in the lavish and leisurely lifestyle that was commensurate with ducal status, and in particular in what was to be his lifelong love of the turf and of fox-hunting; he held the rangership of Whittlesbury Forest from 1712 until his death, having in 1705 inherited the honour of Grafton, a collection of manors in the same south-east vicinity of Northamptonshire. He was also on the look-out for a marriage that would be financially advantageous. In 1708 the social talk was of his courtship of a Mrs Knight, a wealthy lady of dissenting background said to be worth some $70,000. When he did eventually marry, on 30 April 1713 at Chelsea, it was to Lady Henrietta (1690-1726), the daughter of Charles Somerset, marquess of Worcester, and sister of Henry Somerset, second duke of Beaufort. She was the granddaughter, on her mother's side, of the great City of London financier Sir Josiah Child, first baronet. They had eight children, the duchess dying on 9 August 1726, three weeks after the birth of their fourth daughter. 
Soon after the accession of George I in August 1714 Grafton was seeking a position at court as one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber to the new monarch, and was duly appointed, doubtless upon the willing endorsement of the whig leaders. At the king's coronation on 20 October he acted as lord high steward and was a central figure in the procession as bearer of St Edward's crown. In 1715, upon the earl of Sunderland's refusal to go to Ireland to fulfil his office as lord lieutenant, Grafton was appointed to join the commission of lords justices nominated to deputize at Dublin Castle, and accordingly was sworn of the privy council on 31 August. Grafton, already a long-standing friend of Robert Walpole, and firmly aligned with the Townshend-Walpole faction, resigned his offices at the opening of the 'whig schism' in 1717, though he nevertheless continued to be warmly received by the king at court. He later boasted that this was the only time he was ever in opposition to a ministry. 
When Townshend and Walpole were reinstated in the administration in 1720 Grafton returned to Ireland, this time as lord lieutenant. Appointment as a knight of the Garter followed in March 1721. Initially Grafton seemed an ideal choice as viceroy, having as a lord justice established excellent working relations with William Conolly, the speaker of the Irish House of Commons, whom the ministers in London acknowledged as their 'chief undertaker' in the management of Irish parliamentary politics. This 'modus operandi' was threatened by the activities of Conolly's rival, the Irish lord chancellor, Alan Brodrick, Viscount Midleton, who in late years had distanced himself increasingly from the government in London, and Grafton arrived in Dublin in 1721 openly determined to have him removed. He neglected, however, to prepare his ground by lining up a suitable replacement, and was forced by Walpole into the embarrassment of seeking a reconciliation with Midleton and into asking him to remain as chancellor for the time being. Grafton's inept handling of Midleton exposed him as weak and incompetent in the eyes of his colleagues in London. Not surprisingly, when confronted in the autumn of 1723 with the storm of protest in Ireland over Wood's halfpence and the opportunity it gave to Midleton to step up his opposition, Grafton's panic was met with sharp responses from both Townshend and Walpole, reminding him of his responsibilities. He had behaved, they felt, like a 'fair weather pilot' (Coxe, 2.285-6), but they failed to appreciate -- at least until it was noted by the duke of Newcastle -- that Conolly's outright refusal to defend the patent had left Grafton isolated and alone in having to shoulder the burden of this highly unpopular item of government policy. 
In the ministerial reshuffle of April 1724 Grafton was appointed lord chamberlain, and served in this capacity, with a place on the 'cabinet council', for the remaining thirty-three years of his life. He was likewise a lord justice during each of the king's periodic absences in Hanover. The undemanding nature of the chamberlain's office was far more congenial to Grafton's temperament. His duties as the chief functionary of the court were usually no more than ornamental or ceremonial. Lord Hervey complained that he never bothered to master the technicalities of court form and his blundering and lack of interest in delicate points of precedence irritated lowlier courtiers. He was, however, naturally accomplished in the blandnesses of court conversation, a skill that Hervey epitomized as 'a sort of gold leaf, that is a great embellishment where it is joined to anything else, but makes a very poor figure by itself' (Hervey, 266). His semi-royal status enabled him to assume a right to say what he pleased and he was noticed to have a certain over-familiarity with members of the royal family -- with Queen Caroline, towards whom he adopted a teasing dislike, and with her daughter Princess Amelia, whom it was widely suspected he had seduced on one of their frequent hunting expeditions. He was the first lord chamberlain to exercise the powers vested in his office by the 'Licensing Act' of 1737 to license plays in the City of London, Westminster, and certain other areas, the routine work being undertaken by a salaried 'examiner of plays' within his department. 
Beneath Grafton's docile exterior lay the instincts of a shrewd courtier. His friend and fellow ministerialist, James, second Earl Waldegrave, observed that 'from long observation and great natural sagacity, he became the ablest courtier of his time' (Waldegrave, 199). With his disarming wit he would ridicule politics and tease politicians with their foibles. Horace Walpole's comment that at times of crisis Grafton would avoid declaring support for the ministry to which he belonged by going off to hunt fits well with Hervey's recollection of a remark by George II, that he was 'always balancing whether he should speak truth or flatter those whom truth would disoblige' (Hervey, 266). He nevertheless remained closely associated with the generation of ageing 'old corps' whigs led by the duke of Newcastle, and there were key moments when his mollifying interventions on their behalf were vital in smoothing dissensions between king and ministers. Grafton's unmatched ability to manage Newcastle on these occasions was regarded as a particular asset, but so, too, was his relationship with George II, which was probably much closer than that of any other minister or courtier from the early 1740s onwards. The king and the duke were exactly the same age, and the duke 'had a particular manner of talking to his master upon all subjects, and of touching the most tender points, which no other person ventured to imitate' (Waldegrave, 199). 
Grafton died at his home, Euston Hall, Suffolk, on 6 May 1757 and was buried at Euston on 13 May, having as the result of a riding accident in February suffered severe injury to his leg which later turned septic. All four of his sons had predeceased him, and the dukedom passed to Augustus Henry FitzRoy, the son of his third son, Lord Augustus FitzRoy, a captain in the Royal Navy who had died in 1741. The duke's illegitimate son, Charles FitzRoy (later FitzRoy-Scudamore), born about the time of his marriage, enjoyed a long career as an MP and was father of the House of Commons at the time of his death in 1782. 


@@@@@


doc= 93057


Plymley, Katherine (bap. 1758, d. 1829), diarist, naturalist, and painter, was baptized at Longnor, Shropshire, on 31 January 1758, the eldest child of Joseph Plymley (1716-1802), apothecary, of the Bank House, Longnor, Shropshire, and Diana, 'nee' Flint (1725-1779), a member of the Shropshire gentry family of Corbett. Her siblings were Joseph (1759-1838), who became archdeacon of Shropshire in 1792, inherited the Corbett estates in 1804, and took the surname of Corbett in 1806; and Ann (1760-1829), who studied botany. The Plymleys were part of the Shropshire enlightenment, and formed part of a social network which included the Darwins and the Wedgwoods. Both Katherine Plymley and her sister were educated at home, and lived all their lives together in the same house, where during their father's lifetime they assisted him in making and dispensing medicines. Neither of them married. 
Katherine Plymley's written archive comprises 210 unlined notebooks in longhand: 34 are undated study notebooks, 29 are travel journals, 9 are memoirs of her father and her favourite niece, Jane (1788-1807), written after 1802 and 1807 respectively, and 138 are diaries written between 1791 and 1827. She was a well-informed, astute, conscientious and, on occasion, witty observer and her writing is important for its revelation of feminine interests and experience within a particular social and cultural milieu. The study notebooks show her engaged in a programme of self-improvement which continued throughout her life. She read with method, and most contain a series of extracts from diverse texts, with discursive commentaries incorporated. They are not dated, which makes it very difficult to construct a narrative of Plymley's life or trace her intellectual development. However in some the content points to a date and the earliest of these was written in 1781. Central themes include religion and religious debate, moral philosophy, literature, biography, education, and travel. Although she made no overt demands for equal rights, a protofeminist thread runs through all Katherine Plymley's writing. She gave much thought to the dilemma of the single woman in a society that defined women by their relationships with men, and took polite but definite issue with anyone who opposed female education. 
Both Plymley sisters were closely involved with the upbringing and education of their brother's thirteen children from his two marriages. This was a responsibility they welcomed: 'it has been a motive to endeavour to increase our own knowledge,' Katherine Plymley wrote, 'that we may be more capable of informing them' ('Memoirs of my father', fol. 3). One limit to her reading stemmed from the fact that, even in her own comparatively enlightened family, daughters were not taught classics. As a result some texts frustrated her. There was, she wrote in the face of the particularly irritating example of a passage in 'The Pursuits of Literature' by Thomas Mathias, 'often great obscurity from perpetual quotations of Greek & Latin authors' (study notebook, Penzance, 1803, Shrops. RRC, 1066/149). Her brother involved her in at least the social side of the research that led, in 1803, to the publication of 'A General View of the Agriculture of Shropshire', a report on the resources of the county that incorporated research material from a number of leading scholars, including William Withering, Thomas Telford, Joseph Babington (died 1826), John Stackhouse, and Robert Townson. When people like this visited him, as Katherine Plymley remarked: 'my brother has the goodness to ask me... knowing I enjoy listening to such society' (diary, 19 June-17 Aug 1809, Shrops. RRC, 1066/78). 
The travel journals deal with a tour through north Wales to Anglesey in 1792; to Bath in 1794 and 1807; trips to London in 1796, 1804, 1813, and 1814; to London and Bath in 1795; to Oxford in 1801; to Penzance in 1802-3; and to London and Cambridge in 1814. They describe the landscape Plymley passed through, often drawing on the picturesque idiom, and any notable sights or incidents that occurred 'en route'. In 1792, for instance, on her way to Anglesey she visited Plas Newydd, home of Lady Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby, the 'Ladies of Llangollen', and in 1796 on her way to London she saw William Herschel's 'immense tellescopes ['sic']' at Slough ('Journey to London', 1796, Shrops. RRC, 567/5/5/1/8). 
Once arrived at her destination, Plymley made excursions in the locality and these too were faithfully recorded. Her account of Trevithick's steam locomotive trials, written at Penzance in 1803, has been used to establish the number and extent of trials made. Her writing can convey a real sense of immediacy. In 1814 she mingled with the crowd in St James's Park to admire: 'the Chinese Bridge erected there... upon occasion of the Prince Regent's feast in honour of the Peace [with France]... I heard some of them speaking to each other, very coarse & strong expressions of disapprobation of the expence this feast... had put the nation to. ('Journey to London and Cambridge', 1814, Shrops. RRC, 567/5/5/1/31)' She visited galleries and exhibitions, generally noting which works she liked and why, and she took enormous interest in the way people arranged their surroundings and the objects they displayed. The travel journals are littered with descriptions of interiors, both public and private.Katherine Plymley was inspired to begin writing diaries in October 1791, when the leading slavery abolitionist Thomas Clarkson (1760-1846), a man she venerated, made the first of several extended visits to Longnor. There is no regular pattern to the amount of time covered by each diary. Some deal with just a few days or weeks; others cover several months. They are reflective far beyond what was needed for a day-to-day chronicle of events. The Plymleys were at the centre of the campaign for the abolition of the slave trade, and the progress of the abolition, especially 'the part taken by my Brother' (diary, 28 Jan-21 March 1794, Shrops. RRC, 1066/25), dominates the earlier diaries. As time went by, however, she wrote more and more on everyday life. Although her diaries do give mundane quotidian details, many describe selected episodes and incidents. The range of subject material is vast, including sickness and health, fashion and manners, farming, landscape, estate management, economics, politics, pageantry, art, architecture, design, science, industry, and religion. The result is a succession of interwoven narratives that, while focusing on the minutiae of private experience, construct an extraordinary panorama of her life and times. On more than one occasion she declared that it was not her intention to discuss 'public affairs' (diary, 29 Dec 1797-11 July 1798, Shrops. RRC, 1066/51), yet time and again they invade her accounts. While she deplored the violent turn of events in France, she applauded the principles of the French Revolution and supported calls for electoral reform in Britain. She believed in universal education and meritocracy, and was attracted to self-made men. There are numerous thumbnail character sketches, and several of her diaries and journals offer fresh information on the private lives of figures such as Clarkson and William Wilberforce. Plymley was well versed in the religious debates of her day and sympathetic to dissenting beliefs, especially Quakerism, although she remained a committed Anglican throughout her life. 'I have always respected the right of private opinion upon the most important of subjects,' she wrote in 1812, 'this is a subject between God & our conscience' (diary, 11 Nov-22 Dec 1812, Shrops. RRC, 1066/95). 
Katherine and Ann Plymley were keen students of natural history and their collection, which included minerals, shells, insects, dried plants, and lichens, was much admired. Katherine Plymley's specialism was entomology, particularly butterflies and moths. She reared, studied, and made paintings of over 400 varieties of insects, which were afterwards released back into the wild. The earliest dated painting was produced in 1797; many are undated however. She was at her most prolific between 1802 and 1806, when she worked closely with her niece Jane. Her paintings were arranged in loose-leaf albums, each dealing with a separate class of entomology. They were executed in direct response to the subject, with minimal under-drawing and scientific accuracy. Whenever possible she represented the whole cycle of each specimen on a single sheet along with the plants on which it fed. The richness of the colouring, the delicacy of the details, the overall composition, and the immaculate finish show a highly developed aesthetic sense and they are often very beautiful. Katherine Plymley learned many of her skills from her father who had 'superior excellence in painting subjects of natural history' (diary, 8 May-29 June 1811, Shrops. RRC, 1066/86), and who contributed illustrations to Thomas Pennant's 'British Zoology'. She researched her subjects in the latest publications and discussed her findings with eminent contemporaries, including Frederick William Hope. Katherine and Ann Plymley used their natural history collections to teach children: principally their nieces and nephews, but also the offspring of friends and acquaintances. Hope first encountered the Plymley sisters as a boy, and it is possible that Hope's friend Charles Darwin also met the Plymleys as a child. 
In Katherine Plymley a free-thinking, progressive attitude was joined to an accentuated sense of social responsibility. She was acutely aware that society was undergoing rapid changes and she had strong views on the way forward. At the same time, she was a tolerant woman who respected the opinions of others: a reliable witness who strove to be 'active, social and temperate' (study notebook, undated, Shrops. RRC, 1066/154) and who rarely expressed anything like anger. 'I am, I think,' she remarked, 'naturally of a temper the reverse of sanguine -- perhaps to a fault -- it is constitutional in me' (diary, 17-30 Aug 1793, Shrops. RRC, 1066/18). She died at the Bank House, Longnor, on 2 September 1829, a few weeks after her sister. They are both buried in Leebotwood church, where their memorial celebrates them as: 'Women of superior minds which they had cultivated with great industry and devoted to the service of God and of their fellow creatures, no persons perhaps of equal means ever contributed more to the comfort of their nearer relatives or the wants of an extended neighbourhood.' 



@@@@@


doc= 93059


Gillies, Ian Malcolm (1927-2002), question-setter and broadcaster, was born at Upper Heath, Hampstead, London, on 7 December 1927, the son of Duncan Neil Gillies, company accountant, and his wife, Elsie Mary, 'nee' Nowell, of 16B Golders Way, Golders Green, London. He spent his early life in London, but was evacuated to Worcester in 1940 and educated at the city's Royal Grammar School. From there he went to Jesus College, Oxford, where he read modern history. After graduating with a second-class degree in 1949, he spent his national service in the RAF, indulging his boyhood love of aviation. He was posted to RAF Felixstowe, and was quickly appointed the station's education officer. After two years' service he returned to London and joined the advertising firm of Saward Baker as an account director. 
Gillies's general knowledge was already exceptional. According to a colleague at Felixstowe 'he had a wide and deep knowledge of history, politics, world affairs, cricket, literature, music, art, religions, philosophy -- and he could instantly recall facts relating to any of them' ('The Guardian'). Impressed by this, a girlfriend persuaded him to enter 'What Do You Know?', the jauntily named national quiz of the BBC Home Service. Gillies won the 1964 series, as well as two subsequent programmes, 'Brain of Brains' (in 1965), in which past winners of 'What Do You Know?' competed against each other, and 'Top Brain' (in 1971), in which he defeated the other winners of 'Brain of Brains'. He could justly be described as the finest contestant the series had seen in its nineteen-year history, and in 1972 he was sent, with Irene Thomas, to Australia to compete for the title of 'Brain of the World'. 
In 1967 'What Do You Know?' was renamed 'Brain of Britain'. When its avuncular chairman, Franklin Engelmann, died suddenly in the middle of the 1972 series, Gillies, as reigning 'top brain', was invited to take over for the final ten programmes. Although he acquitted himself well, Robert Robinson, a more experienced broadcaster and a more famous name, was appointed full-time chairman for the 1973 series. Gillies, however, was retained as the programme's adjudicator. In this role he was required to sit at Robinson's side and determine whether a contestant's vague stab at an answer was sufficiently close to the correct version to merit a point. To preserve his anonymity and cultivate a certain mystique Robinson dubbed him Mycroft, after Sherlock Holmes's older brother, of whom, like Gillies, it was said that 'all other men are specialists, but his specialism is omniscience' (A. Conan Doyle, 'The adventure of the Bruce-Partington plans', in 'The Complete Adventures of Sherlock Holmes', 1980 edn, 914). This being radio, however, Gillies was amused to receive letters from some of his less omniscient audience addressed to 'Mike Croft' (private information). 
Gillies was by this stage writing most, if not all, of the questions for 'Brain of Britain', and to accommodate this huge task he had left advertising in 1971. In a quiz book derived from the programme he described his method: 'About a quarter of my questions are inspired during ordinary reading of newspapers, magazines or books, by radio or television, and the like, or even occur to me apparently without external prompting. The remaining three-quarters I have consciously to sit down and set. I have twelve subject categories, five major ones, Geography, History, Literature, Science and Technology, and Miscellaneous, and seven minor ones, Current Affairs and Politics, Flags and Heraldry, Music, the other Performing Arts, Religion and Mythology, the Visual Arts, and Sports. For each half-hour quiz I set seventy questions, nine or ten of each of the major categories and between two and four of the minor ones. Thus for a twenty-three programme series I know I will need, for example, about two hundred and thirty geography questions, ninety current affairs, and fifty sport... To build up contestants' confidence the first question each gets in each of the first two rounds is meant to be very easy, and in fact all the first twenty are on the easy side; the next twenty or so between the two music inserts are the hardest, and from there they get easier so that the programme ends on a high note rather than with lots of 'I don't knows'. (Gillies, 6)' The high notes of 'Brain of Britain' prompted Radio 4 to devise another national quiz, this time devoted to music. 'Counterpoint' was launched in 1986 with Ned Sherrin as its chairman. Gillies joined the production team as a question-setter in 1988, and succeeded the programme's first producer, Edward Cole, as referee in 1993. For this programme he was renamed (by Sherrin) Young Grove, after the founder of the musical dictionary. He remained in this role until the 2002 series (when he was succeeded as question-setter by Stephen Follows). He had by this time discovered that he was suffering from prostate cancer, and he retired simultaneously from both 'Counterpoint' and 'Brain of Britain' (where his successor was Kevin Ashman, the most accomplished winner of the programme since Gillies's own triumphs of the 1960s). He died of cancer at Southend Hospital, Essex (near his home in Warren Road, Leigh-on-Sea), on 13 April 2002. He was unmarried, though it was said that 'he always had an eye for a pretty girl' ('The Guardian'). 


@@@@@


doc= 93068


Gallars, Nicolas des (c.1520-1581), Reformed minister, was born in Paris or its environs about 1520, the son of Richard des Gallars and his wife, Ysabeau. Although little is known about his background, he inherited the title of seigneur de Saules, and there survive occasional references to his family. Calvin reported in August 1547 that Nicolas had returned to Paris to visit his mother, and intended to come back with his sister, who was being badly treated by their stepfather, Nicole Thibault. Following the death of his mother, Nicolas and his sisters Jehanne and Marie were in dispute over their inheritance. This was resolved in May 1554, but the family's affairs were in a poor state following the death of Marie, the mother of the minister Michel le Faulcheur, according to a letter to Calvin in late October 1561. 
Known as Gallasius, des Gallars became a minister in Geneva in June 1544, and a member of the company of pastors; he was one of those delegated by the company to undertake a visitation of parishes in 1547 and again in 1552. Like Jean Cousin, he was one of a group of young pastors who recorded Calvin's sermons and acted as his secretary. He combined his notes on the reformer's sermons on 'Isaiah' and 'Genesis' with his lecture notes to publish biblical commentaries in Calvin's name in 1551 and 1560. Although now attributed to Calvin, he was recorded in the title as the author of the tract 'Defensio pro Farello et collegis ejus adv. Petri Caroli theologastri calumnias' published in 1545. Des Gallars was responsible for translating several of Calvin's tracts from Latin: 'Traite de la cene' (1545), 'Inventaire des reliques' (1548), and 'Traite contre les anabaptistes et les libertins' (1549). He was also a biblical scholar in his own right, publishing his 'Commentarii in Exodum, cum textu biblica' (Geneva, 1560) and contributing to the Geneva 'Bible'. 
Des Gallars became a citizen of Geneva on 11 June 1551. In the same year he was sent as Calvin's personal envoy to England, with letters for Edward VI and Protector Somerset, presenting the king with a copy of Calvin's sermons on 'Isaiah' which he had translated. In 1553 he took up the ministry at Jussy, but was replaced in June 1555 and returned to Geneva. On 16 August 1557, however, he left Geneva for Paris in response to a request for a minister, successfully evading capture by the French authorities near Dijon. But his ministry in the capital was cut short by the religious crisis which followed the affair of the rue St Jacques, when a mob attacked a Calvinist meeting and over 130 people were arrested, three of them being subsequently burnt, and a replacement minister was dispatched from Geneva on 1 January 1558. Des Gallars returned to Paris to attend the first national synod of the Reformed church in May 1559, as Calvin's personal envoy to the meeting. 
The consistory of the French church in London wrote to Geneva in March 1560 to request a minister, suggesting that Viret, Beza, or des Gallars might be sent. Calvin authorized the departure of des Gallars and he arrived in London in June 1560. To the embarrassment of the consistory, the eminent minister Pierre Alexandre had in the interim arrived in London, successfully interceded for the restoration of St Anthony's chapel in Threadneedle Street, and had served as the congregation's minister. Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, who had endorsed the letter to Calvin and was also superintendent of the exile churches, was forced to intervene and called upon the church to accept des Gallars as their minister. The latter then overhauled the institutions of the London French church to bring them more into line with Geneva, in fact repeating some sections of the Genevan church order verbatim. The resulting changes anticipated the future growth of the church and ensured that in later years it developed along Calvinist lines. This new church order, 'Forme de police ecclesiastique', was published in both Latin and French in 1561. 
In August 1561 des Gallars was summoned by the Huguenot leader Coligny to be a delegate at the Colloquy of Poissy, and attended at the insistence of Sir William Cecil. He was an active participant at the meeting and provided regular reports for the crown through his correspondence with Grindal and the English ambassador, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton. On his return to England he published 'A True Report of all the Doynges at the Assembly Concernyng Matters of Religion, lately Holden at Poyssy in Fraunce' to explain, in the words of its preface, 'why I have bene so long absente from my churche and also what was the ende of that assemblye' which he dedicated to Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford. In the following year he was involved in government negotiations with the Huguenots which in September led to the treaty of Hampton Court. 
Des Gallars had married Gabrielle Morones in June 1545, but his wife and four children had initially remained in Geneva. In January 1561 the consistory of the French church in London sent a deacon to escort the family to England, but Gabrielle and two of the children had died by the time des Gallars came to leave London in June 1563. The academic progress of his third son, Peter ('b'. 1552), was later discussed in letters between des Gallars and Beza, who in 1570 recommended the youth to Heinrich Bullinger in Zurich. 
The English climate did not suit des Gallars, who received a number of calls to serve churches in France, particularly following the Colloquy of Poissy. It was suggested in 1561, for example, that he should take up the ministry at Poitiers. In March 1563 des Gallars wrote that he hoped to see Calvin at Easter, but he did not leave London until June. He received a fulsome testimony from his successor Jean Cousin, and Edmund Grindal praised his legacy in an effusive letter of thanks. Des Gallars later remembered the bishop by dedicating his commentary on Irenaeus to him in 1570. 
In September 1563 des Gallars left Geneva to take up the ministry at Orleans and the post of professor of theology at the new Reformed academy over which he presided. The academy provided training for the Reformed ministry, and des Gallars reported to Beza that it attracted many students from Germany but particularly from Hainault and Lille. He published a translation of Calvin's 'Traite de la divinite de Jesus-Christ contre les Ariens' at Orleans in 1565, and the following year his own 'De divina Christi filii Dei essentia'. Des Gallars's status meant that he played a prominent role in the French Reformed church. He was the moderator of the fifth national synod, held in Paris in December 1565, which condemned the writings of Jean Morely criticizing the ecclesiastical institutions of the Reformed church. The affair continued but the discovery of a cache of letters in 1566, slandering various Genevan and French ministers, finally led to Morely's disgrace. Des Gallars himself was among those slandered -- he was described as a liar and a fake, particularly skilled at feigning modesty and honesty both in expression and in word. Although he remained technically the minister at Orleans until 1571, he was forced to flee from the city in 1568; having initially considered exile in England he found refuge on the estates of Renee de France before returning to Geneva. He returned to France in 1571 and was secretary at the Synod of La Rochelle, which was presided over by Beza and reformed the discipline of the church. 
The council in Geneva wrote to Beza and des Gallars in April 1571, declaring that their absence from the city was prejudicial to the work of God. Des Gallars had agreed to return to Geneva to serve the church and the academy, but in the same month, following the death of Pierre Viret, he wrote to the Genevan authorities delaying his return for a year. He entered the service of Jeanne d'Albret, queen of Navarre, in order to continue Viret's work directing the Reformation in Bearn. In the following year the Synod of Nimes heard of the continued need of the churches in Bearn for des Gallars's services, and was reluctant to refuse Jeanne's request for him to continue his ministry. The synod therefore wrote to the Genevan authorities on 18 May 1572 to inform them of its decision. 
Although Jeanne d'Albret died soon afterwards, des Gallars continued as first minister and quasi- 'surintendant' of the Reformed church in Bearn until his death. In January 1573 he married Francoise de Contades. He was a professor of the academy at Lescar in 1579, and worked on an edition of Cyprian during his last years. He died in August 1581, between the 4th, when he drew up his will, and the 14th, when his estate was settled by his son Daniel. 


@@@@@


doc= 93069


Cousin, Jean (d. 1574), Reformed minister, was born in Flanders, possibly at Lille. He was a student at Lausanne between 1545 and 1546 and a 'pensionnaire de MM de Berne' (Kennedy, 330), although he was also in Geneva for some of that time. Known as Cognatus (the Latinate form of his name), he, like Nicolas des Gallars, formed one of a small group of students and trainee ministers who transcribed Calvin's sermons. In November 1545 Cousin recorded two sermons arising from the early stages of what became the Schmalkaldic War between the emperor Charles V and German protestants; they were published the following year. Cousin was a schoolmaster in Geneva in 1547, but went on to be a deacon at Moudon and from 1551 a pastor at Payerne in the Pays de Vaud. He became secretary to Pierre Viret in Lausanne and was handling correspondence relating to the local 'classe' of ministers in June 1554. He became an 'habitant' of Geneva in 1559. 
Cousin was sent by the Genevan company of pastors to serve the Reformed church at Caen at the end of May 1559. One of the town's three ministers, he was also active in the surrounding area. He organized a church for N. de Hetteville, baron de la Ferte-Fresnel, and wrote to Calvin, late in October 1561, attesting to the noble's importance and supporting his request for a minister. In Caen, Cousin was actively involved in Calvinist attempts to achieve freedom of worship on the eve of the religious wars. Following the iconoclastic riots in Rouen in April 1562, the Reformed ministers in Caen were summoned to the city's council chamber. Cousin took the opportunity to denounce idolatry and called for it to be overthrown, precipitating a wave of iconoclastic rioting in the city. Later in that year he was involved in suborning a soldier in a Calvinist attempt to seize the castle. 
By autumn 1562 Cousin was resident in London, and in 1563 succeeded Nicolas des Gallars as minister of the French church there, signing a testimonial to his predecessor on 14 May. As a fellow protege of Calvin, Cousin continued the French church's development into an orthodox Calvinist community, although his strict Genevan approach to religious discipline brought him into conflict with some members of the community. Several issues relating to the organization of the church had not been fully resolved by des Gallars, such as the election and tenure of elders, but under Cousin communal elections were abandoned. He was also drawn into the affairs of the other exile churches. Together with Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, and several English ministers, he was a mediator in the dispute over the Dutch church's rejection of godparents at baptism. He was one of the commissioners who examined the charges of sodomy made against the Spanish minister Casiodoro de Reina in September 1563. Cousin doubted Reina's religious orthodoxy, especially on the Trinity, after reading his correspondence with Antonio del Corro in March 1564. His concern to ensure doctrinal orthodoxy continued when Corro began preaching in London in early 1567. Although Corro appealed to Theodore Beza, and the Genevan reformer corresponded with Cousin on the matter, it was referred to Grindal in 1569 for resolution. 
Cousin had been promised an assistant on his appointment; he told the consistory in November 1564 that he would henceforth only give one sermon on feast days because 'he has now served alone for almost two years, and we have thought nothing of it, and he is tired of serving alone' (Johnston, 90). Attempts were made to find him an assistant, which became even more urgent after Cousin fell ill in February 1565. Although these attempts were unsuccessful, the deterioration in the religious climate on the continent during the later 1560s and early 1570s led a number of ministers to seek refuge in London, several of whom assisted in the French church. The rapid growth in the alien population, particularly in the wake of the St Bartholomew's day massacre (1572), created serious difficulties for the church. From September 1572 two services had to be held on Sunday mornings, as the building was not big enough to accommodate the whole congregation. The influx also placed a strain on the community's financial resources, while friction and disputes arose with the local community. Cousin intervened directly with the authorities in certain cases, for instance that of a student called Claude who attempted to defraud the earl of Leicester when he was paid by him to deliver a letter to Beza. The French church was also actively involved in establishing new communities, as at Southampton in 1567, in order to allay concerns about the size of the alien population in the capital. 
In 1571 Cousin was elected to represent the London French church at the Synod of Emden, but the government refused permission for the English exile churches to be represented. None the less the church remained part of the Calvinist network: Cousin corresponded with Beza and des Gallars, as well as with other French Reformed churches, including that at Frankfurt concerning Reina. The French church also continued to provide an important link between the continental reformers and the English court, as it had under des Gallars. Cousin's correspondence shows that he was on intimate terms with English ecclesiastics such as Thomas Cartwright, Thomas Sampson, Bernard Gilpin, and William Whittingham, as well as politicians like Sir Henry Killigrew, Sir Walter Mildmay, and Sir Francis Walsingham. 
Cousin and his wife, Breugen (her surname is unknown), were living in the precincts of Blackfriars, London, 'with iij boyes and ij wenches that goeth to school' in 1568 (Kirk and Kirk, 3.408). The household suffered from plague in 1569, which may have killed Cousin's children; they are mentioned neither in the 1571 return of aliens nor in Cousin's will. The minister died in August 1574, between the 4th, when he made his will, and the 20th, when it was proved. He was survived by his wife, to whom he left all his goods 'comprising my books and meagre furniture' (Kennedy, 343). She was still alive in 1576. 


@@@@@


doc= 93072


Eadgyth (c.911-946), queen of the East Franks, consort of Otto I, was born in Wessex, the daughter of Edward the Elder (870s?-924), king of the Anglo-Saxons, and his second wife, AElfflaed. She was thus half-sister of AEthelstan, king of England (893/4-939) and Edmund, king of England (920/21-946), and full sister of Eadgifu (I) (died in or after 951), who became queen of the West Franks. By 919 AElfflaed was either dead, divorced, or repudiated, and Edward had been married a third time, to Eadgifu (died in or after 966). 
Archaeology has recently confirmed the identification of Eadgyth's remains, excavated in Magdeburg Cathedral in 2008, and provided details of her early life. It reveals a woman who was aged between thirty and forty at her death, and thus born between about 906 and 916. She had been raised in southern England and enjoyed a high-status lifestyle, including a diet rich in protein, especially fish: this may indicate a period spent in a nunnery with her mother at the end of the latter's life, and Eadgyth's diet seems to have changed when she was about nine years old. Stress-markers in her bones are less likely to indicate malnutrition than to have resulted from infectious illness at some stage between the ages of ten and fourteen. 
In late 929 or early 930 Eadgyth married Otto (912-973), later known as the Great, the eldest son of Henry I (died 936) of the Saxon Liudolfing family, who had become king of the East Franks in 919. After Henry sent an embassy to England, Eadgyth and her younger sister, another Eadgifu (II), were dispatched to the continent in the company of Bishop Cenwald of Worcester in the autumn of 929. The marriage has been seen both as part of AEthelstan's ambitious foreign policy and as Henry's quest for legitimation through an ethnically Saxon bride from an old-established dynasty who would set his son apart from his noble rivals. But an understanding of its significance has been obscured by the fact that almost all comment on the marriage, as on Eadgyth herself, post-dates her death, her husband Otto's second marriage to Adelaide, daughter of Rudolf II of Burgundy, and the coronation of Otto as emperor in 962. 
Seen in the context of the politics of late Carolingian Europe, what matters is that Eadgyth was the third of Edward's daughters and AEthelstan's half-sisters to marry a continental European ruler: Eadgifu (I) had married Charles III; Eadhild, Hugh the Great, duke of Francia. The aims and knowledge of Eadgifu (II) were arguably as important as those of AEthelstan or Henry in the making of this match. Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim, and later AEthelweard, speak of a choice given to Otto, the sending of two princesses in a sort of bride-show. Otto chose Eadgyth, and her sister married a brother of Rudolf II of Burgundy. A double marriage may have been envisaged from the outset. Burgundy mattered more in tenth-century politics than modern French and German nationalist historiographies might suggest. AEthelstan had his own motives, which probably included the safe parking of West Saxon royal blood outside England, as well as kinship obligations to Eadgifu (I) and her son. Any dynastic prestige in 929 was likely to accrue to Henry, though legitimation may not have been the prime motivation of a king with two earlier Carolingian marriages in the family. Otto's accession in 936 was soon followed by the death of Rudolf II, who left an infant heir, and a grown brother, married to Eadgyth's sister. The child was brought to Otto's and Eadgyth's court. The network of English royal sisters was a factor in mid-tenth-century European politics. 
Eadgyth arrived with unspecified treasures, gifts, and followers. Little is known of her activities from 929 to 936, though she secured her future with the birth of a son, Liudolf (930-957), and a daughter, Liudgard (931-953). The marriage looked outwards and west; the young couple's initial perambulation was through the Rhineland. But internally it was the culmination of Henry's protracted 'house ordering' of 927-9, which included the designation of Otto as his sole heir. Eadgyth thus arrived at a turning point in Liudolfing family politics, made fraught by the apparent failure of her husband's designation to secure wider noble support. It is noteworthy that she and Otto disappear from the surviving sources until Henry's death in 936, and that her relations with her mother-in-law, Mathilda, were strained thereafter. If Eadgyth was consecrated queen in 936, the unconsecrated Mathilda may have resented it. But the tension probably originated in Mathilda's unhappiness with the implications of 927-9 for her younger son, Henry. The pattern of Eadgyth's interventions in charters often shadows Mathilda's own networks: rivalry, proffered friendship, or some more complex assertion of power and patronage could all explain this. Mathilda disappeared into retirement soon after 936. Although Eadgyth played a role in the reconciliation of her husband to his mother, perhaps in 941, Mathilda did not reappear at court until a few days after Eadgyth's death. 
Eadgyth was an outsider queen, a difficult position: when Otto later designated their son, Liudolf, he chose a bride for him within East Francia. Nevertheless Eadgyth's role as mother of an heir was central. Her charter interventions were early and few, but often made with her son, and it was later claimed that the loss of his mother was a political blow to Liudolf. There is no evidence that his grandmother supported him, and he was increasingly both cause of and participant in the internal tensions and rebellions that rent the family in the 930s and 940s. It was probably at that time that Eadgyth's public persona was developed. The fullest account of her is that of the Gandersheim nun, Hrotsvitha, written in the mid-960s. It represents Eadgyth's mother as an 'illustrious sharer in royal power' ('Gesta Ottonis', l. 80), superior to the mother of her half-brother, AEthelstan. Although this was clearly elaborated in East Francia, it is in fact consistent with later English stories of AEthelstan's birth. Hrotsvitha is also the sole source for Eadgyth's alleged saintly ancestry, linked to St Oswald of Northumbria. She connects this to the choice of Eadgyth as Otto's bride, but Oswald's cult only became strong after 929, at places that included Essen, where Eadgyth's granddaughter became abbess. Such claims could have been intended to counter the Saxon identity increasingly stressed for Mathilda. 
Eadgyth was actively involved in propagating the notion that the Liudolfings had enjoyed a new dynastic beginning in 936. Her possession of Magdeburg as her dower gave her a footing in East Frankish politics, and she and Otto developed it as a mausoleum and new centre of family memory. Some of the relics of St Maurice, with which it was endowed, may have been among the treasures that Eadgyth brought in 929, while relics of St Innocentius were promised to her and Otto by Rudolf II and later claimed by them from him. Meanwhile her links with England and her English half-brothers remained important, though details are scarce. The Ottonian court played a role in English ecclesiastical politics, and a second English marriage after Eadgyth's death may have been mooted. But her brother Edmund's death later in 946 was a turning point. Tenth-century politics continued to provide a central role for women, but the lateral bonds of the Anglo-Saxon sororal network had largely played out. 
Eadgyth died on 26 January 946. Otto buried her at Magdeburg Cathedral, which he designated for his own burial. Her memory remained strong in the 960s, especially in the great Saxon nunneries of Quedlinburg and Gandersheim. In the shifting context of Liudolfing family politics Liudolf, and Eadgyth as his mother, remained important figures. Her memory was strong in England too. Her granddaughter Mathilda, abbess of Essen, was in touch with Ealdorman AEthelweard in the 980s or 990s. By then Eadgyth represented imperial connections, which impressed AEthelweard and continued to be remembered in England into the twelfth century. In his writings AEthelweard stressed the common ancestry of English and German Saxons, but tenth-century Ottonian sources did not do so. Eadgyth's son, Liudolf, died before his father. Her name disappeared from the family name stock, and although her great-grandson became emperor as Conrad II ('r'. 1024-39), his descent from Eadgyth was never emphasized. She was remembered at Magdeburg, however, with some significant ritual commemoration and the development of a popular cult. 


@@@@@


doc= 93073


Illingworth, Percy Holden (1869-1915), politician, was born at Ladye Royde Hall, Manningham, Bradford, Yorkshire, on 19 March 1869, the youngest in the family of three sons and two daughters of Henry Illingworth (1829-1895), partner in D. Illingworth & Sons, worsted spinners of Bradford, and his wife, Mary (1838-1908), daughter of Sir Isaac Holden, founder of another well-known firm in the wool business and Liberal MP for various Yorkshire seats between 1865 and 1895. Illingworth's uncle, Alfred Illingworth, was also a Liberal MP representing Yorkshire constituencies between 1868 and 1895. Given this background it was not surprising that Illingworth was a lifelong Liberal; he also retained an active involvement in the Baptist church, of which the Illingworth family were staunch supporters. 
Illingworth was educated at the London College of the International Education Society (a school inspired by Richard Cobden's ideals) at Isleworth, and Jesus College, Cambridge (1887-1892). This progression to elite university education reflected a wider move by nonconformist businessmen into the centres of British power. Illingworth took only an ordinary degree in law, though, devoting most of his energies to winning blues in rugby and becoming 'spare man' for the Cambridge University boat. In later life his sporting interests diversified into golf, horse-riding, and grouse shooting. These activities did not prevent him being called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1894 and practising on the north-eastern circuit as a special pleader, though the income from the Illingworth and Holden firms meant he never depended on his legal earnings. His finances were probably further improved by his marriage, on 16 January 1907, to Mary Mackenzie Coats (1883-1933), daughter of George Coats (1846-1901), of the Paisley thread manufacturers J. and P. Coats. The couple lived in some style at Westwood Park, Clayton Heights, in Bradford, and 102 Lancaster Gate, in London. 
Illingworth briefly volunteered to fight in the South African War with the Yorkshire yeomanry, but dashed home in 1900 to contest the Shipley constituency that surrounded his home town of Bradford. He lost narrowly, but his manifesto showed that he was prepared to relax the anti-statist attitudes of his uncle, Alfred, by endorsing the 8 hour day and old age pensions. Illingworth served on the Bradford school board between 1900 and 1903 and won Shipley unopposed in 1906, when the sitting Liberal Unionist MP decamped to another seat at the last moment. In parliament Illingworth was 'not a fluent speaker' ('The Times', 4 Jan 1915) and made little impression in the chamber; but his deep connections in the Liberal Party and his uncle Alfred's long service to the cause of Irish home rule made him an ideal candidate for the role of parliamentary secretary to the chief secretary for Ireland. His skills in handling relations with MPs ensured his promotion to the whips' office on 28 February 1910. There he swiftly became the first lieutenant of the chief whip, the master of Elibank, and the obvious person to succeed him when 'the master' retired on 6 August 1912. 
Illingworth inherited a difficult situation. The Liberals depended on Irish Nationalist support for their majority, and this tied them to forcing the 'Irish Home Rule Bill' through the Commons three times in 1912-14 to overcome the House of Lords' veto. The bill faced ferocious Conservative opposition, misgivings among some Liberals, and at best a mixed public reaction. But Illingworth kept his parliamentary forces together and only the outbreak of war stopped the resulting statute being implemented. The respect Illingworth commanded was key to this success. His image was that of an uncomplicated sportsman: his 'frank and cheerful personality' and 'unfailing tact and good humour' ('The Times', 4 Jan 1915) were widely admired and, in contrast to his predecessor, he was felt to be fundamentally honest. The birthday honours list he presented in 1913 was notably restrained compared to Murray's flagrant trafficking of honours in return for party donations. Moreover, he gained Asquith's admiration as 'one of the straightest men I have ever known, and one of the most lovable' (Asquith, 'Memories', 2.192) and he seems to have remained on good terms with the other Liberal leaders, including Lloyd George. Well-liked chief whips are something of a rarity and this status helped ensure that Illingworth survived occasional blunders, notably the government's defeat on a snap vote on 11 November 1912. Subsequently the whips' office modernized its operations, making much more use of the telephone to ensure MPs' attendance and of the record-keeping systems developed by the junior whip, Wedgwood Benn. However, Illingworth vetoed the idea that the chief whip's responsibility for party organization outside parliament should be made into a separate post, though this would have helped the Liberals' efficiency. 
Illingworth was taken ill with enteric fever in December 1914. His condition suddenly deteriorated through intestinal complications, and he died at his home, 102 Lancaster Gate, on 3 January 1915, two days after being named a privy councillor (his final illness was later widely attributed to his eating an infected oyster). He was buried in the Undercliffe cemetery, Bradford. Asquith was visibly moved when paying tribute to him in the House of Commons a month later. In Illingworth's memory a soldiers' home and club was erected by the Baptist Union at Aldershot, and opened in July 1916. After the First World War Lloyd George often suggested that Illingworth could have prevented the split in the Liberal Party in 1916, though this probably reflected Lloyd George's anxiety to present his coup against Asquith as something that arose from purely contingent factors, rather than the result of his irrepressible ambition. Illingworth left three sons -- the middle of whom, Percy Guy Illingworth (1910-1995), unsuccessfully contested his father's old seat of Shipley as a Liberal in 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 93074


Jarrin, William Alexis (1784-1848), confectioner and author, was born in Colorno, near Parma, in northern Italy, on 25 March 1784, the son of William Alexis Jarrin, merchant. Nothing more is known about his family, though the surname suggests they were not of Italian origin. Jarrin's early years coincided with the French occupation of northern Italy in 1796-7. Perhaps this offered opportunities, for he recorded that he worked in Paris early in his career as a confectioner. He referred to having made a sugar sculpture of Napoleon for one of the town banquets given by the city of Paris (1806 or 1807) and to having worked in the imperial household. He seems to have remained in France until 1817, when he came to England. By 1819 he was employed as confectioner and ornament maker for James Gunter's, confectioners, in Berkeley Square, London. 
In 1820 Jarrin published 'The Italian Confectioner', through which he is best known. The book sits within an English tradition of publishing recipes for food and confectionery, but it reveals more about the techniques involved, and about the character of the author, than was usual in the genre. Written when confectionery production was on the point of being industrialized through the activities of such contemporaries as Joseph Terry of York, it represented the high point of artisan skills in the craft, which Jarrin believed could not be improved upon. He devoted several chapters to his speciality of making ornaments for the dessert table using various edible and non-edible materials. Other chapters covered more standard ground including recipes for small confections, preserving fruit, and making ices, but with details which throw light on both his own skills and continental practice. He provided instructions on modelling and wood carving (one wooden confectionery mould signed by him has come to light), and evidently possessed artistic talents, for he signed the two engraved plates illustrating confectionery equipment. Proud of his ingenuity as an inventor, Jarrin described inventions and improvements he had devised for making confectionery. 'The Italian Confectioner' was reprinted at least ten times (the last in 1861, after his death), and was updated with new material on several occasions. Earlier editions incorporated small but often telling additions: for example, observations on managing ice-wells and the introduction of new instruments such as the saccharometer. For the 1844 edition he undertook a major reorganization of the material and added many new recipes. 
By 1822 Jarrin had established his own shop at 123 New Bond Street, London (also his residence), and by 1827 was married and had a family, although details remain obscure. He was a widower at the time of his marriage, on 17 August 1837, to Susan ('b'. 1804/5), daughter of John Rogers; she apparently worked alongside him. One daughter, Maria, is named in his will. An engraved portrait, dated 1827, shows him wearing the order of the Cross of Fidelity, established by Louis XVIII, an indication that he retained influential contacts abroad, despite changes in regime. His English clientele also included a number of prominent persons. He catered for some fashionable events, including the first public breakfast organized by the Horticultural Society at Chiswick in 1827. In that year he obtained a patent (no. 5539, 13 Aug 1827) for a device for cooling water or fruit in which a sealed container of ice and salt was placed inside an outer container (a principle now exploited by the modern cool box). 
After a period of expansion in his business (including venturing into dealing in wines), Jarrin became insolvent and was declared bankrupt on 11 November 1828. He was allowed to continue trading, but subsequent attempts to rebuild his business were only partially successful. They included a move to open a restaurant and cafe in Regent Street Quadrant, but in 1834 he was declared bankrupt once more. For a short time he had premises in Tichbourne Street, but appears to have ceased trading by 1836. From this point Jarrin's career once more becomes obscure. A tendency towards impetuousness and possibly arrogance is hinted at in some sources, and there was evidently a family quarrel. His will, which left everything to his wife, gives no clue to his material circumstances, but mentions an estrangement between his daughter Maria and her mother. Jarrin died of cancer of the pylorus at his home, 22 Cambridge Street, Hyde Park, London, on 11 May 1848 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. His book was eventually superseded by William Jeanes's 'The Modern Confectioner' (1861). 


@@@@@


doc= 93076


Pavy, Salomon (bap. 1588, d. 1602), actor, was baptized on 12 May 1588 at St Dunstan's, Stepney, Middlesex, the son of John Pavy. Nothing is known of his parents, nor of Pavy's early career, except that he was allegedly abducted into service as a child actor. In 1601 the managers of the Children of the Queen's Revels, Nathaniel Giles, Henry Evans, and James Robinson, were accused in a Star Chamber case of abducting Thomas, son of Henry Clifton, in this way; among those named in the court documents as previously having suffered such an abduction was 'Salmon Pavey, apprentice to one Peerce' (Bentley, 276). Nathaniel Giles did indeed have powers to recruit children, forcibly if necessary, deriving from his role as master of the choir at St George's Chapel, Windsor. The Clifton case, at least, appears to have been a misapplication of those powers. 
'Peerce' can be identified as Edward Pearce, master of the second children's company, the Children of Paul's. According to Reavely Gair, Pavy may have played 'Salomon A Schoole Boy' in William Percy's 'The Faery Pastoral', a text probably written for this company and datable to about this period. Pavy seems then to have changed company to return to the Children of the Queen's Revels at the Blackfriars Theatre, since he is included in the cast lists for two plays, 'Cynthia's Revels' (performed 1600-01) and 'Poetaster' (performed 1601), as printed in Ben Jonson's 1616 folio. Pavy is second in these lists, behind Nathan Field, suggesting that his roles were prominent, a conjecture given extra weight by the fact that in the quarto text of 'Cynthia's Revels' 'Sal' is named as one of the three boy actors who perform the Induction. This contracted form of his name gave rise to the erroneous supposition by William Gifford (1756-1826) that Pavy's Christian name was Salathiel, a mistake which is still widely repeated. 
Salomon Pavy died of unknown causes at the age of thirteen, and was buried on 25 July 1602, at the church of St Mary Somerset, a five-minute walk from the Blackfriars Theatre. Ben Jonson commemorated Pavy in a graceful epitaph which includes the lines: '
Yet three filled 'Zodiackes' had he beene 

The stages iewell; 

And did act (what now we mone) 

Old men so duely, 

As, sooth, the 'Parcae' thought him one, 

He plai'd so truely. 
('Epigrams', 120.11-16)' Of all the actors Jonson ever worked with, he honoured only Shakespeare, Richard Burbage, and Pavy with epitaphs, and in this one he praises not just Pavy's youth and innocence but also, strikingly, his technical skill as an actor. Although Jonson is usually taken to mean 'old' in the sense of 'extremely aged', the word could merely be a synonym for 'mature': but either way, this statement that Pavy's acting was convincing is one of the very few pieces of evidence about the verisimilitude of children's company performance. 
In the Induction to 'Cynthia's Revels', Second Child addresses one of the other two children as 'Sal'. William Gifford argued that Second Child was addressing Third Child, thus identifying Pavy as Third Child, and indicating that Pavy played the relatively minor role of Anaides in the play itself. But a rival argument is that the quarto identifies Pavy as First Child, in which case he was charged with speaking the Induction of the play. In addition, he could have played the role of Jonson's avatar Criticus in the play proper, and perhaps therefore even the role of Horace in 'Poetaster'. This might help to explain Jonson's special honouring of him in an epitaph. 
Jonson's poem has ensured that Pavy is not forgotten. In 1912 the composer William Denis Browne set the text to music under the title 'Epitaph on Salathiel Pavy'; a ballad opera entitled 'The Ballad of Salomon Pavey' was written in 1976 by Jeremy James Taylor and David Drew-Smythe, and has enjoyed considerable success since. Whereas Nathan Field and other colleagues of Pavy's are remembered for their later careers, Pavy has, in a sense, become an emblematic representative of that lost figure, the Elizabethan boy actor. 


@@@@@


doc= 93077


Godwin, Matthew (1569?-1587), organist and choirmaster, was probably born in July 1569. Although Godwin's parentage is uncertain, it seems likely that he was a close relative of Thomas Godwin (1517-1590), dean of Canterbury Cathedral (1567-84), and therefore also of Thomas's second son, Francis (1562-1633), subdean of Exeter Cathedral (1587-1601) and later bishop of Hereford. There are two reasons for suggesting such a relationship. First, Dean Godwin was given to finding cathedral posts for his family (his eldest son, Thomas, for instance, was made a porter). Second, Francis, like Matthew, had connections with Exeter Cathedral and according to the Oxford historian Anthony Wood 'omitted no opportunity in disposing of his preferments, in order to provide for his children' (Payne, 'Two early organists', 133). Francis, who was collated subdean of Exeter in 1587, could not have been Matthew's father, but may well have been his brother if Matthew was one of the three younger sons of Dean Godwin and his wife, Isabel, 'nee' Purfrey. 
Dean Godwin appears to have encouraged some expansion of Canterbury Cathedral's musical resources in the 1560s. The chapter's resolution on 15 February 1584 (not 20 January as is sometimes stated), 'that Mathew Godwyn shall be joyned in patent wyth Mr William Selbye yn his office of th'organyst and master of the children' (Payne, 'Two early organists', 134), was something of a gamble, for Godwin was not yet fifteen years old. To make matters worse, the semi-retirement of the aged incumbent, William Selby, who had held office since about 1541 when Thomas Tallis was briefly a lay clerk at the cathedral, had led to a period of instability in the musical establishment and a flurry of short-lived masters of the choristers. Four months later Selby was dead, and some time between 20 and 25 June 1584 Godwin received a new patent: 'Item: where Mathew Godwyn was lately joyned [in] patente with William Selby decessed in the office [of] organyst and master of the children... yt ys agreed that an other patent shall be made... to the said Mathew in such forme as the sayd Selby late had the same. (ibid.)' During his four-month apprenticeship to Selby it is not known whether the young Godwin simply played the organ, or, if warranted by Selby's infirmity, he discharged the full range of duties. There is no means of assessing Godwin's success when he took over from Selby; but when Dean Godwin was made bishop of Wells in late 1584, Matthew was soon after sent to the provinces, perhaps to widen his experience. 
Godwin's next step was to obtain a university degree. The Oxford University register states that on 2 July 1585 he supplicated for, and on 14 July proceeded to, the degree of bachelor of music claiming, somewhat generously, that he had studied the subject for twelve years. At Oxford, seven years was the normal minimum period of study for the BMus, the candidate being required to compose as his 'exercise' a motet or anthem for five voices ('canticum quinque partium') and supervise its performance. However, the actual requirements for this degree varied widely at the time of Godwin's candidature, and there is no mention in the grace for his degree that he was expected to compose anything. In a brief note on Godwin (whose graduation he dated to 24 July 1585), Anthony Wood implied that little was known of Godwin the musician: 'whether he hath published any matters relating to the fac[ulty] of music', he wrote, 'I know not' (Wood, 230). Perhaps on account of his extreme youth, and in contrast to the more famous adolescent English music graduate, Thomas Ravenscroft, no musical compositions or theoretical writings by Godwin are known to be extant. 
Although the date of Matthew Godwin's departure from Canterbury is unknown, the 'terminus ante quem' of his migration to Exeter may be fixed with some precision, thanks to the chance survival of a selection of extracts from missing chapter acts assembled for legal proceedings in the court of arches in 1607. According to a selective list of staff admissions and deprivations, Godwin was formally admitted to the office of organist at Exeter on 13 May 1586 (Devon RO, CC181/5a, fol. lv). However, he had less than a year to enjoy his new appointment before his death (12 January 1587), and is not mentioned again in the extant cathedral archives. Ironically, the final record of his career is also the most informative: the beautiful monument, in colour, situated under the north tower of the cathedral, shows the youth in academic dress, kneeling in prayer before an organ. It is accompanied by a Latin text that reads in translation: 'Erected by G: M: ER: to the everlasting memory of Matthew Godwin, a good, gentle, clever youth, bachelor of music, most worthy and expert chief musician of the Cathedral Churches of Canterbury and Exeter. He lived 17 years and 5 months, and departed hence to heaven on 12 January 1586 [i.e. 1587 NS]' (Shaw, 108). Godwin was formally succeeded at Exeter, as he had been at Canterbury, by Arthur Cocke, who was granted the office of organist on 19 April 1589. 


@@@@@


doc= 93082


Darwin, Anne Elizabeth (1841-1851), daughter of Charles Darwin and subject of a memorial essay, was born on 2 March 1841 at 12 Upper Gower Street, London, the first daughter and second of the ten children of Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882), naturalist, geologist, and originator of the theory of natural selection, and Emma (1808-1896), daughter of Josiah Wedgwood of Maer, Staffordshire. Anne Elizabeth was known in the family as Annie. Her elder brother was William Erasmus Darwin (1839-1914) who, like Annie, was in early life the subject of their father's scientific observation. Among her younger sisters and brothers were Henrietta Emma 
(later Henrietta Litchfield; 1843-1927)
, George Howard Darwin (1845-1912), Francis Darwin (1848-1925), Leonard Darwin (1850-1943), and Horace Darwin (1851-1928). Annie was baptized at St Peter's Church, Maer, on 4 June 1842. For the first eighteen months of her life the family lived at 12 Upper Gower Street. Annie and William were looked after by Jessie Brodie, a Scottish nurse, who had previously cared for Anne Isabella Thackeray 
(later Lady Ritchie; 1837-1919)
and her sisters, daughters of the novelist William Makepeace Thackeray. 
During Annie's first three years Darwin observed her behaviour and expressions for a scientific comparison with her elder brother, William, and a young orang-utan Darwin had observed at London Zoo in 1838. When Annie was a year old, he noted how she stared without blinking at an unfamiliar face while older children and adults would shift their gaze. He conjectured that Annie might lack shyness because she had not yet grasped that the people she saw could have their own awareness and be thinking about her. Darwin also repeated an experiment he had carried out on the orang-utan and William. He observed that Annie was perplexed by the image of a person in a mirror approaching her from behind, and commented that the ape had shown more sense by placing its hand behind the glass. He included both points in his 'Biographical sketch of an infant', which was published in the journal 'Mind' (July 1877) and is one of the founding texts of child psychology. 
In September 1842 Darwin moved with his family to Down House in Downe, Kent, and during the years that followed Annie grew into an outgoing, affectionate, and demonstrative child, loved by her parents and popular in the wider family circle. Emma Darwin -- a devout Unitarian who nevertheless took her family to the village church -- read the 'Bible' with her daughter and taught her a 'simple Unitarian creed' (Litchfield, 2.173). Annie was educated at home by a governess, Catherine Thorley, and the village school teacher. From early childhood she developed a special bond with her father, petting him while he sat with her and pirouetting ahead of him when he paced along the Sand-walk, his 'thinking path'. He particularly valued her affection and high spirits because he was at the time in poor health and under pressure with his work. 
In Annie's tenth year, Emma noticed signs of illness and Darwin sought advice from the physician and hydropath, James Manby Gully of Malvern, who was already providing, with some success, his controversial water treatment for Darwin's ailments. Gully proposed a course of soakings, sweatings, and rubbings for Annie, and Darwin oversaw her care between January and March 1851. He logged the treatment given each morning and recorded Annie's condition during the day and night, using his meticulous experimental method in a desperate attempt to find a cure. At the end of March he took her to Gully's clinic in Malvern; Emma had to remain at Down House because she was heavily pregnant with their ninth child. Ten days after arriving in Malvern, Annie developed a bilious fever; she died on 23 April 1851, aged ten years and one month. Her father, Jessie Brodie, and Catherine Thorley were with her during the last days, and Darwin's daily letters to Emma provide an exceptionally detailed account of three carers' experiences of a child's fatal illness before the advances of modern medicine. Annie was buried in the churchyard of the priory church, Malvern, on 25 April 1851. James Gully certified the cause of death as 'bilious fever with typhoid character'. From what is known about the course of her illness, it is probable that she died from tuberculosis. 
In the days after Annie's death, Darwin composed a twelve-page memorial of her for the family. Writing with utter fluency and directness about his deepest feelings as her father, he dwelt on her lively and affectionate nature while she had been well. Darwin ended the memorial: 'We have lost the joy of the household, and the solace of our old age: she must have known how we loved her; oh that she could now know how deeply, how tenderly we do still and shall ever love her dear joyous face. Blessings on her. ('Correspondence of Charles Darwin', 5.542)' In the remaining thirty years of his life he never spoke about Annie to his other children, but referred briefly to her in a number of letters to friends and acquaintances who had suffered similar losses. His comments show that his grief remained intense for some years but was eventually softened by his lasting memories of 'her sweet ways' (Darwin, 'Autobiographies', 57). Extracts from the memorial were published by Darwin's son Francis in his 'Life and Letters of Charles Darwin' (1887) and in 'Emma Darwin: A Century of Family Letters' (1915) by his daughter Henrietta Litchfield, who added excerpts from the correspondence between Charles and Emma while he was in Malvern. 
Darwin's experience of his daughter's life and his bereavement had a double significance for his thinking. Recent scholarship (Moore) has shown that it was probably the final factor in his gradual rejection of Christian faith, while Pat Jalland notes how the Darwins stood out among middle- and upper-class families of the time for their non-reliance on the standard Victorian consolations of faith. Darwin's feelings for his daughter were almost certainly a factor in his developing view of the natural strength of the human affections. This became a key element in his treatment of the basis of co-operation in animal and human groups, and of the evolution of the moral sense, as set out in 'The Descent of Man' (1871). The now widespread idea that Darwinism sees natural life as an endless selfish struggle for survival misses this central element in his thinking. Darwin put his own view of the value of human affection most clearly in a private comment to his close friend, the botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker, at a time when Hooker was coming to terms with the death of his own daughter and worried about his son who had scarlet fever: 'Much love, much trial, but what an utter desert is life without love' ('Correspondence of Charles Darwin', 11.682). 


@@@@@


doc= 93084


Moulton, Sarah Goodin Barrett (1783-1795), subject of a painting by Thomas Lawrence, was born on 22 March 1783 at Little River, St James's, Jamaica. She was the only daughter and eldest of the four children of Charles Moulton (died 1819), a merchant from Madeira, and his wife, Elizabeth (1763-1830), daughter of Edward Barrett (1734-1798) of Cinnamon Hill, St James's, and his wife, Judith. Sarah was baptized on 29 May 1783, named in memory of her mother's sister, Sarah Goodin Barrett, who had died as an infant two years previously; to her family she was known as Pinkie or Pinkey. Her maternal relatives were descended from Hersey Barrett, a lieutenant who had arrived in Jamaica with Oliver Cromwell's forces in 1655. By the eighteenth century the Barretts had become wealthy landowners, slave owners, and exporters of sugar cane and rum. 
By 1789 Charles Moulton had left his wife, who subsequently raised their children with the help of other members of the Barrett family. In November 1791 Sarah's grandfather, Edward, engaged an Englishman, Francis Murphy, to act as tutor to her and her siblings for four years. Although Murphy had arrived in Jamaica by February 1792, Sarah and her two brothers, Edward (1785-1857) and Samuel (1787-1837), sailed to England in late September of that year in order to continue their education. Sarah was sent to Mrs Fenwick's school at Flint House, Greenwich, along with other children from Jamaican colonial families. 
On 16 November 1793 Sarah's grandmother, Judith Barrett, wrote from Jamaica to her niece Elizabeth Barrett Williams, then living at Richmond Hill in Surrey, asking her to commission a portrait of 'my dear little Pinkey... as I cannot gratify my self with the Original, I must beg the favor of You to have her picture drawn at full Length by one of the best Masters, in an easy Careless attitude' (quoted in Kelley and Hudson, 257). Sarah probably began sitting for Thomas Lawrence, painter-in-ordinary to George III, at his studio in Old Bond Street soon after the receipt of this letter on 11 February 1794. In this famous portrait, she appears to dance on a hillside, dressed in a white muslin dress and silk bonnet. It has been suggested that the background landscape either represents Richmond, the home of Elizabeth Williams whom Sarah would presumably have visited, or the Thames valley at Greenwich, where she was at school. Although the amount paid for the portrait is unknown, Lawrence was charging 160 guineas for a whole length at this date (Garlick, 9-10). 
Sarah Moulton died at Greenwich on 23 April 1795. A letter from her grandmother, dated 6 November 1794, mentions her recent recovery from a cough, which may have contributed to her death. She was buried on 30 April 1795 in the doctor's vault under the parish church of St Alfege, Greenwich. Her portrait by Lawrence was placed on display in the Royal Academy exhibition of 1795, which opened the day after her burial. The picture remained in the family's possession until 1910, passing at one point to Sarah's brother, Edward, father of the poet and writer Elizabeth Barrett Browning. It was purchased in 1926 by Duveen, the dealers, for 74,000 guineas, the highest price ever paid for a painting at auction at that date. Duveen sold it on to Henry E. Huntington the following year and it has since remained in the Huntington collection at San Marino, California. The enduring popularity of the image is evident in its frequent appearance in books, magazines, and articles as well as in its reproduction on a Cadbury's chocolate tin in 1928 and its inclusion in the 'British Paintings' series of United Kingdom stamps, first issued in 1968. The painting has often been linked to Jean-Jacques Rousseau's theories on childhood and even hailed as the first Romantic portrait. 


@@@@@


doc= 93085


Buttall, Jonathan (1752-1805), ironmonger, the possible subject of Thomas Gainsborough's painting 'The Blue Boy', was the eldest of the three sons of Jonathan Buttall (died 1768), ironmonger, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Higgins (died 1780). He was probably born at the family's house in King Street, Soho, London. Jonathan was the last in a line of three generations of ironmongers who worked either in Wrexham or London. His grandfather, Jonathan Buttall (1693-1761), a freeman of the City of London, had married Priscilla Beale ('b'. 1700) at St Michael Cornhill on 19 January 1719. By June 1721 the couple had moved to premises in King Street previously occupied by Priscilla Beale's parents. From then until December 1796 the Buttall family occupied two (and later three) adjoining houses in the parish of St Anne's, Soho, on the north side of King Street, shown on Horwood's 'Plan of London' as numbers 68, 69, and an unnumbered house at the corner with Greek Street. Jonathan followed his father, grandfather, great-uncle 
(Joseph; died 1726)
and uncle 
(James; 1718-1792)
into the ironmongering trade, from which he was said to have become 'an immensely rich man' (Smith, 301). 
After the death of his parents and brothers, Buttall's business ran into financial difficulties as a result of a difficult trading market, perhaps caused by fears of a French invasion of England in the 1790s. As a result, a 'commission of bankrupt' was awarded against him, and in 1795 he was sued by a creditor for more than $3000. In December of the following year, the stock-in-trade of Buttall's business and other property was sold by Sharpe and Coxe, auctioneers. The sale included a valuable collection of drawings and paintings by the artist Thomas Gainsborough (1727-1788). The close friendship between the Buttall family and Gainsborough may have begun in the 1750s during the artist's days in Ipswich where the Buttalls are thought to have had property (Whitley, 378). Jonathan was probably the Mr Buttall present at Gainsborough's funeral at Kew on 9 August 1788, an occasion attended, as the artist requested, only by a few of his most respected friends. 
The collection of paintings sold in 1796 included the portrait that came to be known as 'The Blue Boy' -- now one of Gainsborough's, and the period's, best-known works -- which is generally thought to be a portrait of Buttall as a child. The portrait depicts a youth of approximately fourteen or fifteen years with collar-length dark brown hair, dressed in a fine blue suit in the Van Dyck style. In his right hand he holds a wide-brimmed hat with plumes, and his left is placed on his hip. The precise date of the portrait, which is accepted to be Gainsborough's homage to Anthony Van Dyck, remains unknown. It is thought to have been the 'Portrait of a Young Gentleman' exhibited at the Royal Academy exhibition in 1770, but if the sitter is Jonathan Buttall, it must have been painted around 1766-7. It is possible that Buttall may have sat for the portrait during a family trip to Bath; local newspapers record visits to the town by a married couple of this surname -- perhaps Jonathan's uncle James and his wife -- in 1764 and 1774. The painting may have come into the family's possession through James on his later visit, just before Gainsborough's move to London. The first connection between the portrait and a 'Mr Buttall' was made by Edward Edwards in his 'Anecdotes of Painters' (1808). It was affirmed in November 1832 by the elderly artist John Taylor who, in a conversation reported by the printmaker John Thomas Smith, identified the 'Blue Boy' as 'an ironmonger... He lived at the corner of Greek and King Streets, Soho' (quoted in Whitley, 373). For Whitley, Jonathan Buttall remained the 'supposed original of the picture'. However, the uncertainty over the portrait's date leaves open the possibility that, while 'The Blue Boy' is 'generally considered to be a portrait of Jonathan Buttall' (Sloman, 74), the sitter could be -- as Sloman suggests -- the artist's nephew, Gainsborough Dupont, who was two years younger than Buttall. 
On 31 March 1798 Buttall married Mary Jump (1739-1826) at St Marylebone Church, London; the couple had no children. A note in the 'London Gazette' in July 1798 shows that, despite the sale of his property, he was paying a bankruptcy dividend to his creditors some months after his marriage. During his last years Buttall lived at 241 Oxford Street, London, as a neighbour to his lifelong friend and executor, the coach builder Philip Godsal (1747-1826). Buttall died from 'spasms' at his home on 29 November 1805, aged fifty-three. The 'Morning Herald' (2 December) described him as a 'Gentleman whose amiable manners and good disposition will cause him to be ever regretted by his numerous and respectable friends'. Buttall was buried in a vault at St Anne's Church, Soho, on 6 December 1805. He was survived by his wife, who died at 236 Oxford Street and was buried beside her husband on 31 March 1826. 

'The Blue Boy', the name by which Gainsborough's portrait was known by the late 1790s, was bought in 1796 by the politician John Nesbitt and purchased in his sale in 1802 by the artist John Hoppner. It was subsequently acquired by the second Earl Grosvenor about 1809, and remained in the possession of the dukes of Westminster until purchased by Joseph Duveen in 1921 and sold to the American collector Henry Huntington. One of Gainsborough's most iconic images, 'The Blue Boy' now hangs in the H. E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery, San Marino, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 93088


Sheffield, Robert, marquess of Normanby (1711-1715), subject of a memorial effigy, was born on 11 December 1711, probably at Buckingham House (now Buckingham Palace), Westminster, the second son of John Sheffield, first duke of Buckingham and Normanby (1647-1721), and his third wife, Katherine, 'nee' Lady Katherine Darnley (1681/2-1743), daughter of James II and his mistress Catharine Sedley, and widow of James Annesley, third earl of Anglesey (died 1702). The couple's first son, John, had died before Robert's birth; consequently Robert was the heir to the dukedom and bore his father's second title of marquess of Normanby by courtesy. 
Robert was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 16 December 1711 by John Robinson, then bishop of Bristol and as lord privy seal a ministerial colleague of the duke of Buckingham. Aged three years and one month he died, probably at Buckingham House, on 1 February 1715, and was buried in St Margaret's, Westminster. Following his father's death, his remains were moved in 1721 to the family vault in the Henry VII chapel, Westminster Abbey, as part of his mother's plan to glorify the Sheffield ducal line. It was probably at this time that a memorial effigy was constructed, although no accounts of its manufacture are known to survive. An alternative is that the effigy was constructed in 1735 to accompany the effigy of Normanby's younger brother, Edmund Sheffield, second duke of Buckingham and Normanby, although the clothes in which the effigy is dressed date from 1715. 
The effigy stands 3 feet 3 inches tall; the head and bust are wax, with glass eyes and a wig of human hair. The face may be based on a death mask, possibly by Mrs Goldsmith, 'arguably the finest wax modeller of the day' (Harvey and Mortimer, 14) who in 1700 had made the death mask of William, duke of Gloucester, son of Queen Anne. The hands and forearms are also wax, but the rest of the figure is yellow canvas stuffed 'with tow and other materials' (ibid., 125). The effigy wears the formal clothes of an aristocratic child of the period, which were themselves modelled on the dress of an adult, with velvet robe and long coat of silk and satin, showing Polish and Turkish influences in design. The effigy also wears formal children's shoes, a rare survival for the period; at its base is a painted wooden unicorn, a heraldic device probably referring to the duchess of Buckingham whose armorial bearings included a unicorn and a goat as supporters. 
The memorial effigy remains in Westminster Abbey with others commissioned by the duchess. It has been stated that the carrying of these effigies at Sheffield family funerals in the early eighteenth century 'had no connection whatsoever with the traditional role of the monarchical effigy' (Harvey and Mortimer, 19). Nevertheless the association suggests a wish on the part of the duchess to commemorate her own royal descent and to assert the right of the Sheffield family to a prominence in contemporary politics. The duchess's dynastic ambitions were thwarted, but the effigy of her son provides an example of the dress and posture of a child of the early eighteenth-century British elite. 


@@@@@


doc= 93092


Smith, Alan Verner (1908-1983), toymaker and sculptor, was born on 27 July 1908 at 118 Hill Lane, Shirley, Southampton, the son of Edwin Thomas Smith, a steamship captain, and Alice Margaret, 'nee' Ward; he had two siblings, Ivor and Rita. Between 1918 and 1925 Smith was educated at Victoria College, Jersey, and subsequently at Bournemouth School of Art (1926-8) and Westminster School of Art, London (1928-30). On 6 July 1931 he married Edith Ailsa MacGregor ('b'. 1901/2), artist, and daughter of Donald MacGregor; the couple had a son, Nicolas. Smith's first ambition was to become a painter and in 1925 one of his pictures was exhibited at the Royal Academy of Arts, London. However, his career did not take off and in 1933 he found employment with Muriel Rose as an assistant at her Little Gallery in Ellis Street, London. 
Impressed by an exhibition of European toys, Smith began making small wooden objects and later wooden toys to sell in the gallery. This early work comprised extremely simple human figures, boats, and animals including lions with manes of wood shavings and tails of rough string. In this period he also designed greetings cards, cartoons, postcards, advertisements, illustrated books, and a catalogue for the Piccadilly retailers, Fortnum and Mason. From 1935 Smith's work was exhibited at the Little Gallery and he began to gain critical recognition. Looking back, he saw this as the time in which he shed any lingering desire to be an artist and 'became an ordinary person, making things about ordinary people' (quoted in 'The Times', 11 February 1983). 
During the Second World War Smith worked for the Redbridge Bailey Bridge Company at Christchurch, Hampshire, where he drew bridges for the company's engineers, and edited the works' magazine. The technical skills learned here would be used in his working drawings throughout the rest of his career. After the war Smith recognized that there was a shortage of toys and set up a small factory in the garage of his home at Lilliput, near Poole. His simple toys proved very successful and were bought by Fortnum and Mason. In 1948 he moved to Kingswear, Devon, with Gladys Muriel Jewett ('b'. 1905/6), an artist and stage designer. A meeting with an American businessman, Henry Rothschild, led to 'Sea Breezes', the first of several exhibitions of Smith's work at Rothschild's craft shop, Primavera, in Sloane Street, London. Smith's closeness to the sea during childhood deeply influenced his work, and he retained a fascination with boats throughout his working life. He was also enthralled by the bustle and noise of a lively seaside port. Other formative influences included his memories of ornate theatrical props and the gaudy spectacle of the fairground, as well as an appreciation of the vibrant colours and often naive quality of popular or 'folk art'. 
By the late 1940s Smith's work was becoming more abstract and often larger and more sculptural. He continued to make toy boats, but rather than produce replicas he imbued them with human characteristics such as pride, vanity, and patriotism by which they became vehicles to comment on the complexities of adult life. Many of Smith's sculptures -- often involving working parts -- were also more suggestive than his pre-war models. Figurines of pouchy army officers balancing young women on knees or shoulders offer further examples of Smith's use of sculpture as social and political commentary. In his own words: 'children's toys are mainly about pretending to be grown up. The things I make are about what it's like when you get there' (quoted in information leaflet, 'Toys Grow Up'). 
In 1955 Smith gave his support at the foundation of the British Toymakers' Guild, formed to foster good quality handmade toys in the face of the mass production that dominated the post-war market. By this time Smith was gaining a dedicated following in the United States where, in the mid-1960s, he exhibited at the Museum of Contemporary Crafts, New York, Design Research (New York and Cambridge, Massachusetts), and the Chair House in San Francisco. British shows included a series of exhibitions at London's Portal Gallery (from 1961) and the Arnolfini in Bristol. However, it was not until a major retrospective in 1972 at the Bristol City Art Gallery (and later at the Camden Arts Centre, London, and the Beaford Arts Centre, Devon) that Smith gained the recognition in Britain that had been accorded to him in the United States. Four years later his work featured in a highly regarded 'Arena' documentary for the BBC and the Arts Council. The programme's title, 'Sam Smith: Genuine England', used the signature adopted by the artist after his toys went on sale in the 1930s. Both words are seen by reviewers as highly appropriate descriptions of a body of work which, in its attachment to the 'ordinary', sought to expose pomposity and artifice while playing to an English tradition of nonsense humour, caricature, Victorian carnival, and the seaside. Indeed, in an interview from the 1970s, Smith described himself less as an artist or craftsman and more 'as a kind of entertainer' ('The Times', 31 August 1974), and work in this period also included two illustrated story books, 'The Crew Cats' (1975) and 'Rover's Regatta Day' (1977). Exhibitions throughout the 1970s in Britain, Europe, and North America culminated in a second retrospective at London's Serpentine Gallery between December 1980 and February 1981. From 1975 Smith and Gladys Jewett had lived at Newton Abbot, Devon, and the couple married on 18 September 1978; there were no children from the relationship. After a long illness, the onset of which coincided with the Serpentine exhibition, Sam Smith died on 9 February 1983 at College Road, Newton Abbot; his body was cremated and his ashes scattered on the bank of the River Dart. He was survived by his wife. 
Following his death, Smith's work has been shown at the Plymouth Arts Centre (1986), Southampton City Art Gallery (2001), the Victoria Art Gallery, Bath (2003), and Pollock's Toy Museum, London, in an exhibition entitled 'Toys Grow Up' (2003). Examples of his work may be found in the collections of, among others, the Bristol, Manchester, and Southampton city art galleries, the Crafts Council, Arts Council of Great Britain, the Welsh Arts Council, and the Museum of Childhood which owns one of the artist's largest pieces, 'Tmith' (1973), a wooden sculpture, part lion, part woman with six detachable figures. 


@@@@@


doc= 93093


Travers, Susan Mary Gillian (1909-2003), foreign legionnaire, was born on 23 September 1909 at 35 Courtfield Gardens, Kensington, London, the younger child and only daughter of Captain Francis Eaton Travers (1863-1953), naval officer, and his wife, Eleanor Catherine (Norah), younger daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel John Robertson Turnbull, of the 1st (Royal) Dragoons. Francis Travers had 'almost certainly' married for money, and the marriage was unhappy (Travers, 23). During the First World War, while he was away on war service, his wife and children lived with his wife's mother at her Torquay house. Susan Travers, by her own account unloved by her parents and brother and a loner, was educated by governesses, at a school in Babbacombe, Devon, and from 1918 to 1921 at St Mary's School, Wantage, Oxfordshire, an Anglican convent boarding school that she largely disliked, though she excelled at sport. 
In 1921 Travers's family emigrated to Cannes, where she attended a private day school, the Ecole Cours Fenelon. At sixteen, she later wrote, 'Most of all, I wanted to be wicked. A wicked lady, flirting with danger and scandal' (Travers, 38). Aged sixteen and seventeen she attended Miss Penrose's finishing school in Florence. Aged seventeen, on a school visit to Rome, she was seduced by a middle-aged hotel manager. She decided, she later wrote, that 'men would become my salvation... my ticket to travel and wealth and happiness' (ibid., 47). Attractive, chic, slim, gamine, dark-haired and blue-eyed, with an allowance from her aunt, from 1929 to 1939 she was a rootless, hedonistic socialite, travelling in Europe, playing quasi-professional tennis, skiing, drinking, smoking, dancing, and -- 'une fille facile' (ibid., 49) -- experiencing transient affairs. She later wrote 'I'd been unable to say no to a man for fear of his rejection... none of the men I fell in love with ever asked me to marry them -- probably because I went to bed with them' (ibid., 52, 48-9). Her parents returned to England but she continued on the continent and was in France, staying with a rich American divorcee at the latter's chateau near Poitiers, when the Second World War began. 
In 1939 Travers volunteered for the Croix Rouge and, to qualify as an ambulance driver, completed three months' nursing training at a Poitiers hospital. In spring 1940 she went with a French ambulance unit to Finland, where she nursed convalescent Finnish soldiers. Following the fall of France she returned from Finland to England, arriving in July 1940. After failing to obtain other war service, in July 1940 she volunteered as a nurse at the Free French headquarters in London and was accepted, with the rank of sergeant. At the end of August she sailed with the Free French and British force bound for Dakar, Senegal. After the failure there in September, and nursing in Brazzaville, in 1941 she went with Free French forces to Eritrea. There she chauffeured a medical officer and, according to her autobiography, enjoyed an affair with a handsome married White Russian prince and officer in the Foreign Legion, Dmitry Amilakvari (1906-1942). In May 1941 she went with the Free French via Egypt to Palestine. She was promoted 'adjudant' (warrant officer), and continued chauffeuring. She served in the successful Syria campaign against the Vichy French, enduring strafing, bombing, hardship, and exhaustion. In Syria in June 1941 she became driver to Colonel (later General) Marie-Pierre Koenig (1898-1970), with whom, according to her autobiography, she started a secret affair. 
In February 1942 Koenig's brigade group was sent to Bir Hakeim in the barren wilderness of Cyrenaica, south of Tobruk: a pivotal position at the southern end of the Gazala line, where they endured heat, cold, sandstorms, flies, water shortage, and bombing by Stukas. In early May Italian and German tank and other forces attacked and were repulsed. Travers and the female nurses were ordered out but she soon returned, the only woman there. When at the end of the month Rommel launched his new offensive (26 May to 17 June) the Free French at Bir Hakeim fought heroically: surrounded, outnumbered, and their 75 mm guns outranged by German 105 mm guns. Their ammunition and water almost exhausted, on the night of 10-11 June they broke out. Travers drove Koenig and Amilakvari and, under fire, they escaped back to the British lines, as did some 2700 of the garrison. According to the official French account and her autobiography, Travers drove Koenig out on the night of 10 June, but it has been alleged that they left the previous night, before the garrison. Bir Hakeim was militarily a defeat, yet it was symbolically and psychologically a triumph for the Free French. Travers wrote of the breakout, 'The love and respect I engendered amongst the Legion for that day and night of madness was to support and bolster me throughout the rest of the war and beyond' (Travers, 237). She was awarded the Croix de Guerre. However, according to her autobiography, Koenig, his career ascendant and his wife suspicious -- Italian radio broadcast that he had taken his mistress with him -- jilted her, and she considered suicide. In 1943 she served in Tunisia and, she later claimed, briefly resumed her affair with Koenig. In 1944 she served in Italy and in 1944-5 in France, driving trucks and ambulances. In October 1944 she was promoted 'adjudant-chef' (warrant officer first class). By the end of the war, she later wrote, 'I'd become the person I'd always wanted to be' (ibid., 294) and she feared the armistice 'meant an end to my great adventure' (ibid.). 
In June 1945, apparently through the influence of officer friends, Travers joined the Foreign Legion -- 'my adopted family, the people with whom I felt most at home' (Travers, 296) -- the first woman to do so, as an 'adjudant-chef' in logistics. She served in Tunisia, then from 1946 to 1948 in Indo-China. In April 1947, four months pregnant and after 'my first genuine marriage proposal in thirty-seven years' (ibid., 313), she married, at Hoc-Mon, Nicholas Schlegelmilch, an Alsatian NCO in the Foreign Legion, four years younger than her; they had two sons. She resigned from the legion following her marriage. In 1949 Schlegelmilch was sent back to Indo-China, where he was seriously ill. He was mentally changed and their marriage was no longer close. He left the legion in 1950 and died in 1995. Travers was awarded the Medaille Militaire in 1956 -- presented by Koenig, then minister of defence -- and the Legion d'honneur in 1996. When married she rewrote and 'sanitized' her secret war memoirs, written before her marriage, and burned the originals. In 1998-9 with Wendy Holden she wrote her autobiography, published in 2000 as 'Tomorrow to be Brave': vivid but not entirely reliable. She died on 18 December 2003 in France. 


@@@@@


doc= 93094


Tumim, Sir Stephen (1930-2003), judge and prison inspector, was born on 15 August 1930 at 10 Basing Hill, Golders Green, Hendon, Middlesex, the second son of Joseph Tumim (1895-1957), barrister, and his wife, (Edna) Renee, 'nee' Davis (1902-1941), daughter of Nathaniel Davis, architect. Both families were of Jewish descent. On the outbreak of the Second World War the Tumims moved to Old Headington, Oxford. Tumim's father became clerk of assize to the Oxford circuit, and was appointed CBE in 1953 and a deputy chairman of Oxford quarter sessions in 1954. When Tumim was ten his mother, an artistically gifted woman who had trained at the Slade, died unexpectedly from septicaemia caused by a needle prick while working on an embroidery. This deeply and lastingly affected him. Educated at St Edward's School, Oxford, he entered Worcester College, Oxford, as a history scholar but later switched to jurisprudence, graduating with a second-class degree in 1953. Called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1955, he dealt mainly with divorce, landlord and tenant disputes, and contract disputes between artists or musicians and their agents. On 1 February 1962 he married Winifred Letitia Borthwick ['see 'Tumim, Winifred Letitia (1936-2009)], daughter of Algernon Malcolm Borthwick, chairman of the family meat-importing business. Tumim's wife was, like him, an Oxford graduate and a person of great energy and commitment to philanthropic causes. They had three daughters, two being profoundly deaf. Tumim was chairman of the National Deaf Children's Society from 1974 to 1979. 
On medical advice Tumim had not applied for silk. He became a recorder (part-time judge) of the crown court in 1977 and one year later a full-time circuit judge. He was a 'light sentencer'. His experience of dealing with criminal cases was short-lived, for in 1980 he was appointed a judge of Willesden county court where he dealt exclusively with civil disputes, gaining a reputation for courtesy and fair dealing from those who appeared before him, including a growing number of persons from ethnic minorities. He had also been president of the mental health review tribunals. 
From the relative obscurity of Willesden county court, Tumim was, in 1987, appointed as the third chief inspector of prisons by Douglas Hurd, the home secretary, on the recommendation of Sir Brian Cubbon, the permanent under-secretary of state. At the time his appointment came as a surprise to those who had hoped to see the office of her majesty's chief inspector being taken up by someone with an established reputation as a fighter for prisoners' rights and a radical approach to prison reform. Tumim appeared to be the quintessential 'establishment' safe choice: a member of the Garrick and Beefsteak clubs, he enjoyed the company of politicians, artists, writers, and senior civil servants, who appreciated his urbanity, sense of humour, and fine appreciation of literature and painting. Outwardly he appeared somewhat eccentric -- 'Pickwickian' some said -- with half-moon spectacles, bright bow tie, and a rather 'vague and wistful manner' (Ronald Harwood, memorial service address, 4 May 2004). From an early age he had collected books, his library eventually totalling 10,000 volumes. He especially appreciated Trollope, Johnson, and Sterne, and had published two miscellanies of legal anecdotes: 'Great Legal Disasters' (1983) and 'Great Legal Fiascos' (1985). Between 1983 and 1990 he was chairman of the Friends of the Tate Gallery and for the last ten years of his life he was president of the Royal Literary Fund. 
The establishment of a fully independent chief inspector of prisons, a crown appointment responsible directly to the home secretary, had been recommended in 1979 by the committee of inquiry into the United Kingdom prison service, chaired by Sir John May. Although independent prison inspectors had been appointed in 1835, the home office had appeared perfectly satisfied, since the nationalization of local prisons in 1877, with prison inspectors promoted from the governor ranks to membership of what became the Prisons Board, whose reports were for 'internal' consumption and thus never published. In contrast, the May committee wanted the prison service to be 'opened up to as wide an audience as possible'. The terms of reference given to the chief inspector by the home secretary were to inspect and report 'in particular on conditions in those establishments; the treatment of prisoners and other inmates and the facilities available to them' ('Report of HM Chief Inspector of Prisons', 1981, para. 1.03). 
Tumim's predecessors, Bill Pearce, a former chief probation officer, who died after only a year in post, and Sir James Hennessy, a diplomat, had revealed plenty of inadequacies in the prison system. But their work had received almost no public attention. Reviewing progress at the end of his tenure, Sir James noted 'a period of slow but steady development, during which the independence and objectivity of the conduct of inspections, sought by the May Committee, have become firmly established' ('Report of HM Chief Inspector of Prisons', 1986, para. 7.02). This 'bedding-down period' (ibid., para. 7.03) came abruptly to an end when Tumim was appointed in 1987. He was well aware that it was easier said than done to maintain his independence: first because the inspectorate was a very small organization given the size of the task, secondly because many of his staff were seconded from the prison service and would return to it, but most importantly because the civil servants who advised ministers on the recommendations made by the inspectorate were also from the prison department and were therefore, as Tumim put it, 'judges in their own cause'. He knew there was no easy way round this, save that the inspectorate should gain such a 'reputation for reliability, impartiality, good judgement and truth' that its recommendations would rarely be rejected ('Report', 1986, signed by Tumim, paras. 7.04-7.07). Indeed, when reflecting on how he, as a judge, had approached the 'heart of his job, a decision as to what prisons are about', he had concluded that a chief inspector 'is not by occupation a reformer or controversialist or even a publicist. His job is to advise on general issues' ('Report', April 1993 - March 1994, preface, 1). That had been the theory, but in fact he soon became all three. He moved rapidly from mere inspector and reporter to influential prison reformer, for criticism was allied to a vision of how decent and progressive prisons should be run. 
Tumim began by inspecting Liverpool and Pentonville prisons. What he discovered appalled him, and he decided immediately to 'instigate entirely fresh work on the introduction of integral sanitation' so as to bring as rapid an end as possible to the disgusting practice of 'slopping-out' urine and faeces from cell buckets every morning ('Report', 1987, para. 5.02). By December 1988 a 'thematic review' had been completed with a plan to achieve access to sanitation twenty-four hours a day for all prisoners within seven years, a task the prison department had estimated would take until 2017. Secondly he instituted a series of 'short inspections' so that action could be more swiftly taken on problems occurring over a wider range of establishments. Furthermore, he resolved to concentrate on 'treatment and conditions', noting 'consumer reactions to them', rather than spending time on issues of security and organization, which were more the responsibility of governors and regional directors (ibid., paras. 5.03-5.04). He carved for himself a special role in inspections, namely to gather views from prisoners rather than from officials. He was determined to overcome the delays (sometimes as long as seven months) in the publication by the Home Office of the inspector's reports, which had often allowed the authorities to deflect criticism by claiming that whatever had been discovered at the inspection had by now been remedied -- although Tumim himself was careful not to accuse the prison authorities of such a sinister motive. 
Tumim quickly became aware that the majority of prisoners were uneducated and disadvantaged young men, most of whom 'had committed offences relating to drugs or cars or drink' ('Report', April 1993 - March 1994, preface, 1). In a memorable passage he wrote: 'Young offenders constitute the biggest problem... We are fully conscious that they are offenders but remain far less conscious that they are young'. They needed 'to gain a stake in society' ('Report', April 1994 - March 1995, introduction, xvii). That could, in his view, only be achieved by ensuring decent conditions, humane treatment, and a moral agenda that would preserve human dignity and seek to educate and enlighten prisoners -- he was especially keen to encourage artistic gifts and art therapy through the Koestler Trust -- in preparation for their eventual release. He despised bullying and 'regimented and unconstructive' regimes that enforced idleness or provided only 'soulless employment' ('Report', 1989, para. 3.01 and January 1990 - March 1991, para. 6.41). But he was far from being sentimental: 'It is important to remember that if it is to be effective, the help given to prisoners must be sharp and urgent and based on an active life-style. Rewards and punishments must have a place as in other institutions' ('Report', April 1994 - March 1995, introduction, xviii). In reality he found many prison staff and prisoners caught in a trap of low expectations, a condition he described as 'a deadening experience for both groups' ('Report', 1989, para. 2.01) and one that would not be solved 'until the Prison Service is able to believe that [it] can be resolved...' ('Report', 1990-91, 1992-3). He was quick to encourage with praise whenever he found an institution with a positive regime. 
In 1990, he joined Lord Woolf in considering the lessons to be learned from the latter's monumental inquiry into the serious riots that had taken place at Manchester and other prisons. Their joint report (pt 2 of the Woolf report, 1991) was a landmark in setting a new agenda for the prison service. Yet the emphasis was less on Tumim's rather paternalistic conception of rehabilitation and more on the need to create a proper balance between the maintenance of security and control and ensuring justice for prisoners through a system of 'contracts'. He was enthusiastic about the government white paper 'Custody, Care and Justice', which embodied many of the recommendations of the report. 
Tumim courted the media, including advising and assisting programme researchers, and regularly appeared on the BBC 'Today' programme and television to publicize his reports. So successful was he that he became a household name -- a fearless, yet moderate, proponent of an approach that appealed to a wide range of liberally minded citizens who never before had considered what prisons were for or what the majority of prisoners were like. There was something in it, when he was described on BBC Radio 4's 'Desert Island Discs' as 'a revolutionary masquerading as an old buffer' ('The Independent', 12 Dec 2003). His celebrity status nevertheless had its drawbacks. It was discovered that he was high up on the IRA's hit-list. So seriously was the threat taken that he and his wife had to sell their London home on the Thames and move to a more easily guarded house. For two years he was driven everywhere in an armoured car with police escort, and visitors to his country cottage were greeted by men carrying sub-machine guns. It was typical of him that he carried on with great good humour. 
In 1995 the home secretary, Michael Howard, who was taking a tougher line on prisons, decided not to extend further Tumim's appointment. Tumim was undoubtedly very disappointed, but he had changed dramatically the role and standing of the prisons inspectorate, laying a foundation for his successors to build on. In 1996 he was knighted and was excited by his appointment as principal of St Edmund Hall, Oxford. Popular with the students, he nevertheless began to lose the confidence of the fellowship. He was not the fund-raiser they had hoped for, nor was he regarded as good at college administration. Furthermore he was at odds with some senior members. Always outspoken, his views about them got back to the college and in 1998 he resigned after a vote of no confidence. A lesser personality would have been crushed, but he kept up his public speaking and writing on prison matters (an essay, 'Crime and Punishment', was published in 1997) and was an active patron, trustee, or committee member of many organizations, including the ex-prisoners' charity Unlock. He received eleven honorary degrees as well as several fellowships, including an honorary fellowship of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. He was especially tickled and honoured by his appointment in 1995 to the ancient title of high steward of Wallingford. He died suddenly on 8 December 2003, while swimming, during a holiday in the Galapagos Islands, and was survived by his wife and their three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 93097


Watts, Sir John Peter Barry Condliffe (1930-2003), army officer, was born John Peter Barry Condliffe on 27 August 1930 at The Orchard, St George's Road, Portsmouth, the son of Leonora Emily Condliffe, drapers' shop assistant, of 4 Balfour Road, North End, Portsmouth. His mother subsequently married Gerald Walter Watts, civil engineer, and he took the surname Watts. In 1936 his mother and stepfather went to India. Watts attended school in Cornwall until he joined them in 1939 at the start of the Second World War. He attended schools in Quetta and other stations in north-west India, and acquired a lasting interest in and affection for the subcontinent. From Sheikh Bagh School, Srinagar, Kashmir, he went to Westminster School (1944-7), then, on an English Speaking Union scholarship, attended Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts, for a year. He went to Venezuela and reportedly worked as a bodyguard. Called up for national service in 1949, he attended officer cadet school at Eaton Hall, Cheshire. Selected for training for a regular commission, he attended the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. In February 1951 he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Ulster Rifles (RUR). After two years in Hong Kong (during which he was promoted lieutenant, in 1953) he volunteered for a tour with the Parachute regiment and joined the 3rd battalion in Suez early in 1954. Back in England, on 11 December 1954 he married Mary Elizabeth Gertrude Flynn, a 26-year-old state registered nurse, and daughter of Thomas Flynn, postal clerk. They had four sons and three daughters. 
In 1955 Watts's company was attached to 22 Special Air Service (SAS) for a two-year operational tour in Malaya during the emergency. David Stirling's original Second World War SAS had been disbanded in 1945, and 22 SAS was founded in Malaya in 1952: in the 1950s it was little known outside the army, and within the army had a low reputation as a 'shoddy' unit and career suicide for an officer. In Malaya, Watts first experienced the 'low intensity' counter-insurgency that became his speciality. After a posting to 1 RUR in Cyprus on emergency operations he was recalled to Malaya to command D squadron, 22 SAS. He took part in several major operations deep in the jungle, and was promoted captain. 
In 1957 the sultan of Oman, Said bin Taimur, requested British assistance against the Saudi-supported Imamist rebellion. The rebels held the Jebel Akhdar (Green Mountain) in northern Oman, a high massif with precipitous cliffs. RAF air power failed to dislodge them and the British government did not want to risk using a well-known regiment. In October 1958 D squadron, 22 SAS, commanded by Watts (by now a major), was rapidly recalled from the Perak jungle and sent to Oman. Watts blockaded the routes up the Jebel and by December had established a foothold on the slopes. Following the arrival of a second SAS squadron, on the night of 26 January 1959, though not fully recovered from malaria, he led a moonlit, daring, hazardous ascent of the Jebel cliff, forcing the rebels to flee. The short, successful campaign helped save 22 SAS from disbandment, and Watts was awarded an MC. 
In 1959 Watts was posted to 1 RUR in the British army of the Rhine. He then attended courses at the Royal Military College of Science, Shrivenham, Berkshire, and the Staff College, Quetta, Pakistan, and served as GSO2 at headquarters Berlin. In 1964 he returned to 22 SAS, then in Borneo and involved in the confrontation with Indonesia. The SAS was overstretched and needed another squadron there, so Watts raised and trained B squadron which, within a few months, was operational under his command. The SAS served in the jungle on arduous border surveillance, 'hearts and minds' activities, training the indigenous border scouts, attacking Indonesian incursions, and, from 1964, on the secret 'Claret' raids into Indonesian territory. In 1965 Watts took his squadron to Aden, where they fought rebel tribesmen in the Radfan. He returned to 1 RUR as a company commander for eighteen months before attending the United States overseas defence course in Virginia. In 1967 he went to Hong Kong as brigade major, 48 Gurkha infantry brigade, and in 1968 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Irish Rangers (into which the RUR had been amalgamated). 
In December 1969 Watts took command of 22 SAS. With defence cuts and possible disbanding of 22 SAS he wanted a new role for it and saw the potential of involvement in Oman, oil-exporting from 1967 but threatened by rebellion in the southern province of Dhofar, a harsh mountain area. The rebels were Marxist guerrillas supported by South Yemen, the USSR, and China, and armed with Soviet and Chinese weapons. By spring 1970 Oman was losing the war. This threatened British and Western interests, because of Oman's oil and strategic importance at the entrance to the gulf: 70 per cent of Europe's oil requirement and 30 per cent of the United States' passed through the Strait of Hormuz. In March 1970 Watts, as Mr Smith, flew to Oman, but Sultan Said rejected his proposals. In July Said was deposed by his son Qaboos in a palace coup supported, and allegedly plotted, by the British. Qaboos was Sandhurst-trained, a modernizer determined to win the war and develop Oman. Watts was sent to Oman to report on how to assist Qaboos's government. Using his counter-insurgency experience, he recommended a coherent plan for victory, with SAS participation including intelligence gathering, 'hearts and minds' assistance, civil development, raising Dhofari soldiers to fight for the sultan, and persuading rebels to change sides. With the American experience in Vietnam in mind, he was concerned at the political implications of British combat losses. Briefing Colonel Tony Jeapes before the latter left for Oman, he insisted, 'Whatever you do, you must not have casualties. Got it? Because if you do, that will be it -- finished. We will be withdrawn' (Jeapes, 61). Following Watts's plan, SAS soldiers in the innocuously named British Army Training Team raised and led 'firqats' (irregular units of local warriors) and, as in Malaya, used 'surrendered enemy personnel'. In October 1971 Watts commanded operation Jaguar, a successful offensive by G squadron SAS and Omani units, during which he personally rescued a wounded soldier under fire. On completion of his tour he was appointed OBE, in 1972. The war was not yet won, and he left feeling his task was unfinished. However, he contributed to the 'textbook counterinsurgency campaign' (Mockaitis, 93), resulting in victory by 1976. 
From 1972 to 1974 Watts was a stimulating instructor at the Staff College, Camberley. In 1974 he was briefly a staff colonel at the Ministry of Defence. From 1975 to 1978 he was director, as a brigadier, of the SAS group. The SAS was then operating in Northern Ireland in a different and controversial role, in plain clothes and clandestine. When two carloads of SAS soldiers had mistakenly entered the Irish Republic and been arrested, he accompanied them at their trial at Dublin. In 1979 he was appointed CBE. 
The British-seconded post of commander of the sultan of Oman's land forces was due to become vacant in 1979. Qaboos rejected the officer proposed by the British government and instead requested Watts. From 1979 to 1984 Watts commanded the sultan's land forces, modernizing and accelerating the replacement of British officers and NCOs by Omanis. Promoted lieutenant-general, he was chief of defence staff in Oman from 1984 to 1987. Appointed CB in 1985, he was knighted in the new year's honours list of 1988. He retired to Wiltshire, but repeatedly revisited Oman and was visited by Omani friends. His first marriage had been dissolved in 1986 and on 13 February that year he married Diana Merran Watts, formerly Walker. A 45-year-old divorcee, and daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Reginald Steward, army officer, she had already changed her name to Watts by deed poll by the time of their marriage. 
Short, stocky, and swarthy, with 'an engagingly crumpled face' (de la Billiere, 128), a 'great wide grin' (Fiennes, 'The Feather Men', 306), dark eyes, black hair, deep-voiced, and often scruffy and careless of his appearance, Watts was a heavy smoker. Brave, tough, determined, enthusiastic, and resourceful, he was described by Sir Peter de la Billiere (who served as his second-in-command) as 'an exceptional leader... a real soldier's soldier... much loved by the soldiers, and a marvellous man to work for' (de la Billiere, 128-9, 259). He had an easy, self-deprecating charm, was well-read, loved poetry, and was interested in political and military history, especially of the north-west frontier. He died on 10 December 2003 at his home, Swaynes, Salisbury Road, Steeple Langford, Salisbury, Wiltshire, of a ruptured aortic aneurysm, and was survived by his wife, Diana, and the seven children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 93100


Aiken, Joan Delano (1924-2004), children's writer, was born on 4 September 1924 at Jeakes House, Mermaid Street, Rye, Sussex, the younger daughter and youngest of three children of Conrad Potter Aiken (1889-1973), an American Pulitzer prize-winning poet and writer, and his Canadian-born first wife, Jessie, 'nee' McDonald (1889-1970), who was also a writer. Her parents' marriage was dissolved in 1929 and another writer was added to Aiken's family the following year with her mother's marriage to the novelist Martin Armstrong (1882-1974). 
With her older sister Jane (1917-2009), the writer Jane Aiken Hodge -- their brother John Aiken (1913-1990) was also a writer -- Joan was educated at home by her mother until she was twelve, when she was sent to Wychwood School in Oxford (1936-40). Her education at home included learning Latin, Greek, Spanish, and German as well as being read the English classics, including Charles Dickens, whose 'Oliver Twist' was to have a particularly strong influence on her. She began writing stories when she was five; from this early age, she and her sister Jane swapped details of the imaginary worlds they created throughout their childhood while also providing entertainment for their younger stepbrother, David. 
At sixteen, while away at school, Aiken wrote her first full-length novel and at eighteen she had 'The Dreamer', her first short story for adults, accepted for publication. From then on, she wrote three distinct categories of children's books: short stories, fiction for ten to fourteen year olds, and short novels for younger readers. In 1941 she had her first public success when her short story 'The Parrot Pirate Princess' was broadcast by the BBC in their 'Children's Hour' programme. Between 1943 and 1949 she worked as an information officer, and later as the librarian, at the United Nations' London information centre. On 7 July 1945 she married Ronald George Brown (1911-1955), a news agency journalist and the son of Albert Brown, engineer; the couple had a son, John, and a daughter, Elizabeth, before Brown's death from tuberculosis. In the years following her husband's death Aiken worked as a journalist, including five years as features editor at 'Argosy' magazine (1955-60), and as a copywriter for J. Walter Thompson (1960-61). 
Aiken's first two published works, 'All You've Ever Wanted and Other Stories' (1953) and 'More Than You've Bargained For and Other Stories' (1955), were both collections of short stories for children. Aiken was to become renowned for collections of this kind and in particular for 'A Necklace of Raindrops and Other Stories' (1968), 'A Small Pinch of Weather and Other Stories' (1969), and the 'Last Slice of Rainbow and Other Stories' (1985), all of which include some magical and fantastical 'fairy stories', which were her preferred style for this genre. 
Aiken made her name as an exceptional writer for children with her second novel, 'The Wolves of Willoughby Chase' (1962). Set in an imaginary nineteenth-century Britain that was already linked to Europe by a tunnel through which wolves freely roamed, this is a dramatic gothic adventure with a strong Dickensian feel, especially in the naming of the characters: Miss Slighcarp, the evil governess, Mrs Brisket, the cruel headmistress, and Mrs Bloodvessel, the landlady who was ready to fleece poor children of all they had. The title launched a series of novels that was to occupy Aiken for the rest of her life. In the second, 'Black Hearts in Battersea' (1964), she introduced Dido Twite, a resourceful and feisty girl from a poverty-stricken background whose morals and intelligence led her socially upwards. Although she was not always the central character, Dido Twite's story lies at the heart of the sequence of titles that includes 'The Whispering Mountain' (1969), which won the 1969 'Guardian' children's book prize, 'Dido and Pa' (1986), and the concluding volume, 'The Witch of Clatteringshaws', which was published posthumously in 2005. She wrote other stories for this age group, including 'Night Fall' (1969), which won the 1972 Mystery Writers of America Edgar Allan Poe award. 
Aiken's stories for younger, or newer, readers were launched by a commission from the BBC's children's programme 'Jackanory'. For them she created Arabel and her constant companion the monstrous raven Mortimer. They made a marvellous double act. Aiken later described them in the following terms: 'Arabel is the ego, the perfectly sensible good side and Mortimer is the id, unrepressed passion, and they kind of balance each other' (M. Rosen and J. Burridge, 'Treasure Islands 2', 1993, 19). They appeared first in 'Arabel's Raven' (1972) and then in 'Mortimer's Tie' (1976), followed by a number of sequels including 'Mortimer Says Nothing' (1985). In addition to her writing for children Aiken wrote adult novels, the first of which was 'The Silence of Herondale' (1964). Among her adult titles were eleven crime novels including 'Trouble with Product X' (1966) (entitled 'Beware of the Banquet' in the United States) and 'Foul Matter' (1983). In 1999 she was appointed MBE for her services to literature. After becoming a full-time writer in the early 1960s she lived at Petworth, Sussex, moving finally to The Hermitage on East Street. On 2 September 1976 she married the American artist and teacher Julius Israel Goldstein (1918-2001), whose father of the same name had been a company director, and following her marriage also spent time in New York. She died at The Hermitage on 4 January 2004 after a fall. She was survived by her two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93114


Doniach, Deborah (1912-2004), immunologist, was born on 6 April 1912 in Geneva, Switzerland, the eldest of the three daughters of Arieh Abileah (1885-1985), a Ukranian-born concert pianist and accompanist of the violinist Josef Szigeti, and his wife, Fee Heltes (1886-1983), born Fea Geller in Poltava, Ukraine. Her parents were of Jewish descent. Her father, who was born Joseph Niswitzki, later emigrated to Palestine where he became a professor at the Jerusalem Conservatory of Music. Her mother, inspired by Isadora Duncan, created a novel school of dance and movement in Paris. The family moved frequently during the First World War and eventually settled in Paris, where Deborah was educated at the Lycee Moliere, and later became a medical student at the Sorbonne. On 2 August 1933 she married at St Marylebone register office, London, Israel (Sonny) Doniach (1911-2001), a medical student and son of Aaron Doniach, schoolteacher. The couple had met in Palestine in 1925 and later had a son, Sebastian ('b'. 1934), and a daughter, Vera (1936-1958). Sonny Doniach subsequently became professor of pathology at the London Hospital and a specialist in the diagnosis and treatment of thyroid cancer. Deborah's studies were interrupted by her move to London, but in time she enrolled at the Royal Free Medical School. After graduation she worked for four years as an assistant lecturer in chemical pathology at the Middlesex Hospital, London, and as a research assistant first at the Royal Free Hospital and then, crucially, at the Middlesex as an endocrinologist with the eminent thyroid surgeon Rupert Vaughan Hudson from 1953. She spent the remainder of her career at the Middlesex where she joined the newly formed department of immunology and soon became an honorary consultant immunopathologist and, from 1974, professor of clinical immunology. 
In 1956 Doniach was engaged in research on patients with the thyroid inflammatory disorder Hashimoto's disease. She noted that the serum protein fraction that contains the body's general store of antibodies (which protect against infection) fell from elevated to normal levels after removal of the thyroid. Also aware that the patient's thyroid contained many plasma cells, normally known to produce antibodies to foreign moieties such as microbes, she astutely formed the idea that they were responding to a stimulus within the gland itself. Two colleagues, Ivan Roitt and Peter Campbell, were at the time studying the possibility that autoimmune reactions to milk proteins might help to restrain the growth of certain breast cancers. It was perhaps inevitable that collaboration between Doniach, Roitt, and Campbell would generate the hypothesis that the plasma cells in the Hashimoto gland might be reacting not against external microbes but against 'normal' thyroid components. It was rapidly confirmed that the serum of these patients did in fact react with normal thyroid extracts. The result was the pioneering discovery of the damaging consequence of reaction of a patient's immune system with their own tissues, so-called autoimmune disease. Such was the import of these observations that the preliminary communication was published in 'The Lancet' within a week of receipt. 
Their initial collaboration began an extremely fruitful partnership between Doniach and Roitt, which also involved many gifted postdoctoral scientists and clinicians. Together they elucidated the nature of the thyroid components evoking autoantibodies in Hashimoto's disease, revealed the involvement of the acid-producing parietal cells in the gastric autoimmunity of pernicious anaemia, and formulated the concept of a spectrum of autoimmune disorders: this ranged from organ-specific or restricted diseases such as Hashimoto thyroiditis and pernicious anaemia at one pole, to the rheumatological disorders involving antibodies and widely distributed body components such as DNA at the other. Intensive studies later revealed the central role of mitochondrial autoimmunity in the liver disease primary biliary cirrhosis. In the late 1960s Doniach pursued a wonderfully productive independent path which uncovered the critical evidence for autoimmunity in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and the existence of thyroid growth-promoting and growth-inhibitory antibodies. The care she had for the patients in her thyroid clinic and her awareness of the diagnostic value of the antibodies in these autoimmune diseases were driving forces behind the establishment of a diagnostic clinical immunology routine service, which subsequently became a standard provision in virtually all major pathology laboratories. Her contribution was recognized by numerous awards, including the Van Meter prize of the American Goitre Association (jointly) in 1957, the Toronto-based Gairdner award (jointly) in 1964, and in 1967 the prize of the British Postgraduate Medical Federation. She was also elected woman scientist of the year in 1984 by the Association of American Women Scientists. 
Deborah Doniach retired from the Middlesex Hospital in the late 1980s, though she never lost her enthusiasm for reading and writing about science and published her last review in 2000. Indeed, she was enthusiastic not just about science but also, as a true scholar, about the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake. She undertook detailed studies of Shakespeare, Byron, Freud, Moliere, and latterly Spinoza with great enthusiasm. Among her many talents were a fluency in several languages and an accomplished soprano voice. She loved the arts but hated sports, and could not understand her husband's interest in watching football on television. A warm and friendly person, she was always open to new ideas and willing to help young research workers and clinicians. Her extraordinary zest for life was inspiring and guaranteed that never a dull moment would be had in her company. After a relationship of seventy-five years her husband died in February 2001. Deborah Doniach died of cancer at St John's Hospice, Westminster, on 1 January 2004. She was survived by her son, Sebastian, a professor of physics at Stanford University, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 93115


Dudgeon, Antony Greville (1916-2004), air force officer, was born in a lunatic asylum -- a fact of which he was always proud -- at Khanka, twenty miles north of Cairo, on 6 February 1916, the younger son and youngest of three children of Herbert William Dudgeon (1873-1935), head of the mental health organization for Egypt and Palestine, and his wife, Jessie Gertrude, 'nee' Palmer ('b'. 1873), from a banking family. He was educated at Eton College (1929-33), then won a fee-paying scholarship to the Royal Air Force College, Cranwell, in January 1934. He graduated in December 1935, having been awarded the prestigious Groves prize as the year's best cadet pilot. 
Dudgeon's first posting was to 11 squadron, equipped with single-engined Hawker Hart biplanes (later with twin-engined Bristol Blenheim bombers), at Risalpur on India's north-west frontier. After four years in India he was recalled to England, but when his ship reached Egypt in June 1940 he was required to join 45 squadron as a flight commander, and in October he took command of 55 squadron (both flying Blenheims). From a base west of Alexandria he led his squadron in many attacks on Italian targets in Libya. He was awarded a DFC in February 1941. 
Posted in April 1941 to 4 flying training school at Habbaniyyah in Iraq, fifty miles west of Baghdad, for a rest, Dudgeon suddenly found himself back at war. A rising began in Iraq on 3 April under Rashid Ali al-Gaylani, the spokesman of a pro-Nazi junta, and Habbaniyyah -- a key training base and staging post between Egypt and India -- was soon surrounded. For once the British reacted swiftly: troops marched from Palestine and air reinforcements came from Basrah, but for four critical weeks Habbaniyyah depended on a flying training school equipped with obsolete aircraft, non-operational instructors, and pupil pilots. Inspired by Dudgeon (one of the few men with recent combat experience), they improvised a bomber and fighter force and (despite severe losses both of pilots and of aircraft) drove away their besiegers. Later, in 1942, Sir Arthur Tedder (head of British air forces in the Middle East) told Dudgeon that if the school had surrendered, 'the Germans would have got a foothold in Iraq. If they had then created a bridgehead behind us, through Vichy-controlled Syria from Greece, our Middle East base could have been nipped out with German forces both to its east and west. We might then have lost the war. (Orange, 132)' Dudgeon was promoted to wing commander in March 1942 and sent to the headquarters of 216 group in Cairo -- delaying his arrival in order to marry Phyllis Margaret (Phyl) McFarlane ('c'.1922-1994), daughter of his commanding officer in India, John McFarlane, in All Saints' Cathedral, Cairo, on 5 May 1942. From Egypt he patrolled the route along which numerous aircraft were flown from Takoradi in the Gold Coast to Cairo via several staging posts, a distance of 4000 miles. He was an exceptional pilot and would fly anything in any kind of weather. In July 1943 he returned to England, defying regulations (as he often did) by taking his heavily pregnant wife with him. They eventually had two children, Michael ('b'. 1943) and Jacqueline ('b'. 1946). He joined Transport Command and played a part in planning and executing operations on the continent in 1944-5. 
After a staff college course in 1946 Dudgeon spent three years conducting transport operations during the Malayan emergency. He served briefly in the Air Ministry until July 1952 when he took command of RAF Benson, south of Oxford. Now a group captain and known to have a practical, no-nonsense, good-humoured approach to all problems, he was invited to review the terms and conditions of airmen's employment; his review resulted in several lasting reforms and earned him a CBE in 1955. From December of that year he commanded RAF Bruggen, on the Dutch-German border, and got four squadrons of Hawker Hunter fighters ready for operations before a defence review in 1957 suddenly disbanded them. On promotion to air commodore in January 1962, he was put in charge of air cadets, then made director of flight safety, and finally (as an air vice-marshal) acted as chief of staff to the British defence staff in Washington. 
Dudgeon retired from the RAF in April 1968 and spent the next ten years as head of the Paris office of McKinsey & Co., management consultants. He was then representative in France of Grangersol Ltd (1978-81), before returning to England. As well as regular contributions to 'Blackwood's Magazine' and 'The Aeroplane', he published three books: 'The Luck of the Devil' (1985, revised as 'Delightful and Dangerous' in 2002), covering the years 1934-41; 'Wings Over North Africa' (1987, revised as 'A North African Pilot' in 2002), about the years 1941-3; and a detailed narrative of the Habbaniyyah campaign, 'The War that Never Was' (1991, revised as 'Hidden Victory' in 2000). He tried in vain to get a battle honour awarded to 4 flying training school for its gallant resistance to Iraqis and Germans in 1941, but Air Ministry bureaucrats insisted that a training school was not an operational unit, no matter how many operations it flew to help meet a crisis. 
Tony Dudgeon was a liveryman of the Mercer's Company, and served on the committee of the RAF Benevolent Fund. He was an expert photographer and fluent in both Arabic and French. His wife, Phyllis, died in 1994 and a year later he moved to 155 Rivermead Court, Ranelagh Gardens, Fulham. He spent his last six years with Regine Oliver; his son, Michael, said that meeting Regine was 'a small miracle', bringing her and his father a 'marvellous companionship' (M. Dudgeon, memorial address). He died on 5 January 2004 at Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, London, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93116


Dunstan, Gordon Reginald (1917-2004), Church of England clergyman, theologian, and writer on medical ethics, was born on 25 April 1917 at 79 Beaumont Street, Stoke, Plymouth, the son of Frederick John Menhenett Dunstan, an engineer's draftsman at the city's naval dockyard, and his wife, Winifred Amy, 'nee' Orchard. He was educated at Plymouth grammar school before studying history at the University of Leeds, where he took a first-class degree in 1938 and graduated MA with distinction in 1939. A proud Devonian, he maintained his historical interests throughout his life, publishing 'The Register of Edmund Lacy, Bishop of Exeter, 1420-1455' in five volumes between 1963 and 1972. 
After training for ordination at the College of the Resurrection in Mirfield, Yorkshire, Dunstan served in curacies in Halifax and Huddersfield before becoming sub-warden at St Deniol's Library, Hawarden (1945-9). On 23 August 1949 he married Ruby Maud (Ruth) Fitzer (died 2003), a 34-year-old teacher and daughter of Herbert John Fitzer, a retired naval seaman; they had two sons and a daughter. In the same year he became vicar of Sutton Courtenay in Berkshire, where he conducted the funeral of Eric Blair (George Orwell), and Appleford in Oxfordshire, where he ministered until 1955. During this time he was also a lecturer at William Temple College, Rugby (1947-9), and Ripon Hall, Oxford (1953-5). Then began a series of posts in which Dunstan shaped the Church of England's social policy in ways that had a marked influence on government. Between 1955 and 1959 he was a minor canon at St George's Chapel, Windsor, and at Westminster Abbey from 1959 to 1965, during which time he was also secretary to the Church of England's council for social work (1955-63), editor of the council's journal 'Crucible' (1962-6), and later of 'Theology' (1965-75). In their different ways both journals bridged academic theology and pastoral practice. From 1966 he was canon-theologian of Leicester Cathedral and in the following year was appointed the first F. D. Maurice professor of moral and social theology at King's College, London, where he taught for fifteen years. At that time the F. D. Maurice chair was one of only three such posts in England, the others being at Oxford and Manchester. While at King's College he was for six years from 1976 chaplain to the queen. 
Dunstan stood in a tradition of Anglican moral and social thought particularly influenced by Kenneth Kirk, Robert Mortimer, and Alec Vidler. Dunstan insisted that the study of ethics started with philosophy, and his undergraduate courses began with Aristotle and Aquinas. His own ethical work nearly always opened with a description and analysis of the facts of the case. He was meticulous in his listening to, and questioning of, practitioners in every field of inquiry and he put theology to the service of these other disciplines. On one undergraduate's essay he commented, 'Best not to begin with the 'Bible''. Yet he was clear that the scriptures and Christian tradition illuminated and guided those facing moral problems and dilemmas. Within King's he built a reputation for working with other disciplines, notably medicine and the new war studies department. He was made a fellow of the college in 1974. 
Dunstan's first book, 'The Family is not Broken' (1962), led to his playing a major role in the work of a group appointed by Michael Ramsey, archbishop of Canterbury, and chaired by Robert Mortimer, to advise on changes to the divorce law. Their report, 'Putting Asunder' (1966), built on the distinction between law and morality, its own remit being the law. In place of the 'matrimonial offences' -- with the notion of there being an 'innocent' against a 'guilty' party, which all too often bore no relation to the facts -- the report proposed irretrievable breakdown as the basis for divorce, contributing materially to the 'Divorce Reform Act' (1969). 
In what was perhaps his most important book, 'The Artifice of Ethics' (1974), Dunstan developed the idea that the moralist's task was to help build institutions and conventions that supported morality. In keeping with this he served on a considerable number of government committees and advisory and regulatory bodies, notably concerning medical ethics but also the licensing of experiments on animals. This period also saw the development of in-vitro fertilization, which some sought to ban while others refused to consider the difficulties and disadvantages that might arise from this new medical procedure. With government policies slow to emerge, Dunstan in the interim (1985-91) served on the Voluntary Licensing Authority, which had no legal power but considerable authority, refusing or granting licences to projected work. The authority's work was hugely influential on the way this work was continued by its official successor. A series of later books, typically co-written with medical writers, explored the ethical implications of a range of medical developments and situations. These works included 'Consent in Medicine' (1983) and 'The Status of the Human Embryo: Perspectives from Moral Tradition' (1988), both edited with Mary J. Seller; 'Biomedical Ethics: an Anglo-American Dialogue' (1988, edited with Daniel Callahan); 'Doctors' Decisions: Ethical Conflicts in Medical Practice' (1989, edited with Elliot Shinebourne); and 'Euthanasia: Death, Dying and the Medical Duty' (1996, edited with Peter Lachmann). Uniquely for a priest Dunstan was made a fellow of all the royal medical colleges, a measure of the very high regard in which he was held by that profession. Between 1985 and 2001 he was also vice-president of the London Medical Group, which did much to foster the consideration of ethics in medical training, and of the Institute of Medical Ethics. 
Dunstan's thought was always elegantly expressed and his manner was immensely courteous. At King's College he was a committed teacher of undergraduates, who included Njongonkulu Ndungane, later archbishop of Cape Town. At times he could also be fierce. He disliked mean-spiritedness, loose thinking, and sloth. 
With his wife, Ruth, who was also a considerable theologian, Dunstan created a hospitable home. In 'retirement', which he described as a myth, the couple moved to Exeter, where he became an honorary research fellow of the university (1982-2002). He had been awarded an honorary doctorate by Exeter University in 1973 and his career was similarly recognized by the University of Leicester in 1986. Three years later he was appointed CBE. In their last years, after he had lost his sight, Dunstan and his wife cared for each other beautifully and were supported by their family and their local church. They moved to Birmingham to be near their younger son, where Ruth predeceased him in 2003. Gordon Dunstan died on 15 January 2004 at Selly Oak Hospital, Birmingham, following a stroke; he was survived by his three children. At his memorial service in the chapel at Exeter University, Helen, Lady Oppenheimer, a collaborator and friend, wondered if Dunstan was a traditionalist or liberal. She concluded he had a traditionalist heart, nurtured by the 'Book of Common Prayer', but he followed the argument where it led and was capable of changing his mind, for example about the ordination of women. 


@@@@@


doc= 93122


Fulton, Robert Kerr (1924-2004), actor and comedian, was born on 15 April 1924 at 46 Appin Road, Dennistoun, Glasgow, the third and youngest son of John Fulton (died 1966), hardware salesman, and later stationer and newsagent, and his wife, Margaret McMillan, 'nee' Moffat (died 1956). When Fulton was three the family moved to Riddrie, where he went to primary school, but then moved back to Dennistoun, where he attended Whitehill secondary school. After leaving school (where his talent for acting was already apparent) at fourteen, he worked as a customs clerk before volunteering for the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (RNVR) at the age of seventeen. After passing out as an ordinary seaman, he joined the anti-aircraft sloop HMS 'Ibis' on 26 September 1942. When the ship was torpedoed off north Africa on 10 November two-thirds of the company perished, and Fulton was in the water for five hours before being rescued. Commissioned as a midshipman in the RNVR, he was posted as first lieutenant to a coastal forces motor launch, which, following D-day, plied ceaselessly between Gosport and the Mulberry harbour at Arromanches. He was promoted sub-lieutenant on his nineteenth birthday, but the strain of continuous operations eventually led to blackouts, and he was invalided out of the service for the remainder of the Second World War. 
Back in Glasgow, while working as a manufacturer's agent, Rikki Fulton joined the amateur theatre group the Pantheon Club and soon gained his first radio work with the BBC, in 'The Gowrie Conspiracy', and as the Revd McCrepe in the popular series 'The McFlannels'. He also appeared in 'Scott of Abbotsford' for Perth Repertory Theatre. On 2 April 1949 he married Ethel Muriel Philpotts, a 23-year-old optical instrument research worker, and daughter of Frederick Philpotts, fish merchant. She was also an aspiring actress, with the stage name Ethel Scott, and later worked as Fulton's partner in revue. 
In 1952 Fulton appeared in the film 'Laxdale Hall' and in 'Festival City' at the Gateway Theatre for the Edinburgh Festival. Between 1952 and 1955 he worked for the BBC in London as presenter and compere on a range of radio programmes, including 'The Show Band Show', 'The Saturday Show' (with Alfred Marks), 'Club Piccadilly', and the television programme 'Music Hall Time'. Over this period he worked with such leading names as Nat King Cole, Rosemary Clooney, and his idol, Frank Sinatra. In 1956 he returned to Scotland to begin a ten-year association with the production company Howard and Wyndham, appearing as dame in his first pantomime, 'Goldilocks', at the King's Theatre, Edinburgh, with Jimmy Logan, and the following year in the company's glamorous revue, 'The Five Past Eight Show', with Alec Findlay and Kenneth McKellar. His elegant comic talents were perfectly suited to the revue format, which also offered an outlet for his writing. In 1960 he appeared in 'A Wish For Jamie', Howard and Wyndham's Scottish pantomime at the Alhambra, Glasgow, which proved so successful that it was repeated the following year, playing to 427,000 people, and spawning two sequels. 
It was in the 1958 'Five Past Eight Show' with Stanley Baxter that Fulton first played in the sketch involving Francie and Josie, two Glasgow teddy boys. However, the characters came to life in the show's 1960 edition, at the Alhambra, Glasgow, and King's Theatre, Edinburgh, when he was paired with Jack Milroy. The sketch was initially put in as a short opener to the second half, where it was intended to draw the audience back from the bars. Fulton's and Milroy's natural rapport and ability to extemporize dialogue soon led to what became the Arbroath sketch, an excruciatingly distended scene in which Francie (Milroy) encourages his friend to tell again a funny story, which it transpires Josie (Fulton) has not only completely forgotten, in every detail, but also doesn't 'get'. The full impact of the characters' popularity was not felt until the broadcast of STV's 'The Adventures of Francie and Josie', which led to queues around the King's Theatre, Glasgow, where the two were appearing, and to their being mobbed at public appearances. The two were named television and radio industries personalities of the year in 1963. The television show ran for three series, but a 1966 follow-up for STV, 'The Rikki Fulton Hour', proved a flop. Having separated from his first wife in August 1967 while appearing in Aberdeen, Fulton met Kate Matheson (1936-2005), formerly Audrey Matheson Craig Brown, an actress and television newsreader who was the daughter of William Craig Brown, grocery sales representative. Immediately inseparable, they married on 13 August 1969 after Fulton's divorce. 
In 1978 Fulton began the BBC television sketch show 'Scotch and Wry', which ran for fourteen years. A hogmanay institution, its gallery of characters included the blundering police motorcyclist Supercop, the Gallowgate Gourmet, Dirtie Dickie Dandruff, and, most famously, the Revd I. M. Jolly, a depressive Presbyterian minister whose lugubrious deadpan appearance in 'Last Call', a satirical take on 'Late Call', eventually led to a number of separate spinoffs. Although only once broadcast across the UK network, in 1982, the series was hugely popular in Scotland, at its height attracting 2 million viewers and outselling 'Fawlty Towers' on its video release. 
A hugely versatile performer, Rikki Fulton combined his work in television comedy and as a consummate pantomime dame with a wide range of stage and screen roles. His theatre appearances included Michael Frayn's 'Liberty Hall' at the Greenwich Theatre, 'Let Wives Tak Tent' (both 1981), and his own adaptation of Moliere's 'Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme', 'A Wee Touch o' Class', for Perth Theatre and the 1985 and 1986 Edinburgh festivals. His television work included Autolycus in 'The Winter's Tale' (1981) and McPhail in 'The Tales of Para Handy' (1993), while his film appearances included 'The Dollar Bottom' (1981), a KGB officer in 'Gorky Park' (1983), and roles in Bill Forsyth's 'Local Hero' (1983) and 'Comfort and Joy' (1984). His many awards included appointment as OBE in 1992, honorary doctorates from the universities of Strathclyde and Abertay, and a BAFTA lifetime achievement award in 1993. In 1996 Francie and Josie's 'Nineteenth Final Farewell Performance' at the King's Theatre, Glasgow, played to rapt audiences. In 1997 Fulton was honoured by BBC Scotland for fifty years with the BBC, and in 1999 he published his autobiography, 'Is It That Time Already?'

Fulton was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease in 2002. His and Kate's decision publicly to announce his condition was widely praised. In 2003 he appeared in a television documentary with Kirsty Wark about the devastating effects of the disease. His death at the Quayside Nursing Home, Halley Street, Glasgow, on 27 January 2004 was the occasion of an outpouring of tributes: a motion tabled in the Scottish parliament applauded his 'mesmerizing' performances, while the first minister, Jack McConnell, described him as 'Mr Hogmanay' and 'one of Scotland's great entertainers' ('Evening Times', 28 Jan 2004); John Swinney, leader of the Scottish National Party, termed him 'a national treasure' (ibid.). On 3 February Strathclyde police paid their own tribute to Supercop by providing police motorcyclists to escort the funeral cortege to Clydebank crematorium. It was a further measure of the enormous affection in which he was held that in September 2006 a staged tribute, 'Rikki and Me', based on Kate Fulton's autobiography of 2004, played to packed houses at the King's Theatre, Glasgow. Kate Fulton was by then also dead, having survived her husband by less than fifteen months; many papers suggested that she had died of a broken heart. There were no children of either marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 93125


Grandy, Sir John (1913-2004), air force officer, was born on 8 February 1913 at Northwood, Middlesex, the only son of Francis Grandy (died 1932), a jewellery dealer, and his wife, Nell, 'nee' Lines (died 1948). Educated at Northwood preparatory school and then at University College School, he spent much of his spare time watching the flying at nearby Northolt and soon decided this was the career for him. In September 1931, having overcome his parents' misgivings, he joined the Royal Air Force on a short service commission and learned to fly at RAF Sealand. He spent the next three years at Hornchurch, Essex, with 54 squadron piloting Bulldogs, and in 1935 he became an instructor with 604 squadron of the Auxiliary Air Force at Hendon. Thereafter, having received a permanent commission and qualified as an A1 instructor at the Central Flying School, he continued on these critically important duties until the early months of the Second World War. On 1 September 1937 he married Cecile Elizabeth Florence Rankin, aged twenty-three, the younger daughter of Sir Robert Rankin, baronet, with whom he had two sons. 
Soon after the outbreak of war, Grandy joined the front line in Fighter Command, where he took command of the re-formed 249 squadron, equipped with Hurricanes. Having brought it up to operational standard he moved it in July 1940 to Church Fenton, Yorkshire, and soon afterwards south to Boscombe Down in Wiltshire. Here one of his pilots, Flying Officer James Nicolson, fought the engagement which brought him the only Victoria Cross awarded in the battle of Britain. On 1 September 249 squadron moved yet again, this time to North Weald, and when the battle ended it had been credited with destroying more German aircraft than any other squadron. Grandy, however, missed the closing stages of the action, having been shot down on 6 September and suffering leg injuries which prevented him flying for two months -- though he remained in command. 
Grandy spent short spells back in training and as wing commander flying at Coltishall, and then in 1942 he took command of RAF Duxford, Cambridgeshire, where a wing had been formed to develop the Hawker Typhoon as the successor to the Hurricane. Though the Typhoon's limitations as a fighter interceptor were quickly becoming apparent, Grandy realized its potential as a low-level strike aircraft, the role it was later to demonstrate with marked success during the Normandy invasion. Grandy himself had by then moved on, still on air defence duties, first in north Africa and then the Suez Canal zone, where he commanded 73 (fighter) operational training unit in 1943-4. Increasingly frustrated at being isolated from the final stages of the European war, he was sent to Burma to lead 341 wing, whose four Dakota transport squadrons were to play key roles in supporting General Slim's Fourteenth Army during the closing seven months of the war against Japan. He thus gained invaluable experience of carrying out air operations in close collaboration with land forces. Thereafter he stayed in Singapore at headquarters 232 group, much involved in the repatriation of prisoners of war and the campaign in the Netherlands East Indies. 
Grandy returned home in 1946 and attended the Staff College at Camberley. He then moved for the first time to the Air Ministry for operational training duties, and followed this with two years as air attache in Belgium, which provided him with valuable insights into the diplomatic world. By late 1950 he was back in Fighter Command, where he stayed for six years in staff posts and as commandant of the central fighter establishment, much concerned with the introduction of the new Hunter and Javelin jet fighters. He was made a CB in 1956. Then in 1957 his future potential was recognized by his selection for the Imperial Defence College, where his studies were suddenly cut short. To his great surprise he was immediately promoted to air vice-marshal in order to command the second phase of operation Grapple, the British hydrogen bomb tests at Christmas Island, in the Pacific. These he found both impressive and sobering, persuading him that the very existence of such powerful weapons made major war virtually unthinkable. This conviction was to underlie much of his work in the very senior appointments he was to hold during the 1960s. 
Having spent two years in the Air Ministry as assistant chief of air staff (operations), in January 1961 Grandy went to Germany to fill the first of his three successive commander-in-chief posts. He was knighted KBE the same year. This was a time of high tension, marked not least by the building of the Berlin Wall soon after his arrival. Yet while he had to cope with major RAF force reductions he did much to foster co-operation with the British army of the Rhine and to integrate the Belgian, Dutch, and West German air forces into the 2nd allied tactical air force. In 1963 he returned to England to take over from Air Chief Marshal Sir Kenneth Cross at Bomber Command. Here the V-bomber force continued to provide Britain's nuclear deterrent, but with the Skybolt air-launched missile having recently been cancelled, these increasingly vulnerable aircraft were now required to switch to low-level operations. Consequently Grandy had not just to master a hitherto unfamiliar aspect of air power but also to adapt it to a new concept, a problem further complicated by the unexpected withdrawal of his Valiant bomber squadrons owing to metal fatigue. Despite these difficulties he ensured that his command remained highly effective in the deterrent role, and himself flew one of its Vulcans around the world. 
Grandy's third and final command appointment in May 1965 came as a total contrast, though on familiar territory in the Far East. Grandy became commander-in-chief of Far East command in Singapore and was responsible for the forces of all three British services while the 'confrontation' campaign against Indonesia was still in progress and was involving the forces of several other Commonwealth nations. By the time he returned home two years later he had witnessed the campaign's successful conclusion, observed the difficulties being encountered by the Americans in Vietnam, and gained almost unparalleled knowledge of the RAF front line. 
Grandy became chief of air staff on 1 April 1967 at a time when the defence staff was becoming increasingly centralized and major economies were being sought. Having been made KCB in 1964 he was promoted GCB in 1967. His four years in office included the closing stages of the main British withdrawals from east of Suez, events whose inevitability he accepted with great reluctance. He also had to accept the cancellation of the Anglo-French Variable Geometry aircraft and of the order for the American F-111 long-range strike aircraft, which entailed complex discussions with Denis Healey, Labour's secretary of state for defence, with whom he worked for most of his time in office. There was a tinge of sadness too in June 1969, when, in sending a signal to mark the transfer of Britain's strategic nuclear deterrent role to the Royal Navy, he wrote: 'the task has meant maintaining, at all times through seven years, the highest state of readiness which the RAF has known in peacetime' (Probert, 'High Commanders'). There was also much to take credit for. One of the RAF's great success stories, the vertical-take-off-and-landing Harrier, entered service in that same year, and even more importantly the decision was taken -- jointly with West Germany and Italy -- to develop the multi-role combat aircraft, eventually to be known as the Tornado. Moreover the establishment in 1968 of Strike Command in the face of strong emotional resistance from the traditionalists paved the way for the future United Kingdom command structure. When Grandy handed over in April 1971 his was an air force that had been much changed under the pressures of economy but was still intact. 
Barely two years later Grandy was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of Gibraltar, the first RAF incumbent of this prestigious post. Here, at the height of the cold war, the route past the Rock into the Mediterranean, much used by the Soviet navy, needed to be kept under constant surveillance. Serious problems were also caused by the Spanish government's blockade of Gibraltar's own land, sea, and air routes throughout the 1970s. Much regarded locally, Grandy departed in 1978 and immediately moved to Windsor Castle where he spent his next ten years serving the queen as constable and governor. He was appointed GCVO in 1988. 
During his retirement Grandy also found time to assist numerous service causes. The Imperial War Museum was particularly significant; during his eleven years as chairman of trustees he contributed greatly to the development of the American Air Museum at Duxford. Among other interests were the RAF Benevolent Fund, the Burma Star Association, the RAF Church at St Clement Danes, London, the Officers' Association, the Officers' Pension Society, the Air League, and the Polish Air Force Association. He was also a keen golfer and enthusiastic member of the Royal Yacht Squadron. 
John Grandy was the only officer to command a squadron during the battle of Britain and go on to become chief of air staff; he is recognized as one of the RAF's finest and most respected leaders. He died on 2 January 2004 at Wexham Park Hospital, Slough, following a stroke. After cremation, his ashes were interred beside Windsor Great Park. His wife having predeceased him in 1993, he was survived by their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 93128


Heatley, Norman George (1911-2004), biochemist, was born on 10 January 1911 at Marton Place, Woodbridge, Suffolk, the only child of Thomas George Heatley, veterinary surgeon, and his wife, Grace Alice, 'nee' Symonds. His mother, who was an invalid, left her young son very much to his own devices. At the age of six he was sent away to St Felix School, Southwold, which he later described as 'like 'Lord of the Flies''. He was saved by the family doctor who suggested that he should be moved to a school near to the sea. The selected school, Westbourne House, was a great success. There an inspiring visiting science teacher named Ullyatt instilled a lifelong interest in practical science. He moved on to the Grange School at Folkestone and then to Tonbridge School, where his interest in science was consolidated. At St John's, Cambridge, his talents were further developed and, after graduating in natural sciences with an upper second in 1933, he stayed on to do research for a PhD degree in biochemistry in Gowland Hopkins's laboratory. In 1936, soon after completing his doctorate, he was invited to move to Oxford to work with Ernst Chain and Howard Florey in the Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, where he was to spend the rest of his working life. 
Alexander Fleming had 'discovered' penicillin, essentially by accident, in 1928, but he and his colleagues found that the culture extract containing penicillin was unstable and the antibiotic was impossible to isolate in a pure state, and so they effectively gave up research on it. Only when Florey and Chain decided to work on antibacterial substances in 1938 was serious research on penicillin resumed. When its importance became apparent in 1940, after the results of experiments on mice were published in 'The Lancet', Fleming contacted Florey and visited Oxford to learn more about the breakthrough. (At this time Chain is reputed to have said that he thought Fleming was already dead.) But St Mary's Hospital (where Fleming was based) realized the enormous publicity value of their link with penicillin. Charles Wilson, the dean, and Lord Beaverbrook together were prominent in encouraging the press to publicize and exaggerate the contribution of Fleming and to play down the importance of the Oxford work. Florey himself must bear some responsibility for the distorted stories put out by the media because he consistently refused to speak to them and forbade his colleagues to do so. Nevertheless, in a Florey centenary lecture given in 1998 Sir Henry Harris (Florey's successor as professor of pathology at Oxford) succinctly summed up by saying: 'without Fleming, no Florey or Chain, without Chain no Florey, without Florey no Heatley, without Heatley no penicillin' (Harris, 249). 
The problem that had defeated Fleming and his colleagues was that there was no simple way to extract and purify the penicillin from the culture fluid or to measure its activity. Heatley's genius for improvisation and invention solved both these problems. He found appropriate conditions under which penicillin was stable and applied a multi-stage technique to isolate it from the culture fluid and to concentrate it. The procedure was automated, using a 'Heath Robinson' set-up of bath, milk churns, petrol cans, biscuit-tin lids, and so on, and yards of glass and rubber tubing. Despite its improvisation, the basic principles of the method continued to be used thereafter to produce penicillin. Heatley also devised a new assay method that measured the activity of penicillin precisely, in what became known as 'Oxford units'. In addition he played a key role with Florey in the first experiments in May 1940, which demonstrated the remarkable power of penicillin to cure infected animals. From these it was clear that a trial of treatment in human patients was urgently needed. But a human is 3000 times larger than a mouse and the amount needed to treat humans required large-scale production, which in wartime no commercial firm in Britain was willing to undertake. The Dunn School was therefore turned into a production factory utilizing several hundred Heatley-designed ceramic 'bedpans' for the growth of the penicillium cultures and employing a team of six 'penicillin girls'. After extraction and purification the dry powder produced was still less than 1 per cent pure, but it was nevertheless deemed suitable for a clinical trial. In early 1941 the first patients were treated and it was immediately clear that penicillin really was a 'miracle drug'. The results were published in 'The Lancet' in August 1941. By then it was obvious that penicillin could make a very important contribution to the war effort, and to the morale of injured troops. But increasing the yield of the batches of antibiotic was impossible without industrial-scale production. Accordingly, in late June 1941 Florey and Heatley flew to the USA to seek help from firms less restricted by wartime production than those in the UK. The end result of this initiative was that by late 1943 mass production of the drug had begun in America, using a deep-tank fermentation process. 
As a result of the work on penicillin Lord Nuffield endowed three research fellowships at Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1948. Heatley was elected to one of these, and Edward Abraham and Gordon Sanders, two other members of the penicillin team, to the others. Heatley's relationship with Lincoln College, which continued almost to the end of his life, was a particularly happy one. After the excitement of penicillin the rest of his career might well have seemed something of an anticlimax, but his skill in introducing new methods and refining and miniaturizing existing ones remained. The results, many of them collaborations with a wide range of scientists, were described in more than sixty scientific papers that he wrote or co-wrote. 
In retirement Heatley loved to spend time in his garden and sheds, solving domestic problems and inventing new gadgets. But he was also a quintessential family man. On 18 December 1944 he had married Mercy Irene Bing, a medical student who became a child psychiatrist. She was the daughter of Geoffrey Bing, schoolmaster. They had three sons, one of whom died in a road accident in 1956, and two daughters. Heatley was a proud and immensely involved husband and father, an accomplished house-husband, and an excellent host. His practical brilliance was matched by his down-to-earth, sometimes impish, good humour. He was an excellent raconteur and good company. His home in Marston village was, for more than fifty years, a welcoming haven for generations of students and scientists working in Oxford. 
While Fleming received more than 180 honours (honorary degrees, medals, prizes, decorations, freedom of cities, and honorary memberships of scientific societies and academies), Heatley received just one honorary degree -- from Oxford in 1990: an honorary doctorate in medicine, only the second given in Oxford's 800-year history and in Heatley's view 'an enormous privilege, since I am not medically qualified' (personal knowledge) -- and two honorary fellowships (Lincoln College, Oxford, and St John's College, Cambridge); he was appointed OBE in 1978. Those who knew him readily understood why he became the 'unsung hero of penicillin'. He was a most delightful, old-fashioned gentleman; modest to a fault, courteous, kind, considerate, and always looking for ways to help others. He was a team player, rather than a leader of men. Although he may not have received many public honours, he did, however, have in large measure the enormous satisfaction of knowing that he was a key part of the team that gave the world its first practical antibiotic: one that saved the limbs and lives of thousands of allied troops in the Second World War, and subsequently literally millions of patients all round the world. 
Heatley died on 5 January 2004 at his home, 12 Oxford Road, Marston, Oxford. He was buried in a biodegradable coffin after a funeral service at St Nicholas's Church, Marston, on 15 January. He was survived by his wife, Mercy, and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93130


Hobman, David Burton (1927-2003), social reformer and charity director, was born on 8 June 1927 at 14 Walton Place, Chelsea, London, into a freethinking intellectual family. His father, Joseph Burton Hobman (1872-1953), was a journalist who at one time edited the 'Westminster Gazette', and counted among his friends H. G. Wells and Sigmund Freud. His wife (Hobman's mother), Daisy Lucie, 'nee' Adler, was a social worker who went to Oxford University late in life and was the first person to receive an Oxford diploma in social studies. 
Hobman was educated at University College School in London and Blundell's School in Devon, after which he had a brief spell as a repertory theatre actor, once carrying a spear behind Paul Scofield at Stratford upon Avon. He began his community work in the Forest of Dean between 1954 and 1956. On 9 October 1954, at the Church of the Sacred Heart, Norton Road, Hove, he married Erica Agatha Irwin, a 29-year-old professional ice skater, and daughter of Hugh Basil Irwin, electrical engineer. They had a son, Anthony (later chief executive of the pensions regulator), and a daughter, Lucy. After a brief spell at the British Council for Aid to Refugees in 1957 Hobman moved to the National Council of Social Service, where he worked between 1958 and 1967, latterly as head of the information department. In 1968 he was appointed director of the social work advisory service. During this period he commissioned a report which recommended that voluntary organizations operate under one roof to save on overheads. 
In 1970 Hobman became director of the National Old People's Welfare Council, which had been set up during the Second World War with a focus on developing services for older people at a local level. In 1971 it became Age Concern, and under Hobman as founding director it did much to change the negative perception of elderly people, acting as an interest group and championing the interests of older people in general. Hobman was the driving force behind a two-year project that started in 1973 to find out the views of 8000 older people across Britain through discussions and surveys. This led to the ground-breaking 'Manifesto for Old Age' (1975), which established Age Concern as an organization that underpinned its campaigns with rigorous research. The 'Manifesto for Old Age' helped significantly to raise the profile of older people in Britain. 
With Hobman's energetic leadership and media expertise Age Concern campaigned for older people to be recognized as having a positive contribution to make to society, and as consumers, rather than as a drain on the nation's wealth. An early campaigning success persuaded London Transport to identify seats for older and disabled passengers. During the 1970s Age Concern identified itself with many specific causes, including the elimination of hypothermia, the retention of the death grant, and the problems experienced by social security claimants. Hobman became the engaging public face of Age Concern, hosting breakfast meetings at political party conferences and making numerous appearances on television and radio, including the 'Jimmy Young Show'. Under his leadership Age Concern became the first national charitable body to employ a Westminster lobbyist and have a press office. Hobman also established its own in-house research unit. In 1983 the unit became the Age Concern Institute of Gerontology, in partnership with King's College, London, and Hobman became its chairman. Its David Hobman annual lecture was one of his many memorials. In 1983 he was appointed CBE after serving as a special adviser to the British government at the World Assembly on Ageing in Vienna the previous year. He retired from Age Concern in 1987. When he first took the helm its income was just $50,000. When he retired it had risen to over $8 million. 
In the late 1980s Hobman collaborated in making a television programme, 'Getting On', for Central Television, a fortnightly national magazine programme for older people. He also presented a number of radio programmes on ageing issues. In retirement, from 1985 to 1998 he was a member of the advisory board for 'Saga Magazine' and a regular contributor to its pages. He also worked as an adviser and conciliator for the Sheltered Housing Advisory and Conciliation Service from 1990 to 1994. At home, he concentrated on creating and tending his Japanese garden in Storrington, Pulborough, Sussex. In 'Who's Who' his other interests were listed as reading, writing, and grandchildren. He was the author of many publications on ageing, including 'The Impact of Ageing' (1981), 'The Coming of Age' (1989), 'Planning Your Retirement' (1990), 'Intergenerational Solidarity: Fact and Fiction' (1993), and 'The More We Are Together: a Study of Partnerships in Later Life' (1995). He died from cancer at St Barnabas Hospice, Columbia Drive, Worthing, Sussex, on 24 December 2003. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93131


Horsley, (George) Nicholas Seward (1934-2004), businessman, was born on 21 April 1934 at Ferriby, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, the second of five children (three sons and two daughters) of 
Nicholas Horsley's life was greatly influenced by his father Alec -- a competitive and charismatic but dominating businessman -- in whose shadow he lived and with whom he was frequently at odds. Alec Horsley was born on 1 September 1902 at Alfred Street, Ripley, Derbyshire, the son of George Horsley, a pottery clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Watts. Like his son, he studied PPE at Worcester College, Oxford (to which he won a scholarship), and then entered the colonial service. He was posted to Nigeria in late 1925 but returned in the following decade to join his father in establishing a condensed milk business at Holme on Spalding Moor, Yorkshire, in 1936. During the Second World War the business capitalized on the dairy industry's dislocation by buying up small producers, rationalizing their plant, and in particular establishing a major retail presence with doorstep deliveries. The business, centred on Hull, grew to be the largest dairy in north-east England and as Northern Dairies Ltd was floated as a public company in 1956. 
Alec Horsley combined a robust approach to business with a profound practical concern for peace and justice. Politically, he was at home on the left, joining Sir Richard Acland's Common Wealth Party during the war and serving as a Labour councillor in Hull between 1945 and 1949. In these circles he mixed with the great and the good and revelled in the company of well-known intellectuals. But Horsley's focus always remained the individual judged on personal merit alone, and his friends were drawn from a variety of social backgrounds. The dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki affected him greatly and in the 1950s he became a Quaker, played a prominent role in the Yorkshire peace movement, and was a founder member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. Later he was a leading benefactor of Bradford University's pioneering School of Peace Studies, as well as of Worcester College, where he was made an honorary fellow. In 1970 he retired as chairman of Northern Dairies and was subsequently executive director and life president. He died on 11 June 1993 at Talbot Lodge, Woodfield Lane, Hessle, Yorkshire. 
After Oxford and national service in Germany, Nicholas Horsley briefly tried his hand at journalism in the United States. In 1958, in New Orleans, he married his first wife, Valerie Anne Edwards, two days after the couple met; they later had two sons and a daughter. In the same year he returned to England and joined Northern Dairies as a management trainee at a time when the company's prospects had never seemed brighter. Although the Horsley family's ownership of Northern Dairies had been very greatly diluted through the issue of shares to fund acquisitions, it retained powerful influence and Nicholas Horsley made rapid strides through its management. He became a director in 1963, vice-chairman in 1968, and chairman and managing director in 1970 after leading the board in pressing for his father's retirement in order to make way for a younger man. As early as 1961 he had proved himself a consummate deal maker by buying a 50 per cent stake in the Mr Whippy ice-cream business, selling it a year later to Forte Holdings for a capital profit of $500,000, an amount that exceeded annual pre-tax profits by a fifth. 
In 1970 Nicholas Horsley took charge of a business with a history of uninterrupted growth, a turnover of $44 million, and pre-tax profits of $1.7 million. Challenges, however, lay ahead. Northern Dairies, apart from its finance division, was locked into an increasingly slow-growth, small-margin milk business. Future progress depended on diversification and greater added value. He broadened the business, within three years buying up brewing and flour milling businesses, thereby creating two new divisions to add to dairy and finance, and renamed the business Northern Foods. Soon after, the finance business was replaced by a meat products division. Deal followed deal as Horsley transformed the 'ever acquisitive' Northern Foods into a broadly based food-processing group ('The Times', 30 Sept 1978). At the heart of this strategy was the establishment of close relations with premium retailers, especially Marks and Spencer, and the supply to them of fresh and chilled-prepared foods for which the British middle class was developing a voracious appetite. Horsley, with Christopher Haskins, his brother-in-law, had been quick to identify this innovative opportunity which, inter alia, sustained Northern Foods' traditional dairy division by adding substantial value. By 1988 some 250 products had been developed for Marks and Spencer alone, predicting a major shift in British eating habits. 
This strategy brought outstanding returns to Northern Foods, pushing turnover above $1 billion for the first time in 1982. But like so many other British companies, progress was now checked by major but ill-judged acquisitions in the United States. One was a ham producer (bought for $76 million), the other a supplier of hamburgers to the McDonald's fast-food restaurant chain (which cost $63 million in 1982); both were soon sold, causing heavy write-offs and the first dip in profits for ten years. Horsley admitted to a 'cock up' and certainly there was a prevailing sense that Northern Foods had grown complacent; it still commanded the City's respect but had 'left a nasty taste in the mouth' ('The Times', 4 Dec 1986). Horsley was under no pressure to resign but, faced with increasing poor health which affected his mobility, he stepped down as managing director in 1985, as chairman in 1986, and as deputy chairman two years later. His illness, a rare genetic condition which wasted his thigh muscles, meant he spent the last twenty years of his life in a wheelchair. 
Horsley was as cut and thrust in his deal making as any British businessman of his day; the buying up of businesses and the closure of their plant for greater efficiency had been a hallmark of Northern Foods since Alec Horsley's time. But, like his father, Nicholas also nurtured a distinctive policy of responsibility towards employees. According to 'The Times', Northern Foods 'flourished as an efficient and profitable dairy business' while retaining 'an aura of social responsibility which never seems to interfere with its growth' (28 April 1982). The origins of this dated to Northern Foods' early days and embraced pioneering profit-sharing and employee share-ownership schemes, welfare provision, training schemes, and joint worker/management councils. Almost alone among leading businessmen, Nicholas Horsley spoke up for the closed shop and saw its abolition by the Conservative government in 1982 as unnecessary, vindictive, and ultimately the work of a shopkeeper's daughter. 
Though he never belonged to a political party he did admit to being a 'Tory wet' ('Yorkshire Post', 25 Oct 1986) when it came to industrial policy. Horsley embraced liberal causes: he decried what he saw as the tories' demolition of a caring society in the 1980s and called for greater immigration as a spur to economic growth, labelling its opponents as racist. At Northern Foods he permitted the appointment of openly gay men to senior positions at a time when it would have been frowned on elsewhere. He wore his CND badge with pride. On resigning as chairman of Northern Foods, he was enlisted as chairman of 'News on Sunday', a new left-of-centre tabloid aimed at the young working class in Britain's industrial heartlands. Horsley was instrumental in raising nearly $10 million in funds, but the project was poorly thought out and collapsed after eight issues. It had eschewed the tabloids' staple of sex and sensationalism under the somewhat ambiguous slogan 'no tits but lots of balls'. Elsewhere Horsley was twice president of the Dairy Trades Federation (1975-7 and 1980-85), from which platform he attacked the common agricultural policy -- a policy that made him a dedicated anti-European. He sat on BBC consultative groups and on the Yorkshire and Humber regional economic board. In his retirement he moved to Barbados, where he was a director of several local public companies, including an ice-cream manufacturer and a dairy. 
Horsley was a blunt, no-nonsense Yorkshireman with a love of Yorkshire cricket and Hull City football. In sharp contrast to his father, he enjoyed good living and gambling and had an abundance of good humour. He was divorced from his first wife in 1975 and married Sabita Sarkar, writer, and 25-year-old daughter of Lartic Sarkar, a former air force officer, on 22 December 1975. Following their divorce in 1987 he married Alwyne Marjorie Law, daughter of Lawrence Evers, home furnisher, on 17 June 1988; she was forty-seven. He died on 18 January 2004 in Barbados and was survived by his third wife and his three children from his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 93132


Hubbard, Kenneth Gilbert (1920-2004), air force officer, was born on 26 February 1920 at 22 Ethel Road, Norwich, the son of Gilbert Claud Hubbard, mechanical engineer and footballer (he played for Norwich City), and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Dack. He was educated at Norwich Junior Technical School (1932-5), then became an engineering draughtsman at Messrs Robert Stevenson of Norwich (1936-40). 
Like hundreds of other young men Hubbard volunteered for aircrew duties after the outbreak of the Second World War and he joined the RAF on 21 June 1940, proceeding through the lowest ranks during flying training until May 1941, when he gained his wings at 2 flying training school, Brize Norton, and was commissioned. After a short spell at 2 Central Flying School, Cranwell, in June 1941 he was posted to 12 service flying training school, Grantham, which operated Ansons and Oxfords, and where from July 1942 he served as an instructor. In December that year he was posted to 311 ferry training unit, Moreton in Marsh, and did a conversion course on Wellingtons, then ferried one out to the Mediterranean theatre via Portreath, Rabat Sale, and al-Aouina (Tunis), eventually reaching Foggia, Italy, in January 1944. There he reported to 205 group (responsible for Wellington operations over Italy and the Balkans) and was posted to 70 squadron, operating Wellington Xs, doing a tour of operations throughout 1944. From January 1945 (by now a squadron leader) he was based at Qastina, Palestine, as a pilot instructor, and in April was awarded the DFC, the citation saying that he had 'taken part in many attacks in close support of the Fifth and Eighth armies and against marshalling yards in the Po valley. One night in May 1944 he participated in a special low-level attack on an important railway bridge in north Italy. At all times, Squadron Leader Hubbard has displayed great courage, determination and devotion to duty.' In May 1945 he was posted to 22 personnel transit camp at Almaza, Cairo, and from there back to 70 squadron, now operating Liberator VIs from Tortorella, Italy. 
On 19 January 1946, while on leave in the UK, Hubbard married Beatrice Daphne Taylor, the 23-year-old daughter of Richard Taylor, civil engineer, of Tideswell, Derbyshire. He then returned to the Middle East, serving from May to October with 104 squadron, which had Lancaster BVIIs at Abu Sueir and (from July) at Shallufa. He was then at 21 personnel transit camp at Kasfareet until the end of May, when he was repatriated. After disembarkation leave he was posted to the Empire Armament School, Manby, as a qualified flying instructor; then from July 1949 he was at the RAF Flying College (also at Manby) as flight commander, 1 squadron. In April 1951 he was posted overseas again -- to command RAF Shaybah during a tense period of Anglo-Iraqi relations, involving the evacuation of British personnel from Abadan. In the 1953 new year honours he was made an OBE -- an auspicious beginning to a year that later brought divorce; for on 28 July his wife of seven and a half years was granted a decree absolute. From September he attended a refresher flying course at 201 advanced flying school, Swinderby (Wellingtons and Varsities), then a similar one at 242 Operational Conversion Unit, Dishforth (Valettas and Hastings). A series of courses followed -- at the Staff College, Bracknell, at 3 all-weather jet squadron, Manby (1956), at 321 operational conversion unit, Bassingbourn (Canberras), and in June 1956 at 232 operational conversion unit (Valiants). 
This intensive training led to Hubbard's posting to Wittering in September 1956 to command 49 squadron, which had been re-formed with Valiants as part of the V-bomber force. This was the apogee of Hubbard's career, for his squadron was entrusted with the live drop of Britain's first megaton bomb -- accomplished on 15 May 1957 when he captained Valiant XD818 in operation Grapple, involving extremely accurate flying, at 45,000 feet and a speed of Mach 0.76. Although the yield of the bomb was not as great as its designers had hoped, the flying and airmanship were impeccable, and all five crew members were awarded the Air Force Cross. Subsequently Hubbard wrote a detailed account, in collaboration with Michael Simmons, published as 'Operation 'Grapple': Testing Britain's First H-Bomb' (1985). 
After he relinquished command of 49 squadron Hubbard served at Bomber Command headquarters (plans and policy) from early 1959; then in July 1961, by now a group captain, he was posted overseas again, to command RAF al-Adem in Libya, until January 1963. His last Bomber Command appointment was as officer commanding RAF Scampton, which had three Vulcan squadrons with Blue Steel stand-off bombs. In June 1964 he moved to Transport Command (whose commanding officer was Air Chief Marshal Sir Kenneth Cross, under whom he had served at Bomber Command) as officer in charge of training, holding this post until January 1966, when he was placed on the retired list at his own request -- disappointed at not having achieved air rank. 
Following his retirement from the RAF Hubbard found new roles. Although a venture into farming in the west country was not successful, he there met Margaret Julia Marie Grubbe ('b'. 1910/11), the daughter of Lawrence Carrington Grubbe, artist. They were married on 14 March 1975 at the register office, Blyth, Suffolk, and Hubbard moved to The Priory, Church Lane, Blythburgh, where he involved himself keenly in local affairs. He had joined the board of the refrigeration company the Hubbard-Reader Group, doing some charter flying and being responsible for sales and marketing, until 1982. Then in an active retirement (clouded by the death of his wife in 1997), he was on the Blundeston prison parole board, was involved in the Air Training Corps in Suffolk, assessed applications for RAF Benevolent Fund assistance, and -- among other local activities -- as a great animal lover inaugurated an annual service for animals at Blythburgh church. He died at his home in Blythburgh on 22 January 2004. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93133


Jenkins, Hugh Gater, Baron Jenkins of Putney (1908-2004), politician, was born at Blenheim Dairy, Lancaster Road, Enfield, Middlesex, on 27 July 1908, the only son of Joseph Walter Jenkins (1881-1954), master dairyman, and his wife, Florence Emily, 'nee' Gater. They later had a daughter, Hugh's much loved sister Evelyn. Joseph Jenkins had moved from Wales to set up his north London business. By the 1930s he was a tobacconist. Jenkins, a choirboy in his local church when young, was educated at Enfield grammar school. On leaving school he had a period of unemployment that he did not forget. He then worked for the Prudential Assurance Company from 1930 to 1940. On 18 July 1936 he married (Ethel) Marie Crosbie (died 1989), the 28-year-old daughter of Squadron Leader Ernest William Crosbie. This was a loving personal and political partnership that lasted until Marie's death. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1938 Jenkins had volunteered for the Royal Observer Corps. In 1941 he was offered a commission in the RAF as an air traffic controller, with the rank of flight lieutenant. 'So I jumped and spent much of the next five years on the radio telephone telling our pilots the height, speed and direction they should fly to shoot the bombers down, first in daylight and later at night aided by radar' (H. Jenkins, 'Shall we get rid of war or will war get rid of us?', speech made to the Progressive League, Eastbourne, 29 August 1999). In 1945 he was sent to Burma to run the forces radio station in Rangoon. There he became unpopular with his superiors and even under the suspicion of the intelligence services because of his support for the Burmese nationalists. He spent his leave in 1945 actively working for the Labour Party during the election campaign of that year. 
After his return to England and demobilization in 1947 Jenkins became the Greater London organizer of the National Union of Bank Employees and editor of the 'Bank Officer'. He soon judged that the employees for whom he worked were too timid and would not 'get off their knees' (private information). Selected from a list of three hundred applicants, Jenkins then became the assistant secretary of the actors' union, Equity, in 1950. Having been a Fabian Society lecturer and director of Fabian summer schools in the late 1940s, in 1950 he unsuccessfully contested for the Labour Party the parliamentary constituency of Enfield, where his opponent was Iain Macleod. In 1955, by then a councillor for Stoke Newington and Hackney, he contested Mitcham for Labour but again lost. By this time he had acquired a high profile as a left-winger and Bevanite; he was chairman of Victory for Socialism in 1956-60. He was most notably an active critic of nuclear weapons policies, as chairman of the H Bomb Campaign Committee in 1954, an Aldermaston marcher from 1957 to 1963, and a founder member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) in 1958. In 1964, to the considerable dismay of the Labour Party leadership at Transport House, he was selected by the local party to fight the Putney constituency. Some in the Labour Party management had no sympathy for left-wingers and CND activists. He nevertheless had the support of people like Richard Crossman and Anthony Greenwood, and was not deselected. After a spirited and clever campaign he took the seat and held it until the 1979 election, when he was defeated by David Mellor. 
Jenkins devoted his maiden speech at Westminster to town planning and arts issues and later became a strong supporter of Jenny Lee, Harold Wilson's arts minister, and the widow of Jenkins's hero, Aneurin Bevan. In 1974 he became arts minister himself (as the under-secretary of state for education and science, with special responsibility for the arts), a post which he held for two years until removed by James Callaghan in 1976. He was an active minister. He promoted the National Theatre project and the development of civic theatre throughout the country. In his contribution to 'Essays in Local Government Enterprise' (1964) he had written, 'it seems to me that the primary role of the municipality is the provision of a good theatre' ('Towards the civic theatre' in E. Hillman, ed., 'Essays in Local Government', 1964, 24). After his demotion in 1976 he did not hold office again. 
After his defeat in the 1979 election Jenkins became the national chairman of CND, a movement which he had supported throughout his House of Commons career. He took over the chair of CND at a time of intense activity stimulated in particular by the proposed deployment of American cruise missiles in Britain, which had revived the debate about deterrence and civil defence. Though the nuclear weapon threat was always his primary concern in his later years he, like his contemporary Sir Joseph Rotblat, became more and more committed to the idea that war itself had to be eliminated. Indeed he so opposed the bombing by NATO of Serbia without United Nations approval during the conflict in the Balkans that he resigned from the Labour Party, returning to that fold only when hostilities had ceased. 
When in 1981 he was made a life peer (as Baron Jenkins of Putney), on the recommendation of his old friend Michael Foot, Jenkins took his campaigns to the Lords. CND made him an honorary vice-president. In the Lords he spoke on many matters of social and international concern, but nuclear weapons issues were always his first priority. In part because of his skill in stretching the rules, a limit had to be laid down on the number of questions any peer could ask on one day. When the government tried to prevent the publication of Peter Wright's 'Spycatcher', an expose of the intelligence service, Jenkins thwarted their efforts by reading large sections of it into the 'Hansard' record. 
Typical of the sense of humour that very rarely left Jenkins was his concluding entry in 'Who's Who'. Under the 'recreation' section, 'avoiding retirement' was the last activity listed. In this aim he largely succeeded. Even when confined to a retirement home in Kew he did his best to stir up political interest among his fellow residents, by starting a discussion and debating society. On religious matters he remained a non-dogmatic agnostic. 
A man of distinctive appearance, with ginger, later greying, hair and a neat beard, Jenkins was well known as a writer and broadcaster. While an MP and afterwards he contributed articles to a variety of journals including 'Tribune', the 'New Statesman', and 'The Guardian'. His book 'The Culture Gap' (1979) demonstrated again his keen interest in the arts as a popular and public concern. Most moving were his short plays for BBC radio, all of which had an autobiographical theme. Perhaps the best of them was 'Solo Boy' (1983), which described his first experience of political pressure: as a very young choirboy he had been denied the sixpence owed to the boy who sang solo and as a consequence did his best to organize a walkout. 'Lost Tune from Rangoon' (1987) was another hilarious true tale of a Christmas day when Jenkins left a Burmese civilian in charge of the radio station and went off for his Christmas dinner in the officers' mess. Immediately after the king's speech, to the rage of the top brass present, Jenkins's substitute put on a record of Noel Coward's 'Mad Dogs and Englishmen'. He also wrote poetry. In his short poem 'Contradicting Dylan' he made it clear that he was not one for Dylan Thomas's 'raging'. On the contrary, his own version read: '
Help me go gentle into that good night 

I'll welcome quietly dying with the light. 

' Following the death of his first wife, on 19 April 1991 Jenkins married (Maria) Helena Esmeralda Wilson, a 64-year-old widow, a retired philosophy lecturer and daughter of Nicholas Pavlidis, architect. She died three years later, in 1994. Jenkins spent his last months at Lynde House nursing home, Meadowbank, Cambridge Park, Twickenham. To the end he remained a man of strong socialist conviction. Never personally confrontational, he bore no grudges and was well liked and admired even by those who did not share his world view. He died at Lynde House on 26 January 2004, of cerebrovascular and ischaemic heart disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 93134


Jenkins, Vivian Gordon James (1911-2004), rugby player and journalist, was born on 2 November 1911 at 24 Pentyla, Aberafan, Glamorgan, the son of Thomas Gordon Jenkins, schoolmaster, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' James. At the age of nine he was sent to Llandovery College, from which he claimed to have returned during his first year suffering from malnutrition. His sporting talents developed as a protege of the rugby master T. P. Williams, but he also represented the school at cricket and hockey and captained the cricket team for three years. He played senior rugby while still a schoolboy, making his debut for Bridgend against Blaengarw in 1929. In 1930 he went to Jesus College, Oxford, as a classics exhibitioner, graduating with fourth-class honours in 1933. He won what he termed 'a decidedly lucky' rugby blue during his first term when another player was injured (Beken and Jones, vii), and as 'a centre of the solid, bullocking type' played against Cambridge in all his three years as a student (Arlott, Wooller, and Edelston, 123). Cricket honours in 1933 made him the first 'double blue' from a Welsh school. 
By the time he graduated from Oxford Jenkins was also an international rugby player. Hopeful of winning a Wales trial as a centre he received his selection to play full-back for Bridgend against Newport on Boxing day 1932 with 'not, I admit, the best of grace', since 'I thought my chance of a trial had gone' (Lawrie, 171). He played so well that he was chosen for the trial at full-back, and three weeks later made his debut for Wales against England at Twickenham. Taken ill with flu, he was told by a team-mate, 'you may never get another chance to win a cap' (Hignell, 'Turnbull', 170); consequently he played with a 102 degree temperature and a sore throat in Wales's 7-3 win, the first Welsh victory at Twickenham since the ground had opened in 1910. He was Wales's regular full-back until 1939. During this time Wales won eight and drew two of his fourteen international matches, losing five of the six he missed. He scored thirty-six points, including the first ever try by a Wales full-back, against Ireland in 1934 (a feat not repeated until 1967), two conversions in the 13-12 defeat of New Zealand in 1935, and a penalty goal against Ireland to seal a Welsh championship in 1936. In 1938 he was vice-captain of the British Lions touring team to South Africa. He kicked three penalty goals (one from 8 yards inside his own half) in the first match against the Springboks, but was then forced to sit out the rest of the tour due to injury. 
Jenkins was large and powerful at 6 feet tall and 131/2 stone in weight. He brought to the position of full-back the attacking instincts of the three-quarter he had been and a cricketer's certainty under the high ball, watching opponents' eyes in order to anticipate their next move. His frequent team-mate Wilfred Wooller recalled that he 'would tilt his head slightly on one side as he took the ball. It reminded one of an inquisitive bird wondering what was coming its way' (Arlott, Wooller, and Edelston, 124). He was an accomplished kicker, both at goal and from the hand. E. H. D. Sewell rated him the best kicker among inter-war full-backs: 'One seemed almost to feel the thump when 'VGJ' let her have it; leaving us to gaze in admiration at the ball boring its way torpedo-like and getting valuable distance against the wind in a manner none watching had thought possible' (Sewell, 90). 
After leaving Oxford Jenkins had secured a teaching post at Dover College. He played for London Welsh, captaining them in 1936-7 and winning selection for Kent and London counties. He also played forty-four matches of county cricket as an amateur for Glamorgan from 1931 until 1937, occasionally deputizing as wicket-keeper. In all first-class cricket he scored 1328 runs at an average of a little under eighteen runs per innings. 
In 1939 Jenkins joined the 'News of the World', but on the outbreak of the Second World War he joined the Territorial Army, rising to captain in the anti-aircraft command. He continued to play rugby when the opportunity arose, but his last serious match was for the British army against France in Paris in February 1940. On 1 April that year he married Susan (Sue) Fraser, the 25-year-old daughter of Thomas Hallett Fraser of Maidenhead. They had one son, David. Demobilized in 1946 he rejoined the 'News of the World' and covered the England cricket tours of Australia and New Zealand in 1946-7 and the West Indies in 1947-8. As in his time as a player, rugby eventually became more important in his career in journalism than cricket. He joined the 'Sunday Times' as its rugby correspondent on the retirement of the veteran Dai Gent in the early 1950s, staying on to his own retirement in 1976. He was also editorial technical adviser to 'Rugby World' magazine from its foundation in 1960 to 1985, and founding editor, taking charge of the first twelve editions, of 'Rothmans Rugby Yearbook' (1972-83). 
A rumbustious personality with an acute sense of humour, he particularly enjoyed British Lions tours, on which he was accompanied by a 'substantial portmanteau which generally contained the answer to every emergency', once extracting a miner's helmet with a lamp on its front when light faded in the press box. He wrote books on the Lions tours of 1955 (South Africa) and 1959 (New Zealand). His contemporary J. B. G. Thomas described him as 'methodical and detailed in his approach and, of all my colleagues, the most insistent upon accuracy' (Thomas, 'Rugby', 212). The much younger official historians of the Welsh Rugby Union reckoned him 'one of the most perceptive writers of the modern period' (Smith and Williams, 414), although he was also described as a 'muscular rather than elegant' writer (private information). He was an early campaigner for significant reforms later taken for granted, like the differential penalty, introduced in 1978, and neutral referees at international matches. 
After the death of his wife, Susan, in 1984 Jenkins divided his time between his home in Harpenden and New Zealand, where he developed a close friendship with Elinor Stewart, the widow of Ron Stewart, a New Zealand rugby player. He died at Luton and Dunstable Hospital, Luton, on 5 January 2004, of septicaemia and a urinary tract infection. He was survived by his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 93135


Jolles, Charlotte Alice Berta Eva (1909-2003), German scholar, was born on 5 October 1909 in Berlin, Germany, the daughter of Leopold Jolles (died 1938), engineer, and his wife, Katharina, 'nee' Weihkopf. She attended school there from 1916 to 1929 and university from 1929 to 1936, studying German, history, philosophy, and educational theory. She first pursued her enduring interest in the development of democratic ideas in Germany through study of the 1848 revolution, in engagement with the political discussion of the day, and in her doctoral thesis on 'Fontane und die Politik' ('Fontane and politics'). Her thesis was formally accepted in 1937, but publication in full was prevented by the new racist laws of the Third Reich, which categorized her as 'half Jewish', and because of its democratic political content. 
Jolles arrived in London in January 1939 with a typewriter, ten marks, and a temporary residence permit. After working first with refugee children, who knew her as Jolli, she took up a full-time post teaching German at Watford Girls' Grammar School in 1948. After the war she became a British citizen and in 1946 resumed work on the German novelist Fontane, completing an MA thesis at Birkbeck College on 'Theodor Fontane and England' (1947). In 1955 she was appointed lecturer at Birkbeck, and was promoted to professor in 1974. After retiring in 1977 she continued working vigorously in further fields of research. 
Of particular note among Jolles's many distinguished Fontane publications were the volumes she edited for the Nymphenburg edition of the complete works: volume 17, 'Aus England und Schottland' (1963), and volume 19, 'Politik und Geschichte' (1969); the critical survey and bibliography 'Theodor Fontane' (1974; 4th, revised, edn 1993), an indispensable source for Fontane specialists, and accessible guide to generations of students; the index of Fontane's letters ('Die Briefe Theodor Fontanes: Verzeichnis und Register', 1988); and her edition of Fontane's English diaries ('Tagebucher 1852, 1855-58', 1994). The most remarkable event in her publication history was the appearance in 1983 of 'Fontane und die Politik' -- her 1936 dissertation which had survived as a single copy in Berlin University. Nearly fifty years on there was no need for revision, nor for any kind of apologia. The book, drawing in part on material destroyed during the war, examines Fontane's life and opinions in the 1840s and 1850s, including his visits to Britain. A second edition was published in 1988. Her last publication was the introduction to 'Beyond the Tweed' (1998), an English edition of Fontane's travelogue of 1858. She made the journey from London across the Tweed herself, aged eighty-nine, to speak with her customary humour and unsentimental charm at its launch in the Glasgow Goethe Institute. 
During the cold war she was a frequent visitor to the Fontane archive in Potsdam, then in the German Democratic Republic, moving freely both physically and intellectually as a connecting force between East and West, between Britain and Germany, between historical past and present, apparently equally at home in Berlin, Brandenburg, and London, in German literature and in English culture. In 1990, in the aftermath of German reunification, the Theodor Fontane Society was founded and Jolles became its honorary president, an office she filled well into her last years with gusto, practical insight, and vision. At the founding meeting in Potsdam her address enlivened the rather ponderous and tense proceedings by mischievously suggesting Frau Jenny Treibel (bourgeois parvenu and one of Fontane's least ideal characters) as patron of the society, because she stood for 'Geld und Poesie' (money and poetry) and the society needed the first to support the second. Working constantly in the cause of Fontane, Jolles provided new ideas and fostered initiatives, not least at the Institute of Germanic Studies in London, where she was the moving spirit behind three Fontane conferences. 
Jolles was awarded an honorary doctorate by her alma mater, now the Humboldt University, Berlin, in 1987, and in 1996 she received the Bundesverdienstkreuz, first class, at the German embassy in London. She has been honoured by Festschriften, but also less conventionally. In 1995 a fat package arrived at the door of her flat in Haverstock Hill -- not the proofs of one of her own books, but a copy of Gunter Grass's new novel 'Ein weites Feld' ('Too far afield'), with a handwritten dedication from the author, whom she had never met. Fontane's life and works form multiple threads in the fabric of this fictional portrayal of Germany after reunification, and Charlotte Jolles features in its pages -- part Miss Marple, part mother confessor -- affectionately transposed into literary form, and playing a part, where she belonged, at the heart of German literary culture. But she also belonged in the heart of London, from where she did more for the study of Germany's greatest nineteenth-century novelist than anyone else in the twentieth century. Her influence was exercised not only in the usual academic channels: meticulous original research, editorial and bibliographical work, and literary criticism. Through her creative enthusiasm, vision, and personal warmth she enlisted commitment and released energies in generations of scholars in Britain, Germany, and beyond. She was not married, but had several godchildren and a large circle of friends in whose well-being she took a keen and supportive interest. She died on 31 December 2003 at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, of cancer. Her Church of England funeral service, at Golders Green crematorium on 19 January 2004, was packed with mourners whose lives her humour, energy, and charm had touched. 


@@@@@


doc= 93136


Kaye, Mary Margaret (1908-2004), novelist, was born on 21 August 1908, in Simla, the summer capital of British India in the Himalayan foothills, one of three children of Sir Cecil Kaye (1868-1935), director of the Central Intelligence Bureau of India and a senior member of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Margaret Sarah (Daisy), 'nee' Bryson, a missionary's daughter and watercolour artist. At the age of ten, having been taught to speak Hindustani by her 'ayah' (maidservant) alongside English by her parents, she was packed off to be turned into a prim and proper English lady, at the Lawn School, Clevedon, Somerset, a place she found 'cold and colourless' ('Daily Telegraph', 31 Jan 2004). Much the same fate befell her brother, Bill, and her sister, Bets (Betty). After leaving school she learned how to illustrate children's books at art college. Happily, when her father was sent back from England to India in 1926 to help revise British treaties with princely states, she accompanied him but resisted her parents' attempts to have her married off to a suitable English officer. 
After her father retired and died in India in 1935, Kaye, short of money, was forced to make England her base for a while. But she went back to India again, financed by the handy sum of $65 she had earned from illustrating children's books. She stayed in Simla where she shared a home with her sister. The fateful 'love at first sight' meeting with Godfrey John (Goff) Hamilton (1912-1985), an officer in the Queen's Own corps of guides, took place on 2 June 1941, in Kashmir. He was married with a daughter. Ignoring the traditional morality of the day, Kaye plunged into an affair with Hamilton, became pregnant, and had Carolyn, the first of their two daughters, in 1943. (She later recounted that outside her window, while she was in the throes of childbirth, a tiger was feasting on a water buffalo it had killed.) After Hamilton had obtained a divorce, the couple were married in India on armistice day, 11 November 1945. Her second daughter, Nicola (Nikki), was born in 1946. 
After Indian independence in 1947 it was a wrench for Kaye to leave India but she had to do so when her husband opted to join the British army. As a loyal army wife, she moved with him '22 times in 17 years' ('Daily Telegraph', 31 Jan 2004) but this gave authorship the chance to flourish. His last post was as chief of the joint services liaison organization, British army of the Rhine, from 1963 to 1966, after which he retired, with the rank of major-general. He and Mollie then settled in Pevensey, Sussex, a county she picked 'because Kipling lived here'; he had been her favourite author since hearing her father read 'The Jungle Book' to her at the age of four ('Wall Street Journal', 13 Oct 1978). 
Kaye had not intended to be a writer but became one accidentally when she felt she could do better than some of the authors whose books she was illustrating. In 1940 she published her first novel, 'Six Bars at Seven', as Mollie Kaye, and under the same name brought out 'Night on the Island' (later renamed 'Strange Island') four years later. There followed (as M. M. Kaye) a series of detective novels, among them 'Death Walks in Kashmir' (1953), 'Death Walks in Berlin' (1955), 'Death Walks in Cyprus' (1956), and 'Later Than You Think' (1958), the latter written while her husband's regiment was fighting the Mau Mau in Kenya. 'Shadow of the Moon', her first historical novel, set in the India of 1857, appeared in 1957. 'Trade Wind' (1963), another historical tale of conflicting cultures, was set in Zanzibar. There were also a number of children's stories: 'Potter Pinner Meadow' (1937), 'Black Bramble Wood' (1938), 'Willow Witches Brook' (1944), 'Gold Gorse Common' (1945), 'Ordinary Princess' (1980), and 'Thistledown' (1981). 
Kaye's grandfather, father, brother, and husband (not to mention uncles and cousins) all served the raj. Although she was a prolific author her whole life appeared to provide source material for her most successful novel, 'The Far Pavilions' (1978), about a romance between an English army officer, Ashton Pelham-Martyn, and Anjuli, an Indian princess, in nineteenth-century India. The novel spanned the years between the Indian uprising of 1857 (known in Britain as the Sepoy or Indian Mutiny but in India as the First War of Independence) and the Second Afghan War of 1878-80. It helped that one of Kaye's grandfather's cousins, Edward Kaye, commanded a battery during the siege of Delhi in 1857, while his brother, John Kaye, wrote the official histories of the First Afghan War and the events of 1857. There was a great deal of Goff Hamilton, a dashing soldier who had won a DSO at twenty-three when he was serving on the north-west frontier, which she later put into the character of Pelham-Martyn. Fiction and reality got mixed up when one of her husband's ancestors, Walter Hamilton VC, who perished while defending the British residency in Kabul, was also worked into the novel. She wrote the book in England and took fifteen years to do so, but visited the India of her childhood, especially Rajasthan, to carry out characteristically meticulous research. On publication the novel was immediately recognized as a classic of its kind, with an American reviewer comparing it with Margaret Mitchell's 'Gone with the Wind'. By the time of Kaye's death it had sold at least 15 million copies in sixteen languages. In drawing the central character of the hero, Ashton Pelham-Martyn, who grows up as a happy Indian street urchin, Ashok, in the dusty lanes of India, before being sent off to public school in England to be turned unwillingly into a pukka sahib, she created the opposite of what would be called a 'coconut' -- here was someone who was white on the outside and brown inside. This probably described Kaye's own sentiments exactly. Although she saw nothing intrinsically wrong with the principle of the raj, she considered India, not England, to be her real home, and never lost her genuine love of the country. In 1984 'The Far Pavilions' was turned into a six-hour mini television series on Channel 4. Although the cast included Ben Cross, Amy Irving, Omar Sharif, Christopher Lee, and Sir John Gielgud, the production did not do justice to the novel. 
Kaye (who was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1980) had formed a firm friendship with fellow author Paul Scott, to whom she provided useful background on India, since he had little personal knowledge of the period in which he set the 'Raj Quartet' (1966-75). It is said she even suggested the theme of his novel 'Staying On' (1977). It was intriguing for both to discover that in 1951 Kaye had actually met Scott when he was handling her manuscripts for Pearn, Pollinger, and Higham, a literary agency for whom he then worked. He admitted to having had reservations about her early work but expressed great enthusiasm for 'The Far Pavilions', and she for all his output. 
Two years after her husband's death in 1985 -- she had considered their forty-year marriage to be near perfect -- a devastated Kaye moved in with her sister in a wing of a house belonging to one of her daughters, in Hampshire, moving to Lavenham, Suffolk, in 2001. In her closing years she painted an idyllic portrait of British India in three volumes of autobiography, 'The Sun in the Morning' (1990), 'Golden Afternoon' (1997), and 'Enchanted Evening' (1999). She was planning a fourth at the time of her death. In March 2003 she was awarded the Colonel James Tod international award by the Maharana Mewar Foundation of Udaipur in Rajasthan for her 'contribution of permanent value reflecting the spirit and value of Mewar' ('Financial Express', 24 March 2003). She extended enthusiastic support to Michael Ward, like her born in India, who was passionate about producing a musical version of 'The Far Pavilions'. The novel, dealing with divided loyalties and dual identities, had resonance for a multicultural Britain at the start of the twenty-first century. Kaye warned Ward that were she to fall off her perch before the curtain went up, 'I shall make an awful nuisance of myself in the next life unless I am allowed back to see it run!' ('The Independent', 5 Feb 2004). She died on 29 January 2004 at Ropers House, High Street, Lavenham, of cerebrovascular disease. She was survived by her two daughters. The musical 'The Far Pavilions' opened at the Shaftesbury Theatre in London's West End a year later, a chair being kept empty on the first night in memory of the author. In March 2006 her ashes were taken to India by Ward and his wife, Elaine. Wearing traditional Indian clothes, they rowed to the middle of Lake Pichola in Udaipur, waited until the sun started to dip behind the ramparts of the City Palace, and scattered Kaye's ashes into the water. Her family observed the exact moment back in England and her daughter Nikki remarked: ''The Far Pavilions' was my mother's love letter to India... India was home for mother. She saw India through an Indian eye, not a European one' ('Daily Telegraph', 7 March 2006). 


@@@@@


doc= 93145


McKechnie, Dame Sheila Marshall (1948-2004), housing reformer and consumer rights campaigner, was born on 3 May 1948 at Dunrowan day hospital, Falkirk, the daughter of Hugh McKechnie, then a commercial traveller, and his wife, Christina Hamilton, 'nee' Marshall. She was brought up in a council house in Camelon, Falkirk, where her father worked as a baker. Her mother was an avid and wide reader who gave her daughter confidence, but it was her proud and indomitable grandmother whom McKechnie later saw as a particularly influential figure. Even at that time she was determined: her mother observed that she could 'start a fight in an empty house' ('The Guardian', 5 Jan 2004). Having passed her eleven-plus examination, she went to Falkirk high school and became head girl. She then read politics and history at Edinburgh University, and was the first member of her family to enter higher education. As a senior member of Edinburgh Students' Union she campaigned for student rights and representation. It was probably this formative period that encouraged her to be assertive and direct in her dealings with people in authority. During this period she also became friends with the future Labour chancellor and prime minister Gordon Brown. 
Having graduated from Edinburgh in 1970, McKechnie passed the civil service entrance examination and studied for an MA in industrial relations at Warwick University, followed by a year as a researcher at Oxford University (1971-2). Most of her next thirteen years was spent in the trade union movement. In 1972 she became assistant general secretary of the Wallpaper Workers Union and, after a spell as a WEA tutor at Manchester University (1974-6), she took over as health and safety officer at the Association of Scientific, Technical, and Managerial Staffs (ASTMS) in 1976. Here, through her work with the union's general secretary Clive Jenkins, she gained an apprenticeship in handling the media to promote an institution or campaign. Through her influence the ASTMS became increasingly sensitive to the health risks faced by some of its members, with McKechnie highlighting the importance of environmental issues in her negotiations. During the 1970s she also played an active role in the women's liberation movement and was involved in the collective responsible for the journal 'Red Rag'. McKechnie drew attention to the issue of what became known as the 'work-life balance', seeking to reconfigure men's relationships with women, children, and work. Feminism remained an important theme throughout her later career. In the late 1970s she met Alan Frederick Grant, who became her partner for nearly thirty years. 
In 1985, after nine years at the ASTMS, McKechnie was appointed director of the housing and homelessness charity Shelter. On arrival she found a demoralized and factional organization struggling to adapt to the changes to public housing policy introduced by Margaret Thatcher's government. McKechnie felt that the charity had become introspective and was failing to engage directly with policy issues. She presided over a revolution at Shelter which saw her move the organization to the political centre ground and considerably increase its external profile and campaigning activity. Under her strong leadership it grew from a staff of fifty, and an annual turnover of $1 million, to 250 staff and a turnover of $10 million. 
In policy terms McKechnie challenged the Conservative government's approach to housing head-on. She argued that ministers' emphasis on home ownership meant that sufficient attention was not being paid to the homeless and to some owner-occupiers who, in retirement, could face huge hidden repair bills. While accepting the government's 'right to buy' policy, she predicted that a refusal to replace public housing stock, now transferred to the private sector, would lead to social problems. She was also an innovator in developing homelessness services. In the early 1990s she developed the 'foyer scheme', which provided opportunities in training, employment, and personal development and helped to break the 'no home-no job-no home' cycle. Her campaigning work with Shelter gave her a public and media profile that was virtually unequalled by other voluntary sector leaders in this period. She became a regular interviewee on national television and radio, including programmes such as 'Question Time' and 'Any Questions', where she repeatedly challenged ministers on their policy towards housing and homelessness. She also applied her feminist perspective to housing issues, highlighting the fact that homelessness affected men and women differently, with more men left as owner-occupiers than women. It was her repeated belief that 'People who are homeless are not social inadequates. They are people without homes' ('The Times', 5 January 2004). Her proudest achievement at Shelter, she maintained, was her success in convincing others that young people living on the street were 'more throwaways than runaways' ('Evening News', 10 Jan 2002). 
In 1995 McKechnie left Shelter to become director of the Consumers' Association. Her appointment again led to the repositioning and revival of an organization -- then known principally as a research body -- which she believed failed to offer consumers adequate information on the quality and safety of commercial products and services. Under McKechnie's control the Consumers' Association became an active and highly effective campaigning organization which paid particular attention to the introduction of stronger food regulations, reform of car pricing, and greater accountability in the financial services industry. Her appointment came shortly after a link had been established between non-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in humans and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle. McKechnie thought the government's response inadequate; she campaigned for the creation of an agency for maintaining food standards, and sat on the committee that led to the creation of the Food Standards Agency in 1998. In June 1999 she began a campaign to achieve greater competition in the British car market, which had long operated as a cartel. To publicize the cause she drove a Ford Focus bedecked with a union flag and branded with the slogan 'the Great British rip-off' to the headquarters of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. The media coverage was intense and several dealerships subsequently reduced their prices. In March 2000 she initiated a 'carbusters' scheme, which advised British motorists on how to buy cars at lower prices in continental Europe. In financial services -- the third key focus of her leadership, and the one which most exercised her sense of injustice and her reforming spirit -- she led a successful campaign to secure compensation for thousands of borrowers after the mis-selling of endowment mortgages. Characteristically she referred to Britain's financial institutions as 'the Wild West' ('The Times', 5 Jan 2004) and argued that sections of the insurance industry were able to treat customers with contempt without fear of sanction. Her aim was to recast completely the environment within which individuals bought financial services, and in 2002 she argued for the creation of a new financial advice network to provide consumers with access to unbiased advice. 
In addition to her campaigning roles, McKechnie held a series of senior public positions that reflected her growing influence and authority. In 1998 she was appointed by the chancellor of the exchequer as one of six new non-executive directors to the Bank of England's court. Three years later she was elected president of the European Union Consumer Group. She used both platforms to fight successfully for changes to the competition laws, the labelling of foodstuffs, and regulation of the promotion of pharmaceutical products. In 1995 she had been appointed OBE for services to the homeless and in 2001 was made a DBE for services to consumers. She was in her own words 'a fully paid-up member of the awkward squad and will remain so for the rest of my life', describing both herself and the Consumers' Association as 'fiercely, fiercely independent' ('The Times', 5 Jan 2004). 
In 1997 Sheila McKechnie was diagnosed with breast cancer but continued to work remarkably hard during a long illness. She died on 2 January 2004 at the North London Hospice, 47 Woodside Avenue, Finchley, London, and was survived by her partner, Alan Grant. Following her death a group of her closest friends and colleagues from her days at Shelter and the Consumers' Association formed the Sheila McKechnie Foundation in her memory. The foundation was established to help equip a new generation of campaigners to make an impact on decision makers. 


@@@@@


doc= 93148


Montagu, Helen Margaret (1929-2004), theatre producer, was born on 21 April 1929 in Sydney, Australia; her father was a banker. She studied English literature at Sydney University, where she met Russell Alan Willett, a psychologist, whom she married in 1953. After spending their honeymoon in Italy, where she fell in love with Italian food, the couple decided to move to Britain; they later had three daughters and a son. 
In London Montagu initially trained as an actress at the Central School of Speech and Drama but in 1964 was offered the job of casting director at the Royal Court Theatre under the auspices of the actor and director George Devine. Following Devine's death in 1966, Montagu was appointed general manager of the English Stage Company by the theatre's new artistic director, William Gaskill. During the late 1960s and early 1970s the Royal Court was at the forefront of exciting modern drama and many of its innovative productions transferred to the West End. Among the notable productions on which Montagu worked were Edward Bond's 'Saved' (1965) -- with its controversial scene in which a baby is stoned to death in its pram -- Sir Alec Guinness and Simone Signoret's 'Macbeth' (1966), David Storey's 'Home' (1970, starring Sir John Gielgud and Sir Ralph Richardson, and directed by Lindsay Anderson), and the first flowering of new playwrights like Christopher Hampton ('The Philanthropist', 1970). Montagu often came into conflict with the Lord Chamberlain's Office which, until the 'Theatres Act' (1968), was responsible for licensing plays and took particular objection to some of the works staged at the Royal Court. For her part Montagu hugely relished her battles with the lord chamberlain in his attempts at censorship. Her growing popularity in theatre circles owed much to her irreverently straightforward manner, which was a refreshing alternative to the old-fashioned ways of the theatrical establishment in the 1960s. It was rare for a woman to be successful as a producer at this time and her achievements and talents were soon noticed in the West End. 
After seven years Montagu left the English Stage Company. Following the birth of her third child she was invited by the American producer Arthur Cantor to revive the fortunes of his recently acquired H. M. Tennent Ltd. Formerly Britain's most successful commercial theatre production company, Tennent's had been co-founded by the legendary, and recently deceased, Hugh (Binkie) Beaumont. Many would have been daunted to step into Beaumont's shoes, but Montagu seized the opportunity. As well as presenting star productions, such as Peter O'Toole in 'Dead Eye Dicks' and Paul Scofield in 'The Tempest' (both 1975), she brought many new ideas and talents to the West End. One of these was the return of a modern repertory company at the Lyric Theatre, Shaftesbury Avenue, prompted by her invitation to Ben Travers -- the grand old man of farce -- to write what became a very popular new comedy, 'The Bed Before Yesterday', which alternated with 'The Seagull', both plays being directed by Lindsay Anderson and starring Helen Mirren and Joan Plowright. 
In 1976, on the advice of Arthur Cantor, Montagu teamed up with Cameron Mackintosh on the revue 'Side by Side by Sondheim', which brought Stephen Sondheim's work to the attention of a wider British public. The show proved a huge success, due in part to Montagu's decision to stage it at London's Mermaid Theatre. She also brought her considerable sense of fun to the production, as well as her experience of first-night parties -- prescribing for her young co-producer her favourite hangover remedy, a 'bullshot' made from chilled beef bouillon and vodka. Like any West End producer she had failures as well as successes, but these never dented her enthusiasm and her theatrical ambitions were rarely hindered by the practicalities of cost. This is possibly why her plans for a particularly sumptuous production of the Italian comedy 'Filumena', directed by Franco Zeffirelli, caused her to part company with H. M. Tennent in 1977 to set up Backstage Productions. Later, with Peter Sibley as its general manager, she formed her own company, Helen Montagu Productions. 
Between 1984 and 1988 Montagu worked as the executive producer on the London version of the musical '42nd Street'. Throughout her career she displayed a talent for never losing her composure and for acting as a calming influence backstage. It was this ability that prompted the American producer David Merrick -- a notoriously prickly man and by then severely disabled by a stroke -- to entrust the London and later Australian productions of the musical to her. Uncannily she seemed to be the only person able to interpret Merrick's speech and wishes correctly. Montagu hated pretentiousness and during her career presented, with equal enthusiasm, nearly every kind of theatrical entertainment -- from modern classics to the rock musical 'Tommy' (1993) and an outrageously camp 'Prisoner of Cell Block H' (1995), starring Paul O'Grady (stage name Lily Savage). Other notable, if not always successful, productions included 'Driving Miss Daisy' (Apollo Theatre, 1988, with Dame Wendy Hiller), the musicals 'Gigi' (Lyric Theatre, 1985) and 'Hot Shoe Shuffle' (Queen's Theatre, 1994), and in Australia Ronald Harwood's 'The Dresser' (with Warren Mitchell) and Robyn Archer's 'A Star is Torn', which she also produced in London. 
Helen Montagu never did things by halves. Characteristically in the 1980s she changed her hair colour overnight from a stylish jet black to a glamorous ash blonde. She knew all the best restaurants, the best designers, and the best shops to acquire the necessities of life, which included glamorous clothes and her favourite Cristal champagne. She loved parties and was a terrific, if frenzied, cook. She was also an excellent first-night guest and could be relied on to manufacture an appreciative and loud laugh (even when a show was not that funny) to galvanize the audience into applause. To many of her friends she was La Montagu because there could only be one of her; she invariably greeted friends with the cry of 'Daaahling' across a crowded bar or theatre lobby. She died on 1 January 2004 at St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, Westminster, following a stroke. She was survived by her husband and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93149


Nuttall, Jeffrey Addison (1933-2004), artist and author, was born on 8 July 1933 at 8 York Street, Clitheroe, Lancashire, the son of Kenneth Nuttall, schoolteacher, and his wife, Hilda Mary, 'nee' Addison. His younger brother, Anthony David (Tony) Nuttall (1937-2007), became a distinguished Shakespearian scholar. He grew up near the Welsh border, in Orcop, Herefordshire, where his father was the village schoolmaster, but he was largely educated in Hereford and at art school there, leaving in 1951. He then did his national service in the Royal Army Education Corps. On 17 July 1954 he married his art teacher, Janet (Jane) Louch, five years his senior, and the daughter of Peter Louch, bricklayer; they had a daughter and three sons. He described himself on his marriage certificate as 'artist'. He initially developed as a painter, but became interested in all the arts. From 1956 to 1968 he worked as an art teacher at various secondary schools; he then spent sixteen years working at art colleges, in Bradford, Leeds, and Liverpool (latterly as head of fine arts at Liverpool Polytechnic). He had a special ability to inspire in others a concept of art as a force to stimulate the imagination and thereby escape from habit-living, selfish ambition, and middle-class complacency. He was an inspired teacher, but his radical ideas frequently landed him in trouble. He taught his students to look at things in new ways, recognizing disorder and chaos as being as natural to life as class-based law and order. 
Although he made his mark as an artist (with both joint and one-man exhibitions), poet, writer, actor, and musician, it was as a pioneer of the 'happening' in Britain that Nuttall was perhaps best known in his own lifetime. The late 1950s and early 1960s were an exciting period in life and especially in the arts, due to the rising affluence of the post-war generation and the abandonment of restrictive middle-class culture and values by those who had enjoyed free state higher education. The theatre in particular was going through a revolutionary period far removed from the Coward-Maugham-Rattigan tradition with not only Beckett, Brecht, Osborne, and absurdist and expressionist trends dominating, but Dadaist and 'happening' theatrical innovation emerging too. This last trend immediately appealed to Nuttall, who became an actor and happening-innovator. In a notable Nuttall happening at Better Books, an avant-garde bookshop in central London, actors threw large pieces of raw offal at each other, often hitting the audience. His public performances featured jazz -- he was a competent trumpet player and pianist -- spoken verse, and improvised acting, frequently using his rich and resonant voice for both singing and recitation. In 1967 he co-founded the People Show, which performed everywhere it could, often on a busy street or dockside, using scripts that Nuttall wrote for the occasion, many of which were later published. These were not only shocking, but sometimes even frightening. Audiences who stopped on the street to watch an unusual event, not realizing that it was a rehearsed dramatic performance, were, as Nuttall saw it, experiencing an awareness of art in their lives. On one occasion some actors booked rooms in a hotel, while others used the public rooms pretending to be either guests or police detectives investigating a murder that had taken place there, until the whole building was in a panic, whereupon the actors all disappeared. In two volumes entitled 'Performance Art' (1979), one containing scripts and the other descriptions of performances, Nuttall vividly described the activities of the People Show. 
Nuttall was an important figure in many other aspects of the 1960s counter-culture. For three years from 1965 he edited his own journal, 'My Own Mag', and from its inception in 1966 he contributed cartoons and articles to 'International Times', which when sued had to shorten its title to the initials 'IT'. He took part in a notorious poetry event at the Albert Hall in June 1965, where Alexander Trocchi, Allen Ginsberg, Christopher Logue, and an international collection of poets gave readings in an atmosphere full of marijuana smoke, where the psychiatrist-poet R. D. Laing brought a number of very disturbed mental patients, and where Nuttall himself performed covered entirely in blue paint (an emergency hot bath being required to save him from certain death). The entire box-office takings disappeared, together with two of the organizers, and only a few performers who had been recorded by the BBC received any payment or expenses. But the event was a major factor in making Nuttall better known. 
In 1968 he again came to prominence as the author of 'Bomb Culture', which had much to do with his anti-nuclear activities (he was involved in the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the Committee of 100). The argument advanced in 'Bomb Culture' was that in an age when life could end at any time, either by design or accident, with the major nations able and threatening to destroy each other, young people had to live for the pleasure of the moment. The book was quoted in the House of Commons during a debate on the unruly and much criticized behaviour of the youth of the day, and became a modest best-seller. 
Nuttall published some forty books, including many volumes of poetry, between 1963 and the final 'Selected Poems' a year before his death. His novels included 'Come Back, Sweet Prince' (1966), 'Pig' (1969), 'The House Party' (1975), and 'Snipe's Spinster' (1975). Some of his publications were biographies, including one of Frank Randle, the northern music-hall comedian (1978). His interests were wide and he often tried to bring together high and popular culture. He knew and appreciated the classics, especially in the visual arts and music. He had a special feeling for traditional jazz. 
In 1979 Nuttall became poetry critic for 'The Observer' and his 'Selected Poems' began to sell well. He continued to perform happenings and on one occasion, largely to publicize his books at the invitation of one of his publishers, he went to the American booksellers' convention in Atlanta where, his large overweight body bound up in nothing but tight sellotape, he walked around among the publishers' stands as the climax of a fictitious quest to discover a missing person. But the police were called and he had to be quickly hidden. In New York he was fascinated by the graffiti on the subway trains and spent hours watching them pass. Any art, however improvised or amateur, was to him a certain indication that in any society artists will find a way to express themselves. 
Nuttall's open friendliness and generosity in helping others and collaborating with any activity that took his fancy made him many friends, and few could resist his charm. When his marriage foundered (he was divorced in 1979) he developed other relationships, travelling abroad for a time with Amanda Porter, with whom he had two more sons. His heavy drinking, especially of beer, led to much ill health and occasional hospitalization later in life. But he continued to work at anything that was within his capacity, and his large rotund shape made him ideal for certain parts on stage and screen, Falstaff and Friar Tuck, for instance. He played in many films (notably in 'Robin Hood', 1991), less on the stage because of the discipline and relative sobriety required. He was a good public speaker, but could not help bringing into his public appearances the obscenities that littered his normal conversation. His poetry was rich and unusual, heavy with symbolism and associated imagery, surrealist in its effect, understandable but random, depending on stream of consciousness. Nevertheless his written work was so varied that it is difficult to generalize about it. When he wanted to be clear and incisive, he was. This was most obvious in his 'Art and the Degradation of Awareness' (1999). Too many art critics, he argued, had gone overboard in praising or accepting conceptual works that had no real skill behind them, or, even where there was an element of craftsmanship, no content. Some art was meaningless, harmless, and did not try to make much of a point. But other art, just as meaningless, was idolized. Associated principally with the lifestyle of the artist, such art was simply passing fashion and even if it survived for a while in a museum could not be art in any meaningful sense. Nuttall had been a rebel and had liked to shock, but only in the sense of introducing unexpected surprise into people's lives, thereby stimulating the imagination. He retained a sense of values, and lamented the 'degradation' of artistic standards. 
During his last year Nuttall continued working, promoting his work, accepting speaking engagements, and occasionally playing a small part in a film. His last partner was (Margaret) Jill Richards, with whom he lived in Crickhowell, Brecknockshire. (It was no coincidence that he spent so much of his time in or near Wales. He was almost Welsh in his upbringing and he had a special love of Dylan Thomas, whom in many ways he resembled, both physically and in lifestyle.) It had long been his practice to play his cornet on Sundays in the Hen and Chicks pub in Abergavenny with a jazz group, and it was on 4 January 2004, at the end of such a performance, that he was suddenly taken ill. He was pronounced dead at Nevill Hall Hospital, Abergavenny, the same day, the cause of death being given as coronary artery disease. He was survived by his six children. 
Among twentieth-century British artists, none deserved the description of Renaissance man more than Jeff Nuttall, who aside from being a painter, poet, novelist, actor, musician, playwright, and critic, was a polemicist and promoter of the power of the imagination to bring spiritual and non-materialistic values and attitudes into life. In his case his artistic drive was instinctive and natural, having nothing to do with ambition or any desire for recognition. Worldly success was of little importance to him compared to the realization that he was exploiting his natural interests to the limits of his ability. He was a bon viveur who enjoyed his life, did most things to excess, and whose only enemy lay in narrow-minded attitudes and over-respect for tradition or slavery to fashion. In spite of a personality that most people would call anarchic, he believed in real values, in discipline, and a hierarchy of talent. No one represented the spirit of the 1960s better than Jeff Nuttall. 


@@@@@


doc= 93152


Pike, (Irene) Mervyn Parnicott, Baroness Pike (1918-2004), businesswoman, politician, and voluntary worker, was born at Highmere, Whitwood Mere, Whitwood, Castleford, Yorkshire, on 16 September 1918, the second child and only daughter of Ivan Samuel Pike (1867-1934), managing director of Clokie and Co., a pottery works, and his wife, Alice Goodhead (died 1956). Known as Mervyn, after her intended godfather who fell in action days before her birth, she studied at Hunmanby Hall, in Filey, Yorkshire, before taking a first-class degree in economics and psychology from the University of Reading in 1941. That same year she joined the Women's Auxiliary Air Force, in which she served for the remainder of the Second World War, becoming a flight sergeant responsible for crew selection. 
After the war Pike succeeded her mother as Clokie's managing director and, encouraged by the local Labour chief, followed her father onto the local parish council. By 1950 her dislike of the government's centralization and controls led her to become a Conservative, but she retained the desire to improve social conditions that had attracted her to Labour. She was elected unopposed to Yorkshire West Riding county council but had to be persuaded by the party chairman, Lord Woolton, to run for parliament, feeling that local government was where people's lives could be improved. After standing in Pontefract and Leek in 1951 and 1955 respectively, she finally landed the safe tory seat of Melton, Leicestershire, at the by-election of December 1956 necessitated by the Foreign Office minister Anthony Nutting's resignation over the Suez debacle. The nomination of a woman outsider in this traditional, rural constituency stirred controversy, and some party members withheld their support, but the party's decreased majority was blamed on Suez and she was praised for holding the seat. 
Pike had a brisk, robust manner and set rigorous standards, yet remained fun to work with. Colleagues appreciated her energy, enthusiasm, and humour, and she enjoyed hosting generous dinner parties for friends. However, she had a low parliamentary profile and some were surprised by her rapid rise, as she became a parliamentary private secretary at the Home Office in early 1957, and assistant postmaster-general in October 1959. Despite joking that this formidable title kept her from finding a husband (she never married), Pike, one of parliament's few businesswomen, enjoyed overseeing reforms at one of Britain's largest institutions. These reforms were both cosmetic -- brightening the uniformly brown and cream post office interiors and replacing traditional metal grilles with glass -- and practical, like shortening queues by abolishing the counter clerks' specialization, and separating its finances from the exchequer. During the tories' last eighteen months in power Pike was parliamentary under-secretary at the Home Office, but soon after their defeat in October 1964 she left the front bench for a directorship with the major Devon-based ball clay company Watts Blake Bearne. There she helped to introduce a successful new approach to union relations. 
In 1966 Pike became the most senior woman Conservative in a decade, as shadow minister for social services. She was an innovator -- one of the first MPs to have an office computer -- and a brain-stormer whose spontaneity, bordering on impetuosity, could alarm those with slower thought processes. Her pamphlet 'Needs Want' (1967) reflected her original thinking and position as one of the party's liberals, drawing upon her voluntary experience with the National Council of Social Services and the Child Guidance Council. She rejected the tory orthodoxy that poverty was due to 'feckless work and reckless breeding', and recommended targeted payments rather than family allowances and claw-backs. She also persuaded her party to support the use of voluntary organizations to address social problems. In 1967 she left the shadow cabinet permanently, facilitating Margaret Thatcher's rise as the party's 'statutory' woman front-bencher, but she went on to develop intellectual links between the party and conservative academics. Through this network, and as chairman of the Conservative Systems Research Centre, she did much to shape the Conservatives' economic proposals which contributed to their surprise election victory in 1970. Despite her back-bench status there was none the less surprise when she did not receive a ministerial appointment -- for private health reasons -- and her chief political legacy was therefore made in opposition, not government. 
In 1974 Pike left the Commons to replace her friend Lady Reading as chairman of the Women's Royal Voluntary Service (WRVS). She was made a life peer, as Baroness Pike, in the dissolution honours of April 1974. She rarely spoke in Lords debates, but her political contacts helped the WRVS, and as she undertook its reform, her tactics enabled her almost always to get what she wanted. As usual she brought fresh ideas to her task, introducing such projects as a victims' support scheme in the courts and contact centres where divorced fathers could see their children. In addition she gave the WRVS uniform a more feminine look, encouraged the recruitment of more men, and appointed the first male vice-chairman. Her devolution of authority and fostering of greater professionalism in the WRVS's work made a lasting difference. Despite her having to oversee some difficult economizing and restructuring, this period was the happiest of her life and she greatly invigorated a somewhat hidebound wartime institution. 
On leaving the WRVS in 1981 Pike was made a DBE, and held her last public appointment as the first chairman of the Broadcasting Complaints Commission, from 1981 to 1985. Here she drew upon her experience as chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority's general advisory council from 1974 to 1979. After leaving public life she remained in Hownam, Kelso, where she had lived since the 1970s as a popular 'lady of the manor' with Dame Susan Walker (her long-time companion and a former senior Conservative official), enjoying walking and gardening. She died of pneumonia, following a stroke, on 11 January 2004 at Queens House nursing home, Kelso, and was buried at Hownam. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 93157


Scanlon, Hugh Parr, Baron Scanlon (1913-2004), trade unionist, was born in Melbourne, Australia, on 26 October 1913, the second son of Hugh Scanlon, upholsterer, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Prince. His parents had recently emigrated from Salford in Lancashire and, when his father died a year later, his mother returned to her parents' home in Davyhulme, Manchester, where she gave birth to a daughter and went to work in the local Co-operative soap factory. These family circumstances placed serious financial constraints on Scanlon's upbringing and, while attending St Mary's church school and then Stretford elementary school, he also had to work part-time delivering bread and newspapers. During these years a major influence came from his grandfather, who was active in the local Labour Party and who encouraged him to read the novels of Jack London and Upton Sinclair. 
Scanlon left school at the age of fourteen to take up an apprenticeship as an instrument maker at the huge Metropolitan-Vickers engineering works in Trafford Park, Manchester. There he quickly acquired the reputation of being sharp-witted, outspoken, and mischievous. One often-told story records that soon after starting he found an overpayment in his wage packet, then a week later the same sum was deducted and he complained; on being told 'You did not complain last week when we paid you too much', he replied, 'One mistake I can forgive, but not two' ('Daily Telegraph', 28 Jan 2004). Scanlon continued his education through National Council of Labour Colleges' evening classes but took little interest in technical subjects, preferring to focus on economics, industrial psychology, public speaking, and chairmanship. He was now becoming increasingly active in the Amalgamated Engineering Union: elected as a shop steward at the age of twenty-two, he went on to become the full-time convenor and secretary of the works committee of the recently renamed Associated Electrical Industries, which was by then employing around 6000 people, or half the workforce of the world's largest industrial park. It was therefore not such a big step to become divisional organizer for the north-west region in 1947. Scanlon had also joined the Labour Party through its League of Youth but, like many others of his generation, he became increasingly disillusioned with its policy of non-intervention in the Spanish Civil War and joined the Communist Party in 1936, remaining a member until his resignation in 1954. Although this gave him a lasting reputation in right-wing and security circles as a 'domestic subversive', the British Communist Party had given up its revolutionary ambitions in the late 1920s and explicitly committed itself to a 'parliamentary road' in 1951: membership in these years therefore only implied a more principled reformist socialism. Last but not least, work at the Vickers plant had also brought Scanlon into contact with a young female clerk in the meter department, Nora Kate Markey, daughter of James Markey, a steel dresser. The couple married on 29 July 1944 at Eccles register office and had two daughters. 
The long period of economic prosperity after 1945 enabled the Amalgamated Engineering Union to expand into such new sectors as the motor industry and gradually to re-establish its earlier position of strength, which had been eroded by inter-war unemployment. Its membership grew to around one million and rediscovered its assertiveness, and its leadership began to move away from cold war anti-communism. Scanlon continued his rise to become the most credible leader of the left within the union: in 1963 he was elevated to the national executive after a highly contested election involving a lengthy court case and then, in 1967, ran a successful campaign for the position of president. 
The election of Scanlon -- an avowed Marxist who retained friendly links with members of the Communist Party -- to the head of one of Britain's most powerful industrial organizations aroused both exaggerated fears and exaggerated hopes. For example, soon after his emergence to national prominence he gave a revealing interview to a group of young intellectuals from the 'New Left Review', who hoped to find him advocating a new form of industrial militancy to force an immediate transition to socialism. As a trade-union activist with many years of practical experience, Scanlon's response was more cautious and more concrete: he saw the new mood of rebelliousness as a product of youthful impatience and emphasized the constitutional limitations on his own power. His leftism therefore took a more traditional form, turning questions about the imminence of socialism into answers about the details of collective bargaining, and emphasizing that his presidential campaign had been about resistance to the incomes policy of Harold Wilson's Labour government. Moreover, because he realized that this particular economic demand would have immediate political implications, Scanlon was hesitant about taking industrial action and hoped for an understanding response from Labour ministers. In other respects his priorities remained the familiar ones of normal collective bargaining. Thus, in outlining his own organization's immediate strategy, he explained: 'the Engineering Wages application itself which we have just presented to the engineering employers... asks for a substantial wage increase without any strings attached -- in other words, without any productivity deals, with all that implies for the Prices and Incomes policy -- for a shorter working week, increased holidays and holiday pay, increased overtime premiums and a better guaranteed week. Together with the establishment of illness and pension benefits. ('The role of militancy', 'New Left Review', 46, 1967, 7)' Similarly, though a number of his speeches at this time resulted in Scanlon becoming closely associated with the notion of 'workers' control', his own understanding of this widespread catchphrase remained close to the realities of everyday trade unionism. In the foreseeable future he took it to mean the formalizing of traditional regulation of training and manning, extended to include ratification of the appointment of supervisors at shop level and scrutiny of the decisions of managers at enterprise level. Indeed, at the heart of his conception of workers' control was his own experience as a local union activist during the Second World War and the long post-war boom. Even in his more utopian sketches of a fully democratic, socialist future he still foresaw the survival of roles for technical staff and managers alongside the adversarial pressure of independent trade unions. Much of the language was new and the overall tone was perhaps more assertive, but the goals expressed by Scanlon in these speeches would have been familiar even to his radical-liberal predecessors in the leadership of the craft unions. For the core of his vision was a challenge to the parasitic power of international financiers and the creation of a co-operative atmosphere within British industry to release the full potential of the workforce: 'Fundamentally, the aim within public ownership is the wearing down of sides in industry, with no 'superiors' or 'inferiors' but only differences and functions based on knowledge and ability... Ideas, aspirations and intentions need to have full access and be encouraged upward, whilst explanations, snags and problems should move downward for discussion and the creation of an informed working populace. (H. Scanlon, 'The Way Forward for Workers' Control', 1968, 7)' At the core of his identity, then, Scanlon was not a politician but a trade unionist, and not a mindless militant but a skilful negotiator. While he often referred to 'loyalty to the principles of socialism', what he meant in practice was more investment in up-to-date equipment and the training of the workforce. While he always followed the democratically determined policy of the union, in his retirement he was prepared to be outspoken about the damaging impact of excessive striking. It was therefore entirely consistent that he should have served on a number of joint industrial bodies, including the Engineering Industry Training Board (1975-82); represented the unions on a number of regulatory bodies, including the Metrication Board (1973-8) and the British Gas Corporation (1976-82); and from 1978 taken part in a public inquiry into the teaching of mathematics in schools. However, there was one issue over which he could be uncompromisingly intransigent and which would cause enormous problems for both Labour and Conservative governments: resistance to state intervention in collective bargaining. It was this that prompted Wilson's well-known response, 'get your tanks off my lawn Hughie', issued at Chequers in June 1969 (P. Jenkin, 'The Battle for Number Ten', 1970, 140). 
By the mid-1960s there was a cross-party consensus that the only way to deal with the rising tide of disruptive disputes in the strategic export sector of the motor industry was to impose legal controls on strike action. As a result the Labour white paper 'In Place of Strife' -- produced by Wilson's employment and productivity secretary, Barbara Castle, in January 1969 -- proposed statutory conciliation pauses and strike ballots, thus steering a collision course with the two huge unions most likely to be affected: Scanlon's engineers (members from 1971 of the renamed Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers) and the Transport and General Workers under the equally formidable leadership of Jack Jones. Together Scanlon and Jones soon became known as 'the terrible twins', for under their pressure the Trades Union Congress stubbornly resisted any form of government compulsion and offered only a 'solemn and binding' undertaking to support its member organizations in restraining unofficial strikes. This forced an embarrassed Labour government into making a dramatic U-turn over a key policy and it was subsequently defeated in the general election of 1970. Scanlon and Jones had already made it clear that they were not overly concerned about Edward Heath's new Conservative government being even more determined to impose statutory restraints. The 'Industrial Relations Act' of 1971 was indeed rendered unworkable by a series of one-day protest strikes accompanied by the refusal of both the engineers and the transport workers to pay any attention to the provisions of the legislation, despite substantial fines imposed for contempt of court. The number of days lost through strikes rose to over 24 million in 1972, the highest annual figure since the general strike of 1926, and the act was eventually withdrawn as a dead letter. 
The principles Scanlon was defending were moderate ones, for free collective bargaining or 'voluntarism' had been enshrined as the traditional British approach to industrial relations in two major rounds of Liberal legislation in 1871 and 1906, and had been restated by a recent royal commission under Lord Donovan set up by Wilson himself. However, the methods used in the defence of these principles were a major departure from traditional trade-union respect for the rule of law and the parliamentary process. Scanlon may not have been in favour of a revolution himself, but he helped to provoke one. Buoyed up by the rediscovered strength of his organization, he made a major contribution to the widespread public feeling that trade unions were making the country ungovernable, and thus paved the way for Margaret Thatcher's eventual reversal of all the established assumptions about government non-intervention in this field. Scanlon repaired his relationship with the Labour leadership when it ejected Heath in 1974, repealed the Conservatives' first attempt at compulsory labour legislation, and replaced its own earlier attempt at an incomes policy with the new approach of a 'social contract' under which the unions accepted the need for wage restraint in return for favourable government social policy. 
On his retirement Scanlon was offered and accepted a peerage, as Baron Scanlon, on 30 December 1978: only one of many aspects of his behaviour that contemporaries found surprising. For example, while still a prominent leader of the left and living in union accommodation in Eltham, he bought a house of his own at Broadstairs on the Kent coast and made no secret of his passion for golf, which he played off the relatively low handicap of nine. On the public stage he was usually sharp and tough, but in private he could be charming and witty, and was well liked by both sides of industry. However, these characteristics only seemed paradoxical because of a misunderstanding about the politics of the British Communist Party and a lack of awareness of the diversity of the country's industrial organizations: they fall into place once Hugh Scanlon is seen as an important figure in the mainstream tradition of British craft unionism. After a long retirement he died of arteriosclerosis at his home, 23 Seven Stones Drive, Broadstairs, on 27 January 2004. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 93160


Shipman, Harold Frederick (1946-2004), mass murderer, was born on 14 January 1946 at 163 Longmead Drive, Edwards Lane, Nottingham, the eldest son (and second of three children) of Harold Frederick Shipman (1914-1985), lorry driver, and his wife, Vera, 'nee' Britton (1919-1963), daughter of a bricklayer's labourer. His family was the epitome of working-class decency: his father was quiet, neat, and conscientious; his mother was respectful, house-proud, and wanted her children to better themselves. She encouraged her son -- who was always known to his family and contemporaries as Frederick or Fred Shipman -- to hold aloof from other boys on the Edwards Lane estate and to consider himself destined for superior things. He was an inconspicuous pupil at Whitemoor junior school (1954-7) and High Pavement Grammar School, Nottingham (1957-64). His mother's slow death from lung cancer when he was seventeen made a deep impression on him. His glimpse of the authority that physicians commanded in provincial communities probably influenced his decision at this time to read medicine at university. The power of morphine to ease his mother's pain may have started his lifelong fascination with the drug. 
Shipman trained at Leeds University medical school (1965-70). On his way there in the mornings, travelling on a double-decker red bus, he met a young window-dresser who became his first and only girlfriend: Primrose May ('b'. 1949), daughter of George Oxtoby, a Yorkshire farmworker and highways labourer. She was six months pregnant when they married on 5 November 1966. Their daughter was born in 1967, and three sons followed in 1971, 1979, and 1982. 
For three and a half years Shipman worked as a junior houseman at Pontefract General Infirmary (1970-74). He was confident, pleasant, and conscientious with patients, but aloof and unapproachable with colleagues, and had marked contempt for anyone whom he considered stupid. He is suspected of hastening the deaths of terminally ill patients at Pontefract as early as 1971; his first identifiable victim died on 12 April 1972. He seems to have felt intrigued by the power of opiates and to have enjoyed his own secret power in administering lethal doses. 
While working in the hospital's gynaecology ward and obstetrics unit Shipman began secretly injecting himself with pethidine, a synthetic opiate used as an analgesic in childbirth. He left Pontefract in 1974 to work as a general practitioner at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in Todmorden, and in January 1975 he may have resumed administration of fatal opiate overdoses to terminally ill patients whose deaths were imminent. Later that year he was forced to resign from the Todmorden practice and undergo voluntary treatment for pethidine addiction at a psychiatric unit at York. In February 1976, at Halifax magistrates' court, he was convicted of obtaining a controlled drug by deception, unlawful possession of a controlled drug, and forging declarations of exemption from prescription charges. He was fined $600, but soon afterwards found work as South-West Durham Health Authority's clinical medical officer responsible for child healthcare. 
On 1 October 1977 Shipman began work as one of seven physicians in the Donneybrook medical practice at Hyde in Cheshire. With patients he was tolerant and attentive, but he was arrogant and overbearing with medical colleagues, and Donneybrook's non-medical employees were subjected to his caustic, irritable, and aggressive behaviour. Shipman had, it may be said, a superiority complex: he wanted to feel omnipotent, realized that the ultimate power is that of deciding life and death, and made himself Britain's most prolific serial killer out of vanity. In his fourteen years at Donneybrook he is known to have killed seventy-one patients, probably using morphine, and thirty further suspicious deaths were identified. By no means all his victims were terminally ill: many of them were reasonably hale, and some were not ill at all. 
In 1992 Shipman resigned from the Donneybrook practice in a devious, ruthless manner that caused his former partners heavy financial losses. He then opened his own one-man practice in Market Street, Hyde, called The Surgery. Working alone he proved even deadlier and between 1992 and 1998 he murdered at least 143 patients. Other physicians in Hyde and Greater Manchester found Shipman supercilious and too confident in the rightness of his opinions, but his patients were delighted with his attentiveness. He liked to feel patients were besotted with or awed by him. There was a two-year waiting list to become a Shipman patient. 
Shipman enjoyed browbeating grief-stricken families, and made callous remarks in the presence of the dead. He relished the arbitrary use of his medical authority, and was a cruel, remorseless, and self-infatuated criminal. He murdered, among others, the mother, mother-in-law, and two aunts of his own receptionist. Eventually the high level of mortality among Shipman's patients was noticed by Hyde undertakers, a warden of sheltered accommodation, and another local physician. This led to a slipshod police investigation that exonerated him in April 1998. 
Shipman murdered another patient in May, and two in June of that year. In the case of the last of these, Kathleen Grundy, he had typed a clumsily forged will, bequeathing all her property to him, shortly before he killed her. This attempted fraud was singularly inapposite, given that Mrs Grundy's daughter was a solicitor, who kept her mother's real will in her office safe. Shocked by the suddenness of her mother's death and reluctant to believe that her mother would have made so inept and untidy a will, cutting out her own family, the daughter reported the suspected forgery to the police. Mrs Grundy's body was exhumed and found to contain diamorphine, and Shipman was arrested on 7 September 1998. After further investigations and exhumations, Shipman's trial for the murder of fifteen women and for the forgery of Mrs Grundy's will opened on 5 October 1999 at Preston crown court and lasted for fifty-seven days. He testified in his own defence, denying all the accusations and offering no mitigating circumstances; but the evidence was overwhelming, and he was convicted on 31 January 2000, and sentenced to fifteen life sentences and four years for forgery. In order to protect his wife's pension rights and financial entitlements Shipman hanged himself on 13 January 2004 in Wakefield prison. An official public inquiry chaired by Dame Janet Smith (2001-5) attributed 218 murders to him (171 women and 47 men between the ages of 47 and 93), and listed 63 suspicious deaths. 


@@@@@


doc= 93175


Gibson, George (1885-1953), trade unionist and mental health worker, was born at 98 Cumberland Street, Glasgow, on 3 April 1885, the third son and seventh of the eleven children of Johnston Robertson Gibson ('b'. 1847), outdoor labourer, oil merchant, and tobacconist, and his wife, Mary ('c'.1852-1909), daughter of Hugh McDermott and his wife, Annie. His father was a Northern Irish protestant and his mother was a Scottish protestant. Gibson attended Tureen Street public school from the age of five until the age of eleven, when he hit the teacher with his slate (the teacher had thrown a rolled tawse at him). Too scared to return to school, Gibson found a job as a tailor's assistant, the first of a series of jobs with limited prospects that he held during his teens and early twenties. In 1910 he lost his job as a bottler in a local pub after informing the customers that the only difference between the Irish and Scottish blended whisky sold at the pub was the colour. Unable to find a job in Glasgow, Gibson took a job as an asylum attendant at the Winwick Asylum in Newton-le-Willows near Warrington, Lancashire. 
Gibson's new colleagues were in dispute with their employers over the provisions of the 1909 'Asylum Officers' Superannuation Act', which had replaced a non-contributory pension scheme with a less generous contributory scheme. Dissatisfied with the Asylum Workers' Association, attendants from Winwick and other asylums across Lancashire met at the Mason's Arms in Whitefield, Manchester, and formed the National Asylum Workers' Union (NAWU). Gibson represented Winwick at the meeting and was elected honorary general secretary. In 1913, with the union on the brink of financial collapse, he was made general and organizing secretary, a position which he held until his retirement in 1947. 
Having improved the NAWU finances, Gibson enlisted in the Royal Garrison Artillery in May 1915. Shortly before his unit left for France, he married, on 28 July 1915, Ellen (1886/7-1918), daughter of John Henry Crossfield. Their only child, a daughter, was born in 1916. Gibson rose rapidly through the ranks, receiving a commission in 1917. Having twice been mentioned in dispatches, he left the army in 1919 with the rank of lieutenant, and resumed his union post. Following the death of his first wife, he married, on 2 August 1919, Eva Crabtree ('b'. 1893/4), a widow, the daughter of Thomas Rowson, dock labourer. They had three daughters and two sons. 
Under Gibson's leadership, assisted by his deputy Herbert Shaw, the NAWU grew in size and influence during the inter-war years. Not only did Gibson seek to unionize asylum attendants and improve their terms and conditions of service, but he also strove to professionalize their occupation and modernize the mental health services, advocating the humane treatment of patients and speaking out against proponents of sterilization. He gave evidence on behalf of his union to the royal commission on lunacy and mental disorder, in 1925, and later helped the Labour minister of health Arthur Greenwood draft the 'Mental Treatment Act', 1930. He sought to achieve his objectives through the Whitley council, but was not averse to using strike action. In 1923 he played a critical role in the Radcliffe Mental Hospital strike, persuading the male attendants to occupy the wards and keeping them informed of developments using semaphore. When the 'Daily News' called into question Gibson's commitment to the strike by reporting that he and Shaw left the scene to attend a Nottingham race meeting, they brought a libel action against the editor. Gibson and Shaw won their case, receiving damages and a printed apology. 
From the late 1920s Gibson began to play a wider role in the trade union movement. In 1928 the public employees' section of the Trades Union Congress elected him as their representative on the TUC general council, of which he remained a member until 1948. He took part in TUC attempts to unionize nurses and improve their conditions. In 1940 he was elected TUC president and chairman of the general council. After his term of office ended in September 1941, he attended the annual conference of the Swedish trade union confederation in Stockholm as the TUC representative. While in Sweden he had a private meeting with the Finnish trade unionist Eero Vuori, at the behest of Anthony Eden, in a vain attempt to persuade the Finnish labour movement to pressure their government into ending the 'Continuation War' with the Soviet Union. On his return to the UK, Gibson left for the USA to attend the International Labour Organization conference in New York and raise American support for the British. During the Second World War Gibson represented the TUC on a variety of government bodies. He was a member of the Ministry of Food trade union advisory committee (1939-40), a member of the Rushcliffe committee on the pay of nurses (1941-3), a director of the Children's Overseas Reception Board (1940), and vice-chairman of the National Savings Committee (1943-9). He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Manchester University in 1945, and in the 1946 birthday honours list was made a Companion of Honour in recognition of his war work. 
When the Labour Party came to power in 1945 Gibson was one of several senior trade unionists given important public posts, because the government trusted them to represent the interests of working people. He was appointed chairman of the North Western Regional Board of Industry in 1945, and in the following year became a member of the National Investment Council, chairman of North West Industrial Estates, a director of the Bank of England, and a member of the Treasury excess profits tax advisory panel. He made speeches on a wide range of topics, including demobilization and regional development. Gibson's union colleagues did not look favourably on these roles, which they felt were diverting his energies away from the union at a crucial time. The NAWU, renamed the Mental Hospital and Institutional Workers' Union in 1930, had just merged with the Hospitals and Welfare Services Union to form the Confederation of Health Service Employees (COHSE). Some COHSE members were also unhappy with Gibson's involvement in Winston Churchill's United Europe movement. At the COHSE conference in December 1947 disgruntled union members attempted to remove Gibson from the post of general secretary. Having defeated these attempts, Gibson announced his retirement from the union, aged sixty-two. He also resigned as chairman of the North West Regional Board of Industry. 
During this period of flux in Gibson's career he began to associate with the convicted fraudster Sydney Stanley, who touted his services as a 'contact man' to businessmen seeking raw materials allocations, import licences, and other permissions. Stanley introduced himself to Gibson on a train from Manchester to Euston some time in December 1946 or January 1947. They met each other several times on the train in the coming months. On one occasion, in April 1947, Stanley was accompanied by his brother Marcus Wulkan, who had met Gibson at a fund-raising event during his visit to the USA in 1941. Wulkan expressed a desire to help the UK out of its financial plight. Gibson invited the brothers to attend a dinner party. Stanley befriended Gibson over the course of the following months, promising donations to causes Gibson supported, paying for a private dinner party, arranging for a new suit to be made for Gibson, and giving him trivial gifts. In return Gibson invited Stanley to several dinners, introducing him to senior politicians, who assumed Stanley was respectable because of his relationship with Gibson. Some time in the autumn of 1947 Stanley offered Gibson the chairmanship of a new company at a salary of $10,000 after it had been floated. Gibson did not take up the offer, preferring to accept public office as chairman of the North Western Electricity Board, taking up the post in April 1948 after resigning from the TUC general council. He did, however, make enquiries about the procedure for floating new companies, passing on the information to Stanley. The events surrounding the company flotation and Gibson's friendship with Stanley were to be his downfall. 
In September 1948 the London Metropolitan Police and the lord chancellor began an inquiry into allegations of corruption at the Board of Trade. Having received the lord chancellor's report, the prime minister, Clement Attlee, appointed a tribunal of inquiry into the allegations. Chaired by Sir George Lynskey, the tribunal called Gibson and others to give evidence. After considering days of evidence, the tribunal found that Stanley had offered the chairmanship to Gibson in return for his help in floating the company. Although Gibson had declined the offer, he continued to assist Stanley in his scheme. The tribunal was 'satisfied that Mr. Gibson did this in the hope of material advantage to himself' ('The Times', 26 Jan 1949, 4). The finding was damning and Gibson resigned his public posts and retired from public life. He did not retire quietly, writing to Winston Churchill to plead his innocence and to Harold Wilson to berate him for spreading malicious gossip. He also appeared in a newsreel, denying the charges and attacking the inquisitorial nature of the Lynskey tribunal which had prevented him from defending himself. Until the end of his life he continued to maintain that he had acted properly. 
Gibson was not a healthy man. He suffered from respiratory problems as a result of being gassed during the First World War, and was overweight. Otherwise an affable family man with a fondness for comic songs, he was soured by the experience of the tribunal. He did not, however, see his own position in a tragicomic light: in his unpublished memoirs he likened his sufferings to those of Lord Byron, Oscar Wilde, and Alfred Dreyfus. His obituary in the 'Manchester Guardian' was more proportionate, downplaying the significance of the scandal that blighted the end of his career while remembering the many and various contributions that he made to the trade union movement and the war effort. Gibson died of cardiac failure, flu and bronchitis, and arteriosclerosis, at his home, 2 Demesne Road, Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Manchester, on 4 February 1953; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 93214


O Fiaich, Tomas Seamus (1923-1990), scholar and cardinal, was born on 3 November 1923 at Annamore, Cullyhanna, parish of Lower Creggan, co. Armagh, the second of two sons of Patrick Fee (1882-1964), schoolteacher, and his wife, Annie (1891-1932), also a schoolteacher, daughter of Patrick Carragher of Annaghmare and his wife, Anne. His name at birth was Thomas James Fee, and during his early life he used both English and Irish forms of his name interchangeably, but by the 1950s he used only the Irish form. His grandfather, John Fee, a landless labourer, born in co. Louth in 1848 during the great famine, was a fluent Irish speaker. During the Northern Ireland troubles from 1969 onwards, the area of south Armagh around Crossmaglen in which Tomas O Fiaich grew up became a major centre of republican activity. In his youth about half the adult male population of Crossmaglen had served in the British army in the First World War. He remembered it as 'very English culturally and politically' (private information). 
Tomas O Fiaich had his primary education at Cregganduff public elementary school where his father was a teacher and later headmaster. He had his secondary education at St Patrick's College, Armagh, to which he won an entrance scholarship in 1936. In his youth he was a keen player of Gaelic football and became a knowledgeable follower of Gaelic games, particularly when the Armagh county team was involved. In 1940 he entered St Patrick's College, Maynooth, the national seminary. In addition to his standard seminary courses he took Celtic studies, in which he graduated BA with first-class honours in 1943. A serious illness in 1944 strengthened his determination to become a priest. He did not return to Maynooth, but was ordained in 1948 at St Peter's College, Wexford, a minor seminary. 
O Fiaich's bishop, John D'Alton, recognizing his academic capacity, asked him to resume his studies at University College, Dublin, where he graduated MA in medieval Irish history in 1950. In that year he moved to the University of Louvain. His research there was rewarded in 1952 with a licentiate in historical sciences (Lic. Sc. Hist), 'avec la plus grande distinction'. His period of study in Louvain enabled him to travel widely in search of evidence for the work of medieval Irish monks abroad, a subject on which he became an acknowledged authority. During his time in continental Europe he developed his linguistic skills, becoming fluent in French and German. His contributions to the literature of Irish monastic settlement in Europe included 'Irish Cultural Influence in Europe' (1966), a life of Columbanus, the seventh-century Irish monk whom he described as Ireland's first European (1974), and 'Gaelscrinte san Eoraip' (1986), an account of Irish shrines on the continent. In recognition of his scholarly work he was awarded the degree of doctor of literature by the National University of Ireland in April 1984. 
After a year of parish work in Armagh, O Fiaich was appointed lecturer in modern history at Maynooth in 1953 and professor in 1959. He became registrar of the college in 1968, vice-president in 1970, and president in 1974. He combined his academic duties in Maynooth with an enthusiastic involvement in the activities of the Irish language movement. He was a fluent Irish speaker and writer, having mastered the language during many lengthy visits to the Donegal Gaeltacht of Rann na Feirste from childhood on. 
O Fiaich was a member of every major organization devoted to the propagation of the Irish language as a spoken medium. He was chairman of the commission on the restoration of Irish appointed by the government of the Irish republic in 1959. In 1965 he was appointed chairman of the Irish language advisory council. From 1955 to 1967 he was president of Cumann na Sagart, a society for Irish-speaking priests, and was founder and director of Glor na nGael, which fostered the use of Irish in the everyday life of towns and cities throughout the country. His active support for the Irish language and for compulsory Irish in schools made him a controversial figure in the mid-1960s when a number of groups, most notably the Language Freedom Movement, were agitating for a reduced emphasis on Irish in the educational system and in the public service. In this matter O Fiaich was a vigorous defender of the 'status quo'. The only political party in the republic that reflected his cultural nationalism to any appreciable extent was Fianna Fail, offering as it did at least nominal support to the Irish language movement, and designating itself as republican. He believed that political leaders should have a thorough knowledge of Irish, the first official language. Until De Valera's retirement from the presidency in 1973, the three holders of that office had fulfilled this requirement. When Fianna Fail nominated Erskine Childers, who knew no Irish and showed no interest in it, as De Valera's successor, O Fiaich expressed his displeasure to his close friends, but refrained from public protest. 
When Cardinal William Conway died in April 1977 O Fiaich was not widely regarded as an obvious successor to the see of Armagh, although his candidature enjoyed strong support among the clergy of the archdiocese. He was appointed archbishop of Armagh by Pope Paul VI on 15 August 1977 and was consecrated on 2 October. He was elevated to the College of Cardinals by Pope John Paul II on 30 June 1979. He was the first Armagh man in 800 years to have been appointed archbishop of Armagh. He was also the first primate of all Ireland for over 100 years who was not already a bishop on appointment. 
O Fiaich's period of office as archbishop was a continuously troubled one. Between 1978 and 1989 over 1100 people died in Northern Ireland as a result of violence. Many young men from the archdiocese of Armagh were interned for paramilitary activities. O Fiaich's nationalist background and his known political views made him from the start a target for criticism in the British media, among unionists and among elements of the British government who had reservations about his appointment. His forthright statements on partition and on the British presence in Northern Ireland, together with his comments on what he regarded as the unfair treatment of the Catholic minority, exposed him to sharp rebukes from a variety of unionist politicians. During a long interview with the editor of the 'Irish Press' in January 1978 he suggested that the British government should issue a declaration of intent to withdraw from Northern Ireland. In response the five Church of Ireland bishops with jurisdiction in the six counties issued a statement in support of the union. In January 1984 O Fiaich argued that people might be morally justified in joining Sinn Fein with the purpose of becoming involved in community activities, but not to support the IRA. This view was condemned by many unionists and by the government of the republic. In December 1986 he suggested that the time had not yet come for Catholics to join the Royal Ulster Constabulary. In response, the unionist peer Lord Brookeborough told the House of Lords that O Fiaich was 'an evil prelate' ('Irish Press', 9 May 1990). 
Either as a priest or as cardinal, O Fiaich never offered support to the IRA. On the contrary, he continually condemned IRA violence, while at the same time believing that partition and the British presence in Northern Ireland were root causes of the northern conflict. His even-handed approach to northern politics frequently made him vulnerable to criticism from both sides. At one extreme, loyalists and British Conservatives, particularly at moments of heightened tension, were prone to suggest that he was an IRA and Sinn Fein propagandist, who implicitly condoned IRA violence. At the opposite extreme, his condemnations of this violence attracted angry responses from republicans. When, for example, he condemned the IRA killing of a police constable in 1978, he was described as a traitor by Provisional Sinn Fein. 
From the opening of the violent phase of Northern Irish history in 1969 until his death O Fiaich was deeply engaged with the plight of political prisoners in Northern Ireland, particularly, though not exclusively, those from the Catholic community. In August 1971 Brian Faulkner's unionist government implemented a policy of internment without trial directed exclusively against Catholics. O Fiaich shared and reflected the general view of the Catholic community that selective and often random internment of Catholic men in dilapidated Nissen huts behind barbed wire was an outrage against an entire community. One of O Fiaich's responses was conveyed in his Christmas card for 1971, which depicted a Second World War prison camp and a shackled prisoner, with the motto 'Long Kesh Concentration Camp'. In August 1978, following a day-long visit to Long Kesh, he compared the conditions in which the prisoners were living to those in the slums of Calcutta. His regular visits to inmates of internment camps and prisons received much publicity, as did his willingness to fraternize with loyalist prisoners. He was involved in the campaign for the release of Irish prisoners gaoled in Britain for the Guildford and Birmingham bombings carried out by the IRA in 1974. His involvement was based on his view that these prisoners were innocent. The British appeal court ultimately decided that none of these prisoners should have been gaoled. In the last year of his life O Fiaich visited Irish republican prisoners in the north and midlands of England. 
In March 1981 IRA prisoners in the Maze prison began a hunger strike in support of their demand for special category status. This hunger strike, during which ten prisoners died, inflamed nationalist feelings in Northern Ireland to an unprecedented extent. O Fiaich, who was opposed to the hunger strikes, appealed to all those involved to call them off. He was in frequent touch with British government officials and made futile attempts to secure a compromise between the hunger strikers and the authorities. In response to the threat to civil order posed by the hunger strikes, O Fiaich joined the leaders of other Christian churches in appealing for calm. He pleaded with the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, to intervene personally, but she ignored his plea. The protracted sequence of deaths resulting from the hunger strikes profoundly affected nationalist politics, leading directly to an appreciable growth in support for Sinn Fein. 
During his period of office as archbishop of Armagh and leader of the Catholic church in Ireland, O Fiaich played an active part in the campaign of resistance to changes in social legislation proposed by successive governments in the republic. There was considerable controversy over attempts to introduce divorce and outlaw abortion. During the debate in 1979 on the 'Family Planning Amendment Bill', he publicly opposed the liberalization of the legislation on contraception. In 1986, when Garret Fitzgerald's administration held a referendum with a view to lifting the constitutional ban on divorce, O Fiaich led episcopal opposition to the proposal. He argued that even a limited form of divorce would be damaging to society and would eventually result in a liberal divorce regime. He suggested that the Catholic church represented the strongest defence against what he called 'the plague of divorce' throughout the world and regarded it as his duty to proclaim the traditional Christian teaching on the matter. 
O Fiaich's vigorous, uncompromising proclamation of Catholic moral teaching was combined with a strong commitment to ecumenism. None of his predecessors, nor indeed any other Irish church leader of any denomination, had been involved in so wide a range of ecumenical endeavours as he was. Each year during church unity week, he invited speakers from all the Christian denominations, many from abroad, to preach in his cathedral. He travelled throughout Ireland in the company of leaders of the Church of Ireland, the Presbyterian, and Methodist churches. He regarded such occasions as vital tokens of Christian fellowship, especially at times of tension in Northern Ireland. Observers of these occasions gained the impression that O Fiaich's enthusiasm for them was greater than that of the participants from other churches. 
Throughout his priestly and episcopal careers O Fiaich was an inveterate traveller, participating in numerous pilgrimages, Lourdes being his favourite destination. On 8 May 1990 he died in hospital in Toulouse following a heart attack while leading the annual pilgrimage to Lourdes from the Armagh archdiocese. He was buried on 15 May in the grounds of Armagh Cathedral. 
O Fiaich's spontaneous warmth, his gift for friendship which surmounted social, religious, geographical, and cultural barriers, his generosity of spirit and freedom from pomposity or self-conceit, were qualities that impressed those who knew him. Dispassionate historians have questioned the appropriateness of appointing an ultra-nationalist as leader of the Catholic church in Ireland at a time of rising political and religious tensions in the six counties. His elevation may have owed something to the belief that a man with his Irish-Ireland background and outlook might have been able to persuade militant republicans to espouse constitutional politics. Much as he tried, he failed, as Pope John Paul II did during his visit to Ireland in 1979, to move a substantial body of IRA members in this direction. His inability to exert a decisive influence on the IRA was to become evident during the H-block hunger strikes in 1981. His open sympathy for the demands of the IRA prisoners strengthened their resolve on the one hand, and that of the British government on the other. His public pronouncements on political and religious issues, sometimes made without due reflection on their likely impact, were a reflection of his candour, while at the same time giving the impression that he was deficient in diplomatic skill. Until his appointment as archbishop of Armagh much of his adult life had been spent outside Northern Ireland. As a consequence, he did not fully appreciate the sensitivities of those whose world-view differed radically from his own. Some of his comments, even when motivated by a desire to be even-handed, were liable to antagonize both communities simultaneously. The most egregious example was his suggestion that while 90 per cent of religious bigotry in Northern Ireland was protestant in origin, 90 per cent of political bigotry came from Catholic sources. 
For many nationalists, however, O Fiaich's sometimes incautious political utterances and stances were not the distinctive mark of his leadership of the Catholic church. He strongly reflected the views of those throughout Northern Ireland for whom nationalism implied an intimate link between religious allegiance, Irish culture, and Irish political identity, reinforced their pride in their heritage, and helped them to maintain their self-respect and dignity during one of the most troubled phases in their history. His record of achievement as a scholar is impressive. His best historical writing was published in 'Seanchas Ard Mhacha', the Armagh diocesan journal, between 1954 and 1977. Many of his contributions are substantial, ground-breaking studies, based on primary sources. His work on the Gaelic poets of south Ulster, Mac Cuarta, O Doirnin, Mac a Liondain and Art Mac Cooey, is a significant contribution to the literature of its subject. 


@@@@@


doc= 93216


Monck, Sir Charles Miles Lambert, sixth baronet (1779-1867), architect, landscape designer, and politician, was born in Golden Square, London, on 7 April 1779, the third but only surviving son of Sir William Middleton, fifth baronet (1738-1795), army officer and politician, of Belsay, Northumberland, and his wife, Jane (died 1794), daughter of Lawrence Monck, landowner, of Caenby, Lincolnshire. He attended Rugby School from 1787 to 1794, after which he was taught at Caenby by a private tutor who encouraged his enthusiasm for Greek and Latin authors. He inherited the Belsay estate on his father's death in 1795. He never went to university. In 1798 he inherited Caenby from his maternal grandfather (who had in turn assembled the estate by inheritance through his wife, coheir of the Tournay family, and by purchase from his brother-in-law). His inheritance was disputed, and Middleton became a ward in chancery, but was confirmed as receiver of his own estates by the lord chancellor in 1798. He acceded to a request in Lawrence Monck's will by taking the surname of Monck by royal licence in 1799. 
Despite the change of name, Sir Charles Monck found his Middleton inheritance in Northumberland more attractive than Caenby. An early indication of this was his appointment as sheriff of Northumberland for 1801-2, and another his first marriage, on 11 September 1804 at Doncaster, to his first cousin Louisa Lucy (died 1824), second daughter of Sir George Cooke, seventh baronet, and his wife, Frances Jory, daughter of Sir John Lambert Middleton, fourth baronet. The couple departed for a lengthy honeymoon in Greece, not returning for nearly two years: 'his honeymoon was... not only to be with his wife but with Greek architecture' (Watkin, 67). Monck was obsessed with the ancient world, reportedly never travelling anywhere without a copy of Horace, and his residence in Athens bore fruit not only in a son, Charles Atticus (1805-1856), but also in friendships with the archaeologist William Gell and the architect William Wilkins, and first-hand experience of classical Greek architecture, which Monck resolved to manifest on his Northumberland estate. On his return to Belsay he began building a new house inspired by the Theseion, or temple of Theseus, in Athens. He was responsible for the design, though one architectural drawing for the hall of the new house was by Gell, very similar but not identical to that built. From about 1811 Monck was almost certainly assisted by John Dobson. The digging of the foundations began in August 1807, masonry began to be raised in 1809, and construction and decoration continued until 1830. Monck and his family did not move in until Christmas day 1817, when only the entrance hall and one bedroom above were completed. In order to extract sandstone to build the house, the village of Belsay was demolished, one house and a fragment of the seventeenth-century presbyterian chapel being allowed to survive as ruins, and the site turned into a quarry; a new village of Belsay was erected on the main Newcastle to Jedburgh turnpike road, which ran past the estate. The old castle of Belsay, a short distance from the new house, was abandoned, and the name of Belsay Castle transferred to the Grecian building, though it was also known as Belsay Hall. 
Monck's 'new mansion' (Hussey, 'English Country Houses', 83) was perhaps the most consistent of those country houses of the period that derive their proportions from classical practice. The house was a complete square, with wholly plain fronts apart from the fluted columns at the entrance and the pilasters; the roof was low-pitched so as to be invisible from ground level. Monck's rationalism was expressed in his insistence that the proportional ratios of the design were calculated to three decimal places, forcing masons to abandon their conventional measurements in eighths of an inch. Monck devised a setting for the house that placed his temple as a focus of human order in a landscape that was less cultivated and more suggestive of chaos and decay the further it was from the house. While the immediate environs of the hall were landscaped by Monck in the tradition of Capability Brown and Humphry Repton, the rocky hillside opposite the hall to the south was forested with exotic conifers, Scots pine, and native hardwoods. The quarry excavated on the old site of Belsay village was turned into a canyon garden of the picturesque, inspired by the paintings of Salvator Rosa (1615-1673) and Claude Lorrain ('c'.1600-1682). Grottoes were divided by arches made to appear as if they had occurred naturally; planting was initially limited, to allow native ferns to establish themselves. The precedent of incorporating a quarry from which the stone for a house had been extracted into a picturesque garden would be followed by later country-house builders. Monck's plan to extend Belsay Lough was abandoned in the face of outrage from his neighbours -- an engineer had shown that a valve designed by Monck to regulate the amount of water in the lake could create a wave likely to damage property for several miles down the Blyth valley -- but a smaller lake than originally envisaged was placed to the south of the hall. 
The new house and landscape at Belsay expressed Monck's belief that a rationalist age would confirm the right of the independent country gentleman to rule. This was a doctrine he carried into politics. In 1805 he had been sounded out as a possible successor to Charles Grey as MP for Northumberland, should Grey inherit his father's peerage. Monck had agreed on the understanding that he would withdraw if there was a contest, as he could not afford the expense; and also that he would not regularly align himself with any party, but 'as the representative of a free body of people' (Monck to Grey, 26 April 1808, Fisher, 'Monck', 610) had to adopt whatever line seemed most correct to his judgement both in the abstract and in the interests of his constituents. Monck did not succeed Grey when he went to the House of Lords in 1807. He may at this point have been more interested in the House of Lords, as during 1809 he attempted unsuccessfully to prove the Middleton family tradition that, having been forfeited by Sir Gilbert Middleton in the fourteenth century, Belsay had returned to them by the marriage of Sir John Middleton to the daughter of John, Baron Stryvelyn; if true Monck could have claimed the Stryvelyn peerage as sole heir general, but later research has shown the connection to Stryvelyn to have been through a niece by marriage. He was elected to the Commons in April 1812 when Hugh, Earl Percy, heir to the duke of Northumberland, was called to the Lords. He retained the seat at the general elections of 1812 and 1818, without contests. In practice he normally voted with the opposition whigs throughout his period in the Commons, and was elected to Brooks's in June 1812. He voted with the government on occasion, for example against Henry Brougham's motion that Britain support the Spanish liberals; this was consistent with an outlook that, although in favour of the elimination of the parliamentary representation of decayed boroughs, was hostile to extension of the suffrage to those with little or no property. His favourite issues included the independence of the Ionian Islands, and he made motions relevant to that cause in 1816 and 1819. Thomas Creevey thought him a 'free spoken and honest politician' (Halcrow, 'Election campaigns', 107) but Monck's finances were stretched by the expenses of entertaining electors and supporting local events, and with the duke of Northumberland planning to introduce a candidate for the first time in eight years at the 1820 election, Monck chose not to fight that contest. 
While an MP Monck had maintained his other interests, designing Linden Hall, near Longhorsley, Northumberland, for his friend Charles William Bigge, in 1812-13. He also experimented in horticulture: in 1817 he published 'A Treatise on the Pruning of Fruit Trees', and his method for transporting the buds of fruit trees, developed with Thomas Andrew Knight, was outlined in a paper by Knight in the 'Transactions of the Horticultural Society' in 1822. He was interested in agricultural improvement, but his wish that his tenants grow peas to avoid clover failure was strongly resisted by them. He also painted: a portrait of the queen of the Sandwich Islands and her attendant Boki, made in June 1824, survives. 
Monck's wife died on 5 December 1824; as well as Charles Atticus, they had four daughters, only one of whom, Julia (1808-1846), survived to adulthood, and a second son, William (1809-1845). Monck made a visit to Italy in 1830-31, where he probably saw the buildings that inspired his row of arcaded houses in Belsay village. On 26 July 1831 he married Lady Mary Elizabeth Bennet (1783-1864), daughter of Charles Bennet, fourth earl of Tankerville, at his new brother-in-law's house in Grosvenor Square, London; there were no children of the marriage. In 1832, having long campaigned for parliamentary reform, he declared that he would stand for election to the reformed Commons for the new southern division of Northumberland, but he withdrew when his criticism of the 'Reform Act's' attack on nomination boroughs proved out of step with the expanded electorate. 
In order to provide his second wife with an income Monck had had to mortgage part of his estate. Throughout his life Monck had been reliant on mortgages to raise money for his building projects, for the rounding out of his estates in Northumberland and Lincolnshire, and to maintain his income at a level appropriate for the independent country gentleman he wished to be. In 1819 Sydney Smith remarked that he had heard from Monck 'that rents begin to be paid again in Northumberland; I thought the practice had been lost altogether' ('A Memoir of the Reverend Sydney Smith', 1855, 174). Other ways of raising income included a lease of his property at Allensford, Northumberland, for lead mining, from at least 1822. Monck was also an active breeder and racer of horses. He began investing in horses early in his career, but gained most success on the turf from the late 1830s onwards. 
Monck's politics in later life have been described as 'an idiosyncratic, independent Toryism' (Fisher, 'Monck', 612), and he maintained a long friendship with the Canningite tory politician Thomas Wallace; but in practice he always seems to have considered himself aligned with the whig party. His whiggishness remained of a classical sort, with an exalted place for the independent man of established property. In 1850 he gained national notoriety for successfully preventing a judge passing from one courtroom to another at Newcastle through a room used by the justices of the peace on the grounds that assize judges attended county courts as guests of the local magistracy, whose property Monck thought the courts were, and as such a meeting of 'the Queen's justices' ('Newcastle Daily Courant') would have its independence violated by the room in which it met being treated as a passageway. At the 1852 election he wrote to his tenants in the North Lincolnshire constituency to emphasize that 'Nothing is more agreeable to the Constitution, and to all ancient usages of the Kingdom, or more advantageous to true liberty' (Olney, 35) than that he -- as a landlord and in a position analogous to the monarch -- should direct them to vote for his chosen candidate, the free-trade whig Sir Montague Cholmeley; even if they disagreed with him, he directed the tenants to vote as a bloc in order to protect the political unity of the estate. In 1858 he published 'A Letter to the People on Reform of Parliament and the House of Lords', a response to continued pressure for reform of the House of Commons and the attempt of Lord Palmerston to make Sir James Parke a life peer in 1856, and to the ascendance of a new school of constitutional historians who rejected Monck's old whig belief that the Commons and the Lords attained their ideal form soon after the Norman conquest. Monck argued that representation in both houses should be closely tied to property, envisaging a Lords where peerages were no longer limited to heirs male but to heirs general inheriting united estates sufficient to maintain their independence from the ministry. He saw the political realm as divided into five estates under the crown: the armed forces, from whom all future new peers should be drawn; the clergy; the lawyers; engineers, scientists, and inventors; and independent country gentlemen resident on their own estates. 
By the 1850s Monck's political creed might have seemed remote from the mainstream, but he retained respect in the architectural field. The inaugural address of his former assistant John Dobson as president of the Northern Architectural Association in 1859 hailed his 'enterprise, and cultivated taste' ('Northern Architectural Association', 404) in bringing the Grecian style of architecture to the north of England, setting a trend that provided work for a new generation of architects in the northern counties, and training masons at Belsay in techniques that established the reputation of Northumberland masons across England. Monck's racehorses also enjoyed a further period of good performances in the late 1850s, crowned with the victory of Gamester at the St Leger in 1859. He retired from horse breeding in 1860, selling his stock at York races for 3595 guineas. 
Monck's second wife died on 27 February 1864, and he died unexpectedly at Belsay Castle, Northumberland, in the early hours of 20 July 1867, after he 'rang his bell and called for his butler, stating that he was dying' ('The Times', 23 July 1867). He had survived all his children, and was succeeded by his grandson, the eldest son of Charles Atticus Monck, Arthur Edward (1838-1932). The seventh baronet sold Caenby and the other Lincolnshire properties in 1871, and changed his surname to Middleton in 1876. He introduced new plants into the garden at Belsay, following late nineteenth-century fashions, and built a new wing onto the old castle. The twentieth century saw the house attacked by dry rot, partly through the unforeseen effects of Monck's experimental central heating system, which was based on steam being fed into cavities in the walls; the Middletons moved out in 1962, and Belsay Hall (as Monck's house was by then known), the old castle, and the garden were placed in the guardianship of the Department of the Environment, responsibility passing in 1985 to English Heritage, which embarked on a programme of restoration and opened the site to the public. 
Monck was a man of several convictions, but it was his faith in the marriage of Greek architectural principles and the picturesque as the best way of justifying the ascendancy of the gentry in English political life that proved the most enduring, though not as practical politics. Through Dobson, he influenced several decades of public and private architecture in Newcastle upon Tyne and north-east England. That his principal achievement, Belsay Hall and garden, is in the protection of a government agency established by a parliament elected by universal suffrage and containing life peers, regarded by Monck as twin evils that threatened the social and political order he sought to enhance, is an irony that might have perplexed him. 


@@@@@


doc= 93218


Carre, Jean (d. 1572), entrepreneur and glass manufacturer, was born in Arras, Artois, the son of Antoine Carre and Dunigell Michell Prevost, probably before 1520. It is likely that he passed at least part of his early working life in the town since his daughter Mary was also born there, but while she and her husband Peter Appel arrived in London in 1561, Carre at some point settled in Antwerp before following them later to England as a religious refugee. He may have been active in the confessional conflict in the Low Countries, but was not the Jean Carre of Arras (son of Simeon) whose participation in the failed Calvinist putsch in Antwerp in March 1567 and attendance at protestant sermons led the 'council of troubles' to banish him in 1568. By the summer of 1567 Carre son of Antoine was living in London with his wife, Jane Campe, and daughters, Anne and Gilkin; they were recorded as attending the French church. The family initially lodged with Mary and Peter Appel. 
Carre is credited with the re-establishment of window glass production in England and for introducing the manufacture of 'cristallo' tableware. In July 1567 he obtained a licence from Queen Elizabeth to build furnaces for the production of window glass in the Weald. Fearing competition he petitioned Sir William Cecil, the secretary of state, for a monopoly for the manufacture of window glass and Venetian crystal. On 8 September 1567 letters patent were issued to Carre and one Anthony Becku for the exclusive production of window glass in either the Norman or Lorraine manner for twenty-one years, on condition that Englishmen were trained in this skill. 
Carre leased land at Fernfold Wood near Alford on the Surrey-Sussex border, where he built two glass furnaces and brought glassworkers from the continent to operate them. During 1568 he entered into agreements with glassmakers from Lorraine (Thomas and Balthasar de Hennezell) and Normandy (Pierre and Jean de Bongard) for the production of window glass at these two furnaces. A third furnace at Crutched Friars in London was run by Carre himself and manned by Flemish workers, specializing in the production of 'cristallo' tableware glass. By October 1568 Carre's furnaces were using three different continental traditions for glass production. In spite of his share of the window glass monopoly, Becku was marginalized and in July 1569 he appealed to the privy council. This led to an investigation into Carre's operations, which concluded that while there was little hope of Englishmen being trained in window glass manufacture, production should continue regardless of the terms of the letters patent. 
Carre continued to specialize in manufacturing crystal glass in London but production only expanded with the employment of Italian glassmakers. By June 1571 Carre's household in Broad Street included six men described as 'all his servants, all glassmakers and all Italians'. He subsequently leased the glass furnace to the Italians and moved to Fernfold Wood in Sussex to begin production of drinking vessels in green forest glass. The new furnace had not been completed by May 1572 when Carre died at Fernfold. In his will, dated 11 May, he requested that the enterprise be continued by his widow, brother-in-law (Peter Campe), and sons-in-law (Peter Appel and Hans ten Rude), while his four-year-old son John Baptist was to be educated in 'the art of making small glass'. Carre was buried at Alford parish church on 23 May 1572. 


@@@@@


doc= 93221


Kinkel, Johanna (1810-1858), music teacher and exile, was born at 13 Josephstrasse, Bonn, on 8 July 1810. Her father, a schoolmaster, encouraged her musical talent; she was taught piano by Beethoven's instructor, Franz Anton Ries. In 1832 Johanna married a music publisher, Johann Paul Mathieux, whom she left after a few months. She later wrote that her first marriage was 'the story of thousands of my sisters, and the inevitable consequence of our social conditions' (Brocker, 40). While living in Berlin, from 1836 to 1839, Johanna met Mendelssohn and several literary celebrities. She returned to Bonn to teach music and to secure her divorce, which was granted in 1840. On 22 May 1843 she married (Johann) Gottfried Kinkel (1815-1882), a professor of art history at the University of Bonn. Together they embraced the democratic politics which led to the revolutions of 1848 throughout Europe. Kinkel fought (alongside Friedrich Engels) against Prussian troops in the Baden uprising of June 1849; he was captured and sentenced to life imprisonment at the fortress of Spandau. 
Johanna petitioned ceaselessly for her husband's release, orchestrating accounts in newspapers of the talented young professor doomed to spin wool in a cell while his wife and four young children were left unsupported. Kinkel's plight became a 'cause celebre' in Germany. After his adventurous escape from Spandau in November 1850, aided by a devoted student, Carl Schurz (later a leading national politician in the United States), Kinkel settled in London with Johanna and the children. Thanks to his fame in Germany and Johanna's connections with the Berlin literati, the story of Kinkel's incarceration had been told in English newspapers too, including Dickens's 'Household Words'. 
The Kinkels settled in St John's Wood. They found ready support among leading liberals, including the MPs Richard Monckton Milnes, Thomas Milner Gibson, and Richard Cobden, the radical historian of Greece George Grote, and his formidable wife, Harriet, who shared Johanna's passion for music. With these introductions to English society, both Kinkels found enough pupils to make a living. Though Johanna noted wryly of the many European exiles in London that they were 'a whole colony of teachers seeking pupils' (Leppla, 41), the couple's celebrity, combined with their willingness to work hard and become integrated into the host society, ensured their success. 
Kinkel's fame as a revolutionary made him a magnet for large numbers of impecunious German exiles arriving in Britain in the aftermath of the failed revolutions of 1848. In lively letters to friends in Germany, and in her marvellously detailed semi-autobiographical novel, 'Hans Ibeles in London: ein Familienbild aus dem Fluchtlingsleben' ('Hans Ibeles in London: a portrait of family life in exile', 1860), Johanna complained bitterly but often wittily about her fellow exiles, who idled and dreamed their lives away, begging and borrowing from the Kinkels, all the while showing open contempt for their benefactors' 'bourgeois' way of life. She described the 'clubs' of refugees still 'sitting around here, not mixing at all with the English, but just carrying on among themselves the squabbles' of 1848 and complaining of life in England. For her part Johanna, though aware of certain religious prejudices (she had to be careful about expressing her lack of religious faith), appreciated the freedom from harrassment by the police, and the 'live and let live' philosophy of the British (Leppla, 51). 
The Kinkels attracted the scorn of Karl Marx, also a charismatic leader among the German refugees. Kinkel's sentimental speeches at his trial, the romantic press coverage of his imprisonment and escape, and his personal vanity were targets for Marx's satire in his essay 'The great men of the exile' (1852). Kinkel at the spinning-wheel in prison is 'our captive passion-flower'; Johanna is a 'shrew', boasting to correspondents in Germany about being 'a sort of mother to all emigrants' ('Collected Works', 11.254-5, 40.359). The Russian exile Alexander Herzen, though friendly towards the Kinkels, portrayed them as a comic larger-than-life couple. Johanna's 'perpetual, inexorable solicitude' about her husband and her jealousy of his attractiveness to the women and girls he taught 'persecuted' Kinkel, he noted. 'In return', he added, she 'supported him in his idea that he was a genius' (Herzen, 3.1159). 
Johanna's hard work, anxiety, and jealousy contributed towards severe depression; she also had a heart condition. On 10 November 1858 Kinkel's diary records the completion of 'Hans Ibeles'; five days later, on 15 November 1858, the entry reads: 'At twelve minutes past two the horror happened' (Ashton, 199). Johanna had either thrown herself out of an upstairs window 48 feet from the ground, at their home, 6 Eastbourne Terrace, Paddington, or fallen out while suffering from a dizzy spell. The coroner's verdict was accidental death, though friends and enemies alike suspected suicide while in a depressed state. Johanna was buried in Woking cemetery on 20 November (Gottfried Kinkel's diary, Universitatsbibliothek Bonn). Although Johanna had felt guilty about portraying friends and family too obviously in her novel, Kinkel published it in Stuttgart in 1860. Some of her compositions were published in song collections in Britain, Germany, and America in the later years of the nineteenth century. One song, 'The Soldier's Farewell' ('Ritters Abschied'), was reprinted several times. Her novel and letters show her to have been a spirited and talented woman, able to paint colourful verbal portraits of London life in the 1850s as lived by both the English middle class and the restless group of European exiles who made their homes there. 


@@@@@


doc= 93222


Meysenbug, Baroness Malwida Rivalier von (1816-1903), writer and exile, was born Malwida Rivalier in Kassel, the capital of Hesse, on 28 October 1816, the daughter of Carl Philipp Rivalier (1779-1847), a courtier of Elector Wilhelm I of Hesse, created Baron von Meysenbug by Wilhelm II in 1825, and his wife, Ernestine, 'nee' Hansell (1784-1861). Malwida rebelled against her family's social and political conservatism, enthusiastically welcoming the European revolutions of 1848. In 1850 she attended and then taught at a school in Hamburg dedicated to the further education of women and run by Karl Frobel, a nephew of Friedrich Frobel, founder of the Kindergarten movement. While on a trip to Berlin in the spring of 1852, Malwida was visited by the police, who took away her papers on the grounds that she had been consorting with democrats. Fearing arrest, she fled to London, recalling in her celebrated autobiography 'Memoiren einer Idealistin' ('Memoirs of an Idealist', published in French in 1869, in German in 1875, and in an abridged English translation under the title 'Rebel in a Crinoline' in 1937) the 'pleasant feeling of freedom' that came over her 'when no passport was demanded' on her arrival in England ('Rebel', 129). 
Malwida's destination was the home in St John's Wood of Gottfried and Johanna Kinkel, who had settled there in January 1851 after Kinkel's famous flight from Spandau prison, where he had begun a life sentence for insurrection. The Kinkels had made friends among English liberals; Gottfried lectured on art history and languages at schools and colleges, and Johanna, in Malwida's view 'the outstanding woman of the emigration', gave piano and singing lessons at home ('Rebel', 170). Through the Kinkels, Malwida found lodgings in St John's Wood and started taking pupils. She contemplated becoming a governess in an English family, but identified two barriers: first, a governess was a sort of social 'polyp', 'a something between master and servant, with limited social consideration, the narrowest horizon of pleasures and recreation, and an immoderately long list of tasks and duties'. Second, governesses in England were generally expected to be professing Christians and to accompany their young charges to church (ibid., 137). As Malwida's rebellion against her family had been partly motivated by her loss of religious belief as a result of reading Ludwig Feuerbach and embracing his 'religion of humanity', this part of a governess's duties was impossible for her. Moving in refugee circles, however, she soon found a household unorthodox enough to embrace her. This was the home of the Russian emigre Alexander Herzen (1812-1870), whom she met in 1852 at the Kinkels' house. Herzen, separated from his wife, who had recently died in France, had three young children to bring up. He and Malwida agreed that she would live in the house, having freedom to practise her progressive educational principles on the children, and that she would not be paid. She would therefore have the status of an intellectual and social equal with her 'employer'. She joined the family in their house at Euston Square at the end of 1853, and, though living under the same roof, she and Herzen corresponded regularly about education and politics. The arrangement worked well until 1856, when Russian friends of Herzen came to stay and interfered with Malwida's dealings with the children. Malwida left abruptly, going to live alone once more in lodgings in St John's Wood. 
For the next few years Malwida consorted with many of the European exiles she had met through Herzen and the Kinkels -- among them Mazzini, Kossuth, and Garibaldi -- and spent her days writing for English and German magazines, teaching pupils, and visiting the poor in Whitechapel. She recalled in her memoirs that hundreds of poor German families lived in the district, eking out a living from cleaning animal hides or playing street organs. Helped by Mazzini, she set up a German workers' club, attending their meetings and processions and becoming involved with radical leaders such as the chartist Ernest Jones. She also interested herself in female education. In 1859 she assisted Clementia Taylor, wife of the radical MP Peter Taylor, in seeking patronage for a female professorship in medicine. The plan, originating with the Langham Place group of women's rights supporters, led by Barbara Bodichon, was to found a women's hospital and train women doctors. Gradually, relations with Herzen thawed. Malwida translated his memoirs into German in 1859; in 1862 she published an English translation of Tolstoy, as 'Childhood and Youth'. She was to devote the rest of her long life to the welfare of Herzen's daughters, particularly the younger one, Olga. She obtained Herzen's permission to take Olga to Italy with her in 1862. Malwida remained in Italy until her death in Rome on 26 April 1903. During the 1860s and 1870s she corresponded with Wagner, whom she had met when he visited London in the summer of 1855, and Nietzsche, whom she came to know in Italy. She was cremated in Rome without a religious ceremony. 
Malwida von Meysenbug was an early enthusiast for female emancipation and education; she was free-thinking, independent, and resourceful. Her 'Memoirs' give a detailed picture of an unusual life lived among interesting and influential people at a time of rapid change across Europe. The years she spent in London among the exile community are vividly brought to life. 


@@@@@


doc= 93295


Polakovs, Nicholai (1900?-1974), clown, was believed to have been born near Riga, in Latvia in the Russian empire, probably on 5 October 1900, the son of Peter Polakovs, a cobbler who eked out his meagre living by working as a property master in the local theatre, where his mother was a wardrobe mistress. Nothing more is known about her. As a youngster he persuaded his father to allow him to follow a circus career, and during a four-year apprenticeship with the circus of Rudolpho Truzzi, an Italian who had settled in Russia, he learned the basics of acrobatics, tumbling, trapeze, and clowning. Truzzi gave him the stage name of Kokishka, meaning playful kitten, which was abbreviated to Koko and later rendered as Coco when he came to England. 
While serving in the Russian army during the First World War Polakovs was an outrider with the 11th Siberian regiment in 1915, and was taken prisoner by the Bolsheviks during the Russian revolution, but escaped and rejoined the army. After the revolution he spent periods with the Red Army and then with the White, before deserting and joining a band of Mongolian gypsies, disguised as a girl. In June 1919 he married Valentina Novikova (1901-1983), with whom he had four daughters and two sons. After the war he worked for various Russian circuses, and by 1926 had his own small circus in Lithuania, with a cast of twenty, but this broke up when he had a bad accident during an act that involved balancing a samovar of boiling water on his forehead. After spending months in hospital recovering from his injuries he accepted a contract from the German Circus Busch in Berlin in 1929 and also appeared in the Carl Zuckmayer film 'Katharina Knie'. Through his agent, Wilschke, he was then offered a contract to perform in England, proferred by Willy Schumann, equestrian director and talent scout for the Bertram Mills circus, which he joined in Manchester, appearing for the show's Christmas season from 21 December 1929 to 18 January 1930. Such was his success that Mills offered him a contract for the first year of his new touring circus, the beginning of a thirty-seven-year association with the Mills circus. 
Polakovs (who sometimes rendered his name Poliakoff or Poliakov) brought his wife and two eldest children to England at Easter 1930 for the opening of Bertram Mills' travelling circus. He enjoyed immediate success as a slapstick clown, water and paste being features of his act in the 1930s. Following the Christmas season of 1933-4 he returned to Riga to collect his four remaining children. He never went back to Russia, remaining in Britain for the rest of his life and becoming a naturalized British subject. When the outbreak of the Second World War caused the suspension of the Bertram Mills circus, he worked briefly as a hotel porter, labourer, and a performer in pantomime, before enlisting in the Pioneer Corps, arranging shows at the garrison theatre at Sandwich, Kent. Invalided out of the forces with a damaged lung and arthritis, he was demobilized on 8 August 1941, and then worked for ENSA, performing in various theatres for the troops with his son Michael Polakovs (1923-2009). In 1942 he and his son were engaged for the Blackpool Tower circus Easter and summer programmes, and were joined there in 1943 by his daughter Tamara. They remained in Blackpool for each summer and Easter programme until 1946, often sharing the limelight with the French clowns the Cairolis. During the winter season Coco and his family made appearances at the King's Hall Christmas circus at Belle Vue, Manchester, or toured with Tom Arnold's stage circus presentations. 
In 1947, the year after Bertram Mills circus reopened, Coco and his family returned to Britain's 'Quality Show'. He appeared on tour with Mills every summer thereafter until the closure of the touring show in October 1964 and at the Grand Hall, Olympia, London, each winter from 1947-8 until the last Christmas show in the winter of 1966-7. He had become an indispensable member of the Mills' clown team, working first with his children Michael, Sascha, and Tamara until they left to join Billy Smart's circus, but also with other members of the Mills clown equipe, including Percy Huxter, Alby Austin, and Jackie Sloan. His name became synonymous with that of the Bertram Mills circus and he quickly became its biggest star attraction in a branch of the entertainment industry that did not normally promote individuals as featured artistes. In the first of his two autobiographical books, he paid tribute to Mills for his commitment to reviving the role of clowns for twentieth-century circus audiences. 
Coco became Britain's most famous and best-loved clown, known to millions of children around the country who, touchingly, sent their pocket money to assist him when in January 1953 he found himself in London's bankruptcy court because of an arrears of $338 in income tax. In April 1957 he was hospitalized, and missed a performance in the sawdust ring for the first time in twenty-five years, when he was knocked down and injured by a jeep driven by Kam the elephant during a performance at Chelmsford. After he sustained further injuries in a road crash while touring in Scotland with Mills in 1959, it was feared that he might not work again, but he returned to the ring. Confined to bed with influenza in 1961, he made a miraculous recovery when he heard that a deputy had taken his place at Olympia Grand Hall for three performances. By then his appearances became confined to an entrance at the start of the show, with his trademark baggy suit, huge boots, red hair which could rise alarmingly, and a walking stick shaped like a Belisha beacon. In 1962 he was the subject of Eamonn Andrews's television programme 'This is Your Life'. 
As well as visiting sick children in hospitals in the towns visited by the Mills circus Coco lectured to schools on road safety, and was made OBE for this work in 1963. When the Mills Christmas shows at Olympia ceased, he concentrated on his road safety activities until returning to the circus world in 1974, when he toured with the Roberts Brothers' family show. During that tour he was taken ill with emphysema and bronchitis, and died in the District Hospital, Peterborough on 25 September 1974. Survived by his wife and their six children, he was buried in the parish churchyard at Woodnewton, Northamptonshire, on 27 September. A memorial service at St Paul's Cathedral (29 Nov 1974) was attended by many of his circus colleagues, and three generations of the Polakovs family. 


@@@@@


doc= 93321


Unsworth, Geoffrey Gilyard (1914-1978), cinematographer, was born at 186 Bolton Road, Atherton, near Leigh, Lancashire, on 26 May 1914, the son of Benjamin Hartley Unsworth (1886-1957), blouse factory manager, and his wife, Edith Annie, 'nee' Shephard (1888-1971). He entered the film industry in 1932 as an apprentice camera assistant at the Lime Grove studios of the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation. He moved up through the ranks, from slate boy and focus puller to camera operator, working on films directed by Alfred Hitchcock and Victor Saville and on the MGM-British production 'A Yank at Oxford' (1938). In 1937 he joined the Technicolor Corporation, operating for Georges Perinal on Alexander Korda's 'The Drum' (1938) and 'The Four Feathers' (1939), and on Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's 'The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp' (1943) and, for Jack Cardiff, 'A Matter of Life and Death' (1946). He married on 20 August 1938 Norah ('b'. 1912), daughter of Thomas Lang, electrical engineer. 
Between 1941 and 1945 Unsworth did his first work as director of photography on a series of short documentaries for the British Council, as well as two commercials for Persil washing powder, all of which were filmed in Technicolor. Among the shorts was 'Make Fruitful the Land' (1945), directed by Ken Annakin, with whom Unsworth would go on to work extensively in commercial features. Annakin described his cinematographer as 'an artist in judging only by the eye, the balance of daylight and artificial lights' (Annakin, 21). 
Unsworth's first feature as director of photography was 'The Laughing Lady' (1946), a musical vehicle for Anne Ziegler and Webster Booth. The same year he joined the Rank Organisation, where he was to remain for the next thirteen years. His early work included Gainsborough's first two colour productions, 'The Man Within' (1946) and 'Jassy' (1947), the former noted for its unusually subdued visual palette and the latter for its touches of expressionism. He contributed exterior location work to another costume melodrama, 'Blanche Fury' (1948), and was one of three cameramen on Ealing's 'Scott of the Antarctic' (1948), in his case filming second-unit material in Norway and Switzerland while Osmond Borradaile shot in Antarctica itself and the director of photography Jack Cardiff tried to match their contrasting footage with his studio work. This was a challenge that Unsworth himself often faced when reconstructing overseas locations on sound stages and in front of process screens. Another Ealing production, 'Where No Vultures Fly' (1951), had the luxury of being shot mostly in Africa, but for Rank's 'Simba' (1955) Unsworth had the impossible task of matching close-ups of his stars against back-projected backdrops with long shots of their doubles in Kenya. Similarly, while 'The Purple Plain' (1954) included generous location shooting in Burma, for both 'The Planter's Wife' (1952) and 'A Town Like Alice' (1956) Malaya was a mock-up of Pinewood sets and home counties countryside. Nevertheless, this experience served as useful preparation for some of Unsworth's later, more technically complex projects. 
Throughout the 1950s Unsworth alternated relatively big-budget Technicolor pictures such as the Walt Disney live-action swashbucklers 'The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men' (1952, second unit only) and 'The Sword and the Rose' (1953) -- both among the seven features he photographed for Ken Annakin -- with smaller-scale films in black and white. Among his more notable monochrome assignments were Robert Hamer's 'The Spider and the Fly' (1949), Ralph Thomas's 'The Clouded Yellow' (1950), Cy Endfield's 'Hell Drivers' (1957), and four for Roy Baker, including 'Passage Home' (1955), 'Tiger in the Smoke' (1956), and 'A Night to Remember' (1958). The first and last of these three contain impressive scenes of a storm at sea and the sinking of the 'Titanic', respectively, while 'Tiger in the Smoke' has a strikingly atmospheric first half set in a London fog; all were created largely in the studio with the assistance of Unsworth's camerawork. He also embraced the new screen technologies of the era: 'Hell Drivers', Annakin's 'Value for Money' (1955), and Brian Desmond Hurst's 'Dangerous Exile' (1957) were all filmed in high-definition VistaVision, and with J. Lee Thompson's spectacular imperial adventure 'North West Frontier' (1959) Unsworth encountered CinemaScope for the first time, using it to advantage with the (for once, genuine) Indian locations. 
After this he departed Rank to work on a freelance basis, often photographing American-produced films shot in British studios or in foreign locales with British crews. They included 'The World of Suzie Wong' (1960), 'The 300 Spartans' (1962), and 'Genghis Khan' (1965). For 'Becket' (1964) Unsworth met the challenge of lighting the largest interior set ever built in Europe (a reconstruction of Canterbury Cathedral at Shepperton Studios), an achievement marked by the career milestone of his first British Film Academy award, for best colour cinematography. His second was for Stanley Kubrick's blockbuster '2001: a Space Odyssey' (1968), on which he participated in developing the front projection special-effects technique. This award was shared with his former assistant John Alcott, who took over after Unsworth left the production six months into a two-year shooting schedule, having found working with Kubrick frustrating. 
Unsworth also worked on more intimate, but equally demanding, projects adapting stage performances to the cinema, including Anthony Asquith's 'An Evening with the Royal Ballet' (1963), the National Theatre production of 'Othello' (1965) with Laurence Olivier, and Olivier's own production of 'Three Sisters' (1970) for the American Film Theatre. He also adapted his classical approach, still seen in the likes of 'Cromwell' (1970), to incorporate the fashionable stylistic tricks of younger film-makers with a background in television, such as the zoom-lens aesthetics of 'The Reckoning' (1969), 'Goodbye Gemini' (1970), and 'Say Hello to Yesterday' (1970). Unsworth's generation of cinematographers understood the professional need for flexibility and generally favoured self-effacement. But in the 1970s he found a signature style which remained with him for most of his later assignments. First fully developed in the musical 'Half a Sixpence' (1967), it involved the use of fog filters, back lighting, and diffusion to create a soft, hazy appearance, with bright whites and haloed light sources, which particularly suited period subjects and gave a romantic glow to films of all kinds. This style reached its apotheosis in 'Cabaret' (1972) -- another British Film Academy award recipient (jointly, with his work on 'Alice's Adventures in Wonderland', 1972), and for which he was also awarded an Oscar. His distinctive style subsequently appeared in 'Zardoz' (1974), 'The Abdication' (1974), 'Murder on the Orient Express' (1974), 'The Return of the Pink Panther' (1975), 'Lucky Lady' (1975), 'A Bridge Too Far' (1977), and 'Superman' (1978). Peter MacDonald, his camera operator for twenty years, described Unsworth as an intuitive impressionist: 'he liked muted colours and a muted feel to a scene. He would be happier when the sun was in than when it was out, because he could have that lovely overall light, rather than the brilliant sunlight that leaves heavy shadows everywhere' (MacDonald, 66). He was also particularly renowned for his skill and care in lighting his leading ladies. He was made an OBE in 1976. 
Having completed 'Superman' and part of what would become 'Superman II' (1980), Unsworth began filming 'Tess' (1979) for Roman Polanski on location in rural Brittany, France. On 29 October 1978 Unsworth died suddenly in Paris of a heart attack. At the time of his death he was married to his second wife, the film continuity supervisor Maggie Unsworth, and was the father of three children. He was replaced on 'Tess' by Ghislain Cloquet and the resulting 'collaboration', like '2001' a remarkable stylistic unity, won for Unsworth a second Oscar and a fourth British Academy award (his third had been for the massive war epic 'A Bridge Too Far'). The latter was not awarded until 1982, following 'Tess''s belated British release. The last four pictures on which Unsworth had worked were all released posthumously, and two of them -- 'Superman' and 'The First Great Train Robbery' (1978) -- were dedicated to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 93322


Plant, (Samuel) Cornell (1866-1921), river pilot and cartographer, was born at Framlingham, Suffolk, on 8 August 1866, the second son and third child (of four) of Samuel Plant ('b'. 1828/9), sometime master of the J. H. Allan Company's iron-hulled sailing cargo vessel 'Reigate', and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Bennett ('b'. 1835/6), of Batterdale, Suffolk. He used his maternal grandmother's maiden name Cornell as his own for all of his adult life. 
At his parents' urging Plant joined the 'Reigate' as a boy apprentice, a venture which certainly taught him the rudiments of seamanship, but also brought him, on his first outbound voyage, the tragic corollary of witnessing his father's death at the ship's wheel, in mid-Indian Ocean, and his subsequent burial at the seamen's mission in Madras. The young man then returned home to study navigation at the Trinity House School, Hull, and worked on a variety of ships on various long sea routes until 1886 when, having achieved his second mate's ticket as a precocious twenty-year-old, he promptly switched his professional enthusiasm in a fashion that would define the rest of his life: he decided to abandon the trials of the open sea in favour of what he considered the more challenging world of riverine navigation. He would learn the peculiar challenges of piloting large power vessels through the treacherous environments of shallows, rapids, and abrupt changes of direction that mark all too many of the world's great rivers. 
Plant cut his teeth in Persia, on the Mesopotamian vessels of the Lynch brothers' Euphrates and Tigris Steam Navigation Company. After working as deck officer on a number of company vessels and on a variety of local rivers, he was in 1891 promoted master of the steam-powered sternwheeler 'Shushan' -- a ship built originally for the Nile, to take part in the relief of General Gordon at Khartoum. Using this exceptionally tough craft, and displaying a fearlessness in the face of the mighty river rapids he encountered, Captain Plant inaugurated as directed a regular passenger and cargo service on the highly dangerous Karun River between the towns of Ahvaz and Shustar. He became peculiarly adept at two crucial skills: finding the ideal passage through hitherto non-navigable upstream stretches of the river, and inventively repairing his ship on each of the frequent occasions when ill fortune or misjudgement dashed him onto the rocks. He also became an enthusiastic hunter -- shooting almost everything edible with a massive.577 Nitro express rifle -- and became fascinated by the warring rivalries of the Arab tribes in his territory, once watching the entire progress of a battle among 600 mounted cameleers from a hiding place on a hilltop. 
In Persia Plant met and married, in 1894, Alice Sophia, then aged twenty-four, the daughter of Thomas Peters, a cobbler of Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire. Formerly a domestic servant in England, she was presumed to have travelled to the Middle East as a maid to an expatriate family. The marriage was performed by the acting British consul-general in Bandar Bushehr, and the couple remained inseparable for the rest of their lives. 
In 1899, on leave in London recovering from a bout of malaria, Plant met the noted Sinologist and merchant Archibald Little, who over lunch at the Oriental Club explained his dream of running a regular commercial steamship service through the extremely hazardous waters of the upper Yangtze River. The project appealed to Plant, who by now felt he had met most of the riverine challenges posed by Persia. He welcomed the notion of voyaging to China and working on what most shipowners regarded as the most dangerous navigable river in the world. 
Under treaties then current, foreign companies were permitted to trade in the lower and middle reaches of the 3500 mile long river: only at the beginning of the twentieth century was permission granted for vessels to work in the upper Yangtze above the ports of Ichang (Yichang) and Wuhan, along the spectacular 380 mile defile popularly known as the Three Gorges, and up to the central Szechwan (Sichuan) port of Chunking (Chongqing). Commerce was limited by the ferocity of the rapids: those junks that took essential cargoes upriver had to be warped over the rapids by teams -- sometimes numbering hundreds -- of so-called trackers, village coolies who were employed to pull, often for hours at a time, on bamboo hawsers attached to the vessels' flanks. 
It was commonly believed by Chinese and foreigners alike that opening the Szechwan basin up to trade -- underpinned by powered shipping using the vast waterway of the Yangtze -- would have an immense economic effect on central China: there was consequently much interest in being the first to pioneer power navigation through the gorges. It fell to Cornell Plant, working for Archibald Little, eventually to conquer the considerable difficulties of this section of the river. He did so in a vessel named, appropriately, the 'Pioneer' -- a Scottish-built side-wheeler, weighing 150 tons but drawing only 6 feet. Before leaving for China he travelled to Denny's shipyard in Dumbarton to oversee construction of the little vessel: it was then disassembled, taken in pieces to Shanghai, and put together again, whereupon the Plants travelled to China and the 34-year-old mariner began his assault on the Three Gorges. 
It was a bravura performance. The vessel managed the entire journey to Chunking in seventy-three steaming hours -- though admittedly spread over seven days, with three days spent at the notorious Hsin Tan rapid, with the 'Pioneer''s crew hauling her, hand over hand, using a hawser made fast to a rock. By the time Plant arrived at the Chunking docks he was able to lay claim to his being the first vessel ever to make the upriver journey without the use of trackers. It changed the face of Yangtze commerce for all time: before long Plant himself, who lived with his wife on the river in a specially made three-decker houseboat, was running a regular fortnightly tourist service for the Szechuan Steam Navigation Company: and the city of Chunking began to expand enormously -- it was to become, briefly, China's capital during the 1940s, and would go on to become the most populous of all China's cities -- in no small part due to the opening up of the hitherto almost non-navigable river. 
In 1910 Plant -- a short, slightly chubby pipe-smoker -- joined the Chinese maritime customs as senior river inspector, spending much of the next decade establishing a system of signalling for river traffic, and conducting detailed hydrographic surveys. During this period he published his 'Handbook for the Guidance of Shipmasters on the Ichang-Chunking Section of the Yangtze River' (1920), which remained for half a century a classic pilots' guide to the river's hydraulic caprices. The Chinese government awarded him the order of Chia Ho in gratitude for his services; and when he retired from the customs in 1919 he was given a cottage at the top of a cliff overlooking the infamous Hsin Tan rapid. It became the custom for an upstream shipmaster to sound his siren after successfully passing through the turbulence, whereupon Plant would wave a handkerchief from his terrace in acknowledgement. 
Cornell Plant died suddenly aboard the Blue Funnel liner 'Teiresias' on 26 February 1921, as he and his wife were sailing from Shanghai to Hong Kong 'en route' to a brief holiday in England. Alice Plant died two days later, and the couple were buried beside one another in the cemetery at Happy Valley, Hong Kong. They never had children; but two adopted Chinese foundling girls who had been with them on the homebound ship were left in the care of the Church of Scotland ladies mission, and returned to school in Ichang, since when all trace of them has vanished. 
As, for a while, did a 30 foot tall granite memorial to Plant, paid for by public subscription and unveiled with great ceremony in 1924. The obelisk, the only memorial to a non-Chinese on the banks of the Yangtze, stood near the Plants' house in Xintan. During the xenophobic excesses of the cultural revolution there were attempts to blow it up and deface it, but it proved too strongly built. In 2004, however, threatened with submersion by the rising waters upstream of the Three Gorges Dam, it was moved to a new site on a mountainside. All of the rapids which had made the gorges so justly famous, and which had been so assiduously charted by Cornell Plant, were, however, fully submerged, and have for ever been stilled. 


@@@@@


doc= 93338


Trace, Christopher Leonard (1933-1992), television and radio presenter, was born on 21 March 1933 at Cranleigh, Surrey, the son of Laurence Archibald Trace, a dental surgeon, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Morley. He was educated at Cranleigh School, Surrey, and joined the army in 1951 and trained at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. After seven years in the forces he began an acting career and took small parts in British B crime thrillers such as 'Wrong Number' and 'Urge to Kill'. His most notable movie part was as Charlton Heston's stand-in in 'Ben Hur' (1959). A year earlier, while working on 'The Hound of the Baskervilles', he met Margaret Elizabeth Cattrall ('b'. 1935/6), daughter of Frederick Nelson Cattrall; they were married at St Jude's Church, Kensington, London, on 3 May 1958 and had a son, Jonathan ('b'. 1959) and a daughter, Jessica. 
Trace's acting career was sidetracked when he successfully auditioned for a new BBC children's programme, 'Blue Peter', a stablemate to the established magazine series 'Studio 'E'', aimed at a younger audience. 'Blue Peter' was devised by John Hunter Blair, a model railway enthusiast with a layout in his BBC office. Models and handcrafts were intended as a major part of the programme's early format and Trace, a keen model maker and fellow railway enthusiast, won through to become its first presenter. Duties were shared with Leila Williams, whose first BBC contract listed her as 'assistant compere to Christopher Trace', indicating that it was he who was the show's anchor. 'Blue Peter' was first broadcast on 16 October 1958. As was customary for all BBC announcers and presenters, Trace wore a suit and tie on screen; the effect was a sober but avuncular figure with just a hint of matinee idol. Williams later described their presenting style as an older brother and sister pairing. The programme performed steadily if not spectacularly. After Williams's departure Trace was left as the sole presenter between January and April 1962. At this time he drew heavily on his craft skills and continued to build all the onscreen models himself in the BBC's special effects department -- there being no background assistant to provide the programme's 'makes' until 1963. He also undertook freelance modelwork for the department, including a giant railway layout for a Michael Bentine show. Two of 'Blue Peter''s best-known catchphrases -- 'And now for something completely different' (later taken up by 'Monty Python's Flying Circus') and 'Here's one I made earlier' -- are attributed to Trace. 
Between May and September 1962 Trace presented 'Blue Peter' with Anita West. But the programme reached new heights with the arrival of Valerie Singleton as his co-presenter, and Biddy Baxter as producer, in October and November of that year. Baxter introduced many of the programme's classic elements, including its first pet, the dog Petra. Trace helped train the animal for the programme. A brief mention that Trace and Singleton were to take part in the 1964 London to Brighton vintage car rally drew thousands to the event and was clear evidence of their celebrity (Baxter and Barnes, 53). 'Blue Peter''s popularity led to an increasing amount of location work but this, plus the programme's twice-weekly schedule from October 1964, placed strains on Trace. A day's filming at Camber Sands in May 1965, swimming in freezing weather, was too much and he snapped: 'You get someone else to share this bloody agony or I'm leaving for good' (ibid., 74). This led to a search for a third presenter. Another field trip in 1965, 'Blue Peter''s first summer expedition to Norway, was marred by Trace's romantic liaison with a young Norwegian woman. The event was kept quiet at the time, but proved detrimental to his career. His son Jonathan recalled, 'Not only did it sour the relationship with my mother [who soon filed for divorce] but it also didn't help his reputation within the BBC and he felt it was time to move on' (interview for 'Blue Peter Confidential'). 
Trace's departure was also prompted by the arrival in January 1966 of a third presenter, John Noakes. Noakes was an instant success and, despite Trace's army career, quickly assumed the role of 'action man'. While Trace had long since adopted more informal dress, he now appeared somewhat austere and old-fashioned when set against his down-to-earth and fun-loving colleague. Baxter recalled that the situation made Trace 'morose and difficult to deal with', not least because it was 'very easy for the man who is being paid to give the impression to the public that this is his show, to actually believe it' (Baxter and Barnes, 81). However, Noakes's arrival also exposed the changing styles of children's television performance from a correct and disciplined approach, as practised by Trace, to the more relaxed, and often more popular, manner of younger presenters. 
Trace made his final appearance on 'Blue Peter' in July 1967 and announced that he was moving to Spain to write a book (this never transpired). Edward Barnes, Baxter's deputy, later recalled that Trace's decision did not leave them 'desperately broken-hearted -- he knew he'd had enough' ('Blue Peter Confidential'). This, however, is to underplay Trace's immense contribution to the programme's formative years. Huw Wheldon, then BBC controller of programmes, for example, believed that 'There will be no 'Blue Peter' without Christopher Trace!' He returned to make a special appearance on 'Blue Peter''s twentieth anniversary programme (1978) when live on air he produced an engraved metal boss that became the 'Blue Peter' award for outstanding endeavour, awarded annually until 1990. Reflecting on the programme in 1980 he claimed that 'Occasionally I think it's slipping slightly but I suppose I look at it rather like an indulgent parent' ('Where Are They Now?'). 
On leaving 'Blue Peter', Trace joined a new film company, Spectator, in which he invested heavily but which was wound up in 1973. Trace filed for bankruptcy, having lost $16,000. In the mid-1970s he returned to television, and worked as a presenter of the news magazine 'Look East' for BBC Norwich and the early morning radio programme 'Roundabout East Anglia'. Decrying the 4.30 a.m. starts and 'the ruination of one's social life', he left broadcasting several years later. He subsequently worked for a light engineering firm in Hemel Hempstead and was, by the early 1990s, studying for a law degree in London. In 1991 he was incapacitated by a back injury which he blamed on damage caused while working for 'Blue Peter'. Forced to claim sickness and housing benefit, he rented a room in a fellow student's flat in Walthamstow. Trace died of throat cancer on 5 September 1992 at the Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel, London. On his death Biddy Baxter paid tribute to Trace as one of early television's brightest stars; in particular she acknowledged his efforts in 1962 when he presented the programme alone and so ensured its survival into a later golden period (Baxter, 'The Times'). 


@@@@@


doc= 93348


West, Henry William (1917-2004), politician, was born on 27 March 1917 at Mullaghmeen, Enniskillen, co. Fermanagh, the son of William Henry West, farmer and secretary of the county council, and his wife, Harriet Mary, 'nee' Spence. He attended Enniskillen Model School and Portora Royal School, where he was a keen sportsman and captained the rugby, rowing, and boxing teams. (Later he was a governor of Portora, in which capacity he once tried to sack a history master who had taught his pupils about the Easter rising.) Plans to study agriculture at Queen's University, Belfast, had to be shelved when his father died and, at the age of seventeen, he had to leave school to run the family farm. He became active in the agricultural world, and was a member of the British Wool Marketing Board from 1950 to 1958 and president of the Ulster Farmers' Union from 1955 to 1956. On 22 August 1956 he married Maureen Elizabeth Hall, a 24-year-old schoolteacher, and daughter of George Hall, civil servant. They had four sons and three daughters. 
West entered politics in 1954 when he was asked to stand as Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) candidate for the Enniskillen constituency at Stormont on the death of the sitting Unionist member, T. C. Nelson. At the time he had no political experience, being neither a local councillor nor even a member of the Orange order -- which may be explained by his Presbyterianism, the order's membership in Fermanagh being largely drawn from the Church of Ireland, which was by far the largest protestant denomination in that county. However, he was linked by marriage to the Coopers and Fergusons, two of the leading families in Fermanagh Unionism. He was elected unopposed at the by-election and at subsequent general elections in 1958 and 1962. In 1965 he defeated a Liberal candidate and in 1969 won against candidates from the student radical organization, People's Democracy, and O'Neillite Unionism. 
At Stormont West became parliamentary secretary to the minister of agriculture in 1958, and was himself appointed minister of agriculture in 1960. It was the Fermanagh man Lord Brookeborough who gave him both positions, and West regarded Brookeborough as his best friend. There was little warmth in his relationship with Brookeborough's successor as prime minister from 1963, Terence O'Neill. Like many other Unionists in border areas West distrusted O'Neill's modernizing and reformist approach, which they feared would undermine Unionist control of counties like Fermanagh and Tyrone, where Catholic majorities were nullified by gerrymandering and a property-based franchise for local government elections. When O'Neill invited the Irish taoiseach to Stormont in January 1965 West refused to meet him on the grounds that the prime minister had not informed the cabinet in advance of the visit. However, despite growing grassroots criticism of O'Neill, when in 1966 a number of Unionist MPs urged the prominent right-wing minister Brian Faulkner to stand against O'Neill, West urged Faulkner not to stand. 
Nevertheless in April 1967 O'Neill forced West to resign over a land deal he had made in 1964 when he bought a farm from his cousin at Rossahilly. His purchase became an issue because the farm bordered a small airfield at St Angelo that was being considered for development by Fermanagh council, and part of the Rossahilly land was suitable for the extension. West was sacked not for the original purchase but for ignoring advice by the attorney-general that, if he sold part of the land to the council, he should abide by any price set by the commissioner of valuation. West considered the valuation too low and appealed to the lands tribunal without informing the attorney-general or O'Neill. In his statement justifying the dismissal O'Neill claimed that while there was no question of dishonesty West had violated the code recently introduced to govern ministers' business interests. West maintained that O'Neill had unjustly blackened his character and that he was being sacked for his political opposition to O'Neill's reforms, an argument supported not just by Brian Faulkner but by the Republican Labour MP Harry Diamond. 
Many Unionists in border areas saw West's dismissal as part of an O'Neillite strategy to buy off nationalists by sacrificing the west of the province. O'Neill's resignation in April 1969 did not lead to a lessening of such complaints. In the election to choose a successor West supported Faulkner, who lost by one vote to James Chichester-Clark. In the aftermath of serious communal violence in Belfast in August 1969 Chichester-Clark was impelled into a more radical reformist agenda by Harold Wilson and the home secretary, James Callaghan. The report of the advisory committee on police in Northern Ireland, chaired by Lord Hunt, recommended radical reform of the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the abolition of the B special constabulary. A major reform of local government was undertaken together with the creation of a new central housing authority. West was in the vanguard of those opposing the Hunt committee's proposals and the local government reforms and accusing the government of being supine in the face of pressure from London. He and other dissidents formed the West Ulster Unionist Council to oppose any reform of local government, and in 1970 he attacked Faulkner who, as minister of development, had accepted the proposals of Sir Patrick Macrory for a streamlining of local government. In March 1970 he and four other prominent dissidents were expelled from the parliamentary party for voting against the government's 'Police Bill', which was introducing the Hunt reforms. 
In March 1971 West was recalled to office as minister of agriculture when Faulkner became prime minister. He subsequently resigned from the West Ulster Unionist Council when it passed a motion of no confidence in the government. In March 1972, when Edward Heath asked Faulkner to cede control of security to Westminster, West advised against the government resigning but was ignored by Faulkner who resigned on 24 March, allowing Heath to impose direct rule and inaugurating a radically new phase in the history of Ulster Unionism. Deprived of control of the state, the party appeared for a while to totter on the brink of disintegration, losing support to the more radical alternatives of Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) and from 1973 William Craig's Vanguard Progressive Unionist Party and on the liberal left to the Alliance Party. 
West opposed the British government's 1973 white paper setting out its proposals for power-sharing in Northern Ireland and for a council of Ireland. He fought the subsequent elections for the short-lived Northern Ireland Assembly as an 'unpledged Unionist': one of those who refused to sign a pledge to support Faulkner's policy of accepting the white paper. As Faulkner entered into negotiations with the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), which led to the formation of a power-sharing government at the beginning of 1974, West and the right of the UUP joined with Paisley, Craig, and the Orange order to form the United Ulster Unionist Council to oppose power-sharing or any council of Ireland. At the Sunningdale conference at the end of 1973 Faulkner was pressurized by Heath into agreeing a council of Ireland. But on 4 January 1974 the Ulster Unionist Council rejected a council of Ireland and Faulkner resigned. 
On 22 January 1974 the Ulster Unionist Party's standing committee elected West as leader by eighty-five votes to forty-three for James Molyneaux. In the Westminster general election of February 1974 eleven of the twelve Ulster seats went to anti-Sunningdale candidates. West won the Fermanagh and South Tyrone seat, due to a split nationalist vote. West, Paisley, and Craig were all co-opted members of the Ulster Workers' Council, the alliance of protestant trade unionists and paramilitaries that called a strike against the power-sharing government. Like many conservative Unionists, West, who had not been consulted about the strike, had little sympathy with the action and was surprised by its success in bringing an end to the executive. His own position as leader of the UUP was dealt a major blow when he lost his Westminster seat at the general election in October 1974. Subsequently his only elected position was as a member of the constitutional convention established by the secretary of state, Merlyn Rees, in 1975. 
James Molyneaux, Unionist MP for South Antrim, became leader of the Unionist Parliamentary Party at Westminster, while West remained as leader of the party. Molyneaux had little sympathy for the convention or for West's hope for a deal with the SDLP. He correctly estimated that devolution was only possible on the basis of power-sharing and that West's search for a form of devolution without power-sharing was doomed to failure. Molyneaux came under the influence of the former Conservative politician Enoch Powell, who became Unionist MP for South Down in 1974. West had urged Powell to join the UUP and even said he was willing to cede the leadership to him. However, after the collapse of the convention in 1976 there was growing tension between West, who remained a convinced devolutionist, and Molyneaux and Powell, who supported integration as the best constitutional option for Ulster. In 1979 the UUP put up two candidates in the first direct elections to the European parliament. There were three seats and Paisley (standing for the DUP) won more first preference votes than the two UUP candidates, West and John Taylor, put together. Taylor was elected on Paisley's transfers but the election finished West's leadership. Even his supporters admitted that his lack of an elected position and his low-key approach were severely disadvantaging the party in its competition with the DUP. He resigned in July 1979 and was succeeded by Molyneaux. 
In 1981 West contested the Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election against the sole nationalist candidate, the IRA hunger-striker Bobby Sands. Paisley, who was exploiting protestant anger over the IRA's killing of local part-time members of the Ulster Defence Regiment suggested one of its Fermanagh members who had been targeted by the IRA as a 'unity' Unionist candidate but the UUP refused his overtures. The result was a narrow victory for the IRA man: Sands obtained 30,492 votes to West's 29,046. There were 3280 spoiled votes, many of which had 'DUP' or the name of the Ulster Defence Regiment man written upon them. Not unreasonably West blamed Paisley for providing the IRA with its biggest propaganda victory since 'bloody Sunday'. West continued to play a role in Unionist politics by helping to found the pro-devolution Charter Group, which attacked Molyneaux for his lack of support for devolution. The group was only a marginal influence but West later supported David Trimble and endorsed the Good Friday agreement. 
West has often been portrayed as a reactionary but he is better seen as a typical border Unionist, as suspicious of the Unionist establishment in the east of the province as he was of the political ambitions of Ulster Catholics. Lacking in imagination, he failed to see early enough that after 1972 devolution would return to Ulster only on the basis of power-sharing. But although a limited and uninspiring Unionist leader he was no religious bigot. His attendance in 1970 at the requiem mass for the nationalist politician Cahir Healy left him open to criticism from many of his own Orange brethren and from Ian Paisley. Even his political opponents agreed that he was an affable and personable individual. He died on 5 February 2004 at the Erne Hospital, Enniskillen, of heart failure, and was survived by his wife and their seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93349


Wickham, Glynne William Gladstone (1922-2004), drama scholar, was born in Cape Town, South Africa, on 15 May 1922, the son of William Gladstone Wickham ('b'. 1877), British trade commissioner in South Africa, and his wife, Catherine. He was the grandson of Edward Charles Wickham (1834-1910), dean of Lincoln, and his wife, Agnes (1842-1932), eldest daughter of the prime minister William Ewart Gladstone. He retained his dual nationality until he returned his South African passport following the Sharpeville massacre in 1960, but he grew up mainly in England. As a child he showed a flair for drama, producing plays at the Gladstone family home at Hawarden, and at school at Winchester College, though his youthful ambitions were thwarted when the Dunkirk evacuation put an end to his plans to hire a theatre in Regent Street for his production of '1066 and All That'. His education continued at New College, Oxford, where in 1941 he played Hamlet for the Oxford University Dramatic Society under Nevill Coghill's direction. His studies were interrupted in 1942 when he was called up, and he served more than three years in the RAF. Having completed a tour of operations as a navigator in 9 squadron, Bomber Command, he was posted to Scotland to train French navigators -- solely, in his own account, on the strength of his school certificate French. 
Discharged as a flight lieutenant in 1946, Wickham returned to Oxford, graduated BA in 1947, and began his doctoral research into medieval and early modern drama. He had in 1946-7 been the first post-war president of the Oxford University Dramatic Society, and Coghill, who devised a masque to celebrate the visit of the then Princess Elizabeth to Oxford in 1948, chose Wickham to direct it. This combination of scholarship and practice was a distinctive feature of his approach to drama, and one that influenced the development of it as an academic discipline. In the same year he was faced with a dilemma: whether to pursue the opportunity of a professional theatre career, or take up the offer of an assistant lectureship in the fledgeling department of drama, the first in the country, that was being created at the University of Bristol by its innovative vice-chancellor Sir Philip Morris. He chose Bristol, where over the next few years he secured the future of the new department. He nevertheless continued his doctoral research, and was made an Oxford DPhil in 1952. 
Wickham was aware from the start that two resources in particular would be essential if the department was to flourish: a performing space in which to conduct theatrical experiments (he frequently likened drama to a laboratory subject) and a dedicated research library. The first aim was achieved when funding was provided by the American Rockefeller Foundation to create the first flexible studio theatre space in the UK, located in a former squash court, the second in 1951 when he persuaded Morris to provide $50 with which he purchased William Etty's portrait of Charles Kean as King Lear. This was the foundation stone of a theatre collection dedicated to illustrative material that subsequently became the largest theatre archive in the UK apart from the London Theatre Museum. 
Also in 1951 Wickham convened a symposium at Bristol on 'the responsibility of universities to the theatre' at which he enlisted the support of a range of influential academics and practitioners to support the study of drama in the context of theatre. He soon moved to extend theatre to include radio drama -- he met his future wife, Marjorie Heseltine (Hesel) Mudford, daughter of William Mudford, journalist and army officer, while attending a BBC training course in 1953. A further symposium in 1954 on 'the relationship between universities and radio, film and television' led to the introduction of film and, later, television studies. He and Hesel Mudford married on 1 May 1954. They had two sons, Stephen and Nicholas, and a daughter, Catherine. 
Wickham travelled extensively in Europe, laying the ground for departmental tours of its productions to places such as Bayreuth, Vienna, and Parma, and in 1953, with a Rockefeller award, he travelled to the USA, which had long preceded the UK in having drama as a university subject. He maintained close links with the USA as with continental Europe, and was later appointed as a visiting professor at a number of American universities including Iowa, Yale, and Notre Dame. He was also committed to forging links between university drama and the professional theatre, establishing connections with the Bristol Old Vic and the Theatre School. He wanted to encourage new writers, and both Harold Pinter ('The Room', 1957) and John Arden ('The Happy Haven', 1958) had their first plays performed in the department's studio theatre. 
Wickham's academic career moved forward with impressive speed. In 1955 he became head of department and, in 1960, the university's -- and therefore the UK's -- first professor of drama. His inaugural lecture was published in 1962 as 'Drama in a World of Science'. Having established the discipline's academic respectability he took the opportunity for a broader look at the future of the department and the subject, and to express what he found exciting about drama as an academic subject: its capacity to connect with so many other disciplines (not just in the arts and humanities), its potential to embrace Western and Eastern traditions, and the fact that it had to be pursued through both study and practice -- what he described as 'the hands reunited with the heart and with the head'. 
Wickham published widely and influentially, ready always to make startling connections and to draw on his own practical investigation to enrich his critical and historical writing. His greatest achievement, and one that stemmed from his doctoral research, was his magisterial study 'Early English Stages', which appeared in five volumes between 1952 and 2002 and transformed the study of medieval and early modern theatre. In 1959 he initiated 'New Theatre Magazine', published by the department of drama until 1973; his other publications included 'Shakespeare's Dramatic Heritage' (1969), 'English Moral Interludes' (1975), much of its content drawn from his own production experience, and 'A History of the Theatre' (1985). He also served as chairman of the Bristol-based editorial board of the Cambridge multi-volume 'Theatre in Europe: a Documentary History', with 'English Professional Theatre, 1530-1660' appearing under his own editorship in 2001. 
Wickham's interests outside the department were extensive. He was president of the Society for Theatre Research from 1976 to 1999 and in 1970 he was asked by Sam Wanamaker to advise on the project to reconstruct a replica of the Elizabethan Globe Playhouse on London's South Bank. His contribution to the project was recognized when he received the Sam Wanamaker award for 1999. Between 1979 and 1983 he was the chairman and chief executive of Radio West. In 1982, on his retirement, the drama department's Vandyck Theatre was renamed the Wickham Theatre, the handsome blue plaque in the foyer paying tribute to 'Glynne Wickham, who inspired the study of drama in British universities'. In 1996 he was made an honorary fellow of the University of Bristol, the university's highest honour. An event to commemorate and celebrate his life and work was held in the university's department of drama on 23 May 2004. He died at his home, 6 College Road, Clifton, Bristol, on 27 January 2004. He was survived by his wife, Hesel, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93354


Terry, Arthur Hubert (1927-2004), translator and scholar of Catalan, Spanish, and comparative literature, was born on 17 February 1927 at 25 Grosvenor Terrace, York, the son of Arthur Terry, insurance official, and his wife, Beatrice, 'nee' Hardisty. He was educated at St Peter's School, York, before gaining first-class honours in Spanish and French at Trinity Hall, Cambridge (1944-7), a university with which he was to remain singularly unimpressed. After two years' military service he spent time researching in Barcelona with an informal fellowship provided by the exiled nationalist politician J. M. Batista i Roca before beginning his academic career in 1950 as an associate lecturer in Spanish at Queen's University, Belfast. On 25 June 1955 he married Mary Gordon (Molly) Sellar, a thirty-year-old librarian, and daughter of John Sellar, physician; they had one daughter and two sons. 
It was at Queen's, under the influence of his professor, Ignasi Gonzalez Llubera, that Terry was encouraged to pursue his interest in things Catalan and to acquaint himself fully with the culture and language of a nation that had disappeared under the jackboot of the Franco dictatorship. The result was a ground-breaking monograph on Joan Maragall which, from its publication in 1963, was to revolutionize not only appreciation of the poet but also the assimilation of contemporary Catalan verse in general. In due course a similar series of seminal studies would not only consolidate the reputation of such giants of Catalan letters as Carles Riba, J. V. Foix, Salvador Espriu, Joan Brossa, Gabriel Ferrater, Ramon Xirau, and Pere Gimferrer but also establish a very particular way of viewing them based squarely on the precepts of a sensitive and informed reading of the text. 
Terry's interests, however, were by no means narrow. His voracious appetite for poetry had given rise to a dynamic participation in debates on the Spanish Renaissance and baroque which, after he had succeeded Llubera to the chair in 1962, bore fruit in his acclaimed two-volume anthology of the verse of the period (1965-9), enlarged and updated in 1993 in the form of his 'Seventeenth-century Spanish Poetry', which extended the scope of his earlier edition. His contribution to the appreciation of contemporary Spanish poetry, particularly Cernuda and Machado -- to whom he devoted a reader's guide -- and Valente, was also exemplary, being both original and inspirational. 
Terry's involvement with the life of Northern Ireland, crystallized by his marriage, was further cemented by his membership of the Belfast Writers' Group founded in 1963. Though his original contributions were limited to translations, his presence was indispensable, as was his organizing work, which won him praise from Philip Hobsbaum, Seamus Heaney, Michael Longley, and Philip Larkin among others. In this way, the same solidarity, commitment, and support which typified Terry's commitment to Catalan writers throughout the dictatorship was exhibited in his personal and professional life at the start of the 'troubles' in Northern Ireland. 
In 1973 the University of Essex offered Terry the chair in literature, where his contribution to Hispanic culture, translation, and comparative literature was afforded more scope to flourish. His 'Catalan Literature' (1972, reissued in 2003 as a revised and updated 'Companion to Catalan Literature') became a 'sine qua non' for students of this discipline. Likewise his bilingual anthology of the fifteenth-century poet Ausias March ('Selected Poems', 1976) introduced the genius of this major Valencian writer to an English-speaking readership (as he was to do in the same way with Gabriel Ferrater in 2003). Even after his retirement in 1993 Terry remained a dynamic and diligent Hispanist. The lectures of his tenure as the Jose Angel Valente professor of poetry at the University of Santiago de Compostela appeared as 'La idea de la lengua en la poesia espanola' in 2002. 
Given such a distinguished academic profile it is not surprising that official recognition was forthcoming. Terry served as president of the Anglo-Catalan Society (1962-5) whose conference at Cardiff University in 2002 took the form of a homage to this respected and cherished senior member. He also presided over the British Comparative Literature Association and the Associacio Internacional de Llengua i Literatura Catalanes (1982-8), which in view of his international prestige dedicated a four-volume Festschrift to him, 'Homenatge a Arthur Terry' (1997-2000). Terry's pre-eminence was marked in turn by a series of institutional honours: the premi internacional Catalonia (from the Institut d'Estudis Catalans, 1970), the creu de Sant Jordi (from the autonomous Catalan government, 1982), and the premi internacional Ramon Llull (from the Fundacio Congres de Cultura Catalana, 1995). 
However, it was as much for his personal integrity as for his professional achievement that Arthur Terry was remembered. As supervisor, examiner, and mentor to a whole generation of Hispanists it is no exaggeration to consider him as the inspiration and guiding light to what became a thriving and highly successful community of Catalanists in universities in Britain and Ireland. His expertise, friendship, and support was extended generously to one and all. His devotion to Irish and Catalan culture was, likewise, no accident but a willingly embraced commitment to the democratic rights of minority nations to have their creative voice recognized at moments of repression and crisis. His down-to-earth manner, unfussy steadfastness, and long-term engagement in matters personal, academic, and ethical was summed up well by the recollection of the Hispanic scholar Nicholas Round: 'When I come to think of it, I have no memories of Arthur being in a hurry.' Terry died on 24 January 2004 at his home, 11 Braiswick, Colchester, Essex, from acute peritonitis. His death made headline news in Barcelona. He was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93356


Thelwell, Norman (1923-2004), cartoonist and illustrator, was born on 3 May 1923 at 25 Crofton Road, Tranmere, Birkenhead, Cheshire, the younger of the two sons of Christopher Thelwell (1890-1975), general labourer, and later maintenance engineer on seed-crushing machines for soap production at Lever Brothers, Port Sunlight, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Vick (1891-1964). His brother Alan later worked for the railways and Liverpool city council. He was a distant relative of the Revd Robert Carter Thelwell of Redbourne Hall, Lincolnshire, who featured in a painting of 1776 by George Stubbs. After attending Well Lane infants' school (1928-33) and Rock Ferry high school, Birkenhead (1933-9) -- where he won an art prize -- he left aged sixteen and worked for two years as a junior clerk in the office of Silcock's Seed Merchants in Liverpool docks. 
Conscripted in February 1942, Thelwell served at first in the intelligence section of the 2nd battalion, East Yorkshire regiment, Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, drawing maps and diagrams. For three years he was posted to various parts of Britain and in 1944, while training as a wireless operator in Long Eaton, Derbyshire, took evening classes at Nottingham Art School where he met his future wife, Rhona Evelyn Ladbury ('b'. 1925), a fellow student then serving in the Women's Land Army. She was the daughter of Harold Clyde Ladbury, carpenter and joiner; they were married on 9 April 1949 and had one son, David ('b'. 1950), and one daughter, Penelope ('b'. 1953). In 1944 he was posted to India. There he had some cartoons published in the service magazine 'Victory', which led to his being posted to general headquarters Delhi in 1945 to become art editor of a new monthly army publication for the Indian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, with the rank of sergeant. In August 1945 he had his first two drawings published in 'The Artist', after seeing a copy of the magazine in the NAAFI Club in Nottingham which had invited submissions. The following year he had his first cartoons published in 'London Opinion', and some of his caricatures of Indian service leaders (such as the viceroy, Lord Wavell, and Jayaprakash Narayan) appeared in 'News Review'. 
Demobilized in November 1946, Thelwell returned to Liverpool and took a full-time degree course at Liverpool College of Art (1947-50), studying under H. P. Huggill and G. H. Wedgwood and specializing in illustration and commercial art. While still a student his income from cartoons and drawings continued to grow, with sales to 'Men Only', 'London Opinion', and 'Everybody's Weekly'. After graduating as an art teacher in 1950 he then taught design and illustration at Wolverhampton College of Art (1950-56). During this period he also drew a regular cartoon strip, 'Chicko', for the 'Eagle' children's comic (from 1950 until it merged with 'Lion' in 1969), and worked for the 'Birmingham Post'. He sold his first drawing to 'Punch' in 1952; he eventually contributed more than 1600 cartoons -- including sixty covers -- to the magazine from 1952 to 1977. While a teacher he also produced his first book illustrations, for Denis Morris's 'Poultry for Profit and Pleasure' (1954). 
In August 1956 Thelwell was offered a job producing two editorial cartoons a week for the 'News Chronicle', and so resigned from his job at Wolverhampton College of Art and became a full-time freelance artist. However, disliking the noise of the 'Chronicle''s London office, he continued to live in Codsall, near Wolverhampton (and from 1959 near Romsey in Hampshire), and sent his drawings to Fleet Street by train. He drew 387 cartoons for the 'News Chronicle' before its sudden demise in 1960, and then produced similar work for the 'Sunday Dispatch' until it too closed down in 1961. Other freelance work included cartoons for 'The Tatler', 'Daily Express', 'John Bull', 'Illustrated', 'Picture Post', 'Farming Express', 'Farmer's Weekly', 'Countryman', and 'Esquire'. He also designed book jackets (including those for the Pan edition of the works of James Herriot), postage stamps, greetings cards (creating for Royles their most successful Christmas card of all time), and calendars (notably for Guinness), and worked in advertising (for W. H. Smith and others) and for television. 
Thelwell's books were extremely successful. During his lifetime more than thirty collections of his cartoons were published and translated into many languages. The first of these was 'Angels on Horseback' (1957), and others included 'Thelwell Country' (1959), 'The Penguin Thelwell' (1963), 'The Compleat Tangler' (1967), 'Thelwell Annual' (1980), 'Some Damn Fool's Signed the Rubens Again' (1982), and 'How to Draw Ponies' (1982). He also produced an autobiography, 'Wrestling with a Pencil' (1986), and two volumes of memoirs, 'A Plank Bridge by a Pool' (1978) and 'A Millstone around My Neck' (1981). In addition he produced illustrations for books such as Margaret Baker's 'Away Went Galloper' (1962), Edgar Anstey's 'Committees: How They Work and How to Work Them' (1962), Dorian Williams's 'Pony to Jump' (1963), Caroline Ramsden's 'Racing Without Tears' (1964), Jennifer and Dorian Williams's 'Illustrated Teach Yourself Show Pony' (1968), and Colin Willock's 'Rod, Pole or Perch' (1978), among others. 
A fine draughtsman, Thelwell had a realistic style, placing 'cartoon' figures in naturalistic settings and with great attention paid to detail. He worked in pen, brush, Indian ink, and watercolour, and was particularly well known for his cartoons on fishing, sailing, motoring, and English country life -- especially those featuring young girls and ponies. His first drawing of a child on a pony was published in 'Punch' in 1953 and he later drew a regular strip, 'Penelope' (featuring a small girl named after his own daughter, and a pony called Kipper), for the 'Sunday Express' (1962-71). His cartoons were signed 'thelwell', written with blob serifs in a wavy line, while his landscapes and other paintings had the signature 'Norman Thelwell'. 
Thelwell was one of the founder members of the British Cartoonists' Association in 1966. Examples of his work are held in the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Cartoon Museum, and the British Cartoon Archive at the University of Kent. A number of exhibitions of his drawings have been held at commercial galleries in London and elsewhere, and examples of his work were also included in the major exhibition 'Drawn and quartered: the world of the British newspaper cartoon, 1720-1970' at the National Portrait Gallery in 1970, and in ''Not' by appointment', an exhibition of royal cartoons opened by the prince of Wales at the London Press Club in 1977. 
Thelwell had dark hair when young, and blue eyes. Clean-shaven, he smoked a pipe for many years, enjoyed playing 'boules' and fly-fishing for trout and salmon, and was keen on restoring old buildings. After four years suffering from Alzheimer's disease he died of heart failure at Bereweeke Court Nursing Home, Winchester, on 7 February 2004, and was buried in Timsbury churchyard. He was survived by his wife, Rhona, his son, David (a wildlife artist), and his daughter, Penelope. 


@@@@@


doc= 93359


Alexander, Du Pre, second earl of Caledon (1777-1839), politician and colonial administrator, was born on 14 December 1777, the only son of James Alexander (1730-1802), first earl of Caledon, of Caledon Castle, co. Tyrone, and his wife, Anne (died 1777), daughter of James Crawford of Crawfordsburn, co. Down. His mother died a week after his birth. His father reaped the rewards for the years he had spent, from 1752 to 1772, as a merchant in India and an East India Company official when he acquired wealth that he estimated at over $500,000. In 1774 he had become MP for Londonderry City, where his forebears had been merchants, and in 1775-6 he purchased the 9000 acre Caledon estate on the borders of Tyrone and Armagh for $89,000. By the time of the 'Act of Union' (1800) James Alexander had been raised to an earldom, commanded two parliamentary seats for the borough of Newtownards, and was the head of a family interest that included one Irish bishop and two Irish MPs. 
Alexander, whose forename Du Pre was given to him in recognition of the services rendered to his father by his uncle Josias Du Pre, governor of Madras in 1770-73, was educated at Eton (1791-6) and Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1799. He was the first member of his family to receive an education in England. Appointed a major in the Tyrone militia in 1799, he was returned by his father to represent Newtownards (29 January 1800) in the Irish parliament shortly before the decisive debates on the union. He supported the measure that led to the borough's disfranchisement at the end of the year. Following the union, Alexander was raised to lieutenant-colonel in the Tyrone militia and, having been appointed a sheriff of co. Armagh by the Irish administration, was ready to purchase a seat at Westminster. However, his succession to the earldom on his father's death on 22 March 1802 altered his plans. 
In June 1802 Caledon (as he had now become) purchased from Lord Camelford, Pitt's cousin and the brother-in-law of Lord Grenville, the estate and notorious 'close' borough of Old Sarum for $43,000, deploying Du Pre's nephew Josias Du Pre Porcher (1761?-1820) as an intermediary. At the general election a month later he returned his cousin Henry Alexander (1763?-1818) for one of the seats and offered the other to Nicholas Vansittart, a nominee of the government. Caledon was now not only the head of the influential Alexander family but also possessed of considerable landed and personal wealth together with the means to provide parliamentary seats for both family and political chiefs. This led him to abandon his own plans to find a seat in the House of Commons and to seek instead a place in the House of Lords as one of the twenty-eight Irish representative peers. Thus when a vacancy occurred in 1804 he secured the support of Pitt's government and was elected following an extensive personal canvass. 
Caledon's subsequent career falls into two parts. The first was dominated by his successful application in May 1806 to Lord Grenville, the prime minister, for the post of governor of Cape Colony on its becoming a British possession for the second time. He arrived in Cape Town as the first civil governor on 21 May 1807 and departed on 4 July 1811. The appointment of such a young man to administer an area nearly twice that of the United Kingdom created, it was said, a good deal of 'croakings and groanings' on all sides at Westminster but was the result of personal and political factors (Castilla, Countess Granville, ed., 'Lord Granville Leveson Gower', 2 vols., 1916, 2.201). Caledon once said that he had been 'educated' to regard 'attachment to the King's government' as his 'political principle' and having supported the Addington and Pitt governments he offered the same support, save on the Catholic question, to Lord Grenville's once he was satisfied of the prime minister's ascendancy over Fox (Caledon MSS, D.2431/5/8, pp. 63-4). However, he liked to think of such support as his own choice rather than being a matter of obligation. 
Grenville, for his part, although he was probably aware of Caledon's military experience in Ireland and would have known of him personally through his purchase of Old Sarum, was principally concerned with his electoral interest. The prime minister therefore asked him whether, if appointed to the Cape governorship, he could count on that interest in Ireland being given to supporters of the government. Caledon evidently replied that if this had not been the case, he would not have applied for the post. The deal was therefore settled -- his appointment as governor taking place on 2 July 1806 -- and was accompanied by the appointment of his cousin Henry Alexander, MP for Old Sarum, as his secretary. Later he gave his proxy to Grenville on all matters other than the Catholic question, and when the administration resigned in March 1807 Caledon offered his own resignation to prove himself 'independent', an offer that was not taken up (Caledon MSS, D.2433/C/9/30). Moreover, he offered to resign again in November 1808 when it was intimated that his official position required him to require his 'friends in parliament' to support the Portland administration. He withdrew the offer, however, when he learned that ministers had made no such stipulation (Caledon to Castlereagh, 21 Nov 1808 and 3 July 1809, Caledon MSS, D.2431/5/8). 
During his relatively short tenure of the Cape Colony governorship Caledon operated under a number of disadvantages. Successive governments were principally concerned with the war in Europe and paid scant attention to the problems he confronted, starving him of funds on the argument that the colony should be self-supporting. Although he exercised supreme authority over civil matters, and governed the colony by proclamation, it was unclear whether his authority over military matters superseded that of the army commander, Lieutenant-General Henry George Grey (1766-1845), the result being a conflict between the two men that precipitated Caledon's retirement. The energy and commitment to improvement that he brought to his governorship were nevertheless impressive. 
In the case of the economy, Caledon reorganized the Lombard Bank, ordered that its outstanding loans were to be repaid, and arranged with the British government for an additional 1 million rix dollars to be issued. He also established investment and discount banks in 1808. This, it has been argued, 'left the Colony's financial position on a much sounder footing' ('DSAB', 3.14). In addition he was committed to developing sheep farming and viticulture, and reforming the system of land ownership, but was unable to make much progress in the time available. He was more successful, however, in reforming the administrative and judicial systems, and in improving the health of the settlers. When he arrived the authority of the resident 'fiscal' was extensive and the colony was divided into six districts that were far too large for efficient administration. He therefore reduced the fiscal's powers and sub-divided three of the districts, taking the opportunity to name two after himself (Caledon) and another Irish peer, Clanwilliam. 
As for the law, Caledon made it possible for the governor to hear criminal as well as civil appeals and established a circuit court in order to lessen the inconvenience and expense of having all cases tried in Cape Town. He also applied a feature of the English and Irish system of administration and insisted that circuit court judges keep the government informed on the affairs of the localities. Finally he procured a vaccine against diseases such as smallpox that had an immediate beneficial effect shortly after his departure. These steps, it has been argued, 'improved administrative efficiency' and 'strengthened the government's authority in the inland regions' ('DSAB', 3.13). 
Caledon's greatest difficulties, for which his Irish experience may have prepared him, lay in relations with the indigenous San (bushmen), Khoi, and black Africans. He authorized the raising of a militia or commando to respond to San attacks, and though he instructed it to seek to preserve the peace rather than act in a vengeful manner, the virtual genocide of the San continued. The Khoi presented a greater challenge, for legally they were independent, though their chiefs had lost their authority and most were farm labourers or itinerants in search of a living. Caledon's response was to issue a proclamation in 1809 which made all Khoi subject to the laws of the colony; to insist that they had fixed places of residence, officially regulated by passes; and to have contracts established setting out conditions of employment. These measures regularized relations between Khoi and their employers for the first time, and offered the Khoi some legal protection against ill-treatment, but effectively forced them into the position of farm labour for the colonists, and failed to provide the means for their economic improvement. Pressure exercised upon the London government by the London Missionary Society, following allegations by the missionaries James Read and Johannes Theodorus van der Kemp of violence and even murders committed against the Khoi by the colonists, contributed to Caledon's decision in 1811 to set up the circuit courts to ensure that the law was enforced in outlying areas. 
Caledon's policy towards black Africans ultimately raised the issue that led to his resignation. Raids on farmers in the eastern borderland led to requests for a military response. In 1808 he sent Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Collins (1774?-1813) to review the colony's eastern frontier, and received a recommendation that the Xhosa be expelled from the Zuurveld, and that the colony's frontier be enforced along the Great Fish River. Caledon, however, preferred a more conciliatory approach, partly because he thought it inadvisable to begin a border campaign during the course of the European war, when his garrison was depleted; and partly because of the uncertainty about his and General Grey's authority in the matter. When, in 1811, he eventually decided to authorize a military operation against the Xhosa, he withheld the order because of this uncertainty about his authority. The raids therefore continued and Caledon admitted to his successor Sir John Cradock that in this respect his governorship had been a failure. 
Moreover, it was probably this disappointment that brought about the crucial dispute with Grey. In July 1810 he received a request from Lord Minto, the governor-general of India, for a force to assist in the capture of Mauritius. Caledon detached 2000 infantry in what turned out to be a successful operation but he found that Grey assumed that control of the force would be his. This, together with the government's repeated inattention to his requests, particularly on the question of his powers, led him to resign in June of the following year. His failure to tackle frontier problems and his differences with Grey cast a shadow over what was otherwise a constructive governorship. 
Following his return to Ireland in the summer of 1811 Caledon married within a short period of time (on 16 October 1811) Catharine Freeman Yorke (1786-1863), the second daughter and coheir of Philip Yorke, third earl of Hardwicke. It is possible that they had met earlier when Hardwicke was lord lieutenant of Ireland, in 1801-6, and they were both certainly well prepared for the marriage. He had had his house at Caledon remodelled by Nash during his time in the Cape and she brought land in Hertfordshire as a dowry, including Tittenhanger near St Albans, a house designed by Inigo Jones. Their first and only child, a son, was born on 27 July 1812. 
Caledon's career thereafter consisted of being a representative peer and exercising his responsibilities as a major landowner in Ireland and England. In 1817 his Irish estate was valued at $200,000 and that in Wiltshire at nearly $74,000. It was at this time that he exchanged a portion of his Wiltshire estates at Stratford together with the return for Old Sarum with his nephew, James Alexander, for the latter's property at Bounds, near Tonbridge in Kent. 
In the case of Westminster politics, Caledon continued to regard himself as an independent supporter of the administration. In March 1812 he declined to have Vansittart re-elected, following his prospective appointment as a minister in Perceval's government, on the grounds that it would commit him to support and tie him too closely to Lord Sidmouth's interest. The effect, he wrote, would be to 'neutralise, if not wholly annihilate my parliamentary consequence' (Caledon MSS, D.2433/C/11/8). On that occasion Vansittart declined office in deference to Caledon's wishes but during the formation of Lord Liverpool's government in May of that year he was offered the much greater prize of the chancellorship of the exchequer. Caledon, however, held the same line with Liverpool as he had with his predecessor, Vansittart being replaced at Old Sarum by James Alexander. 
Later, in 1818 and 1820, Caledon was disappointed in his long-standing pursuit of a British peerage, the claim to which he felt justified by his services in the Cape, particularly by supporting the capture of Mauritius, but which he had undermined by surrendering the return for Old Sarum. His only further honour was therefore appointment as a KP in 1821. He was not, however, an active member of the Lords. He made only three recorded interventions in debate between 1804 and 1828 and these were short. On 10 July 1817 he opposed the government's bill to provide independent supervision of the charges (presentments) levied by Irish grand juries for public works, defending the honourable conduct of those in the northern counties. Six years later, on 19 June 1823, he castigated Lord Wellesley's Irish administration for disappointing all his 'expectations'; and on 14 April 1826 he supported an opposition motion making bank notes payable where they were issued, a policy that would have created severe difficulties for the Bank of Ireland. 
Caledon was slightly more active, however, during the turbulent years that followed. He supported the 'Catholic Relief Bill' of 1829 but opposed the English and Welsh 'Reform Act' and intervened a number of times in debate, exhibiting once again an independent frame of mind. Made one of the lords lieutenant of Irish counties -- newly created posts -- in 1831 (for co. Tyrone) by the whigs, he declared that he was 'unconnected' with the government in March the following year and suggested several amendments to its Irish 'Reform Bill' in July. Later, in February 1835, he declined the Peel government's offer, strongly supported by William IV, that he conduct an inquiry into Canadian government as a special commissioner, stating he knew little of the colony. 
In his capacity as lord lieutenant of co. Tyrone, Caledon made no secret of his readiness to defend the interests of protestants but believed that on an all-Ireland basis this was best done by removing outstanding grievances, and in Ulster by preventing sectarianism and acting fairly towards Catholics. At the national level he served as a member of the House of Lords select committee on tithes to the Church of Ireland and supported the committee's recommendation that they be abolished with compensation. As for co. Tyrone, he showed sensitivity to Catholic grievances and was particularly hostile to Orange actions likely to inflame them. In July 1832 he wrote to a local Orange leader: 'I look upon Protestants as being the main support of a British connection, as the most industrious and intelligent part of the community; but I consider the Orange system as tending to disunite us when our religion alone should be a sufficient bond of our union. (Caledon MSS, D.2433/C/12/1, pp. 47-8)' An understanding of the plight of others was also a feature of Caledon's conduct as a landowner. In 1829 he and his wife became patrons of the Mendicity Society of Caledon and in 1831 he became chairman of the London-based Irish Distress Committee formed to gather funds for the relief of severe food scarcity in the western counties. This was dissolved in 1835 and its funds handed to committees in co. Mayo. The Caledon estate records also show him to have been a benevolent and improving landlord. He died at Caledon House, co. Tyrone, on 8 April 1839, having made a significant contribution to the history of the Cape and to the causes of moderation and improvement in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 93362


Kebbel, Thomas Edward (1826-1917), journalist, was born at Kilby, Leicestershire, about 23 November 1826, and baptized there on 7 January 1827. He was the youngest of four children of Henry Kebbel (1772-1867) and his wife, Rachel (1784-1862), daughter of Carsten Dirs. Henry Kebbel had been presented to the vicarage of Kilby and Wistow in 1813 by the patron, the court physician Sir Henry Halford, and remained in office until his death in 1867. A small private income, owing to an investment in the Phoenix Fire Office, helped him to maintain a gentlemanly standing: he was a county magistrate and popular in society. He was a high-church tory, committed to the welfare of the agricultural labourers, and was one of the first Leicestershire landowners to introduce allotments. Thomas penned an affectionate portrait of his father (Kebbel, 'English Country Life', 9-16). He remained deeply attached to Kilby's traditional rural lifestyle, and suffered a major emotional blow when the family had to leave the vicarage after his father's death. 
Kebbel was educated at two local schools and then for five years at Merchant Taylors' School in London. He failed to get a scholarship at Exeter College, Oxford, but matriculated there in May 1845, before coming into residence the following January. Disapproving of its unintellectual regime, and particularly of the tone of William Sewell, he applied successfully for an exhibition at Lincoln College in 1847, where he found Mark Pattison a stimulating teacher. He was disappointed to take a second-class degree in 1849, seeing this, rather too harshly, as 'the just punishment of three years wasted in pleasure, dissipation, and folly' (Kebbel, 'Battle of Life', 149). He planned to read for the bar, but the sum that his father had set aside to pay for a place with a lawyer in chambers had to be diverted to meet his creditors after a series of family financial disasters in the late 1840s. As a result, though Kebbel took rooms in chambers in 1850, he had no confidence of success at the bar and did little work, instead enjoying a carefree life about town until his money ran out. 1853 was a miserable year of poverty, garret life, and pursuit by moneylenders; he was briefly incarcerated in Sloman's debtors' prison. He remained plagued by debts for many years. 
However, after a spell as a private tutor and writer of occasional journalism, in 1855 Kebbel was offered $100 a year by D. T. Coulton, the editor of 'The Press', a newspaper set up by Disraeli to promote the Conservative Party. He wrote regularly for 'The Press' until 1858, and then more occasionally, but also for a series of other papers in the Conservative interest. These included the 'Yorkshire Post' in the first decade of its existence as a daily paper, from 1866, and 'The Day', a short-lived publication of 1867, backed by the leading Adullamite Liberals, which advocated co-operation with the Conservative Party. He also edited the 'New Quarterly Review', a publication subsidized by the Turkish government to advocate the Ottoman cause after the Crimean War, and wrote pieces both for that and for the 'Morning Post' reflecting the views of the Turkish ambassador, Musurus Pasha. Kebbel was one of the first generation of university men to make a career in journalism, and enjoyed the less as well as the more respectable aspects of the newspaper world of the 1850s and 1860s. A convivial man, he was also a significant social presence in two clubs for young men of Conservative principles, the Ramblers, which flourished until the late 1860s, and the Canning, a failed attempt to promote advanced principles within the party after 1867. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1862. 
In these years Kebbel's situation remained precarious, but from 1872 to 1906 he had a regular position on the leading Conservative daily paper 'The Standard'. On 17 April 1873 he married Evelyn Catherine (1844-1912), daughter of John Clarke, a country gentleman and family friend; they had a daughter, Eleanor Catherine Joan. From 1884 to 1898 he was on 'The Standard''s night shift, commenting on parliamentary proceedings. He also wrote regularly for the periodicals. He had written a dozen articles for the 'Cornhill Magazine' in the 1860s, and nearly thirty articles for other journals in the 1860s and 1870s, but in the 1880s and 1890s produced almost 150 pieces, mostly for 'Blackwood's Magazine', the 'National Review', and the 'Quarterly Review'. Most of these were either on modern politics, from a Conservative perspective, or on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century tory history. He also wrote extensively on rural life and pursuits, particularly hunting and shooting, and on the church. A series on tory prime ministers for the 'National Review' in 1884-5 was worked up into a book, a 'History of Toryism', in 1886. An earlier collection of articles was published as 'Essays on History and Politics' in 1864, in order to advertise his talents and principles. 
Kebbel consistently defended the territorial constitution. He regarded the Conservative Party as the only reliable upholders of it and of the nation's global interests. Toryism, he wrote, was the historic popular party, appealing across the classes. He admired the orderliness and effectiveness of the eighteenth-century political system, and believed that Bolingbroke, Burke, Pitt, and Liverpool all offered strong tory role models. He particularly praised Pitt's visible moral national leadership, and he rued the narrow-minded ultra-protestant opposition to Catholic emancipation of 1801. He regarded Canning as the most inspiring Conservative of the nineteenth century, and his early death as a disaster for the country because it prevented him from leading a united tory party to accept a very moderate reform scheme, which he felt would probably have prevented whig-Liberal dominance, avoided an unnecessary tory split over the corn laws, and slowed the progress of democracy. Kebbel regretted the rapidity of that progress in the late nineteenth century, and the growing threat to property and to good government as he defined it (that is, local propertied autonomy and central executive independence from demagogues and popular pressure). He opposed the 1888 reform of county government as an unnecessary assault on the beneficent rule of a resident aristocracy. But he was also a political realist, who accepted that the Conservative Party's function was to offer positive and imaginative rather than defensive political leadership and to make all the legislative concessions necessary to perpetuate popular faith in rule by the governing classes. 
Kebbel particularly admired Disraeli. He was not uncritical, especially of Disraeli's optimism that he could stem the tide of radical and popular pressure. But he appreciated his love of history and patriotism, his admiration for landed rule, his ridicule of whig claims to represent the people, and his panache, which he felt attracted many young men to the party. He had first met him in 1858 and frequently discussed politics with him. Disraeli regarded him as a useful press contact and helped his early career, both journalistically and by trying to find him salaried official positions. Kebbel declined an inspectorship of factories, preferring the excitement of political writing, but about 1877 Disraeli appointed him receiver of fines and penalties at the Treasury, a civil service position which he held until his death. Disraeli appreciated Kebbel's insight into him, and according to Lord Rowton wished Kebbel and Viscount Barrington to write his official biography, but no instructions to this effect were found. Instead, Kebbel edited his speeches in two volumes with an introduction (1882). He also wrote a short biography, 'Lord Beaconsfield', for the 'Statesmen' series in 1888, followed by one of the fourteenth earl of Derby in 1890. He wrote the entries on Disraeli and Canning, along with seven others, in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. 
Kebbel's other significant work was 'The Agricultural Labourer', a survey of recently available information on rural social conditions. When it appeared in 1870 it was one of the first to draw attention to the welfare of the labourer; it went through three more editions (the last in 1907) as the issue became more politically central after 1884. Kebbel remained a countryman at heart. His major sport was shooting; he owned a gun before he was fifteen and shot in all weathers, attributing his long good health to his outdoor lifestyle. He died of cardiac disease on 5 November 1917 at his home, Little Peatling, Bois Avenue, Chesham Bois, Buckinghamshire, and was buried locally. 


@@@@@


doc= 93363


Veno, Sir William Henry (1866-1933), patent medicine entrepreneur, was born William Reynard Varney in Castle Douglas, Renfrewshire, on 22 December 1866, the son of William Varney, a gamekeeper, and his wife, Grace Susan, 'nee' Paterson. He was educated in Newton Stewart and then worked as a shop assistant before running away to sea. Frustrated by the lack of suitable British outlets for his organizing talents, he emigrated to the United States about 1887. 
Varney established a business in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, for the manufacture of a cough medicine, publicizing it by lecture tours on health and disease through much of America and by holding consultations with patients. In 1896, having married Mary (died in or after 1947), daughter of James Pearson of nearby Philipsburg, he changed his name to William Henry Veno (and by deed poll in Britain in 1910). Doubtless emulating James Crossley Eno of fruit salt fame, he felt that Veno's Lightning Cough Cure had a seductive ring to it. The following year he sold up and returned to Britain, founding the Veno Drug Company at Manchester in 1898. After initial periodic tours around northern England to lecture and see patients, Veno soon relied on advertising to push his cough cure. By 1908 he was successful enough to register a limited company of that name with a $40,000 capital, of which $35,000 represented goodwill. A year later the British Medical Association's analysts found that, in addition to a sugary base, the medicine contained 8 per cent glycerine and small quantities of alcohol, chloroform, and resin ('Secret Remedies', 16). 
Veno enjoyed family share control of his enterprise and paid no dividends until 1922. After adding Dr Cassell's tablets for headaches and Germolene ointment to the cough cure, he mechanized his production along American lines, making his Manchester factory the most self-contained site on either side of the Atlantic, with only the basic ingredients being bought in. It had carton-making and printing departments, and the medicine bottles came from a glass manufacturing company which Veno owned. On the technical side, there were an engineering workshop and laboratory, the chief chemist being a skilled engineer who had designed the mixing and filling machinery, and had created a dust-free atmosphere in which no product was touched by hand. 
Veno was also active in civic life and, having become president of the Manchester Press Club and chairman of the local Conservative Association, he was knighted in 1920 for his public services. Widely respected for his untiring drive and business grit, he was also an enthusiastic art collector and interested in the theatre and cinema; after a health scare he generously supported a cancer research charity. By 1923/4 Veno Drug's sales had reached $670,000, earning profits of $125,000. In 1925 he sold the company for a reported $500,000 to the property tycoon Philip Hill, on behalf of the newly created Beecham Estates and Pills Ltd which Hill controlled and was eager to expand by acquiring similar medicinal businesses. Although not yet sixty, Veno may have been concerned about future death duties should he die in harness. He subsequently lamented that selling out had been one of the worst mistakes of his life. Indeed, his remaining eight years demonstrate how his quite exceptional talents as a technological innovator and factory organizer deserted him when he sought business ventures to enhance his fortune, said to be as high as $1 million. He became associated with two of the period's most notorious speculators, James White and Clarence Hatry, losing $100,000 through the former's downfall and suicide in 1927, and a similar amount when the latter's financial empire collapsed two years later. 
Veno's more straightforward investments in Britain and the United States were likewise badly hit by the economic slump from 1929 onwards, while other ventures at home were unwisely chosen. He put large sums into modest businesses that were competing against very powerful rivals; he was, for example, director of a small artificial silk company which, in the shops and the law courts, clashed with the synthetic fibre giant Courtaulds. In 1933, seeking to recapture the excitement and challenge of running his own business, he prepared to launch a new medicine for treating stomach complaints in what was an already overcrowded market. By then, Veno's debts were rapidly overwhelming him, and he was required to put up his imposing mansion, The Woodlands, in Dunham Massey, near Altrincham, for sale by private treaty. But before any agreement was made, he shot himself on 6 March 1933 at his home, according to the coroner during a fit of impulsive insanity. His wife, three sons, and two daughters survived him. He left $181,885 gross, but nil personalty. 


@@@@@


doc= 93364


Parkinson, Frank (1887-1946), electrical engineer and philanthropist, was born at Springfield, Guiseley, Wharfedale, Yorkshire, on 7 February 1887, the eldest of three children of Joseph Parkinson (1862-1902), stone mason and quarry-owner, and his wife, Ann Elizabeth, 'nee' Yeadon ('b'. 1861). Educated at Guiseley Wesleyan day school, he took evening classes at the Guiseley Mechanics' Institute and, during 1903-4, evening lectures in electrical engineering at the University of Leeds on a Baines scholarship. Apprenticed at fourteen to Rhodes Motors, manufacturing electrical engineers, of Bradford and later Doncaster, he rose to works manager by nineteen. At twenty-one he started 'F. Parkinson & Co, electric power engineers', committing all his $21 Post Office savings, but he safeguarded family assets by conveying property inherited on his father's death (1902) to his mother, and laying the basis for a classic business creation myth. His origins were thus modest but far from poor. 
Parkinson moved into manufacturing alternating-current motors with his brother in 1913, as F. and A. Parkinson. This was a union of complementary skills: Frank had a brilliant commercial brain and dominant personality while Albert proved a master of precision production engineering. They converted to limited liability and moved to new custom-built premises in 1916. The factory was organized on flow production methods and layout, unique for British industry at the time, providing significant gains in costs and quality. By 1920 they had an established reputation, and by adopting ball and roller bearings set the industry standard. Their culture of standardization and systematic production was adopted to match foreign competition, and by 1927 they claimed the Guiseley works as 'the most efficient factory in the world' ('Foundations', 50). 
Guiseley was the focus of Frank Parkinson's life until the later 1920s. He married Gertrude Elizabeth ('b'. 1885/6), daughter of George Hull, retired station master, on 21 May 1912. His only child, Arthur, was born in 1915. From 1918 he lived at Greenlaw, a substantial farmhouse with 11/2 acres of land, and built up a dairy farm around Upcroft House, with 28 acres of pasture. He was a very active, even domineering trustee of Guiseley Trinity Wesleyan Chapel, applying sound business principles to introduce 'systematic contributions' and raise insurance cover. 
Fundamental change came with a friend's remark on a bus at the Institution of Electrical Engineers meeting in Nottingham, that Crompton & Co. of Chelmsford had financial problems, and was underperforming in the keen competitive conditions of the 1920s. The outcome was merger in 1927, with Frank Parkinson as chairman. He brought the founder, Rookes Evelyn Bell Crompton, who had been excluded in a boardroom coup in 1912, back onto the board as symbol of continuity, and cultivated his friendship, fly fishing with him at Azerley Chase (near Ripon), and showing him the Guiseley factory and farm. 
Between 1927 and 1937 the new Crompton Parkinson Ltd showed spectacular growth. Parkinson's strategy was one of focused manufacturing, acquisitions, strong profit performance, full employment of capacity, and high liquidity. Capital growth was more significant than share yields, making the company relatively unattractive for the investor seeking income. There was a 'meteoric rise' in profits between 1928 and 1938, from $89,110 to $432,114, and dividends typically exceeded 12.5 per cent cash plus 7 per cent capital bonus. British Electric Transformer Co. Ltd, with Kye Lamps of Edmonton and Tricity Cookers, and Derby Cables were acquired in 1932; Atlas Sprinkler, Young Accumulator, and Associated Electric Vehicles had been added by 1941. Group output thus extended to cables, domestic cookers, starter motors, and batteries, linking the firm to two leading growth sectors, cars and 'white goods'. Manufacturing subsidiaries were established at Bombay and Sydney, with some high-profile power engineering, such as the electrification of the ice-plant at Fleetwood in 1932. By 1946, it had a leading position in battery-powered urban vehicles (a joint venture with Austin) and its motors were in trams, trolleybuses and diesel-electric locomotives. From 1932 the lamp business developed with the marketing of the 'one-shilling lamp', successfully challenging from 1935 the 'Lamp Ring', the manufacturing cartel established in 1919, and gaining admission to its membership in 1937. The new Guiseley factory opened in 1938. By 1933 the firm considered a bid for the underperforming giant, English Electric, forcing GEC and Associated Electrical Industries to make pre-emptive responses, and it explored another asymmetric merger with Callender Cable in 1938. The Guiseley minnow had joined the big fish in twenty years. 
Outstanding manufacturing prowess was accompanied by an inclusive but controlling paternalism in management. Sports and social clubs were run for employees, with inter-plant cup competitions. Employee shares were allotted by directors on a discretionary basis from 1918, and continued after 1927; a superannuation scheme was established in 1926; and a central benevolent fund in 1935. Self-development was encouraged, training emphasized and supported by bursaries, and employee engagement and succession planning was promoted by the creation of a junior board in 1943, designed to open the door to talent and develop the 'democratic principle of selection and government' (Stokoe correspondence, Sci. Mus. library, CRO 7/7, 7). 
The merger of 1927 shifted Parkinson's centre of gravity southward: Bush House, Aldwych, became his base, and remarriage confirmed his relocation. Shortly after his first marriage ended in divorce (15 January 1936), he married, on 21 January 1936, Doris Burke ('b'. 1895/6) of Grosvenor Square. She was the divorced wife of Alfred George Burke, and was the daughter of John William Macduff. World travel and the London scene distanced him from his brother. From 1936 he settled at a country house, Charters, at Sunninghill, Berkshire, having purchased and demolished the Victorian house of that name to make a major statement in the landscape at a cost of $160,000. Built of brick in modern style, it was faced with Portland stone, with a six-column portico lighting a two-storied central hall on the south front. It recalled the university building that was later to bear his name. Internally, it had painted walls in the reception rooms, and modernism in the bedrooms, with craftsman-built furniture throughout. Its services were also modern, befitting the engineer owner: it had air-conditioning, electrically operated curtains, and England's first domestic dishwasher. It was 'a machine to live in'. It sat in mature parkland, echoing classic country houses, and had a model dairy farm to reinforce the comparison. Life there aped the house party. A weary weekend guest recalled the rigours of a typical day in the hands of a 'man of energy': two sets of tennis preceded breakfast; there were rounds of golf at Sunningdale on either side of lunch; bridge before dinner; and a trip to a London show at night. As host, Parkinson was both indefatigable and inexhaustible. 
At the same time Parkinson built up an estate of 3000 acres at West Tisted, Hampshire, and applied Parkinsonian principles: model dairying, with detailed monitoring to produce grade A milk; grass-drying and silage; new buildings with a Danish piggery; and student visits (from the University of Reading) encouraged. Worth around $100,000, it endowed the Frank Parkinson Agricultural Trust established in 1943, but remained a potential drain under lesser management. Effective charitable work -- 'for the improvement and welfare of British agriculture' -- began only with the sale of the farms in the mid-1950s. 
Parkinson also used a considerable portion of his wealth to thank the University of Leeds. In 1936 he covenanted $50,000 to Leeds for Parkinson scholarships, followed in 1937 by $200,000 to finance the building of the 'block' for the university, already in outline design from 1926, an entrance to make an 'indelible impression' on future students. There were nervous moments over project management and design details, where he wanted marble columns for parity with Lord Brotherton's library. He sensed ingratitude when the university queried running costs. The shell of the building was used by the Ministry of Food in the war, but Parkinson did not see its completion: the tower was finished in 1949, and the Parkinson Building formally opened, by the chancellor, the princess royal, in 1951. A modest gift was also made in 1938 to the Newnham College, Cambridge, building fund. 
Parkinson left the chairmanship of Crompton Parkinson in March 1941 to work full-time as deputy director-general of contracts at the Ministry of Supply, but remained on the board. By then his health was failing, and he died of a heart attack at Charters on 28 January 1946. Cremated at Woking on 1 February, with a memorial service at St Margaret's, Westminster, his funeral was at Guiseley Trinity Methodist Chapel, and his ashes interred in the parish church. He left $1,487,285, with the farm effects and $10,000 bequeathed to the Agricultural Trust. After family bequests, the residue funded the Frank Parkinson Yorkshire Trust (established 1950), which built the Frank Parkinson Homes for the elderly in Guiseley, initially six (1953) with a further twenty-four in 1965. 
'Britain's (and Yorkshire's) 'shyest millionaire'' ('Yorkshire Post') was a complex mix: private but cultivating reputation; acquisitive and charitable; a dominant personality, at once charming and unapproachable; and fiercely competitive with great entrepreneurial talent. Even his Guiseley relatives felt they did not know him well. Inspired by a sense of destiny, he left enduring monuments to a remarkable business career in the two trusts and the university building. 


@@@@@


doc= 93365


Curzon, Sir Nathaniel, fourth baronet (1675/6-1758), landowner and politician, was the second of the five sons of Sir Nathaniel Curzon, second baronet (1636-1719), and his wife, Sarah ('c'.1655-1728), daughter of William Penn of Penn, Buckinghamshire. The Curzons, originally from Normandy, had been resident in Derbyshire at Kedleston since the twelfth century, and by the early eighteenth century had come to enjoy a pre-eminence among the county grandees, second only to the dukes of Devonshire in wealth and political influence. Curzon's grandfather, Sir John Curzon (1598-1686), had been created first a Scottish then an English baronet by Charles I, while his father, having three elder brothers, had pursued a successful mercantile career in London before inheriting the title and family estates in 1686. 
Like his elder brother John, Nathaniel was sent to Trinity College, Oxford, where he matriculated aged sixteen on 2 July 1692, before enrolling in 1694 as a student at the Inner Temple, and finally qualifying as a barrister in 1700. His younger brother William qualified in 1705, while another brother, Charles, went on to become a civil lawyer. Curzon spent much of the next decade or so building up a successful legal practice in London, which he continued to maintain after being elected as tory MP for Derby in April 1713. In the Commons, where he joined his elder brother, who had sat as one of Derby's knights of the shire since 1701, he supported the earl of Oxford's ministry, though he had not been uncritical of the recently concluded peace terms. He lost his seat in the general election of 1715. 
On 19 February 1717, at Middleton, Lancashire, Curzon married Mary (1694/5-1776), one of the three daughters and coheirs of Sir Ralph Assheton, second baronet (1652-1716), of Middleton, and with her subsequently had three sons, one of whom died young, and two daughters. The marriage also brought him a large share of the Whalley Abbey estate situated near Clitheroe in Lancashire, and by 1722 he had purchased a sufficient number of burgages in the borough to win one of its two parliamentary seats in the election of that year. Curzon's elder brother John, who had become third baronet in 1719, died unmarried in August 1727 a few weeks after sustaining a fall from his horse while out hunting when one of his spurs punctured his boot and caused a fatal gangrenous wound. Curzon succeeded to the title, adding an estate of $10,000 per annum to the considerable estate he had already amassed through the profits of his legal practice and marriage into the Assheton fortune. Weeks later he also took his brother's place as knight of the shire in the general election and was to retain the seat without interruption until his eventual retirement. 
Curzon now shared a position at the apex of Derbyshire society with the ducal Cavendishes of Chatsworth. His country seat, Kedleston Hall, was a handsome redbrick mansion commissioned by his father and finished about 1700, the state apartments 'extremely well furnished and magnificent, adorned with good paintings of great Italian masters, as Carolo Lutti, Paul Veronese, etc.' ('Egmont Diary', 3.299). His landed wealth included extensive collieries in Derbyshire, as well as much prime property in Westminster, among which was his fashionable new town house in Queen Square, Bloomsbury. Curzon was soon seeking to aggrandize his social position with a peerage, though his record as a tory opponent of whig rule precluded any possibility of his entering the upper house through political favour. In 1729 he sued for a writ of summons to the House of Lords as Lord Grey of Powis on the basis of his family's claim to the barony, but in so doing activated a rival claim from the Kynastons of Shropshire. The case opened in the House of Lords in March 1731 but soon became hopelessly bogged down amid serious doubts about the adequacy of the heralds' records as the chief authority for substantiating or invalidating testimony heard in peerage claims. Curzon's case suffered from not having the backing of John Anstis, Garter king of arms and the senior officer of the heralds' college, who supported the rival claimant, John Kynaston. The proceedings lapsed in 1732, though the Curzon family's pretensions to ennoblement did not diminish. 
Although Curzon was always identified as a member of the large anti-government tory bloc in the House of Commons he was nevertheless an unconventional tory, being one of a small handful who occasionally voted with the government. In Curzon's case this tendency to distance himself openly from his tory confreres during the late 1720s and early 1730s may have been part of a personal strategy to improve his chances of securing the Grey of Powis barony. His active promotion of two controversial, and ultimately unsuccessful, bills in March and April 1733 to reform the ecclesiastical courts, a direct assault on the institutions of the Church of England, was certainly out of character for a tory, but his bold stand marked him as one of a small number of anti-clerical tories who were critical of the monopolization of the church's jurisdictional functions by an exclusively whig hierarchy. 
Much of Curzon's activity in the house was consonant with his professional background as a barrister. There is no record of his ever participating in debate; instead his spokesmanship was confined to the routines of minor legislative business, much of it parochial or private and relating to Derbyshire. More significantly, however, and as the pages of the Commons' journal reveal, he made himself one of the most active and useful committee participants in the house. Session after session he was nominated to a large number of the select committees appointed to scrutinize petitions and bills, an area of Commons business where his grasp of legal and procedural technicality was evidently in particular demand. 
During the Jacobite rebellion of 1745, in which the rebel forces pressed as far south as Derby, Curzon subscribed to the Derbyshire association of loyalty to the king and government and contributed to a fund for raising a local defence regiment. It was doubtless of some embarrassment, however, that his steward Samuel Heathcote, a prominent Derby townsman, was taken up on a charge of treason as a Jacobite sympathizer. Curzon continued to play an active part in the Commons until well into old age. In 1749-50 he was involved in patriotic initiatives to stimulate the domestic economy, particularly the nation's fishing industry, and was a subscriber to and member of the council of the Free British Fishery Society. 
Since his succession to the family estates Curzon had added significantly to his landed fortune; in 1735 he inherited the Penn estate in Buckinghamshire from his mother's family, and his unmarried brother William, dying in 1749, bequeathed him an estate reckoned to be worth $80,000. In addition his investments in major stocks amounted by this time to $13,250. Curzon died on 16 November 1758 and was buried at All Saints' Church, Kedleston. His elder son and namesake Nathaniel Curzon, for whom he had made way as county MP in 1754, was raised to a barony in 1761. His other surviving son, Assheton (1730-1820), who was MP for the family borough of Clitheroe from 1754 to 1780 and from 1792 until 1794, was created Baron Curzon of Penn in the latter year and raised to viscount in 1802, much to his elder brother's chagrin. 


@@@@@


doc= 93366


Savile, Sir George, seventh baronet (bap. 1678, d. 1743), landowner and politician, was born at Thornhill, near Wakefield in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and was baptized there on 18 February 1678, the first of three surviving children, and only son, of John Savile ('b'. 'c'.1640, died 1700/01), the rector of Thornhill's parish church of St Michael, and his second wife, Barbara, the daughter of Thomas Jenison (Jennison) of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Savile matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 4 July 1696, and in March the following year was admitted a student of the Middle Temple in London. It was while he was studying there in 1700 that the death occurred without male issue of his distant cousin William Savile, second marquess of Halifax ['see under 'Savile, George, first marquess of Halifax]. The failure of the senior, ennobled Savile line, the descendants of Sir George Savile, first baronet (1549/50-1622), and his first wife, meant that the estates and baronetcy now reverted to Sir George's descendants from his second wife. The next available male heir, John Savile, a bachelor cousin of Savile's father, succeeded as sixth baronet, but it was young George Savile who, in accordance with the second marquess's will, inherited the lion's share of the great Halifax estates with an annual income of $6000. The estates consisted of extensive lands, including collieries and lead mines, in Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire, though in future years these were subject to some depletion by the obligation to provide portions for the second marquess's four daughters. Savile's principal residence, Rufford Abbey in Nottinghamshire, had been considerably extended into a large country house by the first marquess. When in London he resided in Golden Square until 1722, and thereafter in St James's Street. 
On the death of the sixth baronet in 1704 (precisely when is not known) Savile succeeded to the baronetcy. He declined an invitation in February that year to stand in the by-election for Nottinghamshire, unflattered by appeals that he would be an ideal candidate. He served as sheriff for the county during 1706-7 and was appointed one of its deputy lieutenants in 1715. Savile saw himself in the mould of a typical country squire, steeped in the traditional field sports of hunting and shooting rather than the refined pursuits of dancing, fencing, and elegant horsemanship. In 1721 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, an honour that was probably intended to salute him as the heir of the first marquess of Halifax, one of the instrumental figures of the 1688 revolution, and thus a protector of rational inquiry against superstition. 
At St James's Church, Westminster, on 19 December 1722, Savile married Mary, the sixteen-year-old daughter, officially, of John Pratt of Dublin and Cabra Castle, co. Cavan, who was deputy vice-treasurer of Ireland, although she was reputedly the daughter of Henry Petty, earl of Shelburne. The marriage produced a son, Savile's heir and eventual successor, George ['see 'Savile, Sir George, eighth baronet], and two daughters, the younger of whom, Barbara, was to marry Richard Lumley, fourth earl of Scarbrough, in 1752. Savile's marriage was to have brought him $10,000 but he was 'cheated' ('Egmont Diary', 2.223) of half the sum, probably by his father-in-law who was also found to have embezzled the Irish Treasury and was arrested in 1725. Despite Savile's hope that he 'might live a virtuous life with respect to women' (ibid.) his marriage did not meet his expectations and was not destined to last. 
In May 1728 Savile reluctantly accepted an invitation to stand in a by-election as member of parliament for Yorkshire following the elevation to the peerage of Sir Thomas Watson-Wentworth. He was an odd choice for England's largest county, being a non-resident landowner, but Watson-Wentworth, Savile's friend and kinsman and one of the great powers in the county, urged its other leading whigs that he knew no one more appropriate, and so Savile was elected in June without a contest. After taking his seat in the House of Commons at the beginning of 1729, and despite ill-health brought on by the colds and fatigues of long committee sessions, Savile proved himself a whig of strong 'independent' mind, liable to support or oppose the ministry according to his own view of the merits of each issue. As with many other independent whigs, the ministers were anxious to regard him as a 'friend' and assiduously courted him with lavish hospitality. 
Savile was not a particularly active MP, but in February 1731 he presented petitions from the grand juries of the three Yorkshire ridings, each complaining of the use of Latin in legal proceedings and transactions as a frequent cause of abuse and fraud by lawyers. He chaired the resultant committee and spoke at length, when reporting to the house on 22 February, against the pernicious effects of 'dog latin, tautologies and nonsensical English' in legal usage, a state of affairs that had turned 'our boasted liberty and property into a jest' (Notts. Arch., DDSR 219/21). The bill, which Savile subsequently managed through its closely argued stages in the Commons, replaced Latin with English as the official language of the law, and after further debate in the Lords it received the royal assent on 7 May (4 George II c. 26). Although originating in the complaints of his constituents in Yorkshire, where there was a rapidly developing commercial and industrial sector, Savile's bill played an important part in the 'country' attack during these years on the nation's legal institutions. But it was also in itself a landmark measure which at a stroke brought about a revolutionary change in the character of all legal proceedings. 
In the election of 1734 Savile initially agreed to stand but then withdrew, pleading ill-health and the difficulty of his living outside the county. In 1735 he was appointed a deputy lieutenant of the West Riding. The next two years were clouded by the final breakdown of his marriage. Several years previously his wife had formed a liaison with a neighbouring Nottinghamshire gentleman and MP, William Levinz, but despite Savile's strenuous efforts at reconciliation, the Saviles had permanently separated by early 1737 when Lady Savile was reported to be living with her mother and Lord Shelburne. Savile continued to spend each winter and spring in London, and was a member of the court of St George's Hospital near Hyde Park. He died on 16 September 1743 and was buried at his family's ancestral resting place, St Michael's Church, at Thornhill, Yorkshire, on 25 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 93371


Bird, Sir Vere Cornwall (1909-1999), prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda, was born in St John's, Antigua, probably on 9 December 1909, the son of Theophilus Bird and Amanda Edgehill. He grew up in Garling slum, a swampy area of lower St John's. He always maintained that it was his experiences growing up in this impoverished neighbourhood that led to his lifelong mission to improve the conditions of the poor. His formal education was confined to primary school. At the age of eighteen, he joined the Salvation Army. He became a cadet sergeant while attending its training college in Trinidad and was then stationed in Grenada, where he was promoted to captain. Bird often said that his greatest achievement was becoming an officer in the Salvation Army, and it was there that he learned the skills that he used to great advantage later in life: public speaking, organizing, and negotiating. Bird was tall and charismatic, his speeches laced with biblical references, and he made his reputation giving rousing addresses on the public platform. 
Bird returned to Antigua in 1929. He married Lydia Bryant, a Barbudan, in the 1930s. They jointly owned a grocery store while Bird also managed a bakery. Bird had four sons with his wife: Vere ('b'. 1936), Lester ('b'. 1938), Ivor ('b'. 1940), and Roswald ('b'. 1944). Vere and Lester later trained in Britain as lawyers and became involved in Antiguan politics, while Ivor managed the family-owned Granville Radio (ZDK) and Roswald became an educator. Bird had two other children: Hazel, his first child, an evangelist, and a daughter who was born in his declining years. 
Sugar estates had dominated the Antiguan economy since the early eighteenth century, but by the early twentieth century declining world prices and competition from the European sugar beet industry had left the British West Indian colonies in a precarious economic position. By the 1930s trade unions were being formed throughout the Caribbean. In 1938 Sir Walter Citrine, general secretary of the British Trades Union Congress, visited Antigua as a member of the West Indian royal commission (the Moyne commission) and at a public meeting urged Antiguans to create a trade union. As a direct result Antigua's first trade union, the Antigua Trades and Labour Union (AT&LU), was registered in 1939. Bird was elected to the union's executive committee. At its first delegates' convention in 1943 he unseated the union's first president, Reginald St Clair Stevens, in a bruising fight over trade-union tactics. In 1945 he was elected to the island's legislative council, filling a seat left vacant when Stevens died. The following year he was appointed by the governor to a seat on the policy-making executive council in recognition of the trade union's growing role in Antigua's politics. For the next half-century trade unionism and politics dominated Bird's life. 
In March 1941, as a result of the signing of the lend-lease agreement, the United States opened a naval air station and army base in Antigua to be a centre of anti-submarine patrols. Bird went to work as a tally clerk at the base and continued to lead the union, which had agreed not to impede sugar exports during the war. After the bases closed in 1945 Bird led the union in a series of strikes against the sugar estates, but it was only after a year-long strike in 1951 that the estates recognized the union and signed a contract. During that strike several sugar cane fields, as well as prominent business places, were set on fire. Bird was charged with incitement and contempt of court for leading public meetings but was found not guilty by a jury, the only time he was ever prosecuted for his union activities. 
By the 1950s the British had begun the process of decolonization. One of the first steps was to grant complete adult suffrage in 1951. In successive elections through the 1950s and 1960s Bird headed slates of candidates put up by the AT&LU (under the banner of the Antigua Labour Party, or ALP) that won all the seats. As the British introduced more responsible government, some elected members became government ministers. Bird, as president of the AT&LU, was first appointed chairman of the legislative council, then in 1960 the country's first chief minister, and then, in 1967, with the country given partial self-government (via associated statehood), the first premier. During this period the Bird administration led a series of initiatives that transformed the living conditions of the population: government primary and secondary education was provided for all children, free health clinics were built in the villages, pipe-borne water and electricity supplies were extended, the housing and transportation infrastructure was expanded, and sugar-estate land was allocated to the peasantry for cultivation. 
Bird was a strong believer in Caribbean 'oneness' and participated in several conferences organized to bring the former British West Indian colonies together. When the attempt to form a West Indies federation failed in 1962, Bird joined with the prime ministers of Barbados and Guyana to found the Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA) in 1965, which in 1973 expanded into the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). Bird was also a founder of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS). 
In the late 1960s a group of younger men led by the AT&LU's general secretary, George Walter, challenged Bird's leadership, charging that government ministers who were also union leaders had a conflict of interest because they were in essence negotiating with themselves. In 1967 Walter and his group were dismissed from the AT&LU and immediately formed the Antigua Workers' Union (AWU), which then formed its own political party, the Progressive Labour Movement (PLM). The PLM won the elections of 1971 but in 1976 the ALP, with Bird as leader, was returned to office and Bird resumed the premiership. 
When Antigua and Barbuda became independent on 1 November 1981 Bird became the first prime minister of the independent country. In the post-independence period the illegal export of guns to apartheid South Africa, the trans-shipment of guns to the Medellin drug cartel, the harbouring of unsavoury fugitives from the American courts, and repeated allegations of domestic corruption tarnished Bird's reputation. Nevertheless Papa Bird, as he was known, was still revered in Antigua for ending the stranglehold of the plantocracy and for dramatically raising the standard of living of the population. It was not until March 1994 that ill health forced him to retire from politics. The reins of government then passed to his son Lester, at that time deputy prime minister and minister of foreign affairs. 
Bird was a member of a pioneering generation of Caribbean leaders -- Norman Manley of Jamaica, Forbes Burnham of Guyana, Sir Grantley Adams of Barbados, and Sir Robert Bradshaw of St Kitts -- who used trade-union-affiliated political parties to advance their local economies and to argue for nationhood for the British West Indian colonies. In 1994 he was named Antigua and Barbuda's first national hero. In 1998 he was awarded the order of the Caribbean Community by the heads of government of CARICOM and later the same year received the order of knighthood from the Antiguan government (having reportedly refused a knighthood from the British government). He died in St John's on 28 June 1999. He was honoured with a state funeral at the Antigua Recreation Grounds on 11 July and was buried in the newly created Heroes' Park, in the grounds of the prime minister's residence near St John's. 


@@@@@


doc= 93374


Tajuddin Ahmed (1925-1975), prime minister of Bangladesh, was born in 1925 in the village of Dardaria in the 'upazila' (sub-district) of Kapasia in the Gazipur district of Bengal. Little is known of his parents or early life. Often described as 'leftist' or 'progressive', he was identified as a member of the 'liberal' segment of the Muslim League, the party he joined in 1943. The All-India Muslim League campaigned for a separate state for the Muslim areas of India, a demand that resulted in the partition of India in 1947. While the league was united in its demand for partition, it was not united on the issue of what economic system would be adopted. Tajuddin Ahmed supported the small faction, especially based in what became East Bengal, that proposed a degree of socialism at least in that province. He was a founder of the East Pakistan Juba (youth) League, a radical group. He was also a key leader of the language movement of 1952 that demanded the recognition of Bengali as the language of East Bengal, ending the designation of Urdu as the sole national language of Pakistan. 
Support for the Bengali language movement was one of the issues that led Tajuddin Ahmed to the Awami League, founded and led by Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy. The Awami League in coalition with the Krishak Sramik Party (KSP) routed the Muslim League in the election of 1954 for the provincial assembly. Nevertheless the coalition between the KSP and the Awami League soon failed and the two parties contested for the leadership of East Bengal. Tajuddin Ahmed was one of a number of younger leaders who rose to prominence in the Awami League at this time, the most noted being Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, known as Mujib, who became a minister in the Awami League government. Having graduated from Dacca University with an honours degree in economics the previous year, Tajuddin Ahmed was elected to the provincial assembly in 1954 and was named secretary of cultural affairs and social welfare of the Awami League in 1955. The assembly was dissolved in 1958 when martial law was declared by President Ayub Khan. Tajuddin Ahmed was gaoled for about a year, released, and again arrested in 1964 and 1966, the last time in connection with the Six Points movement, which demanded the transfer of much power from the centre to the provinces. 
In the election of 1970 (held under Ayub Khan's successor, Yahya Khan), the only direct election after 1954, the Awami League won an overwhelming victory in East Pakistan (as the province had been renamed), and gained a majority in the Pakistan parliament. The Pakistan military government failed to honour this victory either at the centre or in the province, although negotiations took place. Widespread agitation began in East Pakistan before the election and intensified afterwards. The Pakistan army struck on 25 March 1971, and Mujib was arrested and taken to gaol in West Pakistan. As the conflict spread, several Bangladeshi leaders were able to flee in the last days of March and to form a government in exile. Tajuddin Ahmed was named prime minister of the government in exile and he and his associates organized resistance to the Pakistan army. On 27 March, Major Ziaur (Zia) Rahman had declared Bangladesh an independent state and stated that he was president in the absence of Mujib. Zia subsequently withdrew the statement and recognized Tajuddin as prime minister. In early December, India entered the conflict on the side of the Bangladeshi insurgents. The Pakistani forces surrendered to the Indian forces on 16 December, and Bangladesh became independent. 
Tajuddin entered Dacca immediately. He and his associates assumed that the form of government of independent Bangladesh would be a presidential form of government, with Mujib as president. However, when Mujib was released from gaol in Pakistan and returned to Dacca (renamed Dhaka) on 10 January 1972 he stated that the government would take a parliamentary form. Tajuddin Ahmed retired from the prime ministership and was replaced by Mujib. From then until November 1974 Tajuddin Ahmed was minister of finance and planning, serving concurrently at various times as minister of defence, of forests, fisheries, and livestock, of information and broadcasting, and of jute. However, he differed, sometimes sharply, from Mujib on many economic issues. These included matters of the domestic economy, but also those concerning international relationships: Tajuddin leaned toward the patterns of socialist India and the Soviet Union, while Mujib recognized that assistance was much more likely to come from the United States and the western bloc. Tajuddin was dropped from the cabinet in November 1974. 
Mujib was assassinated on 15 August 1975 in what is referred to as the 'majors' plot' or the 'August coup'. Tajuddin was arrested eight days later. He was gaoled along with Sayyid Nasrul Islam, Muhammad Qamaruzzaman, and Muhammad Mansur Ali, who had been members of the cabinet in exile and of Mujib's cabinet. Neither Tajuddin nor the other three were implicated in the plot against Mujib. The four were murdered in gaol in Dhaka on 3 November 1975. The killers were never arrested or tried. 


@@@@@


doc= 93375


Haq, Abul Kashem Fazlul (1873-1962), lawyer and politician in India and Pakistan, was born on 26 October 1873 at Saturia, a village in the south of the Bakerganj district of Bengal, the only son of Muhammad Wazid, lawyer, and his wife, Saidunnissa Khatun. His ancestral home was at Chakhar, a village 14 miles from Barisal. After education in Arabic and Persian at home he attended Barisal Zilla School and Presidency College, Calcutta. He obtained the degrees of MA in mathematics and bachelor of law. After completing his studies he worked in legal practice in Barisal and also in 1903-4 was a part-time lecturer at Raj Chandra College there. This was followed by a period in public service until 1912 when he joined the Calcutta high court and determined to enter politics. 
Haq (known throughout his political career as A. K. Fazlul Haq, and soon as Sher-e-Bangla, 'the Tiger of Bengal') entered the Bengal legislative council in 1913 as an elected member for the Dacca division. Like a number of political figures of this time he was active in both the Indian National Congress and the All-India Muslim League. He was president of the latter organization from 1916 to 1921 and served as general secretary of the Indian National Congress in 1918-19. He was a member of the Congress's Punjab inquiry committee after the Jallianwalla Bagh massacre. In 1920, however, he parted ways with the Congress over the issue of the boycott of educational institutions during the non-co-operation movement led by Mahatma Gandhi. He did not believe this would benefit the educationally backward Muslim community of Bengal. Indeed he did much to encourage increased Muslim participation through such policies as the reservation of spaces in colleges affiliated to Calcutta University during his time as minister of education in 1924. Haq's other main concern was to advance the interests of the tenant and professional class of Bengal's rural hinterland. His early initiatives included the short-lived Calcutta Agricultural Association and the Bengal Praja Party. They paved the way for the Krishak Praja Party, which was to institutionalize Haq's rural power base. 
Following the 1937 elections, held under the 'Government of India Act' of 1935, Haq's Krishak Praja Party emerged with thirty-five seats in the Bengal legislature. Short of a majority, he formed a coalition government with the Muslim League (with himself as chief minister), although he was initially more inclined to work with the Congress. Mohamed Ali Jinnah, leader of the Muslim League, at this juncture needed the support of Haq because of the Muslim League's relatively poor showing both in Bengal and in the Punjab, the other major centre of Muslim population. Haq was thus selected to propose the Lahore resolution, popularly known as the Pakistan resolution, on 23 March 1940 at the Lahore session of the All-India Muslim League. By this time he had become dependent on the Muslim League's support in the legislature, following a rupture with left-wing members of his party, who were restive at the delays in implementing such reforms as the abolition of the 'zamindari' system. 
Haq split openly with Jinnah in July 1941 over the issue of Haq's and other Muslims' membership of the viceroy's defence council (which Jinnah condemned, since this meant compromising the league's principle of parity between Muslims and Hindus). He formed another coalition government which drew support from the Bose group of the Congress, as well as the Hindu Mahasabha. The ministry suffered from the Muslim League's offensive against it and the tensions between Haq and the provincial governor, Sir John Herbert. Haq was eventually forced to resign as chief minister on 28 March 1943. His opposition to the demand for the creation of Pakistan resulted in his increasing political marginalization. In the 1946 provincial elections he was able to secure election because of his personal standing, but the Krishak Praja Party captured just 4 of the 117 seats reserved for Muslims. 
After the formation of Pakistan Haq resumed his legal career and served as advocate-general of East Pakistan from 1947 until 1952. He also emerged as a prominent figure in the pro-Bengali language movement that was pitted against the Muslim League. On 27 July 1953 he founded the Krishak Sramik Party. He played a leading role in the United Front campaign that trounced the Muslim League in the 1954 East Bengal elections. However, he lasted less than two months in office as chief minister, as a result of the Adamjee Jute Mills riots and his 'indiscreet' remarks concerning autonomy for East Pakistan during a speech in Calcutta. After the lifting of governor's rule in June 1955 the Krishak Sramik Party returned to form a coalition government. Haq was shortly afterwards made governor of East Pakistan. His efforts to replace Ataur Rahman's Awami League ministry in March 1958 with the Krishak Sramik Party was opposed at the centre and culminated in his dismissal. 
Haq retired to relative obscurity. He was senile by the time of his death at Dacca Medical College on 27 April 1962. There ensued an unseemly squabble between Ayub Khan's government and opposition politicians over who should organize a condolence meeting. The much larger gathering for the unofficial event at the Dacca stadium attested to Haq's popularity arising from his long-time championing of the interests of the rural population and his personal generosity. He was buried in the Tin Netar Mazar ('mausoleum of three national leaders') in Dacca. 


@@@@@


doc= 93387


Bishop, Maurice Rupert (1944-1983), prime minister of Grenada, was born on 29 May 1944 in Aruba, the son of Rupert Bishop (died 1974) and his wife, Alimenta, both of whom had emigrated to work at the island's Standard Oil refinery. On their return to Grenada in 1951 Bishop's father established a successful import and real estate agency, which provided his family with a place in the prosperous 'brown' middle class. The family's middle-class status was further enhanced by the fact that Bishop's mother was a direct descendant of Louis la Grenade, a substantial free coloured landholder who had supported the British during the 1795 rebellion that sought to return the colony to the French. 
Bishop was educated at Wesley Hall primary school and the Roman Catholic school in St George's before attending Presentation Brothers' College, St George's, on a scholarship. Before leaving for England to study law in 1963 he had already demonstrated an interest in public affairs. Earlier that year he co-founded a forum for the discussion of contemporary issues, the Grenada Assembly of Youth after Truth, with another student, Bernard Coard. 
During his six-year sojourn in London Bishop was radicalized by the cumulative effect of current political developments and ideas. He was influenced by the anti-colonial movement throughout the third world, especially the struggle for African independence, and Julius Nyerere's African socialism and the 'ujamaa' village system in Tanzania. His views were also shaped by developments in the American civil rights movement, particularly black power ideas and the Caribbean variants in Jamaica and Trinidad. Bishop was, moreover, exposed to the Marxist writings of C. L. R. James and the ideology of the Cuban revolution. His politicization took practical form, and his awareness of the plight of the West Indian community in London prompted him to assist in establishing a legal aid clinic in Notting Hill Gate. In 1969 he was called to the bar by Gray's Inn and, after a brief spell in the British civil service, returned to Grenada in 1970. He took with him his wife, Angela Constance Jemina, 'nee' Redhead ('b'. 1944/5), a nurse whom he had married at the Roman Catholic church of Our Lady of Lourdes, Acton, on 26 November 1966, and with whom he had two children, John ('b'. 1968), and Nadia ('b'. 1971). 
Once home Bishop started a law practice and became involved in political activities, first in support of the 1970 black power 'February revolution' in Trinidad and eventually in opposition to Eric Gairy, Grenada's chief minister. Gairy had tightened his grip on political power and responded to challenges to his increasingly authoritarian rule with repression and intimidation, relying on the paramilitary 'Mongoose gang' as agents of terror. In 1972 Bishop organized, with his childhood friend and law partner, Kenrick Radix, the Movement for the Assemblies of People, which was merged in the following year with JEWEL (Joint Endeavour for Welfare, Education and Liberation) to form the New Jewel Movement (NJM). The early appeal of this anti-Gairy organization is explained by the growth of an urban-based middle class (made possible by increased educational opportunities, the development of tourism, and an expanded civil service) open to the idea of change. JEWEL brought to the new political alliance the complementary strengths of an organization with a rural base. 
In the years after 1973 the NJM emerged as Gairy's most effective opposition, broadening its following in the process. A key component of its political strategy was to organize a series of demonstrations around issues guaranteed to command public attention. These ranged from agitating for public access to a beach on a property owned by an absentee English landlord to opposing Grenadian independence, which the NJM and its supporters feared would remove any external check on Gairy's rule. The NJM attracted support and sympathy from the general populace when their anti-Gairy campaign met with renewed efforts to suppress dissent. In 1973, for example, Bishop and five of his NJM colleagues were detained and badly beaten, and in January 1974 his father was murdered by Gairy's police during an anti-independence demonstration. (Grenada nevertheless became independent the following month, February 1974.) As early as 1973 the NJM attracted cross-class support from a group of businessmen, professionals, and religious leaders who called for an island-wide strike to protest against the beatings and to demand an inquiry into police conduct. The protests and demonstrations organized by the NJM eventually involved a wide cross-section of Grenadian society. 
During this period of political turmoil Bishop became widely recognized as the leader of the anti-Gairy opposition. The basis of his popularity was his courage in challenging Gairy, his charm, oratorical skills, and easy rapport with ordinary people. His middle-class origins also made him acceptable to businessmen who viewed Gairy as too erratic a supporter of their interests. There was, moreover, little in the NJM's manifesto to cause alarm to the business establishment. It directed attention to the colony's problems and offered a detailed programme for social, economic, and political reconstruction. Its most original proposal was for the replacement of the existing system of parliamentary government by a more direct democracy. By 1976 the NJM had established itself as a credible alternative to Gairyism. In that year's election it joined an anti-Gairy political alliance, the People's Alliance, and secured three of the fifteen seats in the legislature, with Bishop as the leader of the opposition. 
On 13 March 1979 the NJM seized power while Gairy was in New York for a meeting of the United Nations. Bishop proclaimed a People's revolutionary government (PRG), suspended the constitution, replaced the army with the People's Revolutionary Army (PRA), and promised an early return to democratic elections. He declared himself prime minister and Bernard Coard (who had returned permanently to Grenada in 1976, having qualified as an economist) was appointed minister of finance. Between 1974 and 1976 the NJM had secretly adopted Marxism-Leninism but Grenadians assumed that it was a conventional, if radical, political party. 
Although the NJM's seizure of state power was the work of a small group rather than a popular uprising Grenadians greeted the change in government with enthusiasm. The PRG was thus able to mobilize the people's support for national reconstruction. Gairy had left the economy and society in tatters and the PRG quickly turned its attention to reversing decades of neglect, with the participation of the private sector. Public investment in infrastructure development increased and health and education services were improved. The PRG provided free education and health care at all levels. The government constructed low-cost housing and offered grants for home improvement. It also made efforts to revitalize agriculture and to diversify the economy by promoting manufacturing. Its most ambitious project was the construction of an international airport (funded by Cuba), essential for tourism and for linking the island with external markets. The chronically high unemployment rate, estimated at 50 per cent in 1979, was reduced to 15 per cent by 1983. These successes were due mainly to a sharp increase in foreign aid and the PRG's careful financial management. 
The PRG's domestic policy was marked by pragmatism, but its foreign policy represented a sharp break with the pro-American line of most Anglophone Caribbean nations. On 13 April 1979 Bishop adopted a position of anti-imperialism and non-alignment in a speech that challenged American hegemony in the region. The PRG established diplomatic relations with Cuba, increasingly aligned itself with the Soviet Union, and identified with militant third world politics in international organizations. This stance attracted aid from Cuba, North Korea, Libya, Iraq, and the Soviet Union, but earned American hostility, and relations between the two countries deteriorated. The USA viewed closer relations with Cuba and the Soviet bloc as evidence of increased communist influence and the airport's potential for military use as a threat to its national security. 
By 1983 the euphoria of the revolution's early years had dissipated. There was popular resentment of the imprisonment of the PRG's political opponents without trial, the use of torture, the failure to hold elections, limitations on the activities of rival political parties, and the curtailment of press freedom -- all indications that the authoritarianism associated with Gairy had persisted. Falling attendance at political rallies and a reluctance to undertake voluntary work reflected the waning popular enthusiasm for the revolution. Nevertheless, despite the growing hostility to the PRG, Grenadians retained confidence in Bishop's leadership. 
In 1983 Bishop's charismatic leadership was challenged by Coard, then deputy prime minister, and his allies on the NJM's governing central committee. Until that point there had been a tacit power-sharing agreement between them, with Coard operating as the tactician and ideologue and Bishop as the popular leader and the face of the revolution internationally. Coard's primary concern was that the balance of power had shifted in Bishop's favour. The proposal for joint leadership of the party advanced in October 1983 by Coard and his supporters on the central committee (from which most of Bishop's allies had been removed) was intended to pre-empt the consolidation of Bishop's rule as a personalist leader. Bishop's rejection of this proposal led to his house arrest on 13 October. On 19 October he was released by supporters who took him to Fort Rupert, St George's, where a confrontation with the PRA culminated in the execution of Bishop and trusted associates, among them his long-time mistress (also a minister in the PRG) Jacqueline Creft, who was pregnant with their second child (she and Bishop had already had a son, Vladimir). Bishop's body was subsequently burned, leaving no identifiable remains. He was survived by his mother, his wife, Angela, and their two children (who had emigrated to Canada in 1981), and his son Vladimir (1978-1994). After Bishop's death Hudson Austin, leader of the PRA, established a military government, but this was overthrown six days later by an American-led invasion force. 


@@@@@


doc= 93394


Jonathan, Leabua Joseph (1914-1987), prime minister of Basutoland and of Lesotho, was born on 30 October 1914 at Leribe, Basutoland. A great-grandson of Moshoeshoe, founder of the Basotho kingdom, he was the fourth child of Chief Jonathan Molapo (1843/4-1928) and his wife, M'akatiso. Because his father married over fifty wives, Leabua stood to inherit little from his father. After education at mission schools he found employment at a South African gold mine as a clerk in a mine compound, a position usually reserved for chiefs' sons. Returning home, he served in low-level positions in the chief's courts. In 1951 he was selected as assessor for the judicial commissioner, Patrick Duncan. In 1956 he was appointed to the Basutoland national council and served as an adviser to the regent, 'Mantsebo. 
Chief Jonathan became involved in national politics because he was alarmed at what he perceived as the radical anti-white and anti-chief rhetoric of the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) and its leader, Ntsu Mokhehle. In 1958 he joined other conservative politicians in founding the Basutoland National Party, later the Basotho National Party (BNP), which received strong support from junior chiefs and the anti-communist hierarchy of the Catholic church. (Jonathan was himself a devout Catholic.) That same year he participated in a Basotho delegation to London to press the British government for more political and constitutional reforms for Basutoland; and he later took part in the delegation for the final constitutional talks with British officials that led to independence. In the first national election, held on 29 April 1965, the BNP narrowly won, taking thirty-one of sixty seats. Although Jonathan lost the seat he was contesting, his party formed a caretaker government under Chief Sekhonyana Maseribane until Jonathan won a by-election in a safe constituency. Once he joined the national assembly he took over the prime ministership from Maseribane and shepherded through the motion for his nation's independence, which the British granted on 4 October 1966. He then became the kingdom of Lesotho's first prime minister. He soon became embroiled in a dispute with King Moshoeshoe II, whom he accused of supporting his BCP rivals; in December 1966 he placed the king under house arrest, until the following month the king signed a document promising to keep out of politics. 
Lesotho's relationship with South Africa shaped Jonathan's policies for the next two decades. A pragmatist, he sought dialogue and co-operation with South Africa, while his rival Mokhehle condemned South Africa's apartheid system. After Jonathan met South Africa's prime minister, John Vorster, in February 1967, South Africa agreed to loan white staff to Lesotho's civil service and police, and to donate surplus grain. Lesotho held its first post-independence election on 27 January 1970. As the returns came in, it was apparent that the opposition BCP was going to win a majority of seats in the national assembly. Jonathan was prepared to hand over power to Mokhehle, but changed his mind after listening to his counsellors and South African advisers. Citing reports of election irregularities and violence and intimidation at polling stations, he declared a state of emergency, suspended the constitution, and arrested BCP leaders, including Mokhehle. Although Jonathan's decision prompted Britain's Labour government to withdraw recognition of his government and suspend donor assistance, the British government shifted its stance after the Conservative Party won a general election in mid-1970. The coup also caused a second breach with King Moshoeshoe; Jonathan forced the king into exile in the Netherlands for eight months, until the king again signed a document promising to refrain from political activity. Because he had usurped power, Jonathan recognized that he had a problem of legitimacy both within Lesotho and internationally. He negotiated with the jailed Mokhehle to come to an understanding for an all-party government. In 1973 an interim national assembly was established, and after Mokhehle and his deputy Ramoreboli split and Mokhehle went into exile, Jonathan invited Ramoreboli to join his cabinet. Nevertheless there was no further general election in Lesotho until 1993. 
Jonathan's boldest move was reversing his stance toward South Africa and becoming an outspoken opponent of the apartheid system. In 1972 he denounced South Africa at a session of the United Nations general assembly. After one of South Africa's homelands, Transkei, nominally became independent in 1976, Jonathan's government introduced a motion in the UN condemning Transkei's independence. This paid dividends when the Transkei government retaliated by closing Lesotho's eastern border and blocking goods from entering that part of Lesotho, and Lesotho received increased donor assistance from Canada, the United States, Norway, and Sweden. Jonathan also co-operated with the African National Congress (ANC), the leading resistance movement in South Africa. His decision to make Lesotho a haven for ANC members angered the South African government. Once the BCP formed an armed guerrilla wing, the Lesotho Liberation Army, to challenge Jonathan's regime, the South African government destabilized Lesotho by providing material assistance to the Lesotho Liberation Army and allowing it to operate from South Africa. 
On 20 August 1980 Jonathan held a meeting with the South African prime minister, P. W. Botha, on the Lesotho-South African border. Botha's objective was to isolate the ANC regionally, but Jonathan refused to hand over or expel ANC refugees and sign a non-aggression pact. The South African government responded by intensifying economic pressures on Lesotho and, on 9 December 1982, launching a military raid on Lesotho's capital, Maseru, killing forty-two people, mostly Lesotho civilians or citizens. Jonathan also generated controversy by developing Lesotho's ties with socialist countries. Lesotho established diplomatic relations with Cuba in 1979 and with the Soviet Union in the following year. Jonathan's government then broke relations with Taiwan, and allowed China and North Korea to open embassies in Lesotho in 1983. Jonathan's policies lost him the support of Lesotho's Catholic church as well as infuriating the South African government. 
Jonathan's rule collapsed because of an internal rivalry between Lesotho's military and a paramilitary force of the BNP's youth league. After South Africa raided Maseru again in December 1985, and imposed a border blockade on Lesotho on 1 January 1986, the rivalry came to a head. Resenting its marginalization, Lesotho's military overthrew Jonathan on 20 January. After successfully challenging an order placing him under house arrest, Jonathan resided at his farm at Rakolo. Suffering from stomach cancer, he died at the Little Company of Mary Hospital, Pretoria, on 6 April 1987. He was buried on the family farm at Kolonyma Ha Rakolo, Lesotho, on 20 April. He was survived by his wife, Manthli, daughter of Mutlanyane, and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 93397


Stacey, Margaret (1922-2004), sociologist, was born on 27 March 1922 at 160 Hazelwood Lane, Palmers Green, Middlesex, the elder daughter of Conrad Eugene Petrie, a mantle manufacturer and businessman, and his wife, Grace Priscilla, 'nee' Boyce, a teacher. Retaining the name Margaret for formal, professional use, she was widely known as Meg. Her strong drive to do well academically and to forge her own way in the world owed a lot to her parents. Active in the Christian Science movement, they were also committed to feminist ideas, and in their early years both had been involved in the suffrage movement. 
Meg Petrie was educated at the City of London School for Girls, then at the London School of Economics. Initially planning to take a social science certificate, which would have qualified her to be a social worker, she changed to a degree programme on which she studied a range of social science subjects including the nascent discipline of sociology, graduating BSc (Econ) in 1943, with first-class honours. After a brief period of war work, in 1944 she went to Oxford University as a tutor for the extramural delegacy. Her responsibility was to take extramural classes in Oxfordshire and north Buckinghamshire, including the market town of Banbury. This was to prove a decisive move because it led her to undertake a community study, supported by a grant from the Nuffield Foundation, which formed the bedrock of her academic reputation. This work, published in 1960 as 'Tradition and Change: a Study of Banbury', came to be seen as one of the high points of British post-war community studies, and a sociological classic. 
On 20 May 1945 Meg married Frank Arthur Stacey (1923-1977), a political scientist, and the son of Charles Albert Stacey, a commercial traveller; the couple had five children: Patricia ('b'. 1948), Richard ('b'. 1951), Catherine ('b'. 1952), Peter ('b'. 1955), and Michael ('b'. 1958). Their marriage lasted until Frank's death in October 1977. During those years Meg built her own academic career alongside Frank's, not always in the easiest of circumstances. In 1951 Frank Stacey was appointed to an assistant lectureship at the University College of Swansea, and Meg followed him there. Subsequently she came to see the next ten years as wilderness years in her own career. Not that she was inactive in research and writing -- far from it -- but she never had a secure university position and conducted her work from the academic margins, until finally she was appointed a lecturer at Swansea in 1963. She then turned her attention back to Banbury. She directed a highly talented team for this work and the resulting 'Power, Persistence and Change: a Second Study of Banbury', published in 1975, was a major example, without rivals, of tracking social change in a single British community. She also developed a new research interest in the sociology of health and illness, and became one of the pioneers of this sub-discipline within the UK. Beginning with her study of children in hospitals, published in 1970, throughout the remainder of her career she published extensively on illness, health, and healing. She also became involved, at a very senior level, in the governance of health services, including as a member of the Welsh Hospital Board (1970-74) and a lay member of the General Medical Council (1976-84). 
In 1974 Stacey was appointed the first woman professor at the University of Warwick. At the same time Frank moved to a chair in local government at Nottingham University. (After his death three years later, Meg Stacey completed his influential book on ombudsmen, published in 1978.) Always a natural leader, once at Warwick Meg Stacey moved progressively into a leadership position in the discipline of sociology within the UK. She had been active in the British Sociological Association as its honorary general secretary in 1968-70 but she assumed an ever more prominent role and became chairperson in 1977-9 and president in 1981-3. She was therefore at the heart of the discipline in times which were very troubled, with sociology under attack from both the media and the government. Her proactive defence of the discipline was epitomized in her presidential address to the British Sociological Association in 1982, which linked it to the parallel task of bringing women to centre stage. Her academic interest in the sociology of gender was another area where she exerted great influence both intellectually and professionally. She left an enduring mark on the position of women in the discipline through her willingness to work actively to secure a better gender balance, including through mentoring and support for younger women colleagues. She always refused to be called an 'exceptional woman', a concept she regarded as a failure of solidarity with other women. 
Though never uncritical of the feminist movement -- in her later years she came to regard it as deeply ageist -- Meg Stacey always acknowledged its impact on her own life, not least on her personal life. Discovering the joy of an intimate relationship with another woman was, she wrote, 'a most important and unexpected outcome for me of the Women's Liberation Movement' (Stacey, 'Older women', 140). She died on 10 February 2004 at Warwick Hospital, from endocarditis, and was buried at Greenhaven Woodland burial-ground, New Clark's Farm, Warwickshire. She was survived by her partner, Jennifer Ann Lorch, and by her five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93400


Stockdale, Sir (Arthur) Noel (1920-2004), businessman, was born on 25 December 1920 at The Mill, Pateley Bridge, near Ripon, Yorkshire, the son of Arthur Stockdale (died 1961), and his wife, Florence Alberta, 'nee' Wilson. Arthur Stockdale had been a pork butcher, and at the time of his son's birth was a corn miller, but when milk prices fell sharply in the recession years after the First World War he assisted J. W. Hindell, a Yorkshire dairy farmer, in the newly formed Hindells Dairy Farmers Ltd of Leeds. By building up a co-operative of numerous wholesale and retail outlets, they secured remunerative prices for their milk and other products. 
Noel Stockdale was educated at Woodhouse Grove School, near Bradford, and then obtained a diploma in dairying at Reading University, which specialized in agricultural and dairying courses. In 1939 he joined Hindells Dairy Farmers. The following year he volunteered for the Royal Air Force and trained to become a bomber pilot. Shortly after flying in the first thousand-aircraft raid on Cologne in August 1942 he won the distinguished flying medal for diving his plane so as to knock out an anti-aircraft battery that had shot down a number of aircraft ahead of him. He subsequently served in North Africa and in support of the invasion of Sicily. On 4 April 1944 he married Betty Monica Shaw, a 23-year-old private in the Auxiliary Territorial Service and daughter of Percy Shaw, a master hairdresser. Subsequently promoted to squadron leader, he became a flying instructor towards the end of the war. Once demobilized, in 1946 he rejoined Hindells Dairy Farmers which thereafter absorbed so many Yorkshire and Lancashire businesses that in 1949 it renamed itself Associated Dairies and Farm Stores (Leeds) Ltd. Its 1200 workforce ran twenty-six farms, three dairies, two bakeries, forty-two retail shops, and several pork butchering operations. A year later, his father by then being managing director, he was elected to the board of Associated Dairies. 
In 1964 Stockdale unexpectedly received an opportunity to help transform the pattern of retailing throughout the country. As vice-chairman (his father had died three years earlier) he was approached by Peter Asquith, a Pontefract butcher who had opened a supermarket in a former cinema at nearby Castleford. Asquith and his brother Fred had the ambition, but lacked the resources, to set up a chain of similar stores in order to market groceries at cut prices; that year's 'Resale Prices Act' had banned producers from enforcing resale price maintenance. Stockdale drew on Associated Dairies' high profits, from its $13.5 million annual turnover, to fund that imaginative venture through a newly registered subsidiary, Asda Stores Ltd -- the name combining 'Asquith' and 'dairies'. The Stockdale and Asquith partnership rapidly wooed customers in the north of England away from the smallish, local, and independently owned stores that had hitherto been the venue of their day-to-day shopping. Drawn in by the 'Asda price' of penny or twopenny discounts, they were offered the novel experience of wandering at will through stores of unprecedented size (the one in Nottingham covering no less than 70,000 square feet), where cheap groceries compensated for the spartan surroundings and a limited range of products. Asda refused to follow its more established competitors, Tesco and Sainsbury, which were opening supermarkets in easily accessible urban high streets, instead concentrating on uncluttered edge-of-town sites. That strategy paid off when car owners began to savour the Asda experience, attracted by plentiful free parking and then by cheaper petrol in its forecourts. Stockdale calculated that this entirely novel venture gave Asda a seven-year lead in the race to establish the supermarket as the dominant form of grocery retailing. 
As chairman of Asda from 1969 onwards, Stockdale reckoned to open a new superstore every three months on average. Now that shoppers generally were becoming more affluent and choosy, he did introduce such novelties as instore bakeries and delicatessens, as well as selections of fresh food to supplement the tinned and frozen varieties. Yet his entrepreneurial skills were lacking when it came to the organization of this ever-expanding company. A bureaucratic head office uneasily presided over a multi-layered management system. Referring to his employees as 'colleagues', Stockdale devoted much time to visiting stores, not to obtain feedback but to converse with managers and check-out staff. Doubtless he relied too heavily on his managing directors, from Peter Asquith onwards. For too long they seemed to ignore the challenges from rival supermarket chains, which not only opened their own out-of-town stores but also introduced more alluring ranges of products, backed up by more sophisticated marketing and sales techniques. Instead Asda spent its lavish profits on acquiring non-core businesses, such as travel agencies and even furniture stores, which brought no direct benefit to its principal operations, made little money, and had to be sold off. 
John Fletcher, appointed managing director in 1980, was mainly interested in achieving higher profit margins than those of competitors, by raising prices and cutting back on investment in existing stores. He departed in 1984 amid much rancour. His successor, John Hardman, then unveiled a wide-ranging series of reforms, all greatly overdue, but too drastic for the company to absorb in a short space of time. For example, he swept away the traditional brown decor in favour of green pastel shades flattered by indirect lighting; introduced own-brands in a large range of foodstuffs, to enhance profits and take advantage of the company's name, planned the installation of the electronic point-of-sale system to provide instant information on sales; created a centralized method of distribution, and projected a number of new stores in southern England, an area of the country hitherto largely neglected. On top of this costly reform programme, Asda in 1985 arranged a merger with the discount furniture chain MFI. Even though an earlier furnishing venture had failed, the attraction seems to have been that both tended to do well away from town centres. In consequence, Asda's resources came under grave pressure, and two years later MFI had to be sold off. When early in 1986 the half-yearly results showed only a small increase in turnover and stagnant profits, the Asda-MFI board persuaded Stockdale to step down. 
Stockdale was made life president of Asda on retirement in 1986, a post which allowed him to maintain regular contact with the company. That same year he was knighted, and awarded an honorary LLD from Leeds University. He now found himself with time to pursue his sundry recreations. Having earlier served as chairman of Leeds Rugby League Football Club, he enthusiastically supported Yorkshire county cricket. He also enjoyed salmon fishing on the rivers Dee and Tweed, as well as gardening at his modest home, a two-bedroom bungalow at Wetherby. He died in Harrogate District Hospital on 2 February 2004, of prostate cancer and a chest infection, leaving a fortune of nearly $4.3 million. He was survived by his wife and two sons, the elder, Christopher, having become Asda's trading operations manager. That October a plaque was unveiled at the company's headquarters in Leeds to honour Stockdale and the Asquith brothers for having been both creators of Asda and pioneers in revolutionizing the method whereby people conducted their grocery shopping in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 93402


Barltrop, Mabel (1866-1934), prophet and founder of the Panacea Society, was born at 1 Granville Terrace, Montpelier Road, Rye Lane, Peckham, Surrey, on 11 January 1866, the only daughter of Augustus Charles Andrews (1827/8-1875), banker's clerk, and his wife, Katherine Ann, 'nee' Buxton (1828/9-1891). She had an elder brother, Charles. After her father's death she and her invalid mother lived in Croydon with her widowed aunt, Fanny Waldron (1825/6-1923). Mabel was educated at Miss Thurston's school in Croydon. Her Aunt Fanny was low church and encouraged her in doing good works; her mother was Anglo-Catholic and gave her a taste for high church ceremonial that stayed with her for the rest of her life. Her paternal grandfather, Edward Andrews, had been a well-known Congregational minister, and tutor to John Ruskin. 
Soon after leaving school aged eighteen Mabel Andrews became engaged to an Anglican ordinand Arthur Henry Barltrop (1856-1906), son of Henry Barltrop, blacksmith, of Ongar, Essex. He was reading for holy orders at Chichester Theological College. During the period of their betrothal Mabel became acquainted with her literary cousins, the Ormes. Eliza Orme was her father's oldest sister, and she had run a famous literary salon at her Regent's Park home in the mid-nineteenth century. Her daughter, the younger Eliza Orme, was a lawyer and social investigator. Another of her father's sisters, Emily, had been married to Coventry Patmore, and was the model for his 'Angel in the House'. Patmore was Mabel's godfather. These literary associations were important to her self-identity, as her 1924 memoir, 'Octavia's Early Years', makes clear. 
Mabel and Arthur married at the Chapel Royal, Savoy, in London on 1 June 1889, the year after his ordination as deacon and priest. Her mother died shortly afterwards and her Aunt Fanny came to live with her for the rest of her life. Mabel and Arthur had four children: Eric Arthur ('b'. 1890), Ivan Charles ('b'. 1892), Adrian Bazeley ('b'. 1897), and Dilys Mabel (1898-1968). Their early married years were itinerant as her husband served curacies at Dover (1889-94), Maidstone (1894-8), and Croydon (1898-1902), but he failed to secure a living, and was taken ill. 
The Barltrops moved to Bedford some time after 1902 to take advantage of its inexpensive day schools, and to be near Arthur's sister. They rented 12 Albany Road (Mabel later bought it). At the time of Arthur's death in 1906, Mabel Barltrop was a patient at the Three Counties Asylum, Stotfold, diagnosed with melancholia. Discharged and widowed, she returned to Albany Road, Bedford, where she lived with Fanny Waldron and her children, working as a literary editor. She attended St Paul's Church in Bedford, and a prayer circle there, but increasingly felt disillusioned with conventional Christianity. 
In 1914 Barltrop read a leaflet about Joanna Southcott and immediately embraced Southcottianism and its millenarian beliefs. She became convinced and ran her own one-woman campaign for the opening of Southcott's box of sealed prophecies, which was to be opened by twenty-four bishops in a time of national emergency. Exhausted by this campaign and the dearth of episcopal responses, she admitted herself as a voluntary patient at St Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, on 29 April 1915. Two months later, her sister-in-law, Mrs Lennie Bull, who disliked her new religious beliefs, had her sectioned. Mabel's diagnosis was melancholia and menopause. She was critical of the asylum's conditions, and continued her work on behalf of the Southcottian cause from the asylum, later writing about both of these things in 'Brushes with the Bishops' (1919). On 25 October 1916 she was discharged, and returned to her home in Bedford. Her son Eric, who was in the Royal Flying Corps, was killed while flying in April 1917. 
While at St Andrew's Hospital Barltrop initiated contact with Rachel Fox ['see below'], to whom she was related by marriage. Fox was one of the women campaigning to get the box of Southcott's propecies opened, along with Helen Shepstone in South Africa, widowed daughter-in-law of Sir Theophilus Shepstone, and others. When Mabel returned home she began to gather a group of like-minded women around her, including some who were disillusioned followers of Alice Seymour, such as Ellen Oliver ['see below']. They discussed when and how Southcott's spiritual child, Shiloh, would be made incarnate, and read the writings of all the nineteenth-century Southcottian prophets. They decided that Helen Shepstone, who died in September 1918, was the seventh in that lineage, which stretched back to 1790. 
On 14 February 1919 Ellen Oliver had a revelation that Barltrop was that female messiah, Shiloh. With ratification from other followers, Mabel Bartltrop declared herself Shiloh -- the daughter of God. Rachel Fox gave her the name Octavia because she was seen as the eighth prophet in the Southcottian line. The Trinitarian God of orthodox Christianity was now reconfigured to become 'foursquare': God the Father, God the Mother (the Holy Spirit), Jesus the Son, and Octavia the Daughter. 
Octavia appointed twelve female apostles -- one from each of the signs of the zodiac -- and washed their feet in imitation of Jesus. She first celebrated the eucharist on Whit Monday 1919 in the 'upper room' -- a room in her house which served as the place of worship before a chapel was built. Ellen Oliver wrote that Octavia was 'wonderfully calm and collected as if born to it' (letter to other members, 17 June 1919). Octavia believed that she received daily messages from God by the means of automatic writing. She sat down every afternoon at 5.30 p.m. to receive that message and then took it straight to the chapel, where it was read as one of the lessons in evening prayer, a service that was otherwise largely taken from the 1662 'Book of Common Prayer'. These scripts were gathered together and published in sixteen volumes as 'The Writings of the Holy Ghost'. 
The group around Octavia was initially called the Community of the Holy Ghost, changing its name to the Panacea Society in 1926 when it became a charity (and after its healing ministry had begun). Members were 'sealed', just as Joanna Southcott had sealed her members. The community quickly went from a loose network of followers to a more hierarchical society. The 1920 instructions for community living emphasized the authoritarian nature of community life: members were to 'subject themselves completely unto the Head Administrator of the Kingdom, who will be led by the Holy Ghost and through the Writings of the Holy Ghost, to administrate [sic] for their welfare in time and in eternity' ('The Community Ordinances and Doctrines', 1920). This obedience was related to the purpose of community life, which was to achieve immortality on this earth when Jesus returns through a process called 'overcoming' (taken from the book of 'Revelation'). This entailed overcoming one's faults and failings to become 'zero' -- to reduce the self, with its whims and fancies, to vanishing point. This was done by a series of rituals, called 'acts', to get rid of the 'mortal mind'; monitoring one's faults and failings; frequent confessions; consideration for others in daily living; a willingness to be reported by other members for falling short of the community's high standards and rules; and a consent to being disciplined by Octavia. 
The earliest members were mostly middle-class and female, often spinsters or widows, mostly in their fifties and sixties. Many were the wives, widows, daughters, or sisters of Church of England clergy, disillusioned with the established church because women could do so little in it. The feminine imagery of Southcott's and Octavia's theology was part of the appeal of the society. These women brought to the society and its beliefs a domestic religiosity. Octavia remarked that what God needed for the establishment of the kingdom on earth was a group of 'sensible, matter-of-fact women to take on the housekeeping on earth, and to begin to give their orders by word of mouth and on His behalf, until the defeat of Satan and the Divine Jurisdiction begins' (Octavia to Rachel Fox, 25 September 1925). Men gradually joined the community: one of the earliest was Peter Rasmussen, a Danish-Australian Southcottian who left Sydney and came to live in the community in Bedford in August 1920 when he was forty-four years old. He remained in the community for the rest of his life, and was Octavia's right-hand man. 
The society steadily grew, initially through personal and Southcottian networks. Only a minority of members were ever residential; many were non-residential, visiting Bedford when they could. By the beginning of 1923 the society had three community houses; by the middle of that year, it had 122 sealed members, and another 85 provisionally sealed, bringing the total to 207. 
The year 1923 was a turning point in the society. In January Octavia and other members realized that an American resident member, Edgar Peissart, who had arrived at the society the previous year, was not only making a bid for power but had also formed a male homosexual subculture in one of the community houses. He was banished and sent back to the USA as instructed by member Emily Goodwin ['see below'], who had become prominent in the society and was claiming to speak as the instrument of the Divine Mother. She proclaimed that Peissart would die in New York. When the society got word in May 1923 that Peissart had indeed died there, Mrs Goodwin's claim was validated and her authority confirmed. Thereafter she ruled the society alongside Octavia, hearing confessions and dispensing discipline. That same year also saw the beginnings of the healing ministry, when Octavia claimed she could bring healing powers to ordinary tap water. Water was blessed by the addition of a small linen square, over which Octavia had breathed, and the recitation of prayers. This blessed water was put into drinks, added to bath water, and used for illness; primarily, it was regarded as an aid in 'overcoming'. The healing went public in February 1924, and quickly made the Panacea Society a global phenomenon. Water-takers initially reported monthly on the success of the healing, and then quarterly. By March 1926, just over two years after the healing had gone public, 4339 people had applied to take the water, responding to advertisements in regular newspapers and religious magazines all over the world. The women at the Bedford headquarters found that the volume of correspondence was increasing so rapidly that they could no longer promise a reply to all those reporting in, though they continued to serve as 'agony aunt' to many who wrote about their family and marriage problems, economic difficulties, and spiritual questions. In some parts of the world, 'towers' were set up: members who received the letters from that country's water-takers and sent regular summaries back to the Panacea Society. 
Only a small proportion of the water-takers became Panacea members, but the healing ministry provided an important avenue to new members, once the existing Southcottian and early members' personal networks dried up. Meetings in London, speaking at Hyde Park Corner, advertisements in the newspaper and a range of publications -- most of them written by Octavia -- also attracted new members, as did the petitions to open the box. In the 1920s and 1930s the number of resident members ranged from fifty-four to sixty-six. By 1934 there were 1285 sealed members (resident and non-resident); and by 1943, 1978 sealed members. 
The campaign to get the bishops to open the box of Southcott's sealed prophecies was a central activity. The society put regular advertisements in national and local newspapers, and on billboards, the tube, and buses in London. In 1930 the society acquired and furnished a house, Castleside, in a street parallel with Albany Road in Bedford, to accommodate the bishops when they came -- as the Panaceans believed they would -- to study Southcott's published writings and open the box. The society did not own the box until 1957. 
The Panacea members had a paradoxical attitude to the Church of England. They both scorned the bishops and needed them to open the box. They believed the church was wrong but they also thought it was the true church, and insisted all members were baptized in the Church of England, whether or not they had been baptized before. They used the 1662 'Book of Common Prayer' and were vehemently opposed to prayer book revision in 1927-8. They bombarded the church with their materials, targeting those who were dissatisfied with the Church of England with publications such as 'The Impatience of the People' (1928), written by Octavia and published under her male pen-name Mark Proctor, as a response to Dick Sheppard's 'The Impatience of a Parson' (1927). The society had two notable successes in attracting clergy to their ranks. In 1923 Lawrence Iggulden (1863-1953), a vicar and rural dean in Cambridgeshire, became a member while remaining an active clergyman in the Church of England. In 1928 an honorary canon of Calcutta Cathedral, Russell Payne (1872/3-1946), picked up a copy of 'The Impatience of the People', and was converted. He and his wife went to live in the Bedford community in 1932, and he served as the society's chaplain, an especially important role after Octavia's death. 
The society followed Octavia in its conservative politics, deep loyalty to the monarch, and opposition to the Labour Party and the spread of democracy. It was strongly in favour of the British empire, and supportive of the 'buy British' campaign in the 1930s. Octavia did not allow members to vote or give money to charities, believing that the society needed to bypass society's inadequate solutions to the world's challenges, and follow only divine solutions as expressed by the Panacea Society. But she followed politics keenly, was a strong supporter of Stanley Baldwin, encouraged members to oppose the general strike, and recommended the conservative 'Morning Post' as the newspaper of choice. Octavia's rejection of aspects of modernity -- Americanization, make up, short skirts, air travel -- reflected the ambivalence that many felt about the influence of modern trends. At least part of the society's appeal lay in its capacity for a nostalgic version of Englishness combined with a radically heterodox theology, which gave full roles to women. In that sense, it was a 'conservative modern' phenomenon. Members also came to believe, with Octavia, that they were engaged in a cosmic battle between good and evil, and that what they were doing and experiencing in Bedford had consequences far beyond their boundaries. 
Octavia remained the leader of the Panacea Society until her death. She read voraciously, and wrote and published prolifically to spread her ideas. She was a spiritual adviser to hundreds, and maintained a huge correspondence. She was autocratic in her dealings with members but kindly to those who needed help. Her own family life suffered as a result of the religion she formed in her house. Her son Ivan moved to Canada, never to return. Her son Adrian served in the army in India, was agonized by his mother's religion, and worried about his unmarried sister, Dilys, whom he regarded as trapped in the Panacea Society, and who had inherited her mother's mental illness. Octavia died at 12 Albany Road, Bedford, on 16 October 1934, as a result of diabetes, from which she had suffered for several years. She was buried in Bedford cemetery. 
Barltrop's principal collaborators included Ellen Frederica Oliver (1870-1921), who was born in Guernsey on 16 July 1870, the third of four daughters of Samuel Pasfield Oliver, a captain in the Royal Artillery and a geographer who was an authority on Madagascar, and his wife, Clara Georgina, 'nee' Dick (1842-1899). A purity activist, she was influenced by Frances Swiney, became a member of the Women's Social and Political Union, and was imprisoned during the suffragette campaign. She became a Southcottian through suffragette networks, and was initially a part of Alice Seymour's circle until she transferred her allegiance to Mabel Barltrop. She bought the first community house, 5 Albany Road, with other members. She was diagnosed with cancer in 1921 and died at 25 Adelaide Square, Bedford, on 8 July 1921. 
The first president of the Panacea Society, Rachel Juliet Fox (1858-1939), was born at Woodford, Essex, on 11 January 1858, the third daughter of Henry Fowler, timber merchant, and his wife, Ann Ford. Her family were Quakers, and in 1882 she married another Quaker, George Henry Fox (1845/6-1931), a ship agent and timber merchant in Falmouth. She became a spiritualist after the death of her son Barnard (1884-1894) at his prep school, and wrote a number of theological books, some by the process of automatic writing. She became a Southcottian and engaged in an extensive correspondence with bishops about the box, especially Boyd Carpenter, and with her cousin Beatrice Pease, met the archbishop of Canterbury, Randall Davidson, about the subject. She lived in Falmouth until 1936. She wrote and published six volumes, documenting the history of the Panacea Society. She died at 8 Rothsay Gardens, Bedford, on 13 August 1939. 
An increasingly prominent figure in the Society, Emily Goodwin (1858-1943) was born at Upper Sydenham, Kent, on 4 March 1858, the daughter of William Beal, greengrocer, and his wife Elizabeth, 'nee' How. She had been introduced to Jezreel's writings, 'The Flying Roll', in the late 1880s, and had worshipped at the New and Latter House Chapel. She married in 1876 Richard Frederick George Lightfoot (1854-1877). Following his death she married, second, on 25 January 1880, Henry Goodwin (1856-1918), baker, son of Robert Goodwin, grocer. As a widow with five adult children she joined the Panacea Society in July 1920 and moved to Bedford, in February 1921 to care for Mabel Barltrop's aunt, Fanny Waldron. In 1923 she declared that she was the instrument of the Divine Mother, claiming to speak in the voice of the divine feminine. For the next twenty years she wielded great power in that role, hearing confessions and disciplining members. Her position was controversial among some members, especially after Octavia's death in 1934. She died at 12 Albany Road, Bedford, on 22 January 1943. 
Other significant members of the society included Alice Elizabeth Jones (1859/60-1945), secretary of the Church League for Women's Suffrage, who was brought into the society by Ellen Oliver. Barltrop's closest friend, Kate Emily Firth (1865-1934), born in Dewsbury, the daughter of Charles Scholes, solicitor, and widow of Harry Firth, stockbroker, was one of the earliest members of the Panacea Society, along with her sister Henrietta Leach, but she left dramatically in 1926 when she fell in love with a new member, Leonard Squire Tucker. Records of Panacea Society members were kept by (Mary) Hilda Green (1862-1958), daughter of Thomas Green, rector of Sudbury; she was an early member of the society along with her sisters Winna Frances Green (1873-1957) and Mildred Louisa Hollingworth (1864-1952). 


@@@@@


doc= 93403


Seymour, Alice (1857-1947), schoolteacher and expositor and publisher of the writings of Joanna Southcott, was born at 16 Wyndham Square in Plymouth, Devon, on 10 January 1857, the daughter of James Seymour (1814/15-1872), linen draper, and his wife, Lavinia, 'nee' Day (1824/5-1874). Her parents, who lived in Union Street, Plymouth, were Christian Israelites -- followers of John Wroe, one of the nineteenth-century Southcottian prophets -- as were her grandparents. Her family was related to Wroe. She was educated in London, attending classes at Queen's College, Harley Street, and spent some time in London employed as a draper's assistant. She returned to Plymouth where she became principal of a private school for girls, Headlands College. 
Seymour was first seriously attracted to Southcottianism in 1902, after experiencing the annual Southcottian service of 'the lifting up of hands', though she had read Joanna Southcott's books as a young girl. She was also influenced by her friendship with the Revd Walter Begley, vicar of East Hyde, Bedfordshire, a Church of England clergyman and devotee of Southcott, whose great-grandfather, the Revd Thomas Webster, had been one of Southcott's prominent Anglican clerical supporters. Begley encouraged Seymour in her interest, and planned to co-author a biography of Southcott with her, but died (in 1905) before he could do so. Seymour's first publication was 'Radia' (1906), published under the pseudonym Alec C. More. She wrote that 'in the early dawn of an October morning 1904 there came to me with great insistence that I was to write a poem on the Millennium and that it was to be in seven books' (Seymour, ix). The work had no reference to Southcott but took the fulfilment of biblical prophecies to be the true gospel. She published her first work on Southcott, 'The Express', in two volumes, in 1909, inspired by an experience one evening in December 1907: 'I felt as though the room was full of ministering spirits, all insistent on my beginning at once to write a life of Joanna Southcott. Crowds of ideas kept coming in overwhelming profusion, as though there was great promise of help from on high' (ibid., x). The title came from book 22 of Southcott's writings, 'My express shall fly', and the volumes warned the nations of what was coming upon earth. It was reviewed in national papers, including the 'Daily News', which designated it their book of the week. 
Seymour retired from teaching in 1909, moving to a cottage in Yelverton, Devon, where she completed 'The Express'. As a result of its publication she received many requests for Southcott's writings, and reprinted all sixty-five of Southcott's books, as well as extracts from Southcott's writings -- some from unpublished manuscripts in her possession -- in a monthly magazine available by subscription, the 'Express Leaflets'. This publishing enterprise expanded the existing network of Southcottians around the world, especially where they were already strong, on the west coast of the USA, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia. In San Diego, California, a woman and man reprinted all sixty-five books for American readers, and also published 'The Express' and drove thousands of miles to publicize the cause. Seymour was astute in targeting specific groups -- such as suffragists and suffragettes -- with leaflets advertising her publications, and in persuading various society hostesses to host meetings about Southcott in their London homes. She was also one of those who campaigned for the opening of the box of Southcott's sealed prophecies that Southcott had instructed should be opened by twenty-four bishops of the Church of England in a time of national danger, a campaign that gained particular traction during the First World War. Seymour was never a custodian of the box, which was kept by other Southcottian believers. 
In 1919 Seymour purchased what she believed was Southcott's former home in the Cotswolds, Rock Cottage, Blockley, and lived there with a former member of her teaching staff, Mary Robertson. In the 1920s and 1930s she and Robertson published a series of Southcottian leaflets: 'Southcott Despatch' (1919-22), 'Southcott Express' (1926-9), and 'Watch' (1935-8). She continued to write on the relevance of Southcott's prophecies for the political situation; presided over the Southcott Society, a loose, international network of Southcottians; and in 1928 formed the Olive Branch League for young Southcottians. 
Seymour outlived her income, and began to receive a pension of ten shillings a week from a parish charity. In 1941 she sold Rock Cottage, with all its contents, to Miss Vesey (later Mrs Annie Marie Vesey Stitt) for $500. Mrs Stitt cared for her in Rock Cottage until Seymour's death there on 24 October 1947. She was buried in Blockley cemetery. Seymour had a considerable collection of Southcott materials and artefacts, including unpublished manuscripts: many of these were destroyed in a fire at Rock Cottage in 1971, but some went to the British Library and the museum in Exeter, some remained in Blockley, forming the Blockley Southcottian collection, while others were sold through the antiquarian book trade. 
Seymour was responsible, through her publications and activities, for a revival of interest in Southcott in the early twentieth century. But she was fiercely opposed to any group that deviated from, or added to, Southcott's writings. She was in that sense an 'old Southcottian'. She rejected the Southcottian groups with new prophets that had grown up in the nineteenth century, such as the Christian Israelites, though she had been brought up in that tradition. She was proud of the fact that her father had, in his latter years, rejected Wroe's ideas and adhered only to Southcott's writings. She absolutely rejected the Panacea Society, a larger, rival organization to her own smaller, looser network of believers, and the claims of its leader Mabel Barltrop (Octavia), though it was her republication of Southcott's writings that led to Barltrop's interest and capacity to attract followers herself. Several of Seymour's adherents, such as Ellen Oliver, found her increasingly difficult and too vague about money matters, and transferred their allegiance to the Panacea Society. Despite the antagonism between herself and Barltrop, Seymour remained in touch with the Panaceans because they were the main campaigners for the box to be opened: she did not want to be left out of the ceremony, and she also insisted on determining Southcott's very precise conditions for the opening of the box. Her own smaller band of followers began to decline in the mid-1930s as the Panacea Society's numbers were beginning to dwindle. 


@@@@@


doc= 93404


Giri, Varahagiri Venkata (1894-1980), trade unionist and president of India, was born on 10 August 1894 in Berhampore in the Ganjam district of the Madras presidency, India, the second child in the family of seven boys and five girls of V. V. Jogaiah Pantulu ('b'. 1869), lawyer, and his wife, Venkata Subadramma. On his mother's side he came from a prosperous Andhra-Neogi Brahman family, originally from Kakinada in the Godavari district of the Madras presidency, who had relocated in 1869 to Berhampore. His father had come to reside in Berhampore after his marriage to Giri's mother, who was the daughter of Berhampore's distinguished pleader D. V. Ramaiah Pantulu. Jogaiah also thrived in legal practice. He was an avid nationalist as well. A member of the Swaraj Party (founded by Motilal Nehru and Chittaranjan Das), he was elected to the central legislative assembly (1927-30) and, following the act of 1935, to the Madras legislative council. He was also a supporter of the movement for creating the Bengal Nagpur Railway Indian Labour Union. On his own admission Giri imbibed the solid middle-class virtues of thrift, hard work, and punctuality, as well as his nationalist politics, from his parents and grandparents. 
Giri's early education was completed at Khallikote College High School at Berhampore, from where he went to Madras and passed the senior Cambridge examination in 1912. The next year he left for the National University and the inns of court, Dublin, with a view to studying law. In Dublin he was drawn into the cross-currents of the Irish struggle for self-government, which furnished a parallel to the contemporary Indian nationalist struggle for 'Swaraj' (self-rule). With other members of the Indian student community of the university he formed the Anarchical Society; he was also elected secretary of the Indian Students' Association. Suspected of associating with those implicated in the Easter rebellion of 1916, he was ordered by the British government to leave the UK by 1 July that year. Meanwhile he had been called to the Irish bar, though he was yet to be awarded his degree. 
Giri returned to India in September 1916 and enrolled as an advocate of the Madras high court. He also joined the Indian National Congress and began participating in the Home Rule League spearheaded by Annie Besant. In 1917 he married Saraswati Bai, from Bellary. He gave up his law practice in 1921 in order to engage fully in the Indian freedom movement led by Mahatma Gandhi, who was calling for the withdrawal of lawyers from the courts as part of his non-co-operation movement. Aiming to induct the working class into the national movement, in 1922 he became president of the Bengal Nagpur Railway Indian Labour Union and devoted his energy to forming a federation of all the railway unions in British India. Thus the All-India Railwaymen's Federation, with its headquarters at Berhampore and with Giri as its first general secretary, came into being in 1923. Three years later Giri was elected president of the All-India Trade Union Congress at its Madras session (he was elected president a second time in 1942). He represented the Indian workers at the International Labour Congress in Geneva in 1927, and attended the second Round Table conference (September-December 1931) in London as British India's labour representative. In the early 1930s he organized trade unions in support of Gandhi's civil disobedience movement. 
Giri became a member of the Indian legislative assembly in 1934. In 1936 he won a landmark victory over the raja of Bobbili, leader of the Justice Party and erstwhile chief minister, in the general election in Madras and became the minister of labour, industries, co-operation, and commerce in Chakravarti Rajagopalachari's Congress ministry of 1937-9. He had always been concerned for India's economic plans and in October 1938, at a conference of Congress industrial ministers, he spoke on the need for planning and industrialization. When the national planning committee was established in 1939 he became its convener. In that year the Congress decided against co-operating with the British government in the Second World War and Congress ministers in the Indian provinces resigned in October 1939. Giri was incarcerated in January 1940 for participating in anti-war protests, released in March 1941, and arrested again in August for participating in the Quit India movement. After his release he once again became labour minister of Madras in 1946, though he resigned after a short while on the fall of the cabinet that had appointed him. 
Following India's independence in 1947, Giri served as the first Indian high commissioner in Ceylon, until 1951. In the general election of 1952 he was elected to the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Indian parliament) as a Congress candidate and became the minister of labour. In October of that year he adumbrated what became known as the 'Giri approach', highlighting his faith in collective bargaining rather than compulsory adjudication, at the twelfth session of the Indian Labour Conference. The next year he succeeded in getting an amendment to the 'Industrial Disputes Act' of 1947 that safeguarded workers against redundancy without due advance notice or compensation. He resigned from the government in August 1954 when the cabinet, against his wishes, decided to amend an award given by the industrial appellate tribunal in a dispute involving banks and their employees. The next few years saw his political career in limbo, but in 1957 he was appointed governor of Uttar Pradesh. He was subsequently governor of Kerala (1960-65) and Mysore (1965-67). He served as vice-president of India (1967-9) and finally as the country's fourth president, from 24 August 1969 to 23 August 1974. His presidency was marked by India's victory over Pakistan in the war of 1971, which resulted in East Pakistan's emergence as the new sovereign nation of Bangladesh. 
Giri was a prolific writer and among his works two were considered by contemporaries to be magisterial: 'Industrial Relations' (1955) and 'Labour Problems in Indian Industry' (1959). The V. V. Giri National Labour Institute was founded in 1974 as an autonomous body of the Ministry of Labour and Employment of the government of India. He received India's highest civilian decoration, the Bharat Ratna (jewel of India) in January 1975. He died in Madras on 24 June 1980, and was survived by his wife and several children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93405


Husain, Zakir (1897-1969), educationist and president of India, was born in Hyderabad, the third of seven sons of Fida Husain (died 1905), lawyer, and his wife, Naznin (died 1911). The exact date of his birth is not recorded as it is said that his mother, fearing the evil eye, did not register his birth. In his passport it was given as 24 February 1897, but in other sources it is given as 8 February. His father belonged to a well-known family of Afridi Afghans who had long settled in Kaimganj, a small town in Farrukhabad district, United Provinces. His father (Zakir's grandfather), Ghulam Husain Khan, moved to Aurangabad, then part of the nizam of Hyderabad's realm. Fida Husain turned his back on the traditional martial career of a Pathan and became a successful lawyer in Hyderabad. After his death from tuberculosis in 1905, Naznin Begum returned to Kaimganj with her sons. Zakir and his brothers studied at Islamia High School, a residential school in Etawa that combined teaching English with a strict Islamic way of life. There he studied the Koran, Arabic, Persian, and Urdu, as well as English. The headmaster of this school, Syed Altaf Husain, was a nationalist and left a lasting influence on Zakir Husain. There was widespread sympathy in this school for the Turks during the Balkan wars, and boys went without food to collect funds for Turkey. In 1911 Husain's mother and other members of his family in Kaimganj died of bubonic plague. 
In 1913 Husain joined the prestigious Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College in Aligarh. There he was immensely popular for his intelligence, wit, eloquence, and attractive personality. He graduated with distinction in philosophy and economics in 1918, won the Iqbal medal, took an MA in economics in 1919, and was appointed a junior lecturer. In 1915 he married Shahjehan, with whom he had three daughters, Saida, Safia, and Rokeya, who died at the age of five. In 1920 (the year that the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College became the Aligarh Muslim University) Mahatma Gandhi launched the non-co-operation movement against the British government in India and supported the 'khilafat' movement for the preservation of the Turkish empire and the sovereignty of the sultan as the caliph of the Muslim world. Gandhi, together with Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, went to Aligarh and appealed to the students to boycott government schools and colleges. Initially Gandhi's appeal did not get an enthusiastic response, but Husain was one of those moved by it and he decided to leave Aligarh. This changed the course of his life. Years later he said that he began his public career at the feet of Gandhi, who had been his guide and inspirer. There was a demand that for those who had left the Aligarh Muslim University there must be alternative educational facilities, and this led to the foundation of Jamia Millia Islamia (National Muslim University) in Aligarh in 1920. Husain joined Jamia on its foundation as a teacher of economics. 
In 1922, the year of his first publication (a translation of Edwin Cannan's 'Elementary Political Economy'), Husain went to Germany to continue his studies at the University of Berlin, under Werner Sombart. In 1926 he took a PhD in economics, his special subject being the agricultural policy of the British in India, but his real interest was in education. He was influenced by educationists like Eduard Spranger and Georg Kerschensteiner. There was a small group of Indian students in Berlin who met and discussed intellectual and political issues. The two lifelong friends he made there were Abid Husain and Mohammad Mujib. He also developed a close relationship with Gerda Philipsborn, a Jewish woman who had an interest in India's freedom struggle and later taught at Jamia. During his stay in Germany, Husain developed a love for European art, literature, and music, and published 'Die Botschaft des Mahatma Gandhi' (1924). 
On his return to India in 1926 Husain found Jamia (which had moved to Delhi the previous year) in a sorry plight. For the next twenty years he served the university with unsparing dedication, raising funds, improving the teaching, recruiting good lecturers, editing the university magazine, etc. He joined on a salary of Rs 100, but like his friends Abid Husain and Mohammad Mujib voluntarily reduced his salary to Rs 80, of which he claimed only half. He continued to refuse a pay rise even after he became vice-chancellor of the university in 1928. In 1935-6 he oversaw the university's move to a new campus at Okhla, on the outskirts of New Delhi. In October 1937 Gandhi convened an all-India conference on national education in Wardha to consider his scheme for free, compulsory, and self-supporting education for rural areas, the essence of which was education through work. Husain attended this conference and supported Gandhi's scheme, though he disagreed that this was an original idea of Gandhi's (as he had come across similar experiments in the USA and the USSR), and was also sceptical of Gandhi's idea of self-supporting education. Despite his reservations Gandhi appointed him chairman of the committee which reported on what came to be known as the Wardha scheme of basic education. He meanwhile published and lectured widely on both economics and education. 
In 1948, following the partition of India, Husain became vice-chancellor of Aligarh Muslim University, which he tried to rebuild, but his experience there was not happy and he returned to Jamia in 1956. Having entered India's upper house, the Rajya Sabha, in 1952, he served as governor of Bihar from 1957 to 1962. He was awarded the Padma Vibhushan in 1954 and India's highest honour, the Bharat Ratna, in 1963. He was unusual as a prominent Muslim in Indian public life at a time when, following the horrors of partition, communal loyalties had hardened and Indian Muslims had in general been increasingly marginalized. He served as vice-president of India from 1962 to 1967 and was elected president in succession to Sarvepalli Radakrishnan in May 1967. As president he remained conspicuously aloof from political controversy. He died while still in office, at the Presidential Palace, New Delhi, on 3 May 1969, following a heart attack, and was buried two days later in the campus of Jamia Millia Islamia. 


@@@@@


doc= 93409


Mifsud, Sir Ugo Pasquale (1889-1942), prime minister of Malta, was born in Valletta, Malta, on 12 September 1889, the son of Gio Batta Mifsud (1859-1910), judge, and his wife, (Philomena) Marianna, otherwise Marianne, daughter of C. M. Muscat, president of the chamber of commerce in Malta. After attending the lyceum in Valletta and graduating in law at the University of Malta (where for four years he was president of the university students' representative committee) in 1910, Mifsud pursued a successful career at the bar, specializing in international law, an area of expertise in which he achieved international recognition. 
Mifsud first became involved in politics in 1919 at a time of post-war socio-economic distress and heightened political anticipation, in Malta as elsewhere throughout the British empire. Regarded as a moderate, he was elected secretary of the national assembly, meeting in Valletta at the Giovine Malta club -- led by the other, more Italophile contestant, Enrico (Nerik) Mizzi -- where this constituent assembly had set itself the task of drawing up a new constitution for self-government. In the first general election to the new legislative assembly under the 'Amery-Milner' constitution in 1921, Mifsud was returned for Ignazio Panzavecchia's Unione Politica Maltese (UPM), becoming minister for industry and commerce. In 1921-3 and again in 1924 he became leader of the house, in the latter year becoming also leader of the UPM and prime minister of Malta (Malta's third, after Joseph Howard and Francesco Buhagiar). He also took ministerial charge of finance (1924-6) and then justice (1926-7). Measures enacted during the first two self-government legislatures included policies on emigration, industry, tourism, compulsory school attendance, and the simultaneous teaching of English and Italian, and attempts at reviving commercial activity by balancing defence with merchant demands in shipping, anchorage, and clearance rights in the main harbours. In 1926 Mifsud negotiated a pact with Mizzi's party to refound the Partito Nazionale (PN). This had originally been founded by Mizzi's father, Fortunato, on an anti-reformist, anti-assimilationist platform in 1880; it had later split into two main factions, the more moderate UPM and the more radical Partito Democratico Nazionalista (PDN) under Enrico Mizzi. Mifsud became co-leader, with Mizzi, of the reunited Nationalist Party. It was Mifsud, however, who always remained the senior partner, generally regarded as more inclined towards a 'modus vivendi' and less of a firebrand. 
Mifsud was knighted in 1927, but in the same year lost office to the Constitutional Party of Sir Gerald Strickland (later Lord Strickland) and became leader of the opposition. In 1928 he married Malvina Beatrice (Blanche) Francia (died 1964), the daughter of Colonel John Lewis Francia, a wealthy Gibraltar-born, British-educated mill owner and banker having long business and family connections with Malta, whose property had been ransacked during the unrest in 1919 known as the 'Sette Giugno', when British troops killed a number of demonstrators. While remaining active in opposition, Mifsud furthered his professional interests, publishing in the 'London International Law Notes' and participating engagingly, even prominently, in a string of International Law Association conferences in Europe and North America. (He was a lifelong friend of Constantine Colombos, a Valletta-born barrister at the inns of court and a scholarly jurist of Greek descent who would later sponsor an imposing life-size monument to Mifsud in white marble by a leading sculptor at the Mall Gardens in Floriana, just outside the capital.) He was also president of the La Valette Band Club, practically a Nationalist leader's prerequisite since the nineteenth century, and he could hardly avoid being embroiled, if indirectly, in some local squabbles, particularly at a time of intense internecine imperialist-nationalist and church-state rivalry. 
As Lord Strickland's controversial term of office approached its end in 1930 Mifsud was anticipating a return to office, but the colonial authorities cancelled the election half-way through the campaign because of an ecclesiastical interdict on Strickland and his party, a turn of events that involved the papacy as much as Westminster and Whitehall. The constitution was restored in 1932, and Mifsud led the Nationalists to a landslide victory, becoming prime minister for the second time. At the head of a Nationalist delegation which included Mizzi (now minister of education), he proceeded to London to demand dominion status for Malta, a demand that the British government would not countenance. On the contrary, in 1933 it dismissed the cabinet and again suspended the constitution, alleging (but weakly) that there had been financial mismanagement and, more pointedly if exaggeratedly, that plans were afoot to permit once again the teaching of Italian (by means of voluntary evening classes) in what the British regarded as a fortress colony, so close to Italy. Security concerns mounted, not without a degree of paranoia sometimes confusing linguistic or cultural affinity with political allegiance, as the international situation worsened in the 1930s, all the more so at the time of the Abyssinian war, when Anthony Eden led the campaign for the League of Nations to impose economic sanctions on Italy, infuriating Benito Mussolini and making him more popular than ever in his own country. Such tensions necessarily had a deep resonance across the political spectrum in Malta. 
Mifsud was returned to the council of government under a crown colony constitution -- which was finally conceded in 1939 -- similar to that of 1849. This time, however, in a changed political climate and for other reasons, the pro-British Strickland-led party gained a majority of seats. Although Italian had been central to Maltese education, religion, culture, and society for centuries before the advent of fascism in Italy, Anglo-Italian tensions became 'a fortiori' a handy stick with which to beat the Nationalists, including Mifsud, although he had never harboured any irredentist inspiration or ambition. 
On 9 February 1942 Mifsud delivered one of the most outstanding speeches ever heard in the tapestry chamber in the former grand master's palace, when he authoritatively quoted constitutional and international law and precedent to oppose as 'ultra vires' a rushed 'Emergency Powers (Removal of Detained Persons) Bill', which was intended to deport Maltese from Malta on grounds of suspected possible disloyalty to the British crown in wartime. Hundreds of Maltese had already been interned or earmarked for internment and, as it soon turned out, scores of them, from Mizzi and the chief justice to dockyard workers, would be deported to Uganda without charge or trial. While passionately imploring the council not to pass such an unconstitutional piece of legislation Mifsud suffered a heart attack and collapsed; he died two days later. He was buried in the cemetery at Lija. Only one elected member of the council, Giorgio Borg Olivier, who would lead Malta to independence in 1964, had the courage to vote against the government's deportation ordinance so eloquently denounced by Mifsud. The other Nationalist elected member, Mizzi, had already been arrested and interned, and was deported shortly after. 


@@@@@


doc= 93411


Boffa, Sir Paul (1890-1962), prime minister of Malta, was born in Vittoriosa, Malta, on 30 June 1890, the son of Carmelo Boffa and his wife, Carmela, 'nee' Serracino. After attending the lyceum in Valletta and the University of Malta he graduated as a medical doctor in 1913. During the First World War he served with the Royal Army Medical Corps in Malta, in Salonika, and on hospital ships. He quickly became a busy GP in the southern, more working-class, part of Malta and in 1921 married Genoveffa (Genevieve) Cecy, daughter of Daniel Cecy, medical doctor; they had four children (two sons and two daughters). 
Boffa started his political career in 1923, when he joined the newly formed Maltese Labour Party, originally known as La Camera del Lavoro. Although not one of the party's founder members of 1920, he may justly be considered one of its pioneers. He successfully contested his first election in 1924, became involved in the party's organization, and in 1928, when he had been again returned to parliament, was chosen party leader. 
Boffa's leadership and the party's fortunes were both helped and hindered by the ascendancy of Sir Gerald Strickland, a more powerful and better-established personality. In 1926 Strickland's Constitutional Party formed a pre-electoral 'compact' with Boffa's party and it was by means of this that Strickland could form a majority in the legislative assembly and head the government from 1927 to 1930. Although Sir Ugo Mifsud's Nationalists obtained a slightly higher percentage of the vote for the legislative assembly and one seat more than the 'Stricklandians', the latter could add Boffa's three seats to form a two-seat majority. The Nationalists still retained a majority in the senate in a bicameral legislature that proved to be increasingly unworkable. Boffa, however, did not accept a cabinet post. His party's interest was to force through some social legislation, such as the 'Workmen's Compensation Act', as well as to push for a greater recognition of the Maltese language, since Italian, still prevalent even in the courts, was regarded as a bourgeois imposition on working men, many of whom neither spoke nor understood it. Although progress was registered in this direction, the political path was beset with constitutional strife, with Strickland trying to have the constitution changed to weaken the upper house. Not only was there constitutional wrangling; Strickland picked a fight with the Roman Catholic church in Malta, purportedly over ecclesiastical jurisdiction involving a friar who was one of his supporters, after vetoing the disciplinary action proposed by the order. As a result of the ensuing politico-religious conflict, the hitherto Anglophile archbishop Mauro Caruana was led to clash bitterly with Strickland's administration and, inevitably, its junior Labour ally. 
By the time that another election was due in 1932 Labour's support had dwindled and the party would have been wiped out had Boffa not been returned, the only successful candidate on its list. Boffa accepted nomination by the governor to the executive council under a non-representative constitution in 1936, after self-government had been revoked in 1933. When elections again became possible in 1939 (albeit with the elected representatives on the council in a minority) he was again the only Labour candidate to be returned. Labour obtained 10 per cent of the vote compared to 14 per cent in 1927. In 1942 Boffa went along with the six Stricklandian deputies and voted in favour of the unconstitutional deportation ordinance permitting the exile of scores of Maltese from Malta on a suspicion of possible disloyalty in wartime. 
As in the First World War so too during the Second World War Boffa put his medical know-how unreservedly at the service of all those who needed it. He served as a district commissioner on the Cottonera district, and with ARP in the worst hit, most dangerous towns around the grand harbour, which were subjected to fierce axis bombardment, especially by the Luftwaffe in the devastating battle for Malta. For these services in 1941 he was appointed OBE. True to his party's calling, in the council of government Boffa supported the right to universal suffrage, with education and property qualifications abolished. He eventually resigned his seat, only to contest it again in November 1945 when all men over twenty-one became entitled to vote, increasing the electorate by 30 per cent. For various reasons the other main parties boycotted this election, such as it was, so Boffa actually (and ridiculously) led the poll with 76 per cent of the votes cast, Labour obtaining nine of the ten seats on 90 per cent of the vote. However, he was narrowly beaten by the ophthalmologist Sir Luigi Preziosi in a contest to chair the national assembly formed in 1945 to formulate a constitution for self-government, as had happened in 1919. 
In 1947 Boffa led Labour to an altogether unprecedented electoral victory in the first general election held under the constitution of that year. With reconstruction of every shape and form a crying need, and several Nationalists, such as Enrico Mizzi, just returning from exile, Boffa's party presented a timely manifesto centred around social legislation -- income tax, old-age pensions, housing, and emigration -- and won twenty-four out of the forty seats, with 60 per cent of the vote, a feat unparalleled in Maltese electoral history. Boffa himself was returned on the first count from two districts. Malta's first prime minister to be a medical doctor -- all his predecessors since 1923 had been lawyers -- Boffa appointed a talented cabinet possessing the highest credentials. One of his new young ministers was Dominic (Dom) Mintoff, an architect who had been to Oxford as a Rhodes scholar. In the space of two years Mintoff, an ambitious, energetic, and charismatic personality, would topple and replace Boffa as party leader, effectively bring down his administration, and have him expelled from the Labour Party, purportedly for having been too soft in his manner of dealing with London in the face of dockyard lay-offs and pressing post-war socio-economic needs requiring greater financial assistance than was being made available to Malta by Britain. 
Boffa resigned the party leadership in 1949 but remained prime minister until the general election of 1950. He then went briefly into opposition but entered two coalition administrations with the Nationalist Party, led first by Mizzi (who died in harness as prime minister in 1950) and subsequently by his successor, Borg Olivier. Initially the Labour Party was split in half, with Boffa's 'Workers' Party' and Mintoff's 'Labour Party' each electing eleven MPs, and with most Labour ministers having sided with Boffa; but gradually Mintoff eroded Boffa's standing until, in 1955, Mintoff's party won an absolute majority at the polls. 
Boffa retired from politics after the election of 1955 and was knighted in 1956. His retirement was marred by ill health, and he died at Paola, Malta, on 6 July 1962. He was survived by his wife and four children. After his death he remained an icon for many stalwart Labourites and party pioneers, many of whom moved to support the Nationalists against Mintoff, with Lady Boffa herself once taking the stand during a Nationalist mass meeting after Mintoff's return to power in the 1970s. Probably more than that of any other former premier, Boffa's memory continued to be recalled periodically in letters to the local press by veterans. As late as 25 May 2008 an elderly 'Boffist' remembered his mentor 'with profound respect': 'He wore his erudition lightly and was indeed an upright politician and a gentleman endowed with Christian principles... He was a national figure of high values and impeccable character. He also suffered because of his ideals' ('The Times', Malta, 25 May 2008). Many years after his death a life-size bronze monument to Boffa was erected in Valletta by the governing Malta Labour Party, while a public garden was named after him in Paola, his district, by a later Nationalist administration. 


@@@@@


doc= 93675


George Gardstein (1885?-1910) was probably the leader of the gang (his name too has many variants and alternatives, including Garstin, Poloski, Poolka, Morountzeff, Mourimitz, Maurivitz, Morintz, Morin, and Levi). He was another Russian, born around 1885, who started as a social democrat but then turned to anarchism. He was accused of involvement in murderous terrorist acts in Warsaw in 1905. When he arrived in England is unclear; in 1910 he had lodgings at 44 Gold Street, using the name P. Morin. He was responsible for acquiring a metal-cutting tool for use in the robbery, aided by the Italian anarchist Errico Malatesta. After sustaining gunshot wounds in the Houndsditch raid he was carried by his accomplices back to Peter's lodgings at 59 Grove Street, where he died from his injuries on 17 December 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 93676


William Sokolow (1885?-1911), also known as Marx, was a watchmaker by trade. About the same age as Gardstein, he was also born in Russia, but was politically active in Riga (Latvia), where he was arrested on suspicion of murder and robbery in 1905. Again, when he escaped to England is unclear. He may have been responsible for shooting one of the policemen during the Houndsditch raid, after which he took refuge in the lodgings of his friend Betsy Gershon at 100 Sidney Street, where he died in the fire on 4 January 1911. He was buried in unconsecrated ground at the City of London cemetery, Ilford, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 93677


Fritz Svaars (1882x5-1911), who was also known as Peter Trokhimchik, Karl Dumnek, Louis Lambert, and Adolf Brown, and by other aliases. A native of Libau (Liepaja) in Latvia, he was aged between twenty-five and twenty-seven (accounts differ) in 1910. He was another who was arrested for terrorist offences in Riga in 1905 and on two occasions later, but escaped each time (Russian prison security was clearly not all it might have been), spent a period as a sailor, and found time to carry out some robberies in the United States -- the American police put a reward of $2000 on his head -- before arriving in the East End in June 1910 and taking lodgings with Sokolow at 29 Great Garden Street. He had a wife and family in Latvia, whom he hoped eventually to take to Australia, but while in London became the lover of a Russian-Jewish immigrant from Kiev, Luba Milstein (1890/91-1973), who worked as a dressmaker. From November 1910 he shared lodgings with Peter at 59 Grove Street. Svaars's death in the fire did not douse rumours that he too might have been a tsarist 'agent provocateur'; but as these mainly came from his alienated cousin Jacob Peters ['see below'], they should be treated sceptically. Like Sokolow, Svaars was buried at Ilford. After his death Milstein gave birth to their son. 


@@@@@


doc= 93678


Jacob Peters (1886-1938), also known as Colnin, and variants, did not die during the course of these events, but he was probably the most historically significant of the group. The cousin of Fritz Svaars, he was born in Courland in 1886, the son of Christopher Peters, a farm labourer. Moving to Riga, where he joined the Latvian Social Democratic Party, he was arrested for revolutionary activities in 1905, tortured in captivity (apparently his fingernails were torn out), then tried and acquitted on murder charges that may have been trumped up. He arrived in England via Germany and Denmark in October 1909, worked as a tailor's presser, and became secretary of his party's London branch. He was involved in the Houndsditch robbery, and may have shot one or more of the policemen, but was surprisingly acquitted of all charges at his trial in early May 1911 -- an outcome which has been attributed to the ineffective handling of the prosecution case by Archibald Bodkin. Remaining in England, he worked in a tailor's shop in the Holloway Road and married, on 9 September 1916, (Harriett Naomi) May Freeman (1893/4-1942), daughter of William Freeman, like Jacob's father a farm labourer. They lived at 18 Canonbury Street, Islington, and had had a daughter in 1913. He established the Latvian Social Democratic Bolshevik Foreign Bureau in London. The revolution of February 1917 drew him back to Russia, where he became a member of the military revolutionary committee of the Petrograd soviet during the revolution of October 1917; he was one of the Bolshevik captors of the British diplomat Robert Bruce Lockhart. In 1919-20 he helped organize the dreaded Cheka, becoming known as the Executioner. His wife and daughter went to join him in Russia in 1921, but found that he had obtained a divorce and married a Russian woman. Peters fell victim to Stalin's purges: arrested in December 1937, he is believed to have been executed in 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 93679


Lena Vassileva (1887/8-1963), aged twenty-three in 1911 and described as a tailoress and cigarette maker, came from Yekaterinoslav in south Russia; her father was reputed to be a chef at the imperial palace in St Petersburg. When and why she came to England is unknown. She worked in a cigarette factory, lodged with Svaars, Sokolow, and Peters at Great Garden Street, and became Gardstein's lover. After the robbery she was discovered destroying documents; she was tried with Peters in May 1911, found guilty, and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. The jury urged that she should not be deported to Russia, as she would be executed there. She was released on 20 June 1911, when the court of criminal appeal decided that there was insufficient evidence to link her with the Houndsditch break-in. The authorities therefore failed to convict anyone for the robbery or siege. She continued to live in the East End until her death, at St Bartholomew's Hospital, Smithfield, London, on 24 February 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 93680


(Sara) Rosie Trassjonsky (b. c.1885), was born in Chinik, Grodnow, Russia, to a Jewish family, and arrived in London around August 1910. She had a deformity which gave her the appearance of a hunchback. She is supposed to have been Peter Piatkoff's girlfriend. She tended the dying Gardstein in Peter's room; afterwards she was arrested, but acquitted of complicity in the robbery at a preliminary legal hearing in early March. The stress of the whole affair, however, affected her mind, and in April 1911 she was committed to Colney Hatch lunatic asylum. In June 1911, following a summons on behalf of the London county council that she be 'deported as an alien lunatic in receipt of poor relief', a magistrate made an order recommending her deportation ('The Times', 3 June 1911, 3). It is not known whether this was carried out, or when she died. 


@@@@@


doc= 93744


Reina, Casiodoro de (c.1520-1594), Reformed minister and translator, was Spanish by birth, probably from Seville or nearby Montemolin. The names of his parents are not recorded. After graduating from the University of Seville he was ordained and then joined the Observantine Hieronymite monastery of San Isidoro del Campo, where with Antonio del Corro and Cipriano de Valera he adopted protestantism -- all three were burnt in effigy in April 1562. 
By 1557 Reina had fled with his parents to Geneva, where he joined the Italian congregation. He then settled in London, soon after Elizabeth I's accession, and was preaching privately, in Spanish, three times a week, before in 1560 he petitioned Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, and Sir William Cecil for permission to establish a Spanish church, arguing that public meetings would silence accusations of spying or doctrinal error. The petition succeeded and the community was assigned the church of St Mary Axe, while Reina received a royal pension. The French and Dutch churches regarded the new congregation coolly, and the Spanish church was still seeking in April 1563 to be recognized as their equal with a seat on the 'coetus', the synod of ministers and lay elders that oversaw the stranger churches. But despite these reservations Reina reportedly attended the colloquy of Poissy in August 1561, presumably in the entourage of the French minister Nicolas des Gallars. 
The other stranger churches doubted Reina's religious orthodoxy; he was friendly with suspected heretics, and there were rumours that his congregation held unorthodox opinions on the Trinity. On 21 January 1561 the French church grudgingly approved the Spanish confession of faith, but in 1564, following Reina's departure, letters to him from Corro were found which seemed to confirm his anti-trinitarianism. By then, however, Reina was in exile. On 31 August 1563 he appeared before the French consistory, claiming that he had been accused of deceit, heresy, adultery, and sodomy, and on its advice put his case before the bishop of London. In September Grindal appointed a commission to investigate the charges of doctrinal errors and sodomy, but Reina, erroneously believing that sodomy at that time was a capital offence, fled the country on the 21st. 
Reina escaped to Frankfurt via Antwerp, but in 1564 was in France, where he sought the support of Gallars and Corro. He returned to Frankfurt in 1565 but the accusations made in London continued to dog his career. For the next three years he travelled between Frankfurt, Strasbourg, and Basel, and became friendly with a number of influential German churchmen, including the Strasbourg humanist Johann Sturm, while working on a Spanish translation of the 'Bible'. It was published in Basel in August 1569. Reina then returned to Frankfurt with his family. In 1561 he had married Anna de Nivelles (died 1612), daughter of Abraham Leon of Nivelles and widow of Dr Thomas le Feure, in London, but only one son, Marcus, had survived infancy. Settled in Frankfurt, they had four more children: Augustus ('b'. 1571), Margarethe ('b'. 1573), Servas ('b'. 1575), and Johan ('b'. 1577). On 16 August 1571 Reina became a citizen, a month after his admission as a full member of the city's French church, on condition that he again refute the accusations against him and resolve the ill will that had arisen from them between himself and the Calvinist leader Theodore de Beze. Although Reina was probably engaged in the silk trade during these years, he also published two Latin commentaries on the gospels in 1573, and a Spanish confession of faith in 1577. 
At this point an opportunity arose to serve the French Lutheran congregation in Antwerp. Before taking up the post Reina returned to London to address the allegations made against him in 1563. Grindal, now archbishop of Canterbury, convened a hearing at Lambeth Palace on 18 December 1578. The London stranger churches were particularly alarmed that Reina intended to serve the Lutheran church in Antwerp, and so would be in opposition to the Calvinist congregations there. But the matter was finally settled in March 1579, after Reina signed a declaration accepting the terms of the predominantly Calvinist Helvetic confession, although this proved insufficient to reconcile him to the French church. 
Reina's appointment in Antwerp was approved by the city council on 6 August 1579, but his ministry was strongly opposed by the Antwerp Calvinists, led by another former London minister, Pierre Loyseleur de Villiers. The declarations made before Grindal establishing his Calvinist credentials were circulated in an attempt to discredit him among his new Lutheran flock, but although some damage was done, Reina's ministry seems to have been successful and he was well regarded. Following the Spanish occupation of Antwerp in 1585 he led the French-speaking congregation to Frankfurt, where he established a charitable fund for its relief. Having been initially passed over by the city authorities, he was appointed minister of the exile congregation on 20 April 1593. He died in Frankfurt the following year, on 15 March 1594, and was buried there two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 93746


O'Mahony, Pierce Charles de Lacy (1850-1930), politician and philanthropist, was born in Dublin to a Church of Ireland family on 9 June 1850, the second surviving son of Peirce Kenifeck Mahony (1817-1850), a landlord and barrister, of Kilmorna, co. Kerry, and his wife, Jane (died 1873), daughter of Robert Gun Cuninghame, deputy lieutenant for co. Wicklow, of Mount Kennedy, co. Wicklow. Shortly after Pierce's birth his father died; when he was six his mother married Colonel William Henry Vicars (died 1869), and the family moved to Leamington in Warwickshire. The marriage provided Mahony with two half-siblings. Although Mahony claimed ancient lineage, his family's considerable affluence was due to the flourishing solicitor's practice of his grandfather Pierce Mahony (1792-1853). The latter had been a close associate and solicitor to Daniel O'Connell, standing successfully as a Liberal at Kinsale in the parliamentary election of 1837 but being unseated on petition. 
After Rugby School, Mahony matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1870 but did not take a degree. While at Oxford he formed an Irish home rule club; John Gordon Swift MacNeill, later one of the protestant members of the Irish Parliamentary Party, recalled their friendship at Oxford. He proceeded to the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester, leaving in 1875 with the award of the Haygarth gold medal. His interest in agriculture later found practical and political outlets; also he was an enthusiastic botanist. On 24 April 1877 he married Helen Louise (died 1899), daughter of Maurice Collis, a member of the Royal Irish Academy; they had two sons, Pierce Gun (1878-1914) and Dermot Gun ('b'. 1881). 
In November 1881 Mahony was appointed assistant commissioner under the 'Irish Land Law Act' of that year, resigning three years later in 1884. His experience as an assistant commissioner, in part, converted him into a supporter of the rising Irish Parliamentary Party and particularly its leader, Charles Stewart Parnell. He was rewarded with an unopposed return as the party's candidate for Meath North at the general election of 1886. Mahony belonged to the class of Irish Parliamentary Party MPs who could pay their own way and not place a burden on the party's coffers. However, he was not a silent back-bencher and from the outset played an active part in the affairs of the House of Commons, taking an interest in a range of topics, but most especially in land and constituency issues. Fittingly, his maiden parliamentary speech (24 August 1886) was on the land question. He additionally gave attention to standard nationalist nostrums such as the conduct of the police and the plight of political prisoners. He was a member of the Irish piers and roads commission and the board of guardians in Listowel, and was a royal commissioner of market rights and tolls. But for the Parnell divorce crisis of 1890-91 he would have been a long-serving and leading member of the party. 
Mahony was one of the small group of Irish Parliamentary Party MPs who wrote to Parnell on 28 November 1890 urging him to retire. Subsequently Mahony threw in his lot with the minority who stood by Parnell, being one of the four protestant MPs who upheld Parnell's continued leadership during the party's deliberations in December 1890. For Mahony, who was distressed by the breach with Gladstone, 'Parnell was fighting for principle and not for self' (Callanan, 29). He was one of the few to defend publicly Parnell's marriage to Katharine O'Shea, saying they were now married 'according to the laws of the Church to which she and Mr Parnell belonged' (ibid., 127). Loyalty cost Mahony dearly at the general election of 1892 when Michael Davitt won Meath North as an anti-Parnellite. Mahony's election petition alleging undue clerical influence was successful, though Davitt's declaration of bankruptcy prevented Mahony from recovering the costs to which he was entitled. Mahony then narrowly lost the resulting by-election in February 1893. The costs of the petition bore heavily on his financial position. He was called to the Irish bar at King's Inns, Dublin, in 1898 and practised as a barrister. Defeated as a candidate for the St Stephen's Green division of Dublin as a Parnellite at a by-election in September 1895, for the Harbour division in Dublin in October 1915, and as Irish Parliamentary Party candidate against Sinn Fein for Wicklow West in 1918, he never resuscitated his parliamentary career. In 1900 Mahony's financial position was secured when he inherited the Grangecon estate in co. Wicklow from an uncle, David Mahony; he then abandoned legal practice. In 1901 he assumed the original family surname of O'Mahony and in 1912, on the death of his elder brother, assumed the style the O'Mahony of Kerry. A first cousin, Alice Jane (died 1906), daughter of Lieutenant Colonel Francis William Johnstone, became his second wife on 17 December 1901. 
O'Mahony's colourful life began a new phase in 1903 when he and Alice travelled to Sofia, Bulgaria, to undertake relief work among refugee orphans. Large numbers of refugees had fled to Bulgaria to escape Turkish massacres following the abortive uprisings in Macedonia and Thrace. On 30 March 1904 he opened St Patrick's orphanage, which continued functioning until closure during the war in 1915. He supervised and paid its costs, while also bringing at least four orphans to Ireland where he paid for their education. He seems to have lived in Bulgaria until 1909, and at some point became a member of the Bulgarian section of the Greek Orthodox church. In January 1915 he received the cross of the Civil Merit from King Ferdinand I for his work in Bulgaria. His last visit to Bulgaria was in 1915 when he tried unsuccessfully to avert its joining the central powers in the conflict. In the post-war settlement he argued for the exclusion of Bulgaria from the reparations imposed on the defeated powers. 
Meanwhile O'Mahony remained active in Ireland's affairs. He appealed for unity at the national convention in 1907 held to consider the 'Irish Councils Bill' and continued to speak for home rule. For a time his relations with John Redmond, a long-time ally, cooled as a consequence of the theft of the Irish crown jewels in 1907, which led to the dismissal of their custodian, Sir Arthur Vicars, who was O'Mahony's half-brother. O'Mahony believed that Vicars was made a scapegoat for the episode and that Redmond had been insufficiently supportive in the fight to vindicate him. In 1913 O'Mahony was married for a third time, to Grace (died 1969), daughter of James Ledger Hill; they had a daughter. In 1913 he supported the workers during the Dublin lock-out, when a group of powerful employers spearheaded by William Martin Murphy sought to force employees to sign a pledge not to join the trade union led by James Larkin. During the First World War he aided Redmond, serving as a member of the Irish Recruiting Council. In 1920 he was made CBE for his work in promoting recruitment to the British armed forces during the First World War, but later in the year returned the award and also resigned as deputy lieutenant for Wicklow and from the magistracy of Kildare and Wicklow in protest against British policy in Ireland during the Anglo-Irish war. 
From 1921 O'Mahony's son Dermot (who sat as a Cumann na nGaedheal member for co. Wicklow in the Irish Free State parliament, 1927-38) resided in the main house at the Grangecon estate. Pierce moved to a hunting lodge at Coolballintaggart, where he concentrated on his elaborate garden, bred Irish wolfhounds, and, as befitted an 'Irish chieftain', took to wearing an Irish saffron kilt and was accompanied by bagpipers. Although a member of the Orthodox church, he remained a communicant in the Church of Ireland until 1927 when a new rector refused him communion unless he renounced the Orthodox faith. Perhaps more from pique than conviction he became a Roman Catholic in 1929. He died at Coolballintaggart, co. Wicklow, on 31 October 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 93748


Pitt, Joseph (1759-1842), property developer and politician, was born in 1759 at Little Witcombe, a hamlet in Badgeworth, Gloucestershire, where he was baptized at the parish church on 24 June, the youngest of five sons of Joseph Pitt, a yeoman farmer, and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Golding (or Godding). His father, whose farm lay on the main road from Cirencester to Gloucester, was from Brokenborough in north Wiltshire, and much of Pitt's life was played out along an axis connecting the two counties. Although in later life Pitt adopted the arms of the family of former prime minister William Pitt (and as an MP he attended memorial dinners of the Pitt Club), no connection between the two lines is known. 
Pitt's early education is obscure, but by about 1780 he was an attorney or solicitor in Cirencester. John Campbell, later lord chancellor, recalled: 'he used to hold gentlemen's horses for a penny; when, appearing a sharp lad, an attorney took a fancy to him, and bred him to his own business. Pitt soon scraped together a little money by his practice in the law. (Hardcastle, 286)' That 'little money' must have been well-managed, for in 1790 Pitt and three partners set up a bank in Cirencester; with others, he set up a second bank in Cheltenham, with a branch at Burford, Oxfordshire. In a third partnership, he had a bank at Tetbury, Gloucestershire, with an agency at Dursley. 
Pitt had meanwhile married three times. He married first, in 1786, Mary Robbins of Didmarton, a yeoman's daughter, with whom he had one son, Cornelius, who in 1831 became rector of Rendcomb, Gloucestershire, where Pitt had acquired the right of presentation in 1798. Mary died in 1788. He next married, in January 1790, Ann Daubeny, daughter of Andrew Daubeny of a Bristol family; a probable relative, James Daubeny, practised with Pitt as an attorney in Cirencester. She died in August 1792, after a miscarriage brought on by violent coughing caused by loose hairs from a toothbrush. His third wife was Ann Orlidge of Bristol, whom he married on 4 March 1794 and with whom he had four sons and two daughters; she died on 11 July 1819. 
As Pitt prospered he bought land, and was able eventually to establish himself as a country gentleman. He bought his first estate at Minety, Wiltshire, in 1791, and soon sought to improve his income from it by enclosure. This was to prove a slow process, but may have provided the seed for more ambitious plans in Cheltenham, then flourishing as a spa after the landmark royal visit of 1788. As a solicitor, Pitt was involved in property transactions in Cheltenham, and would have been fully aware of the scope to make money in an expanding town. He had been buying small tracts of land himself from 1789. His first significant Cheltenham development, beginning in 1805 on a central site purchased in 1799, was Royal Crescent (a scaled-down echo of the Bath example), intended as first-class lodging houses. This was relatively small beer, and to gain bigger returns Pitt was content to play a long game. He backed Cheltenham's 'Enclosure Act' of 1801, and by the time the awards were finalized in 1806, he was, with 235 acres, the largest single landholder. These holdings, mostly fields to the north of the town centre and now consolidated, allowed him to envisage a complete new estate, planned from scratch and with a new spa as its anchor attraction. Within the town, meanwhile, in 1809 Pitt and others promoted the construction of a residential terrace at Cambray, on a 21-year tontine scheme. 
In 1807 Pitt had acquired an estate at Eastcourt, in the parish of Crudwell and near Minety. This became his home and country seat for the rest of his life; despite his extensive interests in Cheltenham, he never lived in the town. Through his office as bailiff and returning officer for Cirencester, Pitt nurtured an interest in politics. He bought the lordship of the manor of Cricklade in 1811, and was returned as tory MP for Cricklade in 1812; in the same year he sold his solicitor's practice. He served as MP for Cricklade in five parliaments, until retiring in 1831, and through purchase of patronages was also able to control the elections at Malmesbury, though he had less success at influencing the outcome at Wootton Bassett. He rarely spoke in the House of Commons, but was active on parliamentary committees, maintaining a residence nearby in Great George Street, Westminster. 
While in the 1810s Pitt's attention was perhaps more on his parliamentary career, by 1820 the pace of growth and new building in Cheltenham (an aspect of a national economic boom) was not to be ignored, and in 1824 serious work on the creation of a new estate began. It was conceived as a new town, competing with the established spa attractions of Montpellier and Bayshill to the south of the centre. Pitt entrusted the general design to John Forbes, a locally based architect; it covered 100 acres, crossed by several miles of gravelled walks and rides, along which lots for between 500 and 600 houses were to be set out. Careful covenant stipulations ensured that those who bought lots could only erect to building lines, designs, and standards approved by Pitt. Perhaps following the London example of Pentonville (1770s), the name Pittville was quickly applied to the scheme, and was in general use by the time the foundation stone of the pump room was laid in May 1825. 
His friend the Revd Francis Witts wrote in 1825 that Pitt was 'one of those fortunate members of the legal profession, whom great sagacity, lucky opportunity and the skill of seizing on favourable circumstances have elevated from a very humble to a very prosperous situation in life' (Witts, 42). Or so it seemed: almost immediately, the economy weakened, the housing market cooled, and take-up of the Pittville lots became sluggish. Pitt notably failed to attend the grand opening of the pump room in 1830, though was once again taking a personal interest in the development in 1832-3, when his new architect, Robert Stokes, proposed and executed enhancements to the entrance routes to Pittville. While all the houses actually built were fully in line with Pitt's vision, sales of lots did not quicken sufficiently, and Pitt's mortgage debt on the scheme was considerable, exacerbated by his practice of giving builders long loans. His steady disposal or mortgaging of other properties in both counties from 1820 to 1840 failed to offset his net debts, and income consistently fell below outgoings. 
Pitt died on 9 February 1842, at Eastcourt, aged eighty-three. He was buried at Crudwell, his monument noting his record as high steward of Malmesbury, as MP for Cricklade, and as magistrate both in Wiltshire and Gloucestershire, but silent as to Pittville and Cheltenham. His will (drafted 1837) showed he felt he had already made adequate provision for his children; his residual estate went to his son Joseph (1796-1869; also a solicitor), who had the unenviable and protracted task of winding up his affairs. Pitt's debts totalled $154,503, more than a third of it owed to Joseph Randolph Mullings, his long-standing solicitor in Cirencester. After two auctions of building lots in the 1840s, most of the Pittville estate passed into the hands of the County of Gloucester Bank (descendant of Pitt's own Cheltenham Bank), which managed it until its purchase by Cheltenham corporation in 1890. In 1894 the open spaces were re-designated Pittville Park, with the pump room its centrepiece attraction. 
Even though Pitt may have lived to regret his financial misjudgement over Pittville, the design standards he insisted on for the estate have ensured that two centuries later, his legacy is not only still recognizable but widely appreciated by residents and visitors. His later indebtedness should not overshadow his contemporary reputation as a generous and public-spirited man; besides investing in major buildings such as the pump room, he also for example contributed significantly to flood relief works after the inundation at Boston, Lincolnshire, in 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 93749


Knight, Joseph (b. c.1753), slave and litigant, was born in west Africa, where he was captured and sold to a Captain Knight. Captain Knight, by whose surname he was subsequently known, sold him in Jamaica, aged about thirteen, to John Wedderburn, probably in 1766. Wedderburn employed Knight as his personal servant. Wedderburn had fled, with some of his brothers, to Jamaica after the failure of the Jacobite rising of 1745. Their father, Sir John Wedderburn, fifth baronet, of Blackness in Forfarshire, had been executed for treason in 1746 and forfeited. Wedderburn had prospered in Jamaica, and returned to Scotland in 1768, bringing Knight with him. In November 1769 Wedderburn married Margaret Ogilvy, daughter of the Jacobite David Ogilvy, styled sixth earl of Airlie; Wedderburn had fought in Lord Ogilvy's regiment at Culloden. In the same year Wedderburn acquired the house and estate of Ballindean in Perthshire, near Dundee. 
A favourite of Wedderburn's, Knight was taught to read and write and instructed in Christianity, being baptized in Scotland by a minister of the kirk. According to Knight, at his baptism Wedderburn promised to free him in seven years' time 'if he behaved well' (NA Scot., CS 235/K/2/2). He further alleged that Wedderburn stated he would not free him in Scotland, because no one would employ him and he would starve, but in Jamaica, along with a house and some ground, where he could live comfortably. 
At Ballindean, Knight formed an association with a chambermaid, Anne Thomson, and the couple conceived a child. Wedderburn dismissed Thomson because of her pregnancy, but gave Knight the money necessary to support the expenses of the pregnancy including rent of accommodation in Dundee. The child having died, Wedderburn refused further support, hoping Knight would break off the association. On 9 March 1773, however, David Johnston, minister of North Leith, married the couple in Edinburgh. This precipitated a rupture between Wedderburn and Knight. Knight wanted his wife to be re-engaged by Wedderburn, with a house provided on the estate for the couple; this was refused. Knight had read in the 'Edinburgh Advertiser' of 3 July 1772 of Lord Mansfield's decision in the case of the former slave James Somerset. He understood this as meaning he was now free, claiming, however, that the humanity with which he had hitherto been treated led him to decide to stay with Wedderburn. But Knight now decided to leave Wedderburn and go to Dundee, where his wife lived, to seek paid employment. On discovering this, Wedderburn, on 13 November 1773, sought a warrant from the justices of the peace of Perthshire to have Knight detained as his slave. This was granted, and the justices, all of whom were closely connected through marriage with Wedderburn or each other, met at Ballindean on 15 November to interrogate Knight. All having interests in slavery, they found against Knight. Knight managed to have the issue brought before the sheriff court at Perth, where the sheriff-depute, John Swinton of Swinton, was known to be sympathetic; Swinton found 'That the State of Slavery is not recognised by the Laws of this Kingdom and is inconsistent with the principles thereof and Found that the Regulations in Jamaica concerning slaves do not extend to this Kingdom and repelled the Defender's Claim to perpetual Service. (NA Scot., CS 235/K/2/2)' The next month Wedderburn initiated a challenge to Swinton's decision in the court of session. The litigation lasted until 1778. Each party employed the most distinguished counsel of the day, Henry Dundas, then lord advocate, giving a particularly brilliant speech for Knight before the court. The printed pleadings were learned and far-ranging, those for Knight stressing the iniquities of the slave trade and challenging the traditional legal and economic arguments in favour of slavery. 
The twelve opinions of the judges were very varied. Aware that in Somerset's case Lord Mansfield had avoided giving a general view on slavery, all denied that Wedderburn could send Knight back to Jamaica against his will. Three accepted that Wedderburn had the right to Knight's services for life without wages, while Alexander Boswell, Lord Auchinleck, claimed that slavery was unchristian and that Knight was 'our brother; and he is a man, although not our colour' (Dalrymple, 2.777). The court accepted Swinton's judgment, although it is not clear that such a strong statement reflected their common opinion. 
By this time Knight and his wife had a second child. After the decision they disappear from the historical record, their subsequent lives and dates of death unknown, although in 2003 James Robertson published 'Joseph Knight', a convincing and imaginative novel based on his life, in which he supplied a satisfactory literary conclusion to this historical mystery. 


@@@@@


doc= 93754


Gilmour, Sarah (1921-2004), ballet dancer, was born on 2 November 1921 in Sungei Lembing, Malaya, the daughter of Colin and Florence Gilmour. Her father, who was of Scottish extraction, was then chief medical officer in Malaya. He encouraged Sally to dance and took her, from the age of three, to Miss Wright's Dancing Academy in Singapore. He recognized his daughter's stage potential, ensured that she saw Anna Pavlova dance on one of her Asian tours, and, after the family returned to London, sent the nine-year-old Sally to study ballet with Tamara Karsavina. Her academic education took place at Channing School and, from the age of twelve (after Karsavina had left London), she trained with Marie Rambert. 
Gilmour became a key figure in the development of the dramatic tradition in twentieth-century British ballet. She joined Ballet Rambert in 1936 and danced with the company for the next seventeen years. After her parents returned to Asia, Ballet Rambert became her family -- especially after her mother was killed (in February 1942) and her father interned in Malaya during the Second World War. Although she briefly appeared with other companies and was invited to join the Ballets Russes, she felt that she belonged with Rambert, where her distinctive and individual qualities were appreciated. Gilmour was slim and pretty with an elfin quality rather than being a stereotypical ballerina. She was never a great technician, although perfectly able to dance Odette in 'Swan Lake' act 2 and variations from 'The Sleeping Beauty'. She was, nevertheless, acclaimed in the 1940s as second only to Margot Fonteyn among British ballerinas. 
Gilmour had danced at the Ballet Club while still a student, her first roles on 26 April 1936 being a little swan in the 'pas de quatre' from 'Swan Lake' act 2 and in the 'corps de ballet' in 'Les sylphides'. Her individual talent was quickly recognized and, as early as 1937, she created Maria in Wendy Toye's 'Cross-Garter'd' (inspired by 'Twelfth Night'). But it was in May 1939 that she captured the public's imagination, and was recognized as a star, when she danced the title role of the fey and fascinating Silvia Tebrick in the premiere of Andree Howard's 'Lady into Fox'. She assumed other leading roles in 1939 and led the company during the war years. She was also one of the small group who persuaded the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts to help restore Ballet Rambert after its closure in 1942. 
Gilmour's range as a dancer encompassed both comedy and tragedy. She could be childlike as the Granddaughter in 'Cap over Mill', zany and boyish as Peter in 'Peter and the Wolf', and witty in 'Le Boxing', 'Czernyana', and 'Gala Performance'. She moved her audiences to tears as the girl betrayed by the Inquisition in 'Confessional' (1941) or as the innocent younger sister who had just discovered love in 'The Fugitive' (1944). These last two roles were among the many choreographed for her by her then off-stage partner, Walter Gore ['see under 'Hinton, Paula], whose muse she was from 'Valse Finale' in 1939 through to the autobiographical 'Winter Night' in 1948. She also inspired the choreographer Andree Howard, whose anti-racist 'The Sailor's Return' (1947, like 'Lady into Fox' based on a novel by David Garnett) featured Gilmour as Tulip, the negro princess who developed from a childish girl -- who jumped with glee at the finery her husband gave to her -- to a mature widow, desolate at the loss of her husband, son, home, and dignity. Gilmour was also a great Giselle (unrivalled in the dramatic act 1) in the production Marie Rambert had specially produced for her. Cyril Beaumont, a connoisseur of Giselles (including Pavlova, Karsavina, and Alicia Markova), praised Gilmour's performance for 'its lyric qualities, its poetry, its pathos. Other interpreters... may excel her in technical ability, but not one of them equals her in expression' (Beaumont, 115). 
Gilmour led the Ballet Rambert on its important tour of Australia during 1947-9. On this trip she met Allan Wynn (died 1987), a doctor specializing in cardiology, and the son of Samuel Wynn (born Samuel Weintraub), a Jewish emigre from Poland who became a prominent Australian winemaker. The couple were married in 1948 and later had two sons, Simon and Toby, and a daughter, Sabina. After marriage Gilmour divided her life between Australia and Britain. She returned to London to dance as a guest with Rambert, to create the role of Grace in 'Orlando's Silver Wedding' (1951) for the Festival of Britain at Battersea Pleasure Gardens, and to take on the role of Louise in the musical 'Carousel'. Her final London performance, dancing 'Confessional', was on 10 December 1952 at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith. During this period her husband undertook further medical studies in London before the couple returned to Australia, where they settled in Melbourne. In the following years Gilmour made occasional stage appearances and appeared briefly in films and on television, but devoted much of her time to being a wife and mother. She continued to be interested in dance and thanks to her phenomenal memory was able to help reconstruct ballets, including 'Peter and the Wolf', and to restore others -- most notably 'Dark Elegies', in which she had on occasions danced all the female solo roles -- to their original form. In 1970 Gilmour and her family returned to London, where her husband died in 1987. In her later years Gilmour suffered from Alzheimer's disease and in 1996 she went back to Australia. She died on 23 May 2004 in Sydney, and was survived by her three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93756


Hammersley, John Michael (1920-2004), mathematician, was born on 21 March 1920 at Dee Bank, Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, the only child to survive childbirth of Guy Hugh Hammersley (1883-1964), a businessman in the steel industry, and his wife, Marguerite, 'nee' Whitehead (1889-1949). After four years at Waterside School in Bishop's Stortford and a short stay at Bembridge School on the Isle of Wight, he was sent in 1930 to Stratton Park near Bletchley, Buckinghamshire, where he learned the rudiments of Euclidean geometry, algebra, and trigonometry, but no calculus, under the guidance of Gerald Meister. He gained a scholarship to Sedbergh School where he spent the pre-war years from 1934 to 1939. He found the mathematics teaching at Sedbergh to be sound but not exceptional, and remarked later that his teachers were unable to explain how a function could be continuous but non-differentiable everywhere. He went to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1939 with a minor scholarship, and gained an uncharacteristic third class in the first year of the mathematical tripos, before being called up for military service in the Royal Artillery. 
Following a period as a gunner and later as a lance-bombardier, Hammersley was sent for officer training, and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in 1941. His career as a problem-solver appears to have begun with his assignment to an anti-aircraft gun site near Worsham, Oxfordshire, where he became interested in the use of radar as a tool to predict the flight paths of enemy aircraft. After working on the installation of radar at the gun sites defending Scapa Flow, he was transferred to the trials wing of the School of Anti-Aircraft Artillery at Lydstep, Pembrokeshire, where he introduced a number of valuable reforms, including the use of polar co-ordinates and improved numerical and statistical techniques. By the end of the Second World War he had been promoted to the rank of major. 
Post-war Cambridge was a changed place, and Hammersley was better motivated on his return in 1946. He graduated as a wrangler in the mathematical tripos in 1948. Rather than continuing to a PhD, he accepted the post of graduate assistant in the group working in the design and analysis of scientific experiment headed by David Finney at Oxford University. There his duties included statistical consultancy and teaching. On 14 June 1951 he married Shirley Gwendolene (Gwen) Bakewell ('b'. 1918), a physiotherapist, and daughter of William Kenneth Bakewell, barrister. They made their permanent home at Willow Cottage on the Eynsham Road, Oxford, where their sons Julian and Hugo were born in 1954 and 1956. 
In the year of his marriage Hammersley was appointed lecturer in mathematics at Trinity College, Oxford, following the return of Patrick Moran to Australia. His ensuing association with Trinity endured to the end of his life. From 1955 he was principal scientific officer at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell until his return to Oxford as a senior research officer three years later. He was elected to a senior research fellowship at Trinity in 1961. In 1969 he was promoted to a university readership in mathematical statistics and elected to a professorial fellowship at Trinity, two posts which he held until his retirement in 1987. 
John Hammersley was an exceptionally inventive mathematician and a fearless problem-solver. He had the rare ability to identify the basic mathematics of a scientific problem, and to develop an applicable theory. His most outstanding achievements were in the two areas of spatial disorder and Monte Carlo methods, and his scientific legacies in these important fields proved extremely influential. Problems of spatial disorder arise through the random interaction of a large number of particles spread around a space, and the most fundamental model is arguably the 'percolation model'. The mathematical theory originated in the work of S. R. Broadbent on the movement of particles through the filters of gas masks, and percolation subsequently became the standard model of probability and statistical mechanics for a disordered medium. Hammersley embarked on a systematic theory of percolation and its phase transition, and established many of the principal results and techniques that later guided the theory of spatial disorder. He pioneered the use of 'subadditivity' in stochastic and combinatorial geometry, including the counting of self-avoiding walks and lattice animals. Among his most significant methodological advances was the introduction (with Dominic Welsh) of the theory of so-called 'subadditive stochastic processes', primarily in the context of time-dependent percolation, and this tool was later developed further and applied by others in a number of areas of scientific significance. 
From early in his career, Hammersley sought methods for carrying out large numerical computations using limited computing machinery. In the early 1950s he learned of the Monte Carlo methods used earlier at Los Alamos, and he was attracted strongly to the field. The basic idea is that one may estimate a quantity through computations involving random numbers. Hammersley's work had great impact on the solutions of practical problems. His most significant individual contribution (jointly with K. W. Morton) was the introduction of the method of antithetic variables, which permits more accurate estimates through the use of correlated random variables. His volume ('Monte Carlo Methods', published in 1964 with David Handscomb) became a standard work of reference for practitioners in finance and elsewhere. 
Great changes were made during Hammersley's lifetime to the teaching of school mathematics, and he was instrumental in the reforms that led in 1961 to the School Mathematics Project (SMP). However, the SMP disappointed him by its emphasis on abstraction at the expense of concrete problems, and he continued to champion the primacy of problem-solving in secondary and higher education. During his career he held visiting positions at Princeton University, the University of Illinois (Urbana), Bell Laboratories (Murray Hill), and the University of California (Berkeley). He was awarded an ScD by Cambridge University (1959), the von Neumann medal for applied mathematics by the University of Brussels (1966), the gold medal of the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications (1984), and the Polya prize of the London Mathematical Society (1997). He was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society in 1976. Following his retirement in 1987, he spent several fruitful years at the Oxford Centre for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. John Hammersley died on 2 May 2004 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, from pneumonia and cerebrovascular disease. He was cremated on 10 May at the Oxford crematorium, following a memorial service in the chapel of Trinity College, and was survived by his wife and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 93757


Hart, Francis Dudley (1909-2004), rheumatologist, was born on 4 October 1909 at The Vicarage, Glossop, Derbyshire, the son of Charles Dudley Hart, Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Kate Evelyn, 'nee' Bowden. He was educated at Grosvenor School, Nottingham. Intending to become a clergyman, like his father and grandfather, he entered the University of Edinburgh to read theology, but after two years he switched to medicine, graduating MB ChB in 1933 and MD in 1939 and being admitted MRCP in 1937. After a spell as junior registrar at the Royal Northern Hospital, London (1935-7), and house physician and clinical assistant at the Brompton Hospital (1937-9), he became a registrar at the Westminster Hospital in 1939. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War the patients, students, and most of the staff at the Westminster were evacuated, leaving Hart and three surgeons to run the hospital as a casualty clearing station, including during the blitz. In 1942 he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps, serving in Iraq, north Africa, and Italy. He was mentioned in dispatches and rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1944 he married Mary Josephine Tully (died 2002), daughter of Luke Tully, of Carrigaline, co. Cork; they had a son, Paul, and two daughters, Clare and Elizabeth. 
Hart's interest in the rheumatic diseases (then little understood but often devastating in their effects) began in the 1930s, and one of his earliest articles, published in 1939, was a study of rheumatic fever in children. During the war he made a study of ankylosing spondylitis, or 'poker back disease', which he found to be surprisingly common in army recruits. 
On his return to the Westminster Hospital in 1946 as consultant physician in general medicine Hart was able to develop his interest in the rheumatic diseases, establishing the first specialist rheumatology clinic in a London teaching hospital. His subsequent contributions to the identification and treatment of rheumatic diseases and to the burgeoning discipline of rheumatology were manifold. He was among the earliest to argue coherently that ankylosing spondylitis and rheumatoid arthritis are two different diseases, and that a propensity to ankylosing spondylitis is inherited (a hypothesis later confirmed by David James and Derrick Brewerton, working in Hart's unit, who identified a link between the inherited tissue type HLA B27 and ankylosing spondylitis). He was also an early and forceful opponent of the treatment, then common, of ankylosing spondylitis by plaster casts, which he showed to be positively harmful. He directed research into the treatment as well as the classification of rheumatic diseases. He published a number of seminal articles on the clinical pharmacology of analgesics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, particularly with E. C. (Ted) Huskisson. As chairman of the Royal College of Physicians' committee on rheumatology in 1952 (he had been elected FRCP three years earlier) he was instrumental in the recognition of rheumatology as a separate medical specialism, and he was later closely involved in the founding of the Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, attached to the Charing Cross Hospital. He served for many years on the executive committee of the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council (later the Arthritis Research Campaign). 
Hart published some two hundred scientific papers, and wrote, edited, or contributed to some twenty medical textbooks. He also wrote for the general public, most notably 'Overcoming Arthritis' (1981) and a regular column, until 1998, for 'Arthritis Today', the Arthritis Research Campaign's quarterly magazine. Latterly he was interested in the history of rheumatology. A talented musician (reputed to be able to play fifteen different instruments to a high standard), and a lover of jazz and swing, he recorded his own 'Rheumatological Song Cycle' by means of synchronized tape recordings. A kindly doctor who treated his patients with respect, he was an outstanding teacher who kept in touch with an ever expanding network of former colleagues and students by means of 'little notes of encouragement and congratulation sent when a paper was published or a career advancement was made... [which] he kept sending... well into his nineties' (Sturrock, 1461). He retired from the Westminster Hospital at the statutory retirement age in 1974 but continued in private practice in Harley Street (and writing or reviewing for scientific journals) until shortly before his death, at his old hospital, the renamed Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, on 10 April 2004, of cancer of the pancreas. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93760


Norton, Peter John Hill-, Baron Hill-Norton (1915-2004), naval officer, was born Peter John Norton on 8 February 1915 in Germiston, South Africa, the only son of Martin John (Jack) Norton (died 1928), mining engineer and farmer, and his wife, Margery Birnie, 'nee' Hill (died 1940). In 1917 the family moved to England so that Martin Norton, a South African citizen, could join the Royal Flying Corps and fight for Britain in the First World War. After the war he tried farming in Wales without success, and in 1924 returned alone to South Africa, dying of dengue fever four years later without seeing his wife and son again. Widow and son had some very difficult years financially, but were enabled by the generosity of a great-aunt to fund the boy's entry in 1928 into the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, thus fulfilling an ambition of several years' standing and a family tradition of service to the crown. His career in the following years followed the pattern established for officers of high potential who excelled, as he did, in both academic work and sporting activities: midshipman in a cruiser and battleships with some 'destroyer time', sub-lieutenant's professional courses, charge of a battleship gunroom and the ship's youngest officers, divisional and sports officer in a cruiser, and specialization in gunnery at the start of the Second World War. Two matters of domestic note occurred: about 1931 he added Hill to his surname because an officer senior to him was not only named Norton but had the same initials and 'a rather racier lifestyle' with some misplaced bills in consequence (private information); and in 1936 he married Margaret Eileen Linstow ('b'. 1916), the daughter of Carl Adolph Linstow, from a distinguished Danish family. They had first met six years before on a beach in Belgium. Marriage for a naval officer at the early age of twenty-one was frowned on at that time, but theirs was a true and lifelong match; they complemented each other admirably. They had two children, Nicholas ('b'. 1939) and Carla Ann ('b'. 1943). 
During the Second World War, after some time on the instructional staff at the gunnery school, Hill-Norton was appointed to the anti-aircraft cruiser 'Cairo'. He did not think much of this ship or her capabilities, but she provided him with a seminal experience. During an early bombing raid on Plymouth, where the ship was lying secured to a buoy, Hill-Norton was blown off the forecastle by a near miss and found himself, after a brief airborne trajectory, swimming for his life still with a steel helmet on. An appointment followed to the cruiser 'Cumberland', which took part (as had the 'Cairo') in the arduous and dangerous convoys to north Russia. In 1943 he joined the gunnery division at the Admiralty, where his technical abilities were quickly recognized. Then came an important gunnery charge appointment, to HMS 'Howe', one of the latest battleships and a component of the British Pacific Fleet, which took part in all the later campaigns of the Second World War against Japan. 
Peace brought a suitably relaxed job, in the cruiser 'Nigeria', the flagship of the south Atlantic station. Here Hill-Norton performed both service and social duties with distinction, and it was no surprise when he was selected for early promotion to commander at the end of 1947. In this rank he returned to the Admiralty with the naval ordnance division. At that time relations between Britain and the United States in the field of technological development were strained because of the lack of trust resulting from espionage within the scientific establishments. Hill-Norton restored much of the relationship in his field of gun and missile technology by personal effort and conduct, and was able to redirect British development on lines closer to those of the USA. His next appointment could scarcely have been more challenging. He was executive officer of the new aircraft carrier 'Eagle', the largest, most complex, and most heavily manned ship in the Royal Navy to that date. He took up this appointment in 1951 and went into it with his by now well-known energy and attention to detail; it was said that he 'knew every rivet' and certainly every compartment in the ship. His interest in and knowledge of her company were equally comprehensive. Promoted captain at the end of this exacting but successful commission at the end of 1952, he later confessed to having been in need of some rest and relaxation. His next two years provided at least some of this in his posting as naval attache at Buenos Aires, Montevideo, and Asuncion. 
Hill-Norton had unusually reached nearly the middle of the captains' list without exercising sea command, the high point of many officers' careers and certainly an essential element in progress towards flag rank. In 1956 he was appointed to command HMS 'Decoy', a destroyer of the Daring class. These were complex, heavily armed ships that would surely have been classed as light cruisers a generation earlier. In the 'Decoy' Hill-Norton was soon put to the operational test, for in mid-1956 the Suez crisis erupted, and the subsequent operation Musketeer fully involved his ship. She responded to every call made upon her, firing, it was said, almost her full outfit of ammunition in support of the troops ashore. A further Whitehall appointment followed in the defence research policy staff: gruelling and detailed work that was scarcely the best preparation for the greatest ship-command challenge possible. This was the aircraft carrier 'Ark Royal', the only sister ship of the 'Eagle', which Hill-Norton commanded from 1959 to 1961. He probably enjoyed this job more than any other in his career. Its complexity, variety, and constant activity all appealed to him; he described it as 'very like war without the bullets' (Hill-Norton and Tyrie, tape 19). He made the ship, when at sea, a 24-hour-a-day undertaking; he was a pioneer of night flying operations when many experienced naval aviators looked askance at them. He recognized, however, that even his powers of endurance could not cope with endless charge on the bridge, and was consistent in turning over to the executive officer the duty of command during the afternoon, whether flying was taking place or not. 
Promoted rear-admiral in January 1962, Hill-Norton proceeded to another Admiralty appointment, this time as assistant chief of naval staff. In this post he consolidated his reputation as a blunt, straight-talking, and hard-hitting practitioner of Whitehall business. He was appointed CB in 1964. There followed an important operational command as flag officer second-in-command of the Far East Fleet from 1964 to 1966. He was the senior embarked officer of a powerful body of warships, naval aircraft, and Royal Marines during the most intensive part of the confrontation with Indonesia that attended the formation and ensured the survival of the independent states of Malaysia and Singapore, arguably the most successful (and largely unsung) achievement of British arms in the second half of the twentieth century. There followed several Whitehall appointments whose rapid succession was caused, in part, by unexpected changes in the senior officers' hierarchy through illness or resignation. The first, as deputy chief of defence staff (personnel and logistics), was probably relinquished without too much regret, but a subsequent short tour as second sea lord and chief of naval personnel gave little time for any projected reform. However, Hill-Norton, knighted KCB in 1967, moved on in that year to a task even more suited to his talents, that of vice chief of naval staff. In this hugely influential post at the hub of all naval business his impact was immense. His always abrupt, decisive, and sometimes abrasive style was well suited to the time, when the Royal Navy was recovering from the blow of the cancellation of a new generation of aircraft carriers and the planned constriction of its operations largely into the sea area of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). He complemented in turn two first sea lords of quite different character, Sir Varyl Begg and Sir Michael Le Fanu, and was critically instrumental in the evolution of the future navy and its concept of operations. 
In 1969 Hill-Norton became commander-in-chief of British forces (of all three services) in the Far East, the last officer to hold such a post. Though the confrontation with Indonesia was now over and Malaysia and Singapore's future better assured, there was much consolidation to be done in the field of security. Hill-Norton was instrumental in setting up the five power defence agreement that survived to the end of the century and beyond. A less congenial task was supervising the rundown of British forces in the area, numbering 80,000, but this was achieved with few problems thanks to careful planning and implementation. 
Hill-Norton's return to the United Kingdom in 1970 (when he was promoted GCB) was initially in the post of first sea lord and chief of naval staff, a position long predicted for him. He had, he subsequently said, set himself three major objectives (the maximum he believed to be realistically possible in a normal tour of duty). In the event he managed only two. The first was the abolition of the traditional rum ration. Along with most senior officers, and the more far-sighted senior ratings, he had long recognized that the daily issue to each sailor of an eighth of a pint of strong spirits seriously detracted from the efficiency of a highly technical fighting service, and his determination -- with the help of an unexpected piece of Treasury generosity that established the charitable Sailors' Fund in compensation -- saw the change through with very little fuss. The second was a so-called concordat between Hill-Norton and Sir John Grandy, chief of air staff, to minimize conflict between the naval and air staffs, endemic for several years previously; condign sanctions were threatened against transgressors. 
Hill-Norton's time as first sea lord was cut short through the untimely illness of his predecessor, Sir Michael Le Fanu, who was due for appointment as chief of defence staff but had contracted leukaemia, from which he subsequently died. This created a dilemma for the secretary of state for defence, Lord Carrington, who wished Hill-Norton to move straight into the post; the latter demurred, asking for time to prepare his own succession. In consequence the sitting chief of defence staff, Marshal of the Royal Air Force Lord Elworthy, agreed to an extension and Hill-Norton succeeded to the post in March 1971, the appointment being marked by his promotion to admiral of the fleet. His time as chief of defence staff was partly the consolidation of previous policy and partly planning for the future. He had not expected the position and, by his own admission, had much to learn about the other two services; he had not attended a tri-service college (a deficiency he tended to regard as an advantage), and had only limited operational experience with them. But he learned with care and, as is apparent from the numerous lectures and speeches he gave, fairness and thorough appreciation of the problems; although he always gave good measure to the threat from the Soviet navy, which did not, as he often said, recognize NATO boundaries. One of his preoccupations at this time was the British nuclear deterrent and in particular the attitude to it of his likely successor as chief of defence staff, General Sir Michael Carver. Carver, then chief of the general staff, was known to be sceptical of its utility, and Hill-Norton pressed him 'a deux' to make his views and intentions clear, but was unable to get an answer. In the event Carver, as chief of defence staff, loyally followed government policy, only opposing it openly after he had retired, when debates in the House of Lords between Hill-Norton and Lord Lewin on the one hand, and Carver on the other, caused much entertainment to civilian members. 
On his supersession as chief of defence staff Hill-Norton did not expect further employment in a service capacity, but he was offered the post of chairman of the military committee of NATO and took office in April 1974. It was a difficult time for the alliance. Member governments were either set in their ways or moving in a more passive direction, and were generally niggardly in their provision. The doctrine of flexible response, established in the late 1960s, was sound enough but its implementation was often short on substance. Hill-Norton brought to the task of stiffening NATO resolve and action his well-known qualities of bluntness and determination, but also an unexpected degree of diplomatic skill. In this he fully complemented the outstanding secretary-general, Josef Luns; the admiration of the two men was mutual. An early challenge, the aftermath of the Turkish invasion of northern Cyprus in the summer of 1974, when Greece and Turkey -- both members of NATO -- might easily have gone to war, was met by Hill-Norton's shuttle visits to the chiefs of defence of both countries. He modestly said years later that he was 'rather proud' of the peaceful result (private information). His expositions of NATO policy in the public arena were widespread and frequent. His private transactions in the headquarters showed a mixture of subtlety and forthrightness: examples included briefings, declaring the utmost personal confidentiality, to a German colleague in the knowledge that the details would get to Bonn within the hour, and a head-to-head with the newly arrived supreme allied commander, Europe, General Alexander Haig, that left the latter in no doubt about how NATO operated and who was in charge of its military establishment. Hill-Norton left NATO in 1977 in a considerably stronger state than it had been three years earlier. His achievement, which may well have been the most significant of his career, was recognized by his being created a life peer as Baron Hill-Norton in the new year's honours list of 1979. 
Hill-Norton remained active for the rest of his life in a variety of fields. His two books, 'No Soft Options' (1978) and 'Sea Power' (1982), dealt respectively with the future of NATO and the material elements of navies. He was the first president of the British Maritime League (1982-5), an organization that only partially succeeded in its purpose of promoting Britain's maritime interests. He also interested himself in the project for a radically new design of medium-sized warship ('the short fat ship'), and in the possibility of unidentified flying objects; in both he called for deeper investigation and examination of all available evidence, rather than out-and-out advocacy, though his position was often misunderstood. He was president of the Sea Cadets' Association (1977-84) and the Defence Manufacturers' Association (1980-84), a liveryman of the Shipwrights' Company, a freeman of the City of London, a governor of Reigate grammar school, and a director of several companies. 
Hill-Norton was throughout his life a man of uncompromising honesty and determination. This led him to outstanding achievements in the defence field, but also to a bluntness of manner and often arbitrary way of command that gained him a fearsome reputation in the navy and, sometimes, outside it. It was said that of his generation he was the rudest man in the service. Yet there were also many testimonials to his fairness, frequent acts of kindness, and sense of humour. In the last years of his life he cared unstintingly for his frail wife, a measure of an underlying humanity recognized by many. He died on 16 May 2004 at Knoll House Hotel, Studland Bay, Dorset, of heart failure. His ashes were scattered at sea off Plymouth, where he had narrowly escaped death more than sixty years earlier. He was survived by his wife and their two children. His son, Nicholas, was also a naval officer, reaching the rank of vice-admiral and being knighted KCB in 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 93763


Jones, Philip Stuart (1927-2004), television producer, was born on 7 December 1927 at Elmwood, Cirencester Road, Charlton Kings, Cheltenham, the son of Harold Hartley Jones, teacher, and his wife, Mary Eva, 'nee' Long. He was educated at Cheltenham grammar school, where his father was head of languages, and did his national service in the RAF. In 1948 he joined Radio Luxembourg, which beamed commercial pop music across Europe, and during his seven years at the station rose from station assistant to programme controller. On 20 June 1953 he married Florence Elizabeth Green, a 19-year-old secretary at Radio Luxembourg, and daughter of George William Green, antiques dealer; they had two sons, one of whom predeceased him. In 1955 Jones was hired as a light-entertainment producer by the new ITV company Granada Television as it prepared to broadcast weekday programmes to British commercial television's third region, the north-west. Three years later, with experience as a producer and director, he moved to the new north-east company, Tyne Tees, which was launched in January 1959. 
On his arrival his brief was to start an entertaining midday programme aimed at a local audience, Tyne Tees Television's 'One O'Clock Show'. Jones also produced programmes featuring two popular comedians, 'The Bobby Thompson Show' (1959) and 'The Jimmy James Show' (1960), as well as the talent series 'At the Golden Disc' (1959), presented by Tony Martell and Eric Nicholson. In 1959 he was voted producer of the year by readers of the company's listings magazine, 'The Viewer'. 
In 1961 Jones was headhunted by ABC-TV which broadcast to the north and midlands at weekends. His remit was to broaden the company's appeal. He immediately launched the iconic 1960s television pop show, 'Thank Your Lucky Stars' (1961-6), which included a panel of young people giving their verdicts on the latest record releases, most notably Janice Nicholls, an office clerk from the Black Country whose heavily accented 'Oi'll give it foive' became a national catchprase. The Beatles and the Rolling Stones both made their first British national television appearances on the programme, in 1963. As ABC's head of light entertainment from 1965, Jones demonstrated his skill for spotting and nurturing talent. He made the comedians Mike and Bernie Winters hosts of the variety shows 'Big Night Out' (1963) and 'Blackpool Night Out' (1964-5), and later gave them their own programme, 'Mike and Bernie's Show' (1966-72). For Tyne Tees he also directed the Dora Bryan sitcom, 'Happily Ever After' (1961, 1964). 
Jones found greater opportunities following ITV's 1968 franchise reshuffle, which saw the end of ABC and the creation of Thames Television as London's weekday franchise holder and the largest of the ITV companies. As head of light entertainment at Thames, Jones continued some of his established series, including the popular sitcom 'Never Mind the Quality, Feel the Width' (1967-71) and 'Life with Cooper' (1966-9), featuring the fez-wearing comedian Tommy Cooper, who switched to Thames and later fronted 'The Tommy Cooper Hour' (1973-5), 'Cooper' (1975), 'Cooper -- Just Like That' (1978), and 'Cooper's Half Hour' (1980). Another long-running relationship established by Jones was with the comedian Benny Hill, whom he lured away from the BBC for 'The Benny Hill Show' (1969-89), which, with its saucy-postcard humour, became Thames Television's biggest export to foreign markets. Among others he persuaded to join Thames from the BBC were the comedy duo Eric Morecambe and Ernie Wise and the impersonator Mike Yarwood, although 'The Morecambe and Wise Show' (1980-83) and 'Mike Yarwood in Persons' (1982-7) were never as successful as their earlier programmes. At the same time, Jones launched the entertainer Michael Barrymore on a solo career with the series 'Barrymore' (1983). He also revived two former BBC series, 'This Is Your Life' (from 1969), presented by Eamonn Andrews and then Michael Aspel, and the panel game 'What's My Line?' (1984-90), again hosted by Andrews, followed by Angela Rippon. 
As an executive producer at Thames Television, Jones was also responsible for many of ITV's favourite sitcoms which dominated popular viewing in the 1970s and 1980s. These included 'Father, Dear Father' (1968-73, 1978-9), 'For the Love of Ada' (1970-71), 'Bless This House' (1971-6), 'Love Thy Neighbour' (1972-6), 'Man About the House' (1973-6), 'Shelley' (1979-89), and 'Fresh Fields' (1984-6). Although some critics derided these populist programmes, Jones showed his innovativeness when he revived the television career of disc-jockey Kenny Everett whose eponymous 'Video Show' ran between 1978 and 1980. He was himself dismissive of what he considered snobbish criticisms of light entertainment. Success was measured in his programmes' ratings and appeal to a broad range of viewers, and in an ability -- due largely to his deserved reputation as likeable and trustworthy -- to attract and retain the best performers. He was appointed OBE in 1977. After retiring from Thames in 1988, he was executive producer of the BBC sitcom 'As Time Goes By' (1992-2002), made by an independent company. He died of cancer of the brain at his home, 26 Trowlock Avenue, Teddington, Middlesex, on 7 May 2004, and was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 93766


Lee, Anna (1913-2004), actress, was born Joan Boniface Winnifrith at The Rectory, Ightham, Malling, Kent, on 2 January 1913, the daughter of Bertram Thomas Winnifrith, rector of St Peter's Church, Ightham, and his wife, Edith Maude, 'nee' Blaker. Her father ran a small local school at which she was the only girl. She was one of five children; one brother was Sir John Winnifrith (1908-1993), director of the National Trust. From an early age she enjoyed 'showing off', as she later said, and fortuitously her godmother was Dame Sybil Thorndike. Some sources also suggest that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle was a godfather, but as she was later prone to embroider youthful experiences (once claiming to have run away to join a circus) caution is necessary in accepting such information. Certainly she studied at the Central School of Speech and Drama under the renowned Elsie Fogarty, and she toured with the London Repertory Theatre in productions of 'The Constant Nymph' and 'Jane Eyre', now using the professional name of Anna Lee, the constituents of which she later claimed to have derived (for reasons unspecified) from Anna Karenina and Robert E. Lee. 
While still at the Central School of Speech and Drama, Anna Lee obtained work as a film extra in 'quota quickies', low-budget productions aimed at satisfying legislation that demanded exhibition of a certain percentage of British-made films, and this was later said to be the reason why she was not invited back to further terms at the school. In any event, she quickly found her way into British films, and by the end of the 1930s she had appeared in seventeen, many of them in leading roles. With her delicate blonde prettiness she was a natural for English-rose types, but she also brought commendable spirit to these roles. Her earliest features -- 'His Lordship' (1932), 'Chelsea Life' (1933), and 'Mannequin' (1933) -- probably no longer exist. In 1934, however, she starred with Jack Hulbert in a spoof outpost-of-empire adventure, 'The Camels Are Coming', and, though the film was tiresomely facetious for much of its length, Lee evinced the lively freshness that was to be her hallmark. An associate producer on the film was Robert Edward Stevenson, whom she married on 6 December 1934 and who directed her in five films later in the decade. 
Anna Lee played second string to Jessie Matthews in 'First a Girl' (1935), showing some real flair for romantic comedy. She was a charming heroine in 'O.H.M.S.' (1937), for the American director Raoul Walsh, winning the love of John Mills in an entertaining flag-waver, and shone in Walter Forde's version of Edgar Wallace's thriller 'The Four Just Men' (1939), but unquestionably her most attractive work was in the films she did for Stevenson. She coped gamely with the range of genres typical of his output: in the science-fiction piece 'The Man Who Changed His Mind' (1936) she registered an authority and narrative importance more usually the prerogative of men in such circumstances; she was a lively, resourceful heroine (unusually lower-class, and even more unusually doing a stretch in gaol) in the largely airborne thriller 'Non-Stop New York' (1937); and she did what she could with the conventional female lead in 'King Solomon's Mines' (1937). Her last two films for Stevenson were her best. In 'Young Man's Fancy' (1939) she was shot out of a cannon onto the lap of a mother-ridden young aristocrat -- and into the middle of a wittily abrasive account of the British class system. Lee's Irish accent wavered but not the zest with which she tackled the role. In her last British film for nearly twenty years, 'Return to Yesterday' (1940), she played the ingenue in a seaside repertory company who falls in love with a returned Hollywood idol, imbuing her life lessons with affecting poignancy. 
Stevenson was a pacifist and in 1939 he and Lee left for America, where both proved to be in demand. Their marriage ended in 1944 and in the following year she married a pilot, George Stafford. She had substantial roles in 'Seven Sinners' (1940) with John Wayne and Marlene Dietrich, both of whom became personal friends; in the romantic comedy 'My Life with Caroline' (1941), opposite Ronald Colman; and most memorably as Bronwyn in John Ford's 'How Green Was My Valley' (1941). Ford used her in seven more films, including 'Fort Apache' (1948), as graceful mentor to Shirley Temple, her one further British film, 'Gideon's Day' (1958), in which she provides domestic relief for her harassed, police-inspector husband, Jack Hawkins, and 'Horse Soldiers' (1959), in which she has a heart-stopping moment as the widowed mother trying to restrain her remaining son from going off to fight in the American Civil War. Perhaps, though, her best Hollywood leading role was in 'Bedlam' (1946) as the fiery actress who ends up in the nightmare of the eponymous asylum. 
Lee's second marriage was dissolved in 1964 and in 1970 she married the novelist and poet Robert Nathan (1894-1985). In her last decades she won her biggest following as the matriarch Lila Quartermaine in the long-running soap 'General Hospital', playing the role in a wheelchair after she was injured in a serious car accident. Largely in response to her popularity in this she was honoured in 1995 by having her star installed on Hollywood's Walk of Fame. She always retained her love of England, was famous for bringing a 'hunk of England to California' (Morley, 4), and in 1982 was appointed MBE for her work in support of the National Trust. She died in Los Angeles on 14 May 2004 and was survived by four of her five children, including the actress Venetia Stevenson ('b'. 1938) and the actor Jeffrey Byron ('b'. 1955). 


@@@@@


doc= 93769


MacDonald, (Robert) David (1929-2004), translator, director, and playwright, was born on 27 August 1929 in Elgin, Moray. His mother was a doctor and his father an executive in the family tobacco business (MacDonald's of Glasgow, established in 1840). He grew up in rural Scotland and was educated at Wellington School, Somerset. After national service in Trieste with the intelligence corps he went to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he studied modern history. His love of music and ability as a pianist then took him to the Royal College of Music and the Munich Conservatory, where he studied conducting. By young adulthood he spoke at least eight languages fluently -- an autodidact in this respect, the imprecision was of his own making, and he dismissed Dutch, for example, as 'an after-dinner attainment'. He was soon in demand as an interpreter and translator, and in this latter capacity he worked in New York for UNESCO, translating reports about the wheat yield in Argentina. There he learned the importance of working only from the original text and of being wary of too literate an approach to translation; he cited an occasion when Russian translators fed the sentence 'The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak' into a computer and had it come out as 'The whisky is good but the meat has gone off' ('Daily Telegraph', 21 May 2004). 
While with UNESCO MacDonald met the radical German theatre director Erwin Piscator, and his life took a significant turn as a result. He started to work in the theatre, directing Benjamin Britten's 'Noye's Fludde' at the Berlin festival and later working as an assistant director at both Glyndebourne and Covent Garden, before being appointed artistic director of Her Majesty's Theatre, Carlisle, in 1960. His European connections bore fruit when he translated Piscator's 1962 stage version of 'War and Peace', which ran on Broadway for two years, was televised by Granada, and received an Emmy award when broadcast in America. The play became a staple diet of repertory theatres throughout Europe. 
Piscator, newly appointed as director of the Volksbuhne in Berlin, directed a play by the documentary dramatist Rolf Hochhuth, 'Der Stellvertreter', about the alleged indifference of Pope Pius XII to the holocaust; MacDonald translated the play as 'The Representative' and it was produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company at the Aldwych Theatre in 1963. He also translated the next Piscator-Hochhuth collaboration, the equally controversial play 'Soldaten' ('Soldiers') at the behest of Kenneth Tynan, then literary manager of the National Theatre. In the play Winston Churchill was tendentiously implicated in the aeroplane crash that killed the wartime Polish leader General Sikorski. An incensed National Theatre board vetoed the play; Tynan took it to the producer Michael White, who presented it in the West End in 1969. 
Everything in MacDonald's career came into focus when he joined Giles Havergal (whom he had employed as an assistant stage manager at Carlisle in 1961) and the designer Philip Prowse as an artistic director of the Glasgow Citizens' Theatre in 1971. Under this triumvirate the Citizens', founded by the Scottish playwright James Bridie in 1943, became arguably Britain's foremost repertory theatre, with an astonishing programme of European and contemporary plays, most of them either translated or written by MacDonald. As well as rare plays from the Jacobean repertoire, local audiences in the Gorbals could sample MacDonald's witty and idiomatic versions of plays by Goethe, Schiller, Lermontov, Goldoni, Sartre, Karl Kraus, de Musset, de Sade, and Brecht, unintimidated by literary reputation or 'standards of excellence'. The theatre was also responsible for launching the careers of such actors as Gary Oldman, Tim Roth, Rupert Everett, Ciaran Hinds, Pierce Brosnan, Sian Thomas, and Paola Dionisotti. MacDonald's wide cultural interests overlapped tellingly with those of Philip Prowse, Havergal operating brilliantly as the guiding light, public face, politician, and impresario of the regime. Crucially, the theatre kept its seat prices low, believing that public moneys were best spent on audiences, not scenic extravagance. Paradoxically, the brilliance of Prowse's designs deceived critics into thinking the opposite was the case. Ingenuity, practicality, and good housekeeping -- the theatre was never in debt -- underpinned the policy and ensured the creative survival and blossoming of the directors. 
Although his work was primarily dramaturgical -- he produced more than sixty translations of plays and operas from ten languages -- MacDonald directed some fifty productions and often trod the boards in Glasgow. He played the piano in Prowse's sumptuous rediscovery of Noel Coward's bisexual extravaganza 'Semi-Monde' in 1977 and in a production of 'Hamlet' where he was made up to resemble the Abbe Liszt, some of whose more fiendishly difficult works he casually dispensed during the evening (although he refused to play on the night that the pianist Sviatoslav Richter visited the theatre, more out of respect than trepidation). His work was much admired by Glenda Jackson, who, before she retired from the stage to go into politics, appeared in MacDonald's exceptional translations of Racine's 'Phedre' and Brecht's 'Mother Courage'. 
Many of MacDonald's plays, the first being 'Dracula' (1972), were written specifically for the company. Two of them, both landmark Prowse productions, were especially notable. 'Chinchilla' (1977) found analogies for the Citizens' aesthetic in a half-disguised study of personalities at the Ballets Russes at the moment when Diaghilev switched loyalties from Nijinsky to Massine. 'A Waste of Time' (1980), a brilliant distillation, in just four hours, of Proust's 'A la recherche du temps perdu', merits comparison with Harold Pinter's very fine, but different, screenplay. In 'Summit Conference' (1978) MacDonald contrived a comedy of bad manners between Eva Braun and Clara Petacci, mistresses of Hitler and Mussolini (the roles were played in London by Glenda Jackson and Georgina Hale). 'Webster' (1983) was a remarkable sequel to 'Chinchilla', another piece about the ensemble ethic in the guise of a fictional biography of the Jacobean dramatist John Webster. Halfway through the writing MacDonald realized that the title role was far too long for the actor to learn in a short rehearsal period, so he made him talk rapidly and at length in the first act and remain totally silent in the second after being shot in the jaw. 
MacDonald once described his writing style as 'gutter mandarin' ('The Guardian', 24 May 2004). One critic went further: 'like Shaw pulled through a hedge backwards and colliding with Ivy Compton-Burnett on the other side' ('Daily Telegraph', 21 May 2004). His dialogue, like his conversational style, was brilliant, erudite, and aphoristic. Among his favourite playwrights was the eighteenth-century Venetian Carlo Goldoni whom he praised as 'the virtuoso of the superficial. Everything is there in either action or word. This is a great skill shared by a few people, of whom Raymond Chandler would be another' ('The Guardian', 24 May 2004). MacDonald also loved Chekhov and, like Michael Frayn, translated him directly from the Russian. 'All Chekhov's plays', he said, 'seem to me to be about out-of-work actors. Certainly, all of his characters behave like out-of-work actors' (ibid.). 
MacDonald (known as David rather than Robert) was a tall, handsome man, with a forbidding air but an attractive quality of wearing his knowledge lightly. One actor said that working with him was 'like attending a very informal tutorial, terribly funny and interesting' ('The Times', 24 May 2004). MacDonald's last production as a director at the Citizens' was Andrea Hart's new adaptation of Henry Green's novel 'Nothing', and his last written work -- his fourteenth for the company -- was a Christmas pantomime, 'Snow White' (2003). He died of a heart attack at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, on 19 May 2004 and was survived by his companion of many years, the former dancer and antiques dealer Hon Yeung Man (known as Henry Mann). 


@@@@@


doc= 93772


Murray, Lionel, Baron Murray of Epping Forest (1922-2004), trade unionist, was born on 2 August 1922 in Hadley (possibly at 3 Gladstone Street), Shropshire, of unknown parentage. On his marriage certificate Murray identified his father as Peter Allan Murray, a local farm labourer; however, on his application to New College, Oxford (1944), he gave his father's name as Ernest J. Potter and his occupation as schoolmaster. He knew his mother -- albeit he was always careful to deflect any reference to her except to closest friends. She died when he was eight years old. 
From infancy Murray was fostered and brought up by a local district nurse, a friend of his mother, who had known him from birth and who became his guardian. In later years he would describe her -- again only to close friends -- as 'auntie', though she was not related. He had distant cousins who were farm workers in the Hadley area and whom he occasionally visited as a child but as he grew older the contact was not maintained. It was 'auntie' who tutored Murray from an early age, instilled in him a love of literature and poetry, and steered him at the age of eleven into the grammar school in Wellington, Shropshire. There he prospered under the sympathetic influence of a headmaster, H. Cloke, who guided him to his first university place -- at Queen Mary College, London -- and with whom he maintained a long friendship. Murray's was, therefore, a hard childhood with little natural warmth -- not unlike that of such earlier Labour leaders as Keir Hardie, Ernest Bevin, and Ramsay MacDonald. They, similarly, came from illegitimate births and extremely poor backgrounds and they, like Murray, carried with them a certain inner loneliness diligently protected behind the carapace of privacy. In Murray's case it was reflected in a certain hesitancy and even lack of self-confidence. His public persona was frequently presented with some inner pain. 
There were two critical turning points in Murray's life after Wellington grammar school and his brief time at Queen Mary College, where, between October 1941 and June 1942, he studied English. The first of these was his experience of war, through which, as with so many of his generation, he grew quickly to manhood. Murray served with a regiment of his choice, the King's Shropshire light infantry, and after very tough training in the Scottish highlands he was landed on the Normandy beaches on D-day (6 June 1944). He survived the initial carnage but six days later he came under severe fire and was badly wounded. Later he described how he woke up in a London hospital trying to remember what had happened. Some years later a local bank manager told one of Murray's Trades Union Congress (TUC) colleagues how Lieutenant Murray had pulled him from a blazing tank and saved his life -- shortly before Murray himself was wounded. Back in England he slowly recovered from the wounds before being invalided out of the army, whereupon he decided not to return to London University but rather to try his hand at teaching. This was not a success and he returned to the midlands, taking a job as a storekeeper in a Wolverhampton engineering firm. There he joined a trade union, became actively involved on the shop floor, joined the Communist Party, and sold the party's daily newspaper, the 'Daily Worker', on Wolverhampton street corners. His spell as a communist was only brief and he then joined the local Labour Party. While attending hospital for residual problems with his wounds he met a nurse, Heather, the daughter of William Almond Woolf, duty clerk. This was the second important turning point in Murray's early life. The couple married on 22 September 1945. His marriage was a transforming influence in every respect and gave Murray, for the first time, a sense of emotional security within a family of his own. The couple had two sons and two daughters, and Heather remained the most powerful influence in his life. 
Murray, who was always a voracious reader, decided to take up the ex-serviceman's opportunity to study at Oxford University and was admitted to New College to read philosophy, politics, and economics. His talent was quickly recognized, notably by a former fellow of the college, Richard Crossman, who was about to become Labour MP for Coventry East in the 1945 general election, and who during the 1930s had tutored another brilliant young working-class student, George Woodcock, before Woodcock went on to join the TUC. Murray's name was mentioned to Woodcock by Crossman and when, in 1947, a job fell vacant in the TUC's economic department, Murray -- armed with a good degree and Crossman's nod -- applied and was appointed to the TUC staff by Woodcock, then head of its economic department. Thereafter Murray remained a protege of Woodcock, who was another powerful influence on his career. In joining the TUC at that time Murray was fortunate not only to have Woodcock's guidance but to be schooled during the most demanding period of the post-war social revolution, during which the Attlee government nationalized key sectors of British industry and introduced the National Health Service, along with widespread social welfare and industrial reform measures. It was also a period of considerable industrial tension, chiefly on account of a policy of wage restraint necessitated by Britain's precarious balance of payments. All this imposed enormous strain on relations between government, trade unions, and employers and led to frequent personal and ideological divisions within the trade union movement. Murray found himself in the midst of these as the TUC struggled to contain union rivalries while co-operating with the Attlee government. 
In 1954 Murray became head of the TUC's economic department. He remained in this role for fifteen years, during which time there was a marked growth in the strength and influence of the trade unions and the TUC as an institution. Murray's early years as head of the economic department saw the creation of the National Economic Development Council (NEDC), which brought together the TUC (including Murray), government ministers, and employers to discuss national economic policy. In 1969 Murray became deputy general secretary of the TUC on the appointment of Vic Feather to succeed Woodcock as general secretary and in September 1973 he was elected unopposed as Feather's successor. 
Murray took charge of the TUC at the beginning of a period of economic and industrial crisis that eventually led to the fall of Edward Heath's Conservative government (in February 1974) and would come to be seen as an important watershed in relations between government and the trade unions. Heath had plans to reform industrial relations in the face of massive trade union opposition and this put Murray and the TUC under constant pressure to adopt militant counter measures. Relations deteriorated with the Middle East oil crisis that led to a quadrupling of oil prices and precipitated the mineworkers' wage dispute in late 1973. Negotiations took place directly between Heath's government and the mineworkers' leaders, with the TUC on the fringe. But Murray was constantly involved, even if at arm's length. He handled that situation with a maturity that surprised his friends as well as his critics -- most notably at a meeting of the NEDC in January 1974 when the miners' crisis was at its peak. Murray sought to break the deadlock by offering a TUC pledge that if the government accepted the miners' pay claim as 'a special and exceptional case' he would use TUC influence to curb other unions from immediately demanding similar rises. It was a brave and remarkable -- if tentative -- offer that the Heath government rejected. None the less it produced widespread regard for Murray's stature as TUC leader. 
Murray's later years as general secretary can be divided into two very different phases. During the first, between February 1974 and May 1979, he sought to bring the trade unions into a new relationship with the Labour governments of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan. The TUC and its affiliated unions played a vital role in sustaining a government with a very slender and disappearing parliamentary majority. In this task Murray was fortunate to have the support of two exceptional union leaders, Jack Jones of the Transport and General Workers' Union and Hugh Scanlon of the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers. Together they formed the essential partnership that helped introduce Labour's 'social contract' -- a framework for relations between unions and the government -- then held it together with surprising success for most of the period. This was also a time of immense personal pressure and in 1976, as the social contract began to operate, Murray suffered a mild heart attack. However, he quickly returned to play a vital role in bringing trade union leaders into regular contact with Labour ministers to debate not just wages policy but also wider questions of social and economic affairs. Murray saw this as a development in modern trade unionism, albeit one that often led to serious tensions between union leaders and members in a climate of wage restraint. For him it was an important opportunity to bring the TUC into dialogue and partnership with government, which, he believed, held out the promise of a more mature democratic relationship. This was dramatically changed by the worsening industrial relations of the 'winter of discontent' (1978-9) in which Murray sought to act as a moderator, and then in May 1979 by the election of Margaret Thatcher as Conservative prime minister. 
The change of government marked the second significant phase of Murray's term as TUC general secretary. In later years he confessed that he had underestimated Thatcher's determination to transform the entire canvas of government-trade union relations. Along with other senior union leaders he believed Thatcher would ultimately respond to reasoned argument and compromise. As he admitted with profound candour, and regret: 'I seriously underestimated that lady... I was simply astonished that Thatcher declined to change direction despite industrial conflict and ever more appalling economic conditions' ('The Independent', 22 May 2004). 
The critical years were from 1980 to 1984 when the Thatcher government began the process of reforming industrial relations with legislation to limit the powers and activities of trade unions, notably by curbing strike action and secondary picketing. The 'Employment Acts' of 1980 and 1982 set the scene for the conflict, and in May 1980 the TUC agreed to organize a 'day of action' when all affiliated unions called for a one-day national strike in protest against the government's policies. Murray wished to avoid such a demonstration but had little option. There followed eighteen months of disputes in which the TUC was directly involved in seeking to avoid wider confrontation. Murray personally helped to resolve a major rail dispute in July 1982, though the settlement made the unions increasingly cautious of involving the TUC in future disputes. At the same time he was engaged in broadening representation on the TUC general council by providing for a wider and more democratic platform to include smaller white-collar unions, which were now emerging with different agendas and ambitions from the older industrial manual unions. It was Murray's hope that this strategy would help find a way towards a compromise between Margaret Thatcher and the unions, in which the unions accepted the government, and were prepared to work with it in return for the government's acceptance of the unions' role in, and contribution to, economic and industrial life. He described his approach as 'new realism' and as one that was essential following the Conservatives' second and overwhelming general election victory of June 1983. In September he put his formula to the TUC conference and fought with great courage to win his case in the face of severe opposition, especially from unions already feeling the backlash of government legislation. Ultimately he was unsuccessful, though the outcome might have been different but for two unexpected industrial disputes -- the printworkers' confrontation with Eddy Shah and the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) affair at Cheltenham. Shah, a provincial newspaper proprietor from the north-west, employed the government's new legislation against the powerful print union, the National Graphical Association (NGA), on grounds of unlawful picketing at his Warrington print works. The union called for TUC support, which threw Murray into a dilemma. The general council voted to support the NGA, but only within the law. A TUC committee on employment policy then voted to back a one-day print strike in defiance of the law. Murray summoned a special meeting of the TUC leaders, who reversed that strike decision -- for which he won a 29-21 vote of confidence from the full general council. Yet his authority was badly undermined when the prime minister, of all people, publicly praised Murray's courage. It was a bouquet that brought him close to resignation at Christmas 1983. The final blow came in February 1984 when Thatcher announced that trade unionism would be banned for the 7000 civil servants who worked at GCHQ in Cheltenham. Murray protested to Downing Street, but his plea was dismissed by the prime minister despite a powerful attempt by the cabinet secretary to seek a compromise. It was a severe blow for Murray, who, still three and a half years away from scheduled retirement, announced his resignation on 1 May 1984. His struggle to find a 'modus operandi' between Thatcherism and trade unionism lay in ruins -- and, arguably, trade union effectiveness never regained its former status. Murray's retirement came two months after the start of the bitter year-long miners' strike, which the TUC could neither avert nor affect as a mediator. In fact the leader of the National Union of Mineworkers, Arthur Scargill, contemptuously refused to give Murray his private telephone number. He bade farewell to the TUC at the congress in September 1984, when he was succeeded as general secretary by Norman Willis. 
In 1985 Murray was made a Labour life peer. Although he spoke occasionally he rarely played a prominent role in the House of Lords, where he was a strong advocate of the chamber's reform. In retirement he preferred to maintain his privacy, though both he and his wife continued to dedicate much of their time to a range of church and charitable affairs. After his brief spell in the Communist Party he was an active Methodist and lay preacher. He had been appointed OBE in 1966, was elected an honorary fellow of New College, Oxford, in 1975, and was sworn of the privy council in the following year. He was a governor of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research and the London School of Economics, a member of the Social Science Research Council, and a visiting fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, and served several terms as a trustee of the Anglo-German Foundation for the Study of Industrial Society. He was also involved in numerous international trade union bodies. He died on 20 May 2004 at Whipps Cross University Hospital, Leytonstone, from pneumonia and heart disease. He was survived by his wife and their four children. 


