@@@@@


doc= 93776


Rosenthal, Jack Morris (1931-2004), television dramatist, was born on 8 September 1931 at 27 Kendall Road, Crumpsall, Manchester, the younger son of Samuel Rosenthal (died 1966), a waterproof garment worker of Russian-Jewish origin, and his wife, Leah (Lakey), 'nee' Miller, then a machinist, later a dressmaker. His education blazed the episodic trail of much of his subsequent writing for television, starting with the bluntly named Jew School in Derby Street until, some months after the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, he and his brother were evacuated to Blackpool. They were billeted on a singularly chilly and repressive household. Within a year their mother fetched them back to Manchester, whereupon their home was bombed. His father stayed at his job, living in digs during the week, while the rest of the family moved to Colne in north-east Lancashire. There Rosenthal won a scholarship to Colne grammar school. He enrolled briefly at University College, Leicester, before settling on Sheffield University, where in 1953 he graduated in English and modern languages. This was followed by two years' national service in the navy as a Russian coder. 
Rosenthal had made a start as a junior copywriter in an advertising agency when Granada, the London-based cinema chain which had been awarded the weekday commercial television contract for the north of England, set up a temporary office in Manchester. Rosenthal inquired about a job and was offered the opportunity to become the company's first graduate trainee. As Granada TV was not due to go on the air until the following year, 1956, and its studios were only then being built, he was at first given boring, even menial, jobs in Granada picture houses around London. When at last he was recalled to Manchester he found that he was now but one of scores of eager young aspirants. He was made a researcher, along with the future television eminences Jeremy Isaacs and David Plowright. Once the station became operational their role was enlarged to take in the provision of continuity announcements, trailers, and commentary for the outside broadcasts which were a feature of commercial television in its early days. 
Not until 1960 did Rosenthal get the chance to write television drama and comedy. Another of the young lions, Tony Warren, had come up with a proposal for a serial about ordinary lives in an ordinary quarter of their own city, or one very like it. It was given a trial run of six weeks, but was soon extended to become British television's first long-lasting soap opera, 'Coronation Street' (which was still being broadcast at the time of Rosenthal's death). Warren had made it clear that should this come about he wasn't prepared to write on and on. Other hands would have to take over. Rosenthal was one of those chosen, and went on to furnish 161 episodes, if increasingly tempted to tease the everyday realism that was expected. In 1964 he conspired with a fellow writer, Harry Driver, to insinuate a version of the classic western 'High Noon' (starring Gary Cooper) into the story line. The role of the embattled sheriff desperately seeking allies as his vengeful enemies approached was allotted to the character Len Fairclough, once the bad lad of the community, now the only one to challenge a trio of young hoodlums terrorizing it. The pastiche was declared when the episode immediately before the showdown ended with a shot of the three villains framed by the hero's legs, while the usual title music was replaced by that of the ballad 'Do not forsake me' from the film score. In later, more regimented, years this would have been unthinkable. 
Having wisely remained at Granada on a freelance contract rather than a staff appointment, Rosenthal was already chipping in episodes to various BBC and rival ITV series devised by other writers. He was not able to originate much himself until he was invited to contribute to a Granada anthology of single plays on the theme of 'management', broadcast in 1968. His dwelt on the misadventures of a municipal refuse-collecting crew, so droll that it straightway spawned a series, 'The Dustbinmen', which ran to nineteen episodes with Rosenthal also acting as producer. This dual role was confirmed with 'The Lovers' (1970-71), following the tender, if not wholly innocent, manoeuvrings of a teenage couple as, under the shadow of watchful Mum lying in wait with sardine sandwiches, they strove to be alone. 
Rosenthal's own love-life had hardly been thriving. His marriage on 23 February 1964 to (Catherine) Maxine Ward, a 23-year-old fashion model and daughter of William Ward of Blackpool, lasted only two years, and never figured in his 'Who's Who' entry. Now, at the Stables Theatre in Manchester, which in some ways was an annexe to Granada TV, he met and fell for the gifted young actress Maureen Diane Lipman ('b'. 1946), daughter of Maurice Julius Lipman, gentleman's outfitter of Kingston upon Hull, and his wife, Zelma. 'It was like coming home', Rosenthal said (personal knowledge). They moved to London to work together, were married on 18 February 1973 at the West London Synagogue, and settled in Hampstead, while remaining northerners at heart -- or at least, in his case, a Manchester United supporter. They had a son, Adam, and a daughter, Amy. 
Over the next twenty-five years Rosenthal turned out an astonishing volume of work, with forays into the theatre and cinema as well as television. A movie version of 'The Lovers' appeared in 1973. A comedy of even younger love, 'P'Tang, Yang, Kipperbang' (1982), was in response to a scheme devised by Channel 4 television, due to open later that year, whereby films would be commissioned for cinema release first, then transmission over the air. 'The Devil's Lieutenant', written to the same brief but as a co-production with German television, was a rarity from Rosenthal, a sombre period murder drama. Hollywood beckoned in the shape of an invitation from the American star Barbra Streisand to write with her, and for her, the quirky Jewish comedy 'Yentl' (1983). The film won a New York critics' golden globe award, and might have been expected to establish him as a major Hollywood screenwriter. Though he went on to script, or contribute to, a dozen more big-screen projects, some of which were actually made, this transmogrification never quite came to pass. 
On the stage Rosenthal's greatest success was with 'Bar Mitzvah Boy' at Her Majesty's Theatre, in 1978, a musical version of what had started out as a television piece two years earlier. Drawing on his embarrassed but ultimately consoling memories of the rite of passage awaiting every Jewish boy, it was one of many semi-autobiographical works. 'The Evacuees' (BBC, 1975) wrung its precarious comedy from his grisly wartime year in Blackpool. A generation on, 'Eskimo Day' (1996) charted the mixed feelings of parents trying to steer their young through the hoops of university acceptance. The little comic masterpiece 'Ready When You Are, Mr McGill' featured a twitchy television director shooting a cut-price film drama, just as Rosenthal would have overseen many times. Mr McGill was an elderly extra given one line to speak, and muffing it again and again. That had been in 1976, but in 2003 the play was given the rare compliment (for television) of a fresh production, which rather poignantly was also one of its author's final credits, along with an adaptation of Kingsley Amis's 'Lucky Jim'. 
Although Rosenthal disliked long-running series, which for the writer, he said, meant running on the spot, he must have derived some security from those spun off from his work, especially if the spinning were delegated to others. The annals of a London fire station, 'London's Burning', were still cropping up in the schedules fifteen years after his 1986 play of the same name. 'The Chain' (1984), about the ordeals of moving house, led to the 1994 series 'Moving Story'. He and his family had themselves moved twice and were now in Muswell Hill, which lent a certain piquancy to a BBC commission about this time. The corporation wanted a play to mark the fiftieth anniversary of its launch of the world's first television service in 1936, and the original premises were still there in Alexandra Palace, just up the hill. 'The Fools on the Hill' was a rare disappointment. The sheer audacity of the pioneers, tackling Shakespeare and grand opera in tiny cramped studios, was lost in their squabbles. Otherwise Rosenthal's output remained as vigorous as ever, despite the first intimations of cancer. Ever inventive, never failing to find rich comedy in every walk of life, he was justly dubbed television's Charles Dickens -- or, in the comparison Maureen Lipman preferred, its Jane Austen in his capacity to make ordinary people important. 
Rosenthal's marriage to Maureen Lipman was both loving and practical. Sensibly she appeared only two or three times in his plays, but inspired and encouraged him at all times. Working at home, he was happy to take over the cooking and housework when she was busy rehearsing or filming. Companionably both were made CBE, he in 1994, she five years later. He died in the North London Hospice, 47 Woodside Avenue, Finchley, on 29 May 2004, of multiple myeloma, and was buried in Hoop Lane cemetery, Golders Green, London. He was survived by his wife, Maureen, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93778


Shulman, Milton (1913-2004), theatre critic and writer, was born on 30 August 1913 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, the son of Samuel Shulman (died 1919), shopkeeper, and his wife, Ethel. His parents were both Orthodox Jewish emigres from the Ukraine who moved to Canada several years before their son's birth. He was educated at Harbord Collegiate Institute and Toronto University, which he paid for by working as a nightclub singer under the name Whispering Milt. Having studied law, from 1937 he practised as a barrister before joining the 'Toronto Star' as a reporter. From 1940 he served in Europe, initially in the Canadian armoured corps and then with Canadian intelligence, rising to the rank of major; he was mentioned in dispatches following the Normandy landings and after the war was among those responsible for interrogating high-ranking German officers. In 1947 he published 'Defeat in the West', the first book to tell the story of the war, and of Germany's defeat, from the German perspective. The book proved very popular, selling 10,000 copies. 
On leaving the army Shulman was drawn to London, in part due to its many theatres. In 1947 he began work on the 'Evening Standard' as a feature writer and on the paper's 'Londoner's Diary', for which he interviewed numerous actors. A year later he was appointed film critic of the 'Standard' and the 'Sunday Express' by the paper's owner, Lord Beaverbrook, a fellow Canadian who had read and been impressed by 'Defeat in the West'. Shulman proved successful in this role, though his criticism of the quality of many Hollywood productions offended the American film companies who in 1953 withdrew their advertising in the 'Standard' and 'Sunday Express', at an estimated cost to the papers of $250,000. Shulman boasted that he was Lord Beaverbrook's $5000-a-week critic. The proprietor stood firm and the principle of the critic's independence was preserved. 
In 1953, on Beaverbrook's instruction, Shulman succeeded Kenneth Tynan as the 'Evening Standard''s drama critic. Over the next thirty-eight years he provided reviews of more than 5000 productions for the paper. He was seldom inspired by what he saw and claimed that during his entire period as the paper's drama critic not one great play had been premiered. He considered this unsurprising given the absence, in his opinion, of a single good play in the 140 years between Richard Sheridan and Oscar Wilde. Notable targets for his criticism included the complete work of Brecht; the wilful obscurity of Beckett's 'Waiting for Godot' (best suited for 'those who prefer to have their cliches masquerading as epigrams'); the 'self-pitying snivel' of John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger', and what he considered the inaccurate depiction of working-class society in Shelagh Delaney's 'A Taste of Honey', which he declared as true to Lancashire life as 'anything ever written by Ivor Novello on Ruritania' ('The Guardian', 25 May 2004). In truth Shulman was not best placed to judge, being a committed Londoner who went to Stratford upon Avon only with great reluctance. Other targets included stage adaptations of Agatha Christie -- the popularity of which he bemoaned and sought to undermine by on one occasion disclosing the murderer's identity -- and the work of Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose 'Cats' was threatened on the first night by a bomb scare which left Shulman unperturbed: 'This theatre's never had a hit yet' ('The Independent', 24 May 2004). At the 'Evening Standard' he regarded himself as a reporter rather than a critic, whose responsibility was to analyse a production for the ordinary man or woman in the street -- a role that led him to be described as more a people's critic than a critic's critic. He was remarkably diligent in this pursuit of an evening of good entertainment and relayed his findings to a metropolitan readership with clarity, sense, and concision. 
In his youth Shulman had been a keen ladies' man and wrote a series of columns entitled 'Shulman's Beauties'. He was married briefly in Canada at the outbreak of the war. On 16 June 1956 he married his second wife, Drusilla Norman Beyfus, journalist and writer, and daughter of Norman Beyfus, writer. Their witnesses at the ceremony at Westminster register office were the Labour politician Michael Foot and his wife, Jill Craigie. With his second wife Shulman had one son, Jason, a designer and editor, and two daughters, Alexandra, who became editor of British 'Vogue' in 1992, and Nicola (from 1990 marchioness of Normanby), a writer and critic. 
Between 1958 and 1962 Shulman was an executive producer at Granada TV and then for two years assistant controller of programmes at Rediffusion. In these years he produced programmes such as 'Decision' and 'Here and Now', and devised for Granada the notably unsuccessful 'Challenge', where panellists were asked their candid opinion of a guest. 'Challenge' ended soon after the programme's first subject, Randolph Churchill, had received a thorough grilling. Between 1964 and 1973 Shulman was television critic of the 'Evening Standard' and in 1967 he was voted critic of the year for his column 'Inside TV'. By the early 1970s he had become disillusioned with the quality of BBC television compared with BBC radio and drew links between modern programming trends on Granada and the rise of violent crime in Britain. It was a theme he pursued in his books 'The Ravenous Eye' and 'The Least Worst Television in the World' (both 1973). From 1972 Shulman appeared regularly on Radio 4's 'Stop the Week', hosted by Robert Robinson, where he became a pontificator and teller of Jewish jokes. He published books throughout his time as a critic, including several for children and a memoir, 'Marilyn, Hitler and Me' (1998); during the mid-1970s he also wrote a column for the 'Daily Express' and was film critic of 'Vogue' for twelve years from 1975. He retired as the 'Standard''s theatre critic in 1991 though he continued as an occasional columnist until 1996. 
Shulman was a keen tennis player at the Hurlingham Club, Fulham. He was always competitive and was particularly proud of having won one game when he played a set against Jaroslav Drobny, then Wimbledon champion. He also collected modern art and had a shrewd eye for the investment value of a picture. On one occasion he decided to sell an impressive Lowry and, having taken the picture to a dealer in Bruton Street, spent some time haggling over the price. With no agreement, he left the shop but was followed by the dealer who finally agreed his terms. Shulman asked what he would re-sell the painting for and was told laconically, 'You couldn't afford it' (private information). He was notably unsuccessful in another favourite diversion, gambling on horses, and in 1975 took his bookmaker to court for claiming that he had defaulted on his debts. Represented by the Conservative politician Leon Brittan, Shulman maintained that he had paid for his bets with postdated cheques, and won his case. 
Shulman died on 21 May 2004 at his home, 51 Eaton Square, Westminster, from kidney failure. He was survived by his wife, Drusilla, and their three children, whose success was a deep satisfaction to him. After his cremation, Shulman's son, Jason, wrapped some of his ashes in pages of the 'Evening Standard', attached them to a rocket, and fired them over his father's bookmaker's premises in London; he used another batch to create an art work entitled 'A Piece of My Father', exhibited at the Madder Rose gallery in east London in 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 93781


Sutton, (Alfred) Shaun Graham (1919-2004), television executive and writer, was born on 14 October 1919 at the Parkside Maternity Home, Hammersmith, London, the son of Eric Graham Sutton (1892-1959), schoolmaster and author, and his wife, (Edithe) Beryl, 'nee' Astley-Marsden, actress. His father, who was originally from Carlisle, wrote novels under his own name and detective fiction under the pseudonym Anthony Marsden. Shaun Sutton grew up in London and was educated at Latymer Upper School (where his father taught him Latin) and the Embassy School of Acting. He learned his craft as an actor and stage manager at various London theatres until, in 1940, he joined the Royal Navy. He served in cruisers and destroyers, was on board a ship sunk in the Mediterranean, and survived the Arctic convoys to the Soviet Union. Discharged in 1946 with the rank of lieutenant, he went back to the Embassy Theatre, north London, and looked set for a modest career in repertory. On 1 September 1948 he married Barbara Leslie, a 25-year-old actress and the daughter of the late Howard Leslie, who had been a theatrical manager. Sutton had previously been married to Peggy Emily Rosemary Martin, from whom he was divorced. With Barbara Leslie he had a son and three daughters. In 1950 the couple toured in South Africa and met a young actor, Nigel Hawthorne, whom they helped to gain a place at the Embassy. 
In 1952 Sutton's career took an important turn when a friend suggested that he stand in for him in a production for the BBC's television service. He made his television debut as an assistant director and small-part actor in a live production of 'Huckleberry Finn' broadcast from Alexandra Palace. Over the next decade, and alongside several more performances in front of the camera, he became proficient in television by writing and directing children's drama. Among these programmes were a dozen episodes of the 'Billy Bunter' series, 'The Silver Sword' (1957), based on the novel by Ian Serraillier, and a children's comedy, 'Bonehead' (1960-62), which he also wrote. 
In 1962 Sutton's experience led to his being offered one of the original directorial positions on 'Z Cars', a twice-weekly series that broke new ground in the dramatic depiction of the police force. Sutton directed twenty-four early episodes and also worked on the spin-off series, 'Softly Softly' (1966-70). In January 1963 the arrival of Sydney Newman as the BBC's head of drama added significantly to the impact that television drama was making. Newman reorganized his group into three departments, plays, series, and serials, and in 1966 appointed Sutton as head of serials. He began with a lucky break: 'The Forsyte Saga', produced by Donald Wilson, was already in the pipeline and the twenty-six-episode adaptation of John Galsworthy's story became one of the BBC's biggest hits when it was screened in the following year. 
In 1969 Sutton was appointed head of the BBC's drama group in the wake of Newman's move into film production eighteen months earlier. Sutton's ensuing eleven years as head of drama were characterized by a more collegiate style than that favoured by his rumbustious predecessor; the three drama departments were allowed considerable freedom and they prospered. One subtle change underlined Sutton's diplomacy. In 1970 he replaced the 'Wednesday Play' -- which, though critically acclaimed and popular, had its detractors, notably Mrs Mary Whitehouse -- with 'Play for Today', which, just as challenging, provided opportunities for such new writers as Alan Bennett and Alan Bleasdale. 
Sutton was now in command of what he rightly called the 'largest theatre in the world' and under his benign but firm leadership some 650 episodes of series and serials, along with 100 single plays, were screened annually. This was a time when numerous talented authors wished to write for the BBC, among them Dennis Potter, David Mercer, Peter Terson, Alan Plater, Fay Weldon, and Julia Jones. His group of producers and directors, including Tony Garnett, Ken Loach, and Kenith Trodd, may have been more aggressive and more politically minded than Sutton, but they were loyal to him and he, and they, knew where the line was drawn. Sutton's years as head of drama also brought innovations, including a notable rise in the number of new drama productions made outside London, particularly in Birmingham (under David Rose, his mentor on 'Z Cars') and in Belfast. Overall his leadership was responsible for productions that were authoritative, adventurous, and popular, and included series such as 'The Onedin Line' (1971-80), 'Colditz' (1972-4), 'When the Boat Comes In' (1976-81), and 'All Creatures Great and Small' (1978-90), and television plays including 'Bar Mitzvah Boy' (1976), 'Abigail's Party' (1977), and 'Blue Remembered Hills' (1979). 
Sutton, who was proud of never having been on the staff of the BBC, retired from his executive post in 1981, only to begin work on the BBC Shakespeare project. Between 1982 and 1984 he produced television adaptations of fourteen Shakespeare plays and then, aged sixty-five, went on to produce BBC2's 'Theatre Night', which featured works by Moliere, Ibsen, and Bernard Shaw alongside Joe Orton, David Storey, Michael Frayn, and Alan Ayckbourn. 
Sutton was a tall, slim man who never seemed to age. He was an amiable figure, with a fund of theatrical stories, who was popular with staff at the BBC's Television Centre and with European colleagues whom he met at the annual Prix Italia festival. He remained involved in television and theatrical productions after his retirement to Trunch in Norfolk. He was appointed OBE in 1979 and his brisk guide to television drama, 'The Largest Theatre in the World', was published in 1982. He died from multi-organ failure on 14 May 2004 at Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Colney. He was survived by his wife, Barbara, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93783


Tanner, John Benedict Ian (1927-2004), museum director, was born John Ian Tanner on 2 January 1927 at 54 Stockwell Green, London, the son of Arthur William Tanner (1900-1969), motor fitter, of Salisbury, and Ina Dorothy Mabel Wibberley (1897-1986), elder daughter of Henry Maundrell Manners, also of Salisbury. After St Martin's Primary School, Salisbury, he attended Poole grammar school from 1938 to 1940. Having completed his formal schooling by the age of fourteen, he continued his self-education while working voluntarily in the Reading public library service. Gifted with an almost photographic memory, he read voraciously. In January 1943 he became a temporary library assistant at Reading. In 1945 he was temporarily conscripted to work as a 'Bevin boy' at Eastwood colliery, Nottinghamshire. He then returned to Reading as a library assistant. After passing the Library Association's preliminary, entrance, and registration examinations (for which he took a year's unpaid study leave) he moved in October 1949 to Kensington Central Library, where he displayed unusual skill in presenting the art collection of its offshoot, Leighton House Museum. He became an associate of the Library Association in 1952. From 1940 until 1954 his successive homes were at Tilehurst, near Reading, except for his brief sojourn in Nottinghamshire. 
An early interest in aviation led Tanner to move from Kensington to the Royal Air Force College, Cranwell, where he was librarian and tutor in English from 1953 to 1963. He married on 18 June 1954 April Rothery ('b'. 1931), eldest daughter of Geoffrey Rothery, wool manufacturer, and a colleague from his Kensington days. After their marriage they lived at Bloxholm, near Sleaford, for nine years. Tanner's achievement in compiling a register of Cranwell graduates gained him in 1960 the fellowship of the Library Association. His friendship with Vivian de Sola Pinto inspired him to write two Nottingham theses of a theological nature (an MA in 1961, a PhD in 1965). During his last four years at Cranwell his extraordinary versatility found further expression in Nottingham University extramural classes on art history, for example on Tintoretto. 
In 1962 the Air Force council conceived the idea of creating a museum for the Royal Air Force along the lines of the National Army Museum. Tanner submitted a practical action plan to Sir Dermot Boyle's working party. At Cranwell, from 1958 onwards, he had assembled an admired museum of memorabilia; his gift for museum display and his fund-raising skills qualified him to lay the foundations of the Royal Air Force Museum. Appointed its director early in 1963, he built up the museum in the years that followed. It was a success that won him the abiding loyalty and admiration of his staff but that was achieved at huge cost to himself. After the breakdown of his marriage in 1967 he lived on at 57 Drayton Gardens, Chelsea, in a flat bought six years previously. The severe heart attack he suffered on 9 December 1970 was followed by other illnesses. On 21 June 1972 he and April Tanner were divorced. 
The Royal Air Force Museum, officially opened by the queen at the former Hendon airfield in November 1972, covered the history of air fighting, flying training, maritime operations, air transport, and air bombardment. Tanner went on to open the Battle of Britain Museum in 1978 and the Bomber Command Museum in 1983 (both on the Hendon site); in 1979 the Royal Air Force Aerospace Museum at Cosford, near Shifnal in Shropshire, was also fully opened to the public. He also set up and maintained a reserve collection and restoration centre at Cardington in Bedfordshire. Although a civil servant, he, together with his trustees, was required to raise all the capital needed to build his projects. He also, sometimes with buccaneering spirit, had to negotiate the labyrinthine ways of the civil service. He retired from the directorship of all four museums in 1988, having been made a CBE nine years previously. 
Tanner's interests were not confined to aviation history. A keen genealogist and heraldist, and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, he was an authority on the British and Irish pedigrees of American knights of Malta. In addition to receiving other honours he was made a knight of the order of St John of Jerusalem in 1978 and, from 1978 to 1984, was its joint (junior) deputy director of ceremonies. Honorary archivist of Pembroke College, Oxford, from 1980 to 1996, he set in train the cataloguing of its archives, for two years at his own expense. At that college he was a senior research fellow in English from 1982 to 1996 and remained a supernumerary fellow from 1996 until his death. In 1986 he was also a visiting fellow of Wolfson College, Cambridge. On 20 April 1991 he married a fellow genealogist, Andrea Isobel Duncan ('b'. 1956), daughter of William Duncan, engineer. She shared his antiquarian interests, and their happy and devoted union drew him into the Roman Catholic church. He adopted the additional name of Benedict on being formally received into the church on 8 July 1993. 
An art collector, owner of Rolls-Royces and Bentleys, lover of France, and keen amateur actor while at Reading, Tanner could discourse with equal authority and brilliance on opera, the fine arts, literature, cricket, food, wine, or the history of the Christian church, which, like Oxford University, fascinated him throughout his adult life. Besides his 'List of Cranwell Graduates' he was the author of various books on genealogy and aviation history. He liked to say that he tried to write his history 'three-dimensionally' (personal knowledge). Not technical but a Romantic in outlook, he had a genius for translating dreams into reality. To him nothing seemed truly impossible. Employing his huge social skills and talents of persuasiveness upon a wide range of contacts, he acquired for Hendon some outstanding aircraft, including a Bleriot XI monoplane, biplanes of the early twentieth century, an Avro Lancaster bomber, the only surviving Supermarine Stranraer general reconnaissance flying-boat, and the wooden hull of the only surviving Supermarine Southampton. The four museums -- essentially one, employing at least 160 staff -- that he brought into being were by the time of his retirement among the finest museums of their kind in the world. Having been in failing health for some five years, he was profoundly shaken by the death of his only child, Sarah-Jane (1958-2004), nine weeks before his own. He died of a heart attack at his home, Flat 1, 57 Drayton Gardens, Chelsea, London, on the morning of 18 May 2004. He was survived by his second wife, Andrea. After a funeral service at the London Oratory he was buried on 27 May at Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 93795


Jebb, Caroline Lane, Lady Jebb (1840-1930), academic hostess, was born in Milford, Delaware, USA, on 26 December 1840, the youngest of the three daughters and one son who survived to adulthood of John Reynolds, a clergyman in the Protestant Episcopal Church who was rector of Christ Church, Milford, and his wife, Eleanor, 'nee' Evans, of Perkiomen, Pennsylvania. As a young man her father had emigrated from England to America, where he was ordained and, in 1832, married her mother. 
Caroline Reynolds's childhood was peripatetic as the family moved to parishes as far apart as Tennessee, Connecticut, and New Jersey. Aged fourteen she graduated from St Mary's Hall (later Doane's Academy) in Burlington, New Jersey. In 1857 she married Lieutenant Adam Jacoby Slemmer of Norristown, Pennsylvania, and their son, Albert, was born a year later. When the American Civil War began, Caroline decided that her husband's military achievements had not been sufficiently recognized, so went to see Abraham Lincoln in person. Her strength of personality was evident in a note the president wrote afterwards recommending Lieutenant Slemmer for promotion: 'his pretty wife says a Major or First Captain' (Lincoln correspondence, ser. 1, July 1861). 
Caroline's only son died of diphtheria in 1862, and after her husband's death of heart disease in 1868 she moved to West Philadelphia to live with her sister and widowed mother. After turning down several marriage proposals, including one from the business magnate Cornelius Vanderbilt, she travelled to Europe in 1870. Her plans to visit the continent had to be abandoned because of the Franco-Prussian War, and instead she spent a year in Cambridge, staying with her cousin Jeannetta and her husband, the mathematician Robert Potts. 
Cambridge in the early 1870s was still a remote, semi-monastic place. With her auburn hair, 'Titianesque beauty of eyes', and American vitality, Caroline Slemmer sent 'a thrill through the social atmosphere' ('The Times', 24 July 1930). She refused three proposals on the same day, more interested in the educational opportunities that Cambridge offered, and attending lectures in zoology, moral philosophy, law, and German literature. Despite this she made light of her intellectual interests, saying she particularly enjoyed Alfred Marshall's lectures in political economy because they supplied 'such good after-dinner conversation' (Marshall, 24). 
One don whose proposal Slemmer turned down was Richard Claverhouse Jebb (1841-1905), an Irish classical scholar and public orator for the university. After she returned to Philadelphia in 1871 they continued to correspond, however. Richard's translations into Greek and Latin verse, and editions of Sophocles and Theophrastus were noticed in the literary world, and his social circles included Leslie Stephen, Annie Thackeray, Robert Browning, and George Eliot. His letters offered her a glimpse of a brilliant literary society of writers and poets whose work she revered. In 1874 she returned to Cambridge and married him on 18 August, making sure she retained control over her own finances. Her letters to her mother and sisters are coruscating dispatches chronicling the peculiarities of life in an ancient university town in Victorian England. 
In 1875 Richard Jebb accepted the chair of Greek at Glasgow University. They moved to Glasgow but continued to spend summers in Cambridge. Springfield, their comfortable home on the Backs, was the centre of much social and intellectual life, and they mixed with Balfours, Butchers, Tennysons, and Sidgwicks. She was adept at making social gatherings lively events; widely read and able to discourse on any subject, she also discovered that 'if the subject of 'sex' was introduced at a dinner table every one became interested at once' (Marshall, 47). Cambridge was gradually changing, as women students arrived at Newnham and Girton in greater numbers and college fellows were permitted to marry. She frequently took on the role of match-maker, introducing her American niece Maud Du Puy to George Darwin; they married and settled in Cambridge in 1884, and their daughter Gwen was born a year later. 
Following Richard's appointment, in 1889, as regius professor of Greek at Cambridge the Jebbs lived permanently in Cambridge, at the centre of a close academic community. Caroline's niece Gwen Raverat's memoir drolly depicts 'Aunt Cara' during this period as a socially dominant figure, astutely managing her own and others' investments and 'emphatically a man's woman' (Raverat, 90). Much as she liked men and her power over them, Caroline was also an active member of the Ladies' Dining Society, an elite group of twelve influential women who were close friends and met regularly from 1890 to 1914 for intelligent debate. She was a committee member and vice-president of the Cambridge Association for Women's Suffrage from 1893 to 1912. 
In 1891 Richard Jebb, standing as a Conservative, became the university's member of parliament, giving Caroline the chance to escape from Cambridge occasionally and have refreshing contact with 'nimble London wits and tongues' such as Richard Haldane, John Lubbock, and Arthur Balfour (Bobbitt, 240). In 1900 Richard was knighted and, as Lady Jebb, Caroline demonstrated to her niece Eglantyne Jebb how connections came in useful when raising money for charitable causes. 
Richard died in 1905 and Caroline Jebb's 'Life and Letters of Sir Richard Claverhouse Jebb' was published two years later: as a biography it is respectful, a little heavy, but stylishly written and peppered with her characteristically dry observations. Her personal letters contain the best examples of her analytical skills, however, with memorable insights into the poets, writers, and politicians she met. She was particularly adept at skewering Victorian foibles and fads, and has been called 'that cool American observer' (Thwaite, 461). 
In 1917 Caroline Jebb moved back to America. She died at her niece Mary Spencer's home, 519 West Sixth Street, Erie, Pennsylvania, on 11 July 1930, and her ashes were brought back to Cambridge and buried in St Giles' cemetery (later Ascension Parish burial ground) under the tombstone of her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 93798


Davies, David Richard (1889-1958), writer, political agitator, and minister of religion, was born at Pontycymer, Glamorgan, on 19 February 1889, the son of Richard Davies and his wife, Hannah. He was the youngest of four children. His father had been a miner, but had broken his back in a colliery accident before Davies was born and spent some years out of work. When Davies was eight, his father found work as a chapel choirmaster and colliery checkweighman in Clydach-on-Tawe in the Swansea valley. After three or four years the family moved to Maesteg, where his father became a colliery lampman. Davies later recalled being teased at school for wearing shirts made from his elder sister's old nightshirts. The poverty of his upbringing left him with 'a grudge against society' (Davies, 21). 
The Davies family was imbued with the values of working-class self-improvement. He received musical education from his father, learning the violin, and religious education from his mother. Influenced by an inspirational history teacher, he had read Macaulay's 'History of England' before he was twelve. He also read Charles Lamb, Hazlitt, and Ruskin. He won a scholarship to the county school at Ystalyfera, but the family's precarious finances precluded further education, so after a brief apprenticeship in a grocer's shop, which he hated, he became a miner in his local pit before he was thirteen. He joined the Miners' Federation, later securing places on the library committee of the Maesteg Miners' Institute (which gained him more access to books), and, in 1909, as a member of the executive of his local miners' lodge. He also joined the Independent Labour Party, and lectured in support of women's suffrage. 
Davies's ten-year career as a miner was punctuated by two breaks, both indicative of his intellectual restlessness. In 1904 he experienced a conversion during the Welsh revival led by Evan Roberts, which made him resolve to train for the ministry. He enrolled at the Old College School in Carmarthen in order to gain qualifications, but under the influence of a friend, and to the chagrin of his parents, he converted to Unitarianism, and became a student pastor at the Unitarian Church in Aberystwyth. In 1907 he went to Summerville Unitarian College, in Victoria Park, Manchester, and also started taking pre-matriculation classes at Manchester University. He soon became bored by his studies and disaffected with Unitarianism, but developed a taste for playgoing at the Gaiety Theatre in Manchester. When his father became ill again, he was forced to return to his old job in the pit as the family's main breadwinner. His father's subsequent recovery led Davies to leave home and sign up as a stoker on a tramp steamer to New York. On his return to Britain he travelled around the country as a vagrant for several months before resuming his old job as a miner. 
Reverting to his plan of entering the Congregationalist ministry, Davies entered Yorkshire United Independent College, Bradford, in 1912. He was sent to Edinburgh University as part of his training, but suffered a nervous breakdown and returned to Bradford. When his college closed in 1916, he was for a period a student minister in churches around the West Riding, before being ordained in October 1919. From then until October 1922 he was minister of Ravensthorpe Congregational Church, Dewsbury. At this time Davies was an exponent of the social gospel, and a convinced pacifist. His pacifism brought him into conflict with local businessmen, but into contact with prominent pacifists like Ramsay MacDonald, Charles Trevelyan, and W. E. Orchard. Through the No-Conscription Fellowship he also met Edith Firth (died 1934), an elementary school teacher, daughter of William Firth, cashier. They married on 29 April 1918. 
While at Ravensthorpe Davies became increasingly interested in the arts, helping found a branch of the Poetry Society in Dewsbury, where 'I found people who were intensely more intellectually alive and alert than any church people I knew' (Davies, 73). He became acquainted with the Leeds artist Jacob Kramer, through whom he also met Jacob Epstein. He put a photograph of Epstein's 'Risen Christ' in the entrance to his church. 
In October 1922 Davies moved to Hawkeshead Street Congregational Church, Southport, ignoring friends' warnings that the seaside town would not be a hospitable place for a socialist. He initially succeeded in increasing his congregation by laying on lectures, but his ministry was disrupted by bouts of rheumatism and depression. What energized him was the miners' lock-out of 1926, which, he later recounted, came as a kind of new religious awakening. On 9 May 1926 he preached to a packed church on 'Christianity and the miners' claim' in which he declared 'the miners are altogether right and the owners are altogether wrong' (Davies, 86). This unequivocal support for the miners from a former miner lost Davies many members of his congregation, but he was able to replace them with working-class supporters. As a Congregationalist, he could not be disciplined by any superior ecclesiastical authority. Having acquired the sobriquet 'the Bolshie Parson', he was elected as the only Labour member of the borough council in 1926. He also stood unsuccessfully as Labour candidate in the parliamentary by-election at Lancaster in 1928. In April 1928 he resigned the Congregationalist ministry to set up a Labour church in Southport, but this only lasted for a year. 
In 1929 Davies moved to London, without his wife, to seek work as a journalist. Unemployed, he was forced to sell most of his 3000-volume library to eke out a living. By this time, he later recalled, 'religion had ceased to matter at all. I never went near a church' (Davies, 109). He was rescued from penury by relatives of his wife, who offered him a temporary home in Enfield. His fortunes improved further when he attended a public meeting addressed by Dimitrije Mitrinovic, the Serbian mystic and utopian. Mitrinovic ran a number of movements in the early 1930s advocating causes like social credit and European federation, among them the New Britain movement and the Eleventh Hour Group. Mitrinovic installed Davies as editor of 'New Britain Quarterly' and later as national organizer of the New Britain movement. Through this connection Davies encountered A. R. Orage and John Macmurray. At the behest of Mitrinovic he also underwent psychoanalysis and a traumatic form of group therapy. But he was increasingly unimpressed by social credit, which he thought 'nothing but confused nonsense', and by Mitrinovic, whom he thought a fantasist (ibid., 128-9). 
Davies had by his own account grown apart from his wife in the early 1930s. But when she became seriously ill he nursed her, and they were reconciled before her death in March 1934. In his autobiography he admitted to feeling 'remorseful' at her death (Davies, 136). Months later, on 11 July 1934, he married Ruth Esther McCormick, a twenty-seven-year-old editorial secretary on the 'New Britain', and daughter of the late Samuel McCormick, a dentist, at Holborn register office. They had two daughters and a son. 
After breaking with Mitrinovic, Davies became drawn towards Marxism, under the influence of the former communist and general secretary of the Socialist League, J. T. Murphy. He joined the Socialist League, and read his way through Marx. But after quarrelling with Stafford Cripps and the league's other leaders, Davies and Murphy left to form their own campaign for a 'People's front against fascism'. In March 1937 Davies went to Spain with Hewlett Johnson, dean of Canterbury, and John Macmurray, as part of a delegation investigating the treatment of the churches by the republican government. He was sympathetic to the republicans he met, but in Spain his belief in human progress was shattered by witnessing a column of refugees fleeing the bombing of Durango, and the body of a young soldier in a Bilbao morgue. Already before his visit he had begun to be disillusioned with Marxism because of Stalin's purges and his own reading of the American theologian Reinhold Niebuhr. This led to another psychological crisis. On a family holiday in Southerdown, south Wales, he attempted suicide by jumping into the sea, but managed to swim to safety, and found himself weeping on the shore. He was overcome by a powerful recollection of his mother teaching him the catechism. 'I heard her saying -- 'Who is Jesus Christ?' to which I answered, 'Jesus Christ is my Saviour,'' he recalled. At this, 'a deep peace... flooded my inner being. I knew that I had passed through the great tribulation' (Davies, 190). 
In the aftermath of this religious experience Davies wrote a book, 'On to Orthodoxy', arguing that recent international events had revealed the bankruptcy of liberal theology, and the need to return to a theology of original sin. The book was conceived during a walk on Hampstead Heath and written in five weeks. As Davies conceded, it was part of a wider shift towards a theology of sin already seen in the writings of Karl Barth and Reinhold Niebuhr, but it was more accessibly written, and its publication as war broke out in September 1939 gave its arguments particular resonance. 
Davies returned briefly to the Congregationalist ministry in 1939 as pastor of Richmond Road Congregational Church, Cardiff, but was dismayed to discover how far Congregationalism had declined during his decade of absence. Seeking reception into the Church of England, he went to see Archbishop William Temple, who had been impressed by 'On to Orthodoxy', and who advised him to talk to Alec Vidler, warden of St Deiniol's, Hawarden. He embarked on a few months' study at St Deiniol's and had an experience of 'ecstasy' on reading the 'Book of Common Prayer' for the first time (Davies, 205). Vidler became a close friend, though he later began to worry that Davies had 'an almost one-track obsession' with original sin (Vidler, 'Defenders of the Faith', 100). 
In 1941 Davies was ordained in York Minster by William Temple, and served as curate of St John's, Newland, in Hull, until 1943. For the remainder of his life he had charge of a succession of parishes in Dulwich (1943-7), Brighton (1947-9), St Leonards (1949-58), and finally Parham, Sussex, at the foot of the South Downs. A striking figure with a mane of white hair, and a compelling orator, he was in great demand as a preacher, public speaker, and radio broadcaster. He also published a number of other books, and co-founded a magazine called 'Pulpit Monthly' to raise the standard of Anglican preaching. Davies died, of meningitis and bronchopneumonia, at the Atkinson Morley Hospital, 31 Copse Hill, Wimbledon, on 1 November 1958. His widow saw through the posthumous publication of his autobiography, 'In Search of Myself' (1961). 
Davies was not unusual among inter-war British intellectuals in being attracted to varieties of socialism, Marxism, internationalism, and Christianity. What 'was' unusual was the sheer number of belief systems he embraced, and his candour in describing his successive conversions. His autobiography owes much to traditional evangelical conversion narratives, but even allowing for a degree of retrospective self-fashioning, it offers a remarkable account of a working-class intellectual's political and spiritual odyssey in the first decades of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 93800


Dering, Unton, Lady Dering (d. 1676), letter writer and political agent, was the eldest of the five daughters and one of the twelve children of Sir Ralph Gibbes, first baronet (died 1613), of Honington Manor, Honington, Warwickshire, and Gertrude (died 1611), daughter of Sir Thomas Wroughton of Broadhenton, Wiltshire; Charles Gibbes (bap. 1603, d. 1681) was her brother. On 16 July 1629 Unton married the courtier and local politician Sir Edward Dering, first baronet (1598-1644), of Surrenden Dering, Pluckley, Kent, as his third wife. The couple had two sons and two daughters, Dorothy Unton (1630?-1669), Henry ('b'. 1632), Edward (1633-1703) -- (who shared the name of his half-brother Edward Dering (1625-1684), later second baronet -- and Frances ('b'. 1636); Unton also took a close interest in the six orphaned children of her sister Gertrude and Anthony Percival. This was a marriage of strong mutual love and affection, evidenced by a collection of more than twenty-five letters from Dering to his wife, spanning a period of twelve years, from the end of 1629 to early 1642 (CKS, U275/C1 and U350/C2). She is his 'very deare Numpes' and the letters are directed to his 'best and dearest freinde'. Detectable throughout their correspondence is the unity of purpose and interest between them, and the increasing trust Sir Edward placed in the integrity and advice of his wife. 
Only scattered evidence survives of elite women's influence in early modern parliamentary elections. Along with Lady Brilliana Harley, however, Lady Dering provides one of the best documented examples of a woman orchestrating an election campaign in this period. During the Long Parliament elections of 1640 Unton Dering acted as her husband's agent in his successful bid to be returned as one of the two knights of the shire for Kent. She gathered political information from a wide variety of sources and relayed this to Sir Edward on the campaign trail. In her letters she reported who had declared support for him, including the dean of Canterbury Cathedral, Isaac Bargrave, and warned him of the double dealing of Sir Edward Boys, 'who professes to be for you, yett he works earnestly for some other under-hand'. She also warned him that his choice of running-mate, Sir John Culpepper, would alienate some voters. Her activities included meetings with or writing to local gentlemen to secure their support, advising her husband to canvass key voters personally, and telling him where his opponent's greatest strength lay. Lady Dering's combination of eminent political sense and calm religious faith is revealed in her advice to Sir Edward that despite his 'desiers and endevors' he should not 'lett this posses the[e] to deeply, but lett it be indiferent to the[e]... god knowes what is best his will be don' (Cresswell, 49-51); they were agreed that all their effort and expense was for God's glory alone. 
The Derings suffered badly during the early years of the civil war when, after a brief but high-profile courtship period with the parliamentarians, Sir Edward, essentially a moderate, raised a company of troops and joined the king in the latter half of 1643. Surrenden was plundered by parliamentary troops on four separate occasions, and it was Unton who appealed to the committee for sequestration that year, outlining her grievances and requesting recompense. Her husband was forced to sue for pardon, but it was only after his death on 22 June 1644 that his heir, his son Edward from his second marriage, obtained a remission of his fine and return of the family estate. Unton had been left Surrenden Dering to enjoy during her lifetime as part of a jointure bestowed on her by her husband in 1639. She continued to live there with her children until 1661, when her stepson arranged to 'hire' the family seat from her. By 1646 she and the second baronet had fallen out over lands that they both claimed, she as part of her jointure and he as his inheritance. Bitter legal wrangles continued throughout the 1650s. Unton must then have moved to Maidstone, where she lived in some style as befitted her status. She died there, intestate, early in November 1676 and was buried in Pluckley on 10 November. Although viewed critically by some, many contemporaries valued her piety, capability, and intelligence. Henry Oxinden, a former neighbour of her sister Gertrude and a co-guardian of the latter's children, wrote to her in 1647 that 'you not only excell those of your owne sexe but also the most able and learned of the other' and that 'as a woman... you are able not onlie to manage a private Estate butt also to governe a Kingdome if called thereunto' ('Oxinden and Peyton Letters'). 


@@@@@


doc= 93802


Twysden, Isabella, Lady Twysden (1605-1657), diarist, was the third and youngest daughter of Sir Nicholas Saunder of Nonsuch, Surrey. On 27 January 1635 she married the antiquary Sir Roger Twysden, second baronet (1597-1672), of Roydon Hall, East Peckham, Kent. Sir Roger was detained by parliament for supporting the Kentish petition of March 1642 and in May 1643 his estates were sequestrated. He spent much of the remaining years of the 1640s in prison or in regular attendance on parliamentary committees trying to remove the sequestration. Lady Twysden was entrusted with much of her husband's business in these years and throughout these tribulations the couple maintained a stance of neutrality, making it clear that the family supported neither king nor parliament. Like many other wives of sequestered gentlemen and clergymen at the time, she found herself increasingly drawn into the political process of negotiating with parliamentarian officials. She made frequent appearances before parliamentary committees in London and the county committee in Kent in order to obtain the 'fifth part' of her husband's estates as maintenance and to prevent the indiscriminate felling of his woods. She was forced to attend these committees even when she was, in her husband's words, 'great with child' or had recently recovered from childbirth. In his later account Sir Roger wrote that his wife was put off 'from post to pillar' and only obtained her fifth 'with unspeakable trouble, vexation and charge' ('Sir Roger Twysden's journal', 4.139, 143). 
Lady Twysden's surviving diary covers the years 1645 to 1651 and is written on the blank pages of printed almanacs. In it she gives brief accounts of the major political events of the period, the movements of troops, her family's dealings with the sequestrators, and other family affairs. She was careful not to express any personal opinions about the conflict, but her diary entries exemplify the keen interest in the national and local political events of the time expressed by many other contemporary gentlewomen, and are a good source of evidence for how and when information was received. Her diary starts with the execution of Sir John Hotham, his son, and Archbishop William Laud at the beginning of January 1645 and she noted later executions including that of Charles I as well as the deaths of politicians, among them Sir Anthony Weldon, chairman of the parliamentarian county committee in Kent, whom Sir Roger regarded as a particular enemy. Lady Twysden also noted the billeting of parliamentarian troops in East Peckham in August 1647, the use of the local trained bands to put down the Christmas riots at Canterbury in January 1648, and the defeat of the Kent rebels in the second civil war by Sir Thomas Fairfax at Maidstone later in June. She was similarly concerned by the progress of the war outside the county and recorded the parliamentarian success at Naseby in 1645, the subsequent fall of Bristol in September 1645, and the defeat of Charles II and his Scottish allies by Cromwell at Worcester in 1651. 
The personal impact of the civil war played an important part in the diary and Lady Twysden thus noted the regular receipt of payments of rents representing her fifth, her husband's return to Roydon on 5 August 1647, 'where he had not ben in 5 yeare before' and the decision reached by the parliamentary committee at Goldsmiths' Hall in May 1649 that Sir Roger should pay a reduced fine of $1500. In April 1651 Roydon Hall was searched for arms and letters, and Sir Roger and Lady Twysden's brother-in-law, Sir Hugh Cholmley, were briefly imprisoned in Leeds Castle 'for no cause, I thank God' as she noted in her diary (Bennitt, 'Diary of Isabella', 121, 131, 133). Sir Roger later wrote that his wife's health never fully recovered after the birth of her sixth and last child, Charles, in March 1645. She died in Dean's Yard, Westminster, on 11 March 1657 after suffering from a cold and was buried at East Peckham church on 17 March. Sir Roger wrote a moving tribute to her in which he described her adherence to the English church 'as it was reformed' by Elizabeth I and James I; she was 'a wise and temperat sollicitrix' to him during his troubles and the 'saver' of his estate ('Sir Roger Twysden's journal', 4.169, 200). 


@@@@@


doc= 93807


Rathbone, (Beatrice) Irene (1892-1980), novelist, was born at 63 Wellington Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 11 June 1892, the eldest of three children of George Rathbone (1857/8-1953), brass and copper manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Robina, 'nee' Mathews (1867-1964). Her father belonged to the Liverpool Rathbone family, which was prominent in Liberal politics. Her two younger brothers were educated at the progressive Bedales School, but she attended a dame school and later a south-coast boarding-school. She then embarked on a theatrical career as a member of Frank Benson's Shakespeare Company, also acting in a Noel Coward play, and taking part in the women's suffrage movement. 
On the outbreak of war Rathbone worked as a volunteer in YMCA canteens in France and then trained as a VAD nurse, serving at St Valery in France and then in London hospitals, including the First London General. These experiences, along with those of a close friend, Ruby Wyld, who worked in a munitions factory, became the basis for her best-known work, 'We That Were Young' (1932), a fictionalized autobiography that 'gives a detailed description of women's war work... as if anticipating that these lives would never survive in the pages of the histories of this war' (Marcus, 270). While Rathbone's novel was less well received than Vera Brittain's 'Testament of Youth' (1933), the work is important for depicting women's emotional and practical involvement with the war. Presenting the war as a generational experience, it stripped away the glamour associated with nursing, and captured the monotony, danger, and extreme physical demands of the munitions factory, represented overwhelmingly as a world of tiring repetition and 'deafening, stupefying, brain shattering' noise, interrupted abruptly by grotesque accidents. 

'We That Were Young' also reflects the emotional toll of the war on women, drawing the reader into the constant background anxiety and then the devastating grief when brothers and lovers died. Rathbone works her own losses into the story: her brother Benson, to whom she dedicated the novel, died of pneumonia while in Germany in 1919 with the army of occupation, and her fiance, Mansfield Priestley Evans, a political officer in Iraq, was killed during the uprising there in July 1920. 
After the war Rathbone lived with women friends in a Chelsea flat, acting and working in an office. During 1919-20 she appeared in productions of Chekhov plays at the Art Theatre. The experience of visiting her brother, Reginald, in India and China, inspired her first novel, 'Susan Goes East' (1929). 'They Call it Peace' (1936), although less well known than 'We That Were Young', reflected her increasing involvement with left-wing politics. It is a bitterly angry novel, detailing the struggles of a wartime generation to survive in a post-war Britain that has made no attempt to fulfil its promise of a home fit for heroes. It is particularly unflinching in confronting the daily misery of an underpaid or unemployed underclass and their deaths from poverty and despair, though it also documents the radical changes confronting the middle classes and explores the consciousness of both men and women. It also, importantly, treats the war as a continuum, emphasizing the extent to which the aftermath is merely a different kind of struggle for survival and stressing the betrayal of a generation who gave their lives and energy so willingly during the war. 

'They Call it Peace' was dedicated to Richard Aldington, who had helped Rathbone to publish 'We That Were Young'. They had a brief but intense affair, which resulted in her long poem 'Was There a Summer?' (1943). Although the relationship ended in 1937, Rathbone visited Sury-en-Vaux in 1964, two years after Aldington's death, to place flowers on his grave. She had other relationships with men and proposals of marriage, but remained single. 
During the 1930s Rathbone's political involvement and membership of PEN led to a close friendship with Margaret Storm Jameson as well as with other literary women such as Nancy Cunard and the journalist Louise Morgan Theis. She wrote four novels not specifically on the war, 'The Golden Rim' (1933), 'October' (1934), 'When Days Were Years' (1939), and 'The Seeds of Time' (1952). During the 1950s and early 1960s she looked after her ageing parents in Chipping Camden, Gloucestershire. She subsequently moved back to Chelsea. Her life and her writing were 'characterized by a frustration with women's traditional lot and by a clarity of vision that allowed her to explore women's individual struggles as well as the dynamics of the larger social and political issues they raise' (Zilboorg, 77). She died at Quinton House, Lower Quinton, Stratford upon Avon, Warwickshire, on 21 January 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 93808


Moat, Henry (1871-1940), servant, was born on 2 August 1871 at 17 The Cragg, Whitby, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the son of John Moat ('b'. 1827/8), master joiner, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Carter ('b'. 1831/2). By his own account the Moats were descended from a family of Italian jet cutters, the Moatti, who came to England in the late sixteenth century; certainly the family had been resident in Whitby for more than 200 years by the time of Henry's birth. At the 1881 census Moat and his immediate family were living with his maternal grandparents at The Cragg, with Henry attending a local school. Little more is known about Moat's life before he entered the service of Sir George Reresby Sitwell, antiquary and father of the authors Edith, Osbert, and Sacheverell Sitwell. He may be the Henry Moat of Whitby listed as lodging in Ripon in the 1891 census. 
On 26 October 1893 Moat joined the Sitwell household as a footman. One of his first acts was to etch his name, and the date of his arrival, on a window pane of the pantry at Renishaw Hall, Derbyshire, then the Sitwells' principal residence. So began Moat's forty-two-year association with Sir George, during which time he rose to become the family's butler about 1902. His, however, was not a continuous life in service. Moat left Sir George's employment on a number of occasions, his longest absence from the family being between April 1913 and 1923. In this period he worked briefly and unhappily as butler to a Hampshire fur trader before joining the Army Service Corps, in which he served throughout the First World War. On his return to the Sitwells in the 1920s Moat resumed as butler -- now principally at Sir George's Italian property, Castello di Montegufoni, near Florence -- and retained this post until his retirement in the following decade. 
Moat's extended absences from the Sitwell household were typically prompted by his frequent disputes with Sir George, with whom Henry enjoyed and endured a relationship that was simultaneously affectionate, confrontational, intimate, long-suffering, and considerate. Its ebb and flow was lovingly charted by Osbert Sitwell in his autobiography, 'Left Hand, Right Hand!' (1945-50) and in Sitwell's publication of extracts of Moat's correspondence in 'Tales my Father Taught Me' (1962). Osbert and Henry were lifelong friends, often drawn together by shared exasperation at Sir George's behaviour, and it was through Sitwell's popular autobiographical works that Moat reached a wider audience as the colourful but dedicated servant who was not afraid to bite back. 
Periods of worsening relations between employer and butler were often brought on by another of what Moat described as 'Sir George's fads' or eccentric schemes. These he typically dismissed with a characteristic deadpan rebuff. One such exchange followed Sitwell's proposal that all knife handles be replaced with new ones made of condensed milk. 'Henry looked particularly disgusted at the idea and very worried at its application. Then with emphasis, and with an unusual air of correctitude, he countered, 'Yes, Sir George, but what if the cat gets them?'' (O. Sitwell, 'Left Hand', 1.94-5). On another occasion Moat showed his displeasure at his master's habit of filling his houses with Italian ornaments: 'I am going to ask him if he will allow me to go through them after him with a huge hammer' (O. Sitwell, 'Tales', 71). 
Several of Moat's absences followed his dismissal when an 'enjoyment of sensual pleasures' was considered 'too pronounced' by Sir George. A heavy man with a taste for alcohol, Moat was notably attractive to women, though he did not marry. More than six foot tall, he gave the 'impression of great physical strength' and combined this with a 'robust, original and audacious' character ('Left Hand', 1.95). Osbert's memoir also makes frequent reference to Moat's striding walk and his habit of never leaving the house without his bowler hat. Edith Sitwell offered a more vibrant description of an 'enormous purple man like a benevolent hippopotamus... a voice like some fog-horn endowed with splendour' (E. Sitwell, 28). Moat's performances in the Renishaw pantry gave him a reputation for sombre wit and irreverence (especially popular with the younger Sitwells), though he was also a lifelong source of advice and support to the children and especially to Osbert. Moat himself retained a fascination with and respect for learning; asked what he would do if he had his life again, he spoke of his wish to 'go in for scholarship and deep-thinking' ('Left Hand', 1.97). 
Moat's disputes with his employer could be bitter and prolonged, but no offence was ever severe enough for either man to break off relations fully. To Sir George, Moat was always 'the Great Man', while Henry reciprocated with a blend of 'utmost disrespect' and 'sentiments approaching veneration' ('Left Hand', 1.93, 96). Having returned to the Sitwells in 1923, Moat enjoyed one of his happiest periods as butler at Montegufoni, where he passed his time serving and quarrelling with Sir George, learning Italian (which he spoke with a thick North Riding accent), reading in his garret room, drinking, and consorting with visitors such as, in 1928, William Walton and Constant Lambert, to whom he described Sir George as 'the strangest old bugger you ever met' (Ziegler, 5). A life in service meant that Moat spent most of his adulthood outside Yorkshire. Even so he remained intensely proud of his native county. Having fallen ill during an early trip to Italy, he responded to Sir George's offer of assistance by saying that he wanted nothing 'except to be buried with his feet in the direction of Whitby' ('Left Hand', 2.246). 
Moat finally retired from Sir George's service in spring 1936. He moved to 1 Beulah Terrace, Falsgrave, Scarborough, from where ('a born letter-writer') he conducted a regular correspondence with his former employer and with Osbert ('Left Hand', 1.24). These letters tell of a period of ill health in late 1936 and a new regimen in which he only drank boiled water 'for I go to a herbalist and am giving these herbs a fair chance and feel grand' (20 Sept 1938, ibid., 4.306). In retirement Moat wrote warmly to Sir George ('I think you are wonderful and much to be proud of'), urged him to look after himself by eating more slowly and taking less salt, and concluded that 'I have not had a single happy day since I left your service' (ibid.). Yet, even in later life, he could never refuse the chance to swipe, albeit affectionately. In his final letter to Osbert he noted his surprise on hearing that Sir George had attempted to avoid giving offence: 'I don't think it is habitual of him considering others feelings' (23 Feb 1940, ibid., 4.311). By then Henry Moat was living in his family's Whitby home, 17 The Cragg, where he died, on 23 March 1940. He was buried in Whitby. 


@@@@@


doc= 93811


Hamilton, Margaret, Lady Belhaven and Stenton (b. in or before 1625, d. in or after 1694), royalist heroine and medical practitioner, was the illegitimate daughter of James Hamilton, second marquess of Hamilton (1589-1625). It has been plausibly suggested that her mother was Anne, widow of John Abernethy, eighth Lord Saltoun, and daughter of Walter Stewart, first Lord Blantyre, but the evidence for this claim is unclear. The marquess spent a good deal of time in London at the court of King James VI and I, but since Margaret seems always to have lived in Scotland the assumption is that she was born there. As was the custom in the seventeenth century, she was acknowledged by her father, who presumably arranged her marriage to his distant relative Sir John Hamilton (died 1679) of the Biel, Haddingtonshire, descendant of an illegitimate son of James Hamilton, first Lord Hamilton (died 1479). 
During the civil war Sir John was a faithful supporter of Charles I, who on 15 December 1647 created him Lord Belhaven and Stenton. The following year, when Margaret's half-brother James Hamilton, first duke of Hamilton, launched an expedition into England to try to rescue the king, Belhaven participated, lending his kinsman considerable sums of money. After the duke's execution in 1649 Belhaven feared that his creditors would have him arrested but his wife came up with a daring plan to save him. Following her instructions, he announced that he was travelling to England and set off to cross the estuary of the River Solway, notorious for its treacherous tides. Shortly afterwards his distraught servant returned, leading his horse and carrying his hat. Lord Belhaven, it seemed, had been swept away and drowned. The Lyon king of arms recorded death as having taken place on 3 July 1652, and an admonition relating to the administration of his goods was granted on 11 November 1656, the deceased being described as having lived at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Middlesex. 
Lady Belhaven mourned her husband's death very publicly, and if neighbours were sometimes surprised when she received occasional visits from a mysterious stranger, no one suspected the truth. It was not until Charles II had been safely restored to the throne that Lord Belhaven miraculously reappeared, explaining that for the past six years he had been working as a gardener in England. Some of his contemporaries criticized him for feigning death, and when his only son, 'a verie hopeful youth and prettie scholar', contracted a fever and died about 1661, the minister Robert Baillie noted grimly, 'In this reall death by God's hand, who will not be mocked, the hope of that house perished' ('Letters and Journals', 3.436). When Belhaven in fact died, on 17 June 1679, his title passed by prior agreement to John Hamilton (1656-1708), son-in-law of one of the Belhavens' three daughters. 
The loss of her son was all the more poignant because Lady Belhaven was well known for her skill in medical matters. Ailing relatives would invite themselves to stay with her so that they could enjoy the benefits of her nursing, and she made up her own herbal remedies. In the 1690s she tried very hard to help her great-niece, Margaret Hamilton, countess of Panmure (died 1731), to avoid miscarriages. She collected helpful recipes from friends and acquaintances like Lady Lauderdale and Lady Ranelagh, sensibly advised against bleeding as a treatment, and told Margaret, 'If my infirm old age could permit me to go from my chamber to the place where I make my [astringent] plasters at this season, no other should be employed' (NA Scot., Dalhousie muniments, GD45/26/131). Lady Belhaven's date of death has not been found but this, her last known letter, was written on 3 January 1694. 


@@@@@


doc= 93821


Conchobar mac Donnchada (d. 833), high-king of Ireland, was a son of Donnchad mac Domnaill, high-king of Ireland (733-797) and Fuirseach, daughter of Congal of the Dal nAraidi. His recorded career began in 802, when the high-king Aed Oirdnide mac Neill of Cenel nEogain, the husband of Conchobar's sister Euginis, divided lordship over Clann Cholmain of the southern Ui Neill between Conchobar and his brother Ailill following the death of their uncle Muiredach. The next year Conchobar attacked and killed Ailill at Rathconnell. 
Five years later Conchobar attempted to seize the high-kingship. With his ally Muirgus mac Tommaltaig, the king of Connacht, he camped for three days at the Ui Neill ceremonial site of Tailtiu (Teltown), an action that implied overlordship. They fled 'like young goats', according to the annals of Ulster, when Aed appeared with his army. In revenge, Aed ravaged some of the lands of Conchobar, whose misfortunes continued when his son Cinaed was slain during a raid on Iveagh that year. 
Conchobar remained formidable, however, and on Aed's death in 819 he was recognized as high-king. His main rival was Aed's cousin Murchad mac Maele Duin, who led an army to Drimnagh in 820 to challenge the new high-king. Conchobar confronted him, but the clergy prevented battle. So Conchobar retaliated with raids around Armagh the following year. Murchad then made a secret alliance with some of Conchobar's subjects, the Sil nAeda Slaine of Brega. Conchobar reacted forcefully when he discovered the treachery, twice attacking the traitors, with an especially horrific slaughter on 1 November 822. 
Conchobar employed the church in his political machinations, as may be seen in the career of his son Artri, born of his marriage to Land, daughter of Aed Oirdnide. Artri belonged to the church at Armagh, and was its sometime head. In 823 he allied with the southern Irish prince Feidlimid mac Crimthainn, king of Munster, to proclaim the 'law of St Patrick' over Munster. Artri had made the same proclamation in Connacht in 818, and did so again in 825. Armagh was now recognized as the head of the southern Irish churches, and control of it was so important that in 827 Conchobar intervened there on Artri's behalf, when he 'dishonoured' a rival named Eogan, the candidate of his old foes the Cenel nEogain. 
For four years Conchobar was harassed on all sides. The minor clan of Gailenga attempted to hold the fair of Tailtiu in 827 without his permission, and the high-king promptly dispersed the gathering. In southern Ireland Feidlimid began campaigns for supremacy, and to forestall a confrontation Conchobar negotiated a peace with him in 827 at Birr. But any alliance or accommodation had ended by 830, when Feidlimid's subjects killed Conchobar's brother Folloman. The following year Feidlimid raided as far north as Fennor with an army that included troops from Leinster, a province that became a battleground between northern and southern princes. Conchobar responded by plundering the valley of the River Liffey. Adding to the turmoil were disturbances at the fair of Tailtiu, leading to many deaths, and Conchobar's return to Armagh where he imprisoned the retinue of Artri's rival Eogan. 
From 831 to his death in 833, however, Conchobar's reign was quiet, partly due to the escalation of viking attacks, especially in the regions of the rivers Boyne and Liffey. Conchobar is buried at Clonard, Meath. He had four known sons: Artri, who died in the same month as his father; Cathal (died 842); Eochocan; and Cinaed. While his career spanned a turbulent period of Ireland's history, it was considered a success, and is described in 'Baile in scail' as 'showers of prosperity' (Meyer, 234). 


@@@@@


doc= 93824


Hatton, Murray Edward Gordon Finch-, twelfth earl of Winchilsea and seventh earl of Nottingham (1851-1898), politician and agriculturist, was born on 28 March 1851 at Wilton Crescent, London, the second son of the ultra-tory, anti-Catholic politician George William Finch-Hatton, tenth earl of Winchilsea and fifth earl of Nottingham (1791-1858), and his third wife, Fanny Margaretta (died 1909), daughter of Edward Royd Rice of Dane Court, Kent. He spent his early years (until his father's death) at the family seat in Eastwell Park, near Ashford in Kent, and was educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford (1870-74), where he developed a lasting admiration for Benjamin Jowett, the college's famous master. In later life the two exchanged visits and correspondence. Independent of spirit, Finch-Hatton combined academic excellence with mild eccentricity: he cultivated bell ringing as a hobby, kept an organ in his rooms, and in 1874 took first-class honours in modern history. There followed in 1875 election to a fellowship at the newly refounded Hertford College, which he relinquished later that year on his marriage, on 27 October 1875, to Edith (1855-1944), daughter of Edward William Harcourt of Nuneham Park, Conservative MP for Oxfordshire. 
A Conservative, Finch-Hatton unsuccessfully contested Newark at the general election of 1880. In 1884 he won a by-election in Lincolnshire South and was returned for Lincolnshire, Spalding, at the general elections of 1885 and 1886. In the House of Commons, Finch-Hatton showed considerable interest in imperial affairs. This was perhaps partly because his younger brother Harold Heneage Finch-Hatton, author of 'Advance Australia!' and a boomerang expert, had lived in Queensland for some years. His maiden speech, in March 1884, dealt with the Liberal government's Egypt policy. A firm imperialist, Finch-Hatton supported the Imperial Federation League in the 1880s and remained an advocate of imperial federation throughout his life. 
Finch-Hatton remained an MP until 1887, when he succeeded his half-brother to the peerage. In the House of Lords, Winchilsea (as he had become) made agriculture, rather than empire, the particular focus of his politics. Significantly, in 1889 he turned down the offer of the governorship of Cape Colony. As the inheritor of nearly 12,900 acres of heavily mortgaged estates, he experienced at first hand the late nineteenth-century depression in agriculture. In 1892, not long after he came into possession, falling income forced him to sell Eastwell Park, his childhood home. Appalled by the state of agriculture, which he regarded as England's 'national industry', Winchilsea conceived the idea of a popular, cross-class, non-partisan pressure group to champion the interests of all those who lived by the land. In December 1892, at a congress held in London to draw attention to the depressed condition of agriculture, he unveiled his plan. Encouraged by the positive reception it received, he set about establishing a working organization. By March 1893 a governing council had been formed, a newspaper ('The Cable') launched, and the National Agricultural Union (NAU) had come into being, with Winchilsea as its president. 
Open to 'all persons interested in agriculture', the NAU sought to mobilize mass support behind a programme of legislative action. At the outset the programme consisted of six items: tax relief for agricultural land; reduction of railway rates; state-aided old age pensions for agricultural labourers; land tenure reform; extension of the merchandizing marks and food adulteration laws; and state funding for landlord provision of smallholdings. This remained unchanged until April 1897, which saw reform of the beer duties, bimetallism, and other measures added to the list. The NAU and its programme attracted significant support. By December 1894 it claimed 365 local branches and over 50,000 members, four-fifths of whom were said to be agricultural labourers. At the general election of 1895, 283 candidates gave their backing to the full NAU programme, and 81 to parts of it. Of these 364 candidates, 217 were elected, comprising 160 tories, 28 Liberal Unionists, and 29 Liberals. 
Winchilsea made strenuous efforts to organize his parliamentary supporters into a coherent 'agricultural party' to push for the enactment of NAU proposals. These efforts, however, foundered on the rock of established party loyalties, with the NAU never securing much influence at Westminster. Outside parliament the extent of Winchilsea's success was also limited. Despite NAU claims, membership probably never exceeded about 30,000, the spread of local branches was extremely uneven (being concentrated in the south and midlands), and many members were reluctant to contribute time or funds to the cause. Following three years of growth the NAU began to stagnate, and after 1896 slipped into gradual decline -- not the least reason for this being Winchilsea's incapacitation through illness from January 1897. The NAU finally disappeared in January 1901, when it was amalgamated with R. A. Yerburgh's Agricultural Organisation Society, a body that promoted co-operative methods of agriculture. 
Co-operation was one of Winchilsea's main concerns in his last years. In March 1896 he set up the British Produce Supply Association (BPSA) as a commercial co-operative. The BPSA aimed at establishing a network of depots to receive and distribute agricultural produce. However, the BPSA was ill run and proved a failure, folding after three years of heavy losses. The problems of the BPSA (which were apparent early on) placed strain on Winchilsea. Early in 1897 his health collapsed, and despite trips to France and South Africa in an attempt to recover he died at his Lincolnshire estate, Haverholme Priory, Sleaford, on 7 September 1898. He was buried on 12 September at Ewerby in Lincolnshire. He was survived by his wife and their only daughter, Lady Muriel Evelyn Vernon Paget; their only son, Viscount Maidstone, had died in 1891, aged nine. 
Until his final illness Winchilsea was a restlessly energetic man, frequently working eighteen-hour days for the NAU and 'The Cable' (for which he wrote all leading articles). Aside from matters agricultural and political, his energy found an outlet in an eclectic range of pastimes. These included bricklaying, glazing, dyke digging, shorthand writing, climbing (often up cliffs in pursuit of eagles' eggs, which he collected), and motoring. He was a prominent participant in the famous motor-car procession from London to Brighton on 14 November 1896, presiding at the celebratory dinner that evening. 


@@@@@


doc= 93828


Barnes, Peter Henry (1931-2004), playwright and screenwriter, was born on 10 January 1931 at 33 Devons Road, Bromley, London, the son of (James) Frederick Barnes, fairground caterer and cafe owner, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Miller. 'I grew up in a downmarket seaside resort on the east coast where my parents worked in amusement arcades on the pier and later owned two cafes on the seafront, along with the cockles and whelks stalls, the deckchairs, Punch and Judy booths, and artists who would draw, with a pointed stick, elegant pictures in the wet sand. ('The Guardian', 5 July 2004)' It was a background that may explain some of the carnivalesque elements in his later writing. It may also account for his fascination with comedy created from improbable circumstances -- a wet, windswept English summer, for instance. On his birth certificate his father's occupation was given as 'amusement caterer'. It was a title Barnes might have chosen for himself. 
Educated at Stroud grammar school, Barnes did his national service in the RAF, worked for London county council, and then, in 1954, joined the magazine 'Films and Filming'. In 1956 he became a screenwriter for Warwick Films. His scripts were good, sharp, and professional, and from then on provided his main source of income. 'They never got made, of course', he once said, 'but you still got paid' (personal knowledge). They paid for his lifelong passion -- playwriting. 
Barnes's first stage play was 'The Time of the Barracudas' (San Francisco, 1963), his first UK stage play was 'Sclerosis' (Edinburgh, 1965), and his first major success was 'The Ruling Class' (Nottingham Playhouse, 1968; Piccadilly, 1969). Directed by Stuart Burge and led by Derek Godfrey, it won both the John Whiting award and the Evening Standard award. In 1972 it was filmed with Peter O'Toole. 'The Ruling Class' was the first of his great plays and the first to explore fully his anti-authoritarian stance, his mockery of worship, and his refusal to be bound by stage conventions. His hero, the Fourteenth Earl of Gurney, is deemed mad when he thinks he is Jesus Christ and preaches love and compassion, and regarded as perfectly sane when he thinks he is Jack the Ripper and preaches punishment and revenge. 'I don't believe in God, the afterlife (this one is surely enough) or any of the other aspects of desperation', Barnes said in later life, 'but I am concerned with faith. What is it? How does it operate through men and women and why?' (Rabey, 256). 
The success of 'The Ruling Class' made Barnes popular for the next decade. 'Leonardo's Last Supper' and 'Noonday Demons' (double bill, Open Space, 1969) were both well received, as was his adaptation and co-direction of Frank Wedekind's 'Lulu' (Nottingham Playhouse and Royal Court, 1970). But it was 'The Bewitched' (Royal Shakespeare Company at Aldwych, 1974), directed by Terry Hands and starring Alan Howard, that introduced the word 'Barnesian' to theatre language. It brought together all Barnes's obsessions -- religion, authority, cruelty, anarchy, history -- all served up in a carnival of popular music, black comedy, and irreverence. Barnes admired Ben Jonson and particularly 'Bartholomew Fair'. 'The Bewitched' stands comparison with what is arguably Jonson's greatest play. 
In 1976 Barnes turned to directing with his adaptation of Georges Feydeau's 'The Purging' (Old Vic and Criterion). This was followed by Jonson's 'The Devil is an Ass' (Edinburgh/National Theatre, 1977), Wedekind and Bertolt Brecht's 'For All Those Who Get Despondent' (1977), Jonson's 'Bartholomew Fair' (Round House, 1978), Edward Marston's 'Antonio' (Nottingham Playhouse, 1979), Wedekind's 'The Devil Himself' (1980), and again Jonson's 'Bartholomew Fair' (Round House, 1987). 
Throughout the majority of Barnes's career anger had been the primary energy fuelling his best work -- anger at injustice, inhumanity, or bureaucratic barbarism. In 1978, with 'Laughter' (Royal Court), it was generally regarded that this anger had gone too far. It was a double bill that moved from the cruelties of Ivan the Terrible to the insane horrors of Auschwitz. As a Jewish writer Barnes felt that he could make jokes about the extermination camps. The world disagreed. It was a turning point. Whether consciously or unconsciously Barnes began to allow the warmth of his own personality to inform his work. Those who knew him well turned to him often for support and advice. Those who worked with him loved him: those who worked with him often, like Dilys Laye, regarded him as a friend for life. When asked, 'What do you see as the main function of your comedy?', Barnes replied: 'Revolution' (Rabey, 254). But now instead of anger the mainspring became love. 
Written in 1978, the same year as 'Laughter', 'Red Noses' (RSC at the Barbican, 1985) became his third great play. Directed by Terry Hands and starring Anthony Sher, it dealt with a group of fools called God's Zanies bringing laughter and momentary happiness to those dying of the plague. The concept was typically Barnesian and so too the targets -- organized religion, bureaucracy, and injustice. And as always it was irreverent. 'I see God', cries Flote (their leader) at one point, 'and... (pause)... she's black!!' 'Red Noses' won the Olivier award for best new play. 
In 1986 Barnes adapted Feydeau's 'Scenes from a Marriage' (RSC at the Barbican) and then continued this 'warmer' phase with 'Sunsets and Glories' (West Yorkshire Playhouse and Queens, 1990), the story of a man too saintly to be pope, and 'Dreaming' (Royal Exchange, Manchester, and Queens, 1999), the story of a soldier from the Wars of the Roses seeking a home. In 1991 he adapted Kunio Shimizu's 'Tango at the End of Winter' and in 1997 Charles Dickens's 'A Christmas Carol' (Clwyd Theatr Cymru) -- later televised with Patrick Stewart as Scrooge. This was followed in 2001 by 'Jubilee' (RSC at The Swan), a lighthearted look at the Shakespeare industry. 
With political correctness gaining ground it was becoming increasingly difficult to mount or remount a Barnes play. His screenwriting continued to be a financial support and increasingly his scripts were actually being made, particularly for television. These included 'The Spirit of Man' (1989), 'Nobody Here But Us Chickens' (1990), which won the Royal Television Society award for best screen play, 'Enchanted April' (1991), based on the novel by Elizabeth von Arnim (also adapted for film in 1993, for which he won an Oscar nomination), 'Bye Bye Columbus' (1992), 'Hard Times' (1994), and 'Babies' (2004), along with various adaptations for American television. He was particularly pleased with the Oscar nomination. 'It's put my fees up', he said gleefully. 'I can write more plays. Not that anybody'll put them on' (personal knowledge). 
Barnes loved actors, and radio enabled him to work with the best. His radio plays included 'My Ben Jonson' (1973), 'The Two Hangmen', from Wedekind and Brecht (1979), 'The Jumping Minuses of Byzantium' (1981, Giles Cooper award), 'A Mad World My Masters' from Thomas Middleton (1983), 'The Primrose Path' from Feydeau (1984), 'The Old Law' from Middleton, William Rowley and Philip Massinger (1986), 'Don Juan and Faust', from Christian Dietrich Grabbe (1987), 'The Magnetic Lady' from Jonson (1987), and four instalments of 'Barnes' People' (1981, 1983, 1986, and 1989). His 'Collected Plays' were published in three volumes, in 1981, 1993, and 1996. 
For a writer whose plays sprawled with epic exuberance through every barrier known to convention, Barnes's personal life was a model of discipline and restraint. Every morning he would write. Initially it was in the reading room of the British Museum, where he taught himself everything there was to know about the Jacobeans and unearthed those corners of forgotten history that inspired his plays, and latterly in a hamburger bar in central London. He would work from nine until one with his hamburger cooling in front of him. The bun went into the bin and the meat went home with him for the dog. This was eccentric, perhaps, but there was a statement in everything Barnes did and that would have included sitting defiantly for four hours on one of those downward-sloping plastic seats. 
Barnes had a happy home life, first with the Austrian Charlotte Beck, whom he married in 1958, and then, after she died in 1995, with an American computer animation designer, Christie Jane Horn, whom he married on 4 March 1995. They had a daughter, Leela ('b'. 2000), followed by triplets, Zachary, Nathaniel, and Abigail ('b'. 2002). His happiness was complete. 'Maybe it's what I always wanted', he said. 'It's just that I always seem to do things the wrong way round' (personal knowledge). 
Barnes always did things the wrong way round. While others were writing 'through-the-letterbox' plays -- complete with stage directions and instructions on how to reduce the seven-man cast to five in case of touring -- he was writing vast epics with casts of forty-five and more locations than a travel guide. He wrote with the wild freedom of an Elizabethan, delighting in language, and inventing words when he could not find the ones he wanted. When asked about influences on his writing he answered, 'Wedekind, Feydeau, Jonson and the Jacobean playwrights -- Middleton, Marston and to a lesser extent Otway. In films, Lubitsch, Renoir. Comedians, Laurel and Hardy, W. C. Fields, Keaton, Will Hay, Spike Milligan. Vaudeville and Music Hall. Writers -- William Burroughs, Rabelais, James Joyce' (Rabey, 255). To these one can surely add Ingmar Bergman and Alfred Jarry. It all added up to being 'Barnesian'. 
Peter Barnes was the boldest playwright of the late twentieth century. He died on 1 July 2004 at St Mary's Hospital, Westminster, following a stroke, and was survived by his wife, Christie, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93830


Ellis Samuel Birk (1915-2004), lawyer and newspaper executive, was born Elias Samuel Birk on 30 October 1915 at 3 Tankerville Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, the son of Barnett Birk, a successful financial agent, and his wife, Sylvia, 'nee' Finkelstone; his parents were Orthodox Jews who had emigrated from Ritova in Lithuania. Birk was educated at Clifton College, at which time he became a socialist (he later described himself as a 'Gaitskellite socialist') and a lifelong member of the Labour Party. He studied classics and law at Jesus College, Cambridge, and served with the Royal Artillery during the Second World War. In 1946 he joined -- through his father's influence -- the City lawyers Nicholson, Graham, and Jones. There he met the shipping magnate Sir John Ellerman, who noted Birk's considerable ability as a lawyer and who, in 1950, appointed him as his nominee on the board of the 'Sunday Pictorial', part of the Mirror Group of newspapers, in which Ellerman had a large interest. In this capacity Birk met Hugh Cudlipp, who in 1951 became editorial director of the 'Pictorial' and 'Mirror' at the invitation of the group's new chairman, Cecil King. Birk and Cudlipp formed a close partnership (dubbed the Fire Brigade) that sought to oversee and control the actions of King during the 'Daily Mirror''s heyday of the early to mid-1960s. Birk also made a significant, if obscure, contribution to King's downfall in May 1968 after the chairman had published an article, entitled 'Enough is enough', calling for the dismissal of the prime minister, Harold Wilson. Birk's insistence that King be sacked and that Cudlipp replace him as chairman was significant for the resulting transfer of power. In his youth Birk had reacted against his parents' religious orthodoxy and had become a member of the Jewish Reform community. However, in later life he returned to Orthodoxy and held a number of influential positions in Jewish life within Britain, sitting from 1956 as a director of the 'Jewish Chronicle' (and from 1987 as chairman of its board), and as chairman of the Jewish Welfare Board; he was also a governor of the Hebrew University, Jerusalem. At the 'Mirror' he remained an influential, though behind-the-scenes, figure until the group's takeover by Robert Maxwell in 1984. He died at Hammerson House, a residential care home in Bishops Avenue, Finchley, London, on 3 July 2004. He was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93831


Birks, Peter Brian Herrenden (1941-2004), jurist, was born on 3 October 1941 at Green Hedges, Westmeston, Lewes, Sussex, the eldest son of Peter Herrenden Birks, a medical practitioner and captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and his wife, (Maud) Mary, 'nee' Morgan. The family moved to Assam in India after the war, though Birks himself was sent back at the age of seven to attend an English preparatory school. In India his father became convinced that tea was the cure of many ills, and would often experiment on himself in attempts to prove it. He almost bankrupted the family in the process and they were forced to return to England in the mid-1950s. Birks was taken out of school for a whole year, being forced to live with his father in a series of guest houses. In 1956 he became a pupil at Chislehurst and Sidcup grammar school, where he excelled in both academic and sporting fields. He then spent a year teaching Latin at his old prep school before going to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1961 to read law on a state scholarship. On 15 September of the following year he married Sarah Anne Hanson, the 19-year-old daughter of Christopher Wharton Hanson, a scientific librarian; the couple had one daughter. After graduating in 1964 with a first-class degree, he spent a year as a Bigelow teaching fellow at the Northwestern law school in Chicago. Birks was now set on an academic career with his main area of interest being Roman law. The advice from his college tutor was that he should study and teach outside Oxford before entertaining any thoughts of returning, and that he should go to University College, London, to study with another Romanist, Tony Thomas. Birks was duly appointed an assistant lecturer at University College and enrolled for a part-time University of London LLM, which he achieved with distinction. 
Birks stayed at University College until 1971, when he was appointed to a fellowship at Brasenose College, Oxford. By this time he had separated from his first wife and on 26 May 1972 he married Gwendolen Tilley, a 23-year-old law student, and daughter of Ronald Tilley, bank manager, with whom he had a son and a daughter. Although he loved his time at Brasenose and was devoted to the college, deteriorating relations with his second wife led to him putting his name forward for the chair of civil law in Edinburgh when invited to apply; he was elected in 1981. He was, however, still based in Oxford, having by now met his third wife, Jacqueline Susan (Jackie) Berrington ('b'. 1946), a statistician and the daughter of John Gilbert Stimpson; they married on 29 October 1984. With the subsequent birth of their son, Birks decided to relocate to England and in 1987 took a chair at the University of Southampton. However, within eighteen months the regius chair of civil law in Oxford became vacant. Birks was the obvious candidate and was appointed in 1989, whereupon he also took up a fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford. 
For common lawyers, Birks's fame rests on his work on the law of restitution, a subject he first encountered in the London LLM. Restitution is essentially the law of gain-based rather than loss-based awards, the giving up of enrichments rather than the payment of compensation. It includes the recovery of mistaken payments and the value of improvements to another's land or goods, and the disgorgement of the profits of wrongdoing. When Birks studied the subject at University College, London, it was obscured under such fictitious headings as 'quasi-contract', 'waiver of tort', and 'constructive trusts'. Moreover, it did not even have its own textbook, something only put right after Birks had completed his studies with the publication by Robert Goff and Gareth Jones of 'The Law of Restitution' (1966). This was a great step forward in that the case law and statutory material for this subject was now collected together in one source rather than being dispersed to the four corners of the law library. What the book lacked, however, was a coherent, analytical structure, and it was this which Birks set out to supply. 
Common lawyers have never been much interested in issues of taxonomy and structure, as witness the fact that the principal reference work for practitioners, 'Halsbury's Laws of England', is still organized around the alphabet. Bringing his knowledge of Roman law to bear on restitution, especially the attempts made by Gaius in the second century and Justinian in the sixth to organize that formulary system, Birks sought to 'find the scheme on which the law in [the] cases can be most elegantly and efficiently arranged' ('An Introduction to the Law of Restitution', 1985, vii). In a series of articles in the 1970s, and culminating in the publication of 'An Introduction to the Law of Restitution' in 1985, Birks established a number of taxonomic norms for the subject. The first was that the word 'restitution' had to be reserved for gain-based awards: the problem was that in common parlance it was often used to cover both claims for losses and gains. Second, a fundamental divide had to be drawn between those gain-based responses triggered by wrongdoing (restitution for wrongdoing) and those, such as the recovery of a mistaken payment, involving no wrongdoing on the part of the defendant (autonomous unjust enrichment). Third, within autonomous unjust enrichment there could be identified a number of 'unjust factors', the reasons for restitution. These in turn could be subdivided between those in which the claimant's intent to make the transfer of value was vitiated, where it was qualified, and where, for other reasons, such as an insistence on the legality of governmental action, the law said that the gain had to be given up. Fourth, and again within 'autonomous unjust enrichment', a differentiation was to be made between the various constituent parts of a restitutionary cause of action, those which went to the determination whether the defendant had been enriched, whether that enrichment was at the claimant's expense, whether there was an unjust factor, and finally, whether there were any defences to the claim. A final distinction was to be made between the type of right, personal or proprietary, awarded by the court. 
The Birksian scheme, with its clear language and its rejection of fictions, was immediately embraced by the judiciary and academics, at least those with an interest in rationalizing the law. Indeed it soon became the standard language in English cases up to and including the level of the House of Lords. Further thinking about his scheme, however, led Birks to realize in 1998 that the title 'restitution' was a misnomer, and that it was better to split apart entirely autonomous unjust enrichment and restitution for wrongs, leaving the latter to be dealt with in books on wrongs. But this was not the most radical view expressed in his book 'Unjust Enrichment' (2003). Much the most important, and far more contentious, was his abandonment of 'unjust factors', the specific reasons for restitution (for example, mistake, duress, undue influence, and so on) to be replaced by a model that asked, in modern civil-law fashion, whether or not there was a 'legal ground' for the transfer of value, and stated that in the 'absence' of such ground restitution should, subject to defences, follow. Ironically, Birks had earlier dismissed such an approach on the basis that the law needed to be explicable to the common man, and while mistake and duress as grounds of recovery could be so understood, absence of legal ground was both technical and abstract and gave no normative reason in itself for recovery. Birks's untimely death meant that he did not have the opportunity to defend and refine a thesis that had yet to be accepted by the courts and the academic community. It was, however, characteristic that he was prepared to overthrow all his previous work ('Almost everything of mine now needs calling back for burning', he wrote ('Unjust Enrichment', 2003, xiv)) in his search for the truth. 
But though restitution was his prime concern, Birks never stopped work in Roman law, especially on the Roman law of delict or civil wrongs, though his ambition to write a comprehensive account of this area, for which he had been collecting materials all his life, was thwarted by the onset of cancer. He did, however, produce in 1987 (with Grant McLeod) an excellent translation, 'Justinian's Institutes', which contained a valuable introduction to the institutional scheme, and particularly its relationship to the modern law. Indeed it was one of the themes of Birks's work that the study of Roman law was incredibly important to common lawyers, not only to equip them to communicate better with their civil-law colleagues, but also to understand and improve their own system. It was for that reason that Birks was a passionate supporter of the compulsory study of Roman law by first-year law students in Oxford. 
Birks was also heavily involved in the politics of legal education, most notably through being for many years the secretary of the Society of Public Teachers of Law, which he almost single-handed turned into a vibrant and scholarly institution, and of which he was president in 2002-3. He took great interest in trying to produce a rational structure of the law syllabus the professions expected the universities to teach, which in turn led him to attempt to produce in 2000, with a team of specialist writers, a 'Justinian's Institutes' for English law -- 'English Private Law' -- swiftly followed by 'English Public Law' (2004) under the editorship of David Feldman. Part of his motivation was his love of the common law and the fear that its incomprehensibility to civil lawyers might lead to the dominance of their laws through the European Union. Like Thomas Wood three centuries earlier, he aimed to 'put in some order... this heap of good learning' (T. Wood, 'An Institute of the Laws of England', 1722, i). 
In 1989 Birks was elected a fellow of the British Academy; he was made an honorary QC in 1995 and became an honorary fellow of Trinity College in the same year. His contribution to legal scholarship was also recognized with honorary degrees from a number of universities in Britain and overseas and a fellowship of University College, London. Though a brilliant academic, he was one of the least stuffy persons imaginable. He was interested in academic gossip, and had plenty of his own to impart. He was always willing to share his knowledge with others, most especially the army of doctoral students he supervised and who willingly took some of his more embryonic ideas and turned them into full-blown theses. He was a great supporter of his junior colleagues, spending many hours painstakingly reading their work in draft, sometimes improving it beyond all recognition. His generosity was also evidenced in the administrative burdens he willingly shouldered for the Oxford law faculty. He had a very strong sense of duty, both to his subject and to the institutions to which he belonged. 
Birks's third marriage was extremely happy and his most productive period undoubtedly followed his meeting with Jackie. He died of cancer of the oesophagus on 6 July 2004 at his home, Oak Trees, Sandy Lane, Boars Hill, Oxford. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93832


Brett, Lionel Gordon Baliol, fourth Viscount Esher (1913-2004), architect and town planner, was born on 18 July 1913 at Orchard Lea, Winkfield, in Windsor Forest, Berkshire, the eldest of three children and only son of Oliver Sylvain Baliol Brett, from 1930 third Viscount Esher (1881-1963), and his wife, Antoinette, 'nee' Heckscher (died 1965), daughter of August Heckscher of New York. He was born at his paternal grandfather's house, which was a legacy of his close relationship to the court of Queen Victoria, but in 1921 his father bought Watlington Park, Oxfordshire, where Brett himself lived in the post-war years. In retrospect he felt deprived of unconditional affection as a child, writing, 'I knew I had the gifts that in those days were supposed to guarantee success. But the bad fairy at my christening had brought two other presents -- a compulsion to succeed and a longing to be liked' ('Our Selves Unknown', 48). Academic success at Eton College came easily, and took him to New College, Oxford, with a history scholarship in 1932, although he had already declared his intention to be an architect. He graduated with a first-class degree in 1935. On 22 October the same year he married (Helena) Christian Olive Pike (1914-2006), the eldest daughter of Colonel Ebenezer John Lecky Pike, an officer in the Grenadier Guards. This was one factor that influenced a rather impatient entry into his new profession, via an incomplete course at the Architectural Association, a short pupillage with A. S. G. Butler, a pupil of Sir Edwin Lutyens, and some cramming for the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) exams. He later regretted that as a result of his truncated architectural education he was not confident enough to work on his own as an architect. A convert to the modern movement, he joined the architects William and Aileen Tatton Brown briefly, designing with them an extension to his aunt's house. He won the RIBA's Ashpitel prize in 1939. He and his wife had five sons and a daughter, between 1936 and 1952. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War, Brett enlisted in the Royal Artillery, and joined in the invasion of Europe in 1944. Part of his mind was filled with schemes of post-war reconstruction, and after coming third in the 1945 election as Liberal candidate for South Oxfordshire, and being demobilized with the rank of major, Brett formed a brief professional alliance with Clough Williams-Ellis for making town plans for Littlehampton, Sussex, and Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, and worked alongside Patrick Abercrombie on plans for Redditch new town. In 1947 he was appointed architect-planner for Hatfield New Town and recruited Kenneth Boyd as a partner, later joined by Peter Bosanquet, working initially in a converted cowshed at Watlington. Other commissions came for Stevenage and Basildon, and Brett took charge himself of several private houses, as well as the high commissioner's residence at Lagos. Their public housing designs and layouts, aiming for urbanity, were professionally well received, but an elegant serpentine terrace in Hatfield built by Wimpey with a novel aluminium roof suffered storm damage in November 1957, some fifty houses losing their roofs. Brett felt that the public enquiry that followed was a needlessly vindictive way to determine liability, and bore the scars of this event. The practice dissolved, and Brett travelled to the USA to lecture on new towns, and elsewhere for planning consultancy. 
In 1960 Brett accepted an invitation from the architect Francis Pollen, an architect of great natural ability specializing in Catholic and domestic work, to go into partnership as Brett and Pollen. Some of their work was collaborative, with Brett suggesting strategies, and Pollen giving form to the design, but other projects were individual. Brett (who succeeded his father as fourth Viscount Esher in 1963) continued to focus on planning. 
In 1963 he won the commission for the redevelopment of the Guildhall area of Portsmouth, including Portsmouth civic centre, and worked on the buildings with Harry Teggin, who joined Brett and Pollen and became a third partner, specializing in black steel and glass construction. Teggin helped to bring the practice's image up to date and gained widespread admiration for its work, such as 82-90 Sloane Street, London, and Pall Mall Court in King Street, Manchester, as well as contributing to the planning side. Esher was also involved in schemes for Abingdon, as well as for Santiago, Chile, and Caracas, Venezuela. In 1965 he published a study of south Oxfordshire, 'Landscape in Distress'. This was also the year in which he became president of the RIBA. In 1966 he was selected by Richard Crossman (his former history tutor at Oxford) to make one of a set of pilot studies of historic towns, on York. 'Its central purpose was not 'conservation'... but the return of people to live in the heart of a once densely populated mediaeval environment', he later wrote (Esher to Alan Powers, 18 February 2003, priv. coll.). The report was handsomely published in 1969 and widely read. One of his own best designs from this period was the brick tower house, a reworking of a historic form amid tall trees, with a moat, at Christmas Common on the Watlington estate, that he built for himself in 1967. 
By the late 1960s personal relationships between Esher, Pollen, and Teggin had become strained, and when Esher was invited in 1971 to succeed Sir Robin Darwin as rector of the Royal College of Art, he saw a way out and handed the practice to his partners. Unfortunately, it was a turbulent period in higher education, and he failed to stop a simmering revolt at the college, although it was defused before he left in 1978. He devoted himself subsequently to the diverse range of committee work in the heritage and environment sector that had formed a background to his whole adult life (he was, 'inter alia', a member of the Royal Fine Arts Commission, 1951-69, and of the Arts Council, 1972-7, a trustee of the Soane Museum, 1976-94, and chairman of the Thames and Chilterns region of the National Trust, 1979-83), and to continuing his career as a writer. In 1947 his first book for Penguin, 'Houses', praised modernism as a continuation of the Georgian traditions of urban form. 'Parameters and Images' (1970) was an investigation of architectural and planning problems in the light of modernism's incipient collapse, a story told again in 'A Broken Wave' (1981). Esher's writing style was sometimes too epigrammatic and clever to match the seriousness of his thoughts, but it was evidence of his humanity and breadth of concern. His love of mountains emerged in the 'Shell Guide' to 'North Wales' (1971), written with Elisabeth Beazley; he had been offered this commission since he had a holiday house on the Portmeirion estate. 'Our Selves Unknown' (1985), his autobiography, was an honest self-portrait. 
Reg Gadney, a supporter at the Royal College of Art, wrote that 'Esher was one of those rare Englishmen of influence whose goodness was strengthened, paradoxically, by sensitivity and self-doubt. He took far less from life than he gave to it, and was the most lovable of men' ('The Guardian', 13 July 2004). He died at the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, on 9 July 2004, of septicaemia and perforated diverticular disease, and was survived by his wife of sixty-eight years, Christian, and their six children; he was succeeded as fifth viscount by his eldest son, Christopher ('b'. 1936). 


@@@@@


doc= 93833


Burchfield, Robert William (1923-2004), lexicographer, was born on 27 January 1923 at 58 Pitt Street, Wanganui, New Zealand, the younger son of Frederick Burchfield (1891-1979), formerly a coalminer and subsequently an electricity company employee, and his wife, Mary Lauder, 'nee' Blair (1894-1974). His father was born in the village of Halling, near Rochester, Kent, and the family had emigrated when Frederick Burchfield was fourteen; his mother was born at Fortrose, Southland, New Zealand, her family having previously emigrated from Scotland. 
Burchfield attended the Keith Street primary school and Victoria Avenue intermediate school in Wanganui, and subsequently Wanganui Technical College. He was proud that his subsequent achievements stemmed from a public education. By the age of seventeen his academic prowess had earned him a place in the English department of Victoria University College in Wellington. His university course was interrupted by the Second World War, though he completed his BA course part-time while in uniform. In 1941 he was conscripted into the Royal New Zealand Artillery and went in 1944 with a survey troop to northern Italy. He described his time there as 'the great adventure' of his life, mixing with his fellow soldiers, learning Italian, playing rugby, and experiencing the excitement of military service (E. Burchfield, unpublished memoir). In 1946 he was discharged from the army and returned to New Zealand to take his MA degree (1948) and to work as a junior lecturer in English. 
In 1949 Burchfield's life took a new turn, with the award of a Rhodes scholarship to Oxford (he was an undergraduate at Magdalen College) and his marriage on 2 July, in Palmerston North, New Zealand, to Ethel May Yates (1924-2001), daughter of John Yates and Lily, 'nee' Beaumont. He never returned to live in New Zealand, but his experience of growing up there informed his approach to scholarship and to lexicography for the rest of his life. His fascination with philology had begun at Victoria, but it flourished in Oxford, where he studied under J. A. W. Bennett, C. S. Lewis, and J. R. R. Tolkien. He graduated BA at Oxford in 1951 (and MA in 1955). Tolkien supervised his postgraduate work on the 'Ormulum', a twelfth-century verse text characterized by its semi-phonetic spelling system. 
Burchfield seemed destined for a conventional academic career. In 1952 he was appointed to a junior lectureship in English language at Magdalen College, and in 1953 to a lectureship at Christ Church. In 1955 his long association with St Peter's College in Oxford began, initially as a lecturer, then from 1963 as a fellow. Alongside academic articles he published 'The Land and People of New Zealand' in 1953, with his wife. From 1950 he had a growing family, with three children (two girls and a boy); he delighted in the mix of family and academic life that he experienced in Oxford. 
While at Magdalen Burchfield got to know Charles Talbut Onions, one of the original editors of the 'Oxford English Dictionary (OED)'. In 1957 Onions recommended Burchfield to Oxford University Press as editor of a proposed single-volume 'Supplement to the OED'. Burchfield was appointed, and began a twenty-nine-year journey through the alphabet culminating in the publication in 1986 of the final volume of what had become a four-volume labour of love. The editorial department of the 'OED' had been disbanded in 1933, and Burchfield effectively had to rebuild it and its resources from scratch. He recalled his first day on the 'Supplement' in 1957, 'spent in a thorough reading of that day's 'Times'' for the dictionary (E. Burchfield, unpublished memoir). Gradually he built up an editorial staff and laid the groundwork for a word file that would form the basis of the new 'Supplement'. The publication of 'Webster's Third International Dictionary' in 1961 convinced him that he needed to collect much more material. His teaching duties at St Peter's continued until 1990, but work on the dictionary began to take over his life. 
In 1972 Oxford University Press published the first volume (A-G) of the 'Supplement', to general acclaim. In 1975 Burchfield was appointed CBE, and he received honorary doctorates from the universities of Liverpool and Victoria in 1978 and 1983 respectively. His first marriage having ended in divorce in 1976, on 5 November that year he married Elizabeth Austen Knight ('b'. 1927), a fellow New Zealander and a senior publicity officer at Oxford University Press; she was the daughter of Cedric Hankinson Knight, a company manager. Burchfield's New Zealand background made him particularly conscious that the 'Supplement' should enhance the 'OED''s coverage of international varieties of English, and the achievement of this remains one of his legacies to the dictionary. In the first volume (A-G) he added to the dictionary the celebrated four-letter words that the original editors had not been permitted to include. He was occasionally confronted with requests (even death threats) suggesting that he omit some sensitive words from the 'OED', but he refused to allow the content of the dictionary to be censored. He was adamant that the dictionary should remain descriptive rather than becoming prescriptive. He had little truck with what he regarded as the algebraic approach of some contemporary linguists. 
While working on the 'Supplement' Burchfield served as honorary secretary to the Early English Text Society (1955-68) and as editor of 'Notes and Queries' (1959-62). He produced a number of books (notably 'The Spoken Word', 1981, 'The English Language', 1985, and 'The New Zealand Pocket Oxford Dictionary', 1986). The fifth volume of the 'Cambridge History of the English Language', 'English in Britain and Overseas', was published under his editorship in 1994. He also maintained his output of academic articles and reviews on the language. The completion of work on the 'Supplement' gave him the opportunity to turn to his other academic interests. He toyed with the idea of returning to his earlier work on the 'Ormulum', but was soon swept up in a new project, a revision of 'Fowler's Modern English Usage', continued after his retirement from Oxford University Press in 1986 and published in 1996. He applied his descriptivist techniques to this work, and produced a text that pleased some and frustrated others. 
Burchfield's retirement in Sutton Courtenay, Oxfordshire, was clouded by the onset of Parkinson's disease in the late 1990s, and apart from rechecking for the 'OED' the many hundreds of quotations from the 'Ormulum' in his transcript of the original manuscript he became unable to continue his academic pursuits. He died of bronchopneumonia on 5 July 2004 at Abingdon Hospital. After a funeral service at St Peter's College on 12 July his body was cremated, and the ashes interred in Sutton Courtenay churchyard on 4 August. He was survived by his second wife, Elizabeth, and his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93834


Cahill, Joseph (1920-2004), Irish republican activist, was born on 19 May 1920 at 60 Divis Street, Belfast, the eldest son and first of the eleven children of Joseph Cahill, printer, and his wife, Josephine, 'nee' Mulholland. A Roman Catholic, he attended St Mary's Christian Brothers School in Barrack Street, Belfast. At seventeen he joined the republican boy-scout movement na Fianna Eireann before joining the Irish Republican Army (IRA) at eighteen. 
On Easter Sunday 1942 Cahill was one of a five-man IRA unit detailed to create an incident to divert Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) attention from an IRA commemoration of the 1916 Easter rising. A police vehicle was fired on in the belief that it would retreat before returning with reinforcements, allowing the IRA unit to escape. However, the RUC officers immediately pursued the IRA unit. One, Patrick Murphy, saw them enter a safe house and followed without waiting for back-up. The incident ended in a gun battle. The leader of the IRA unit, Tom Williams, was hit three times and Murphy was hit five times and fatally wounded. All five members of the IRA unit, and a sixth IRA man and two women who were present in the safe house as part of the IRA support team, were charged with murder. The six men were subsequently sentenced to death. Following a large reprieve campaign (including a plea from Pope Pius XII) all but Williams had their death sentences commuted. Cahill and the four others were eventually released in October 1949. 
Cahill, rather unusually for a Catholic and especially for a republican, worked as a joiner in the loyalist-dominated Harland and Wolff shipyard in east Belfast for a time in 1950-51. Otherwise he worked in the building industry but also resumed his IRA activities. On 2 April 1956 at St John's Church, Falls Road, Belfast, he married the 20-year-old Annie Magee, of Whiterock Road, Belfast, a stitcher, and twin and joint second youngest of nine children of Edward (Ned) Magee, labourer. They had seven children. Following the initiation of the IRA's border campaign of 1956-62 Cahill and other Belfast republicans were interned in Belfast's Crumlin Road gaol in January 1957. (His first child and only son, Thomas, was born two months later.) Cahill was eventually released in April 1961. The republican leadership that emerged in Dublin after the disastrous border campaign turned increasingly from armed struggle to a political approach, much to the disillusionment of Cahill, who remained a traditional physical-force republican. He resigned from the IRA in 1965, limiting his republican involvement to membership of the National Graves Association. 
As the civil rights crisis deepened in the later 1960s Cahill claimed that anti-Catholic pogroms were inevitable but that the Dublin IRA leadership was taking no precautions to deal with such an eventuality. He and other IRA veterans attempted to organize 'auxiliaries' for the defence of Catholic areas. When violence broke out in August 1969 and Catholic areas of Belfast came under attack, there was deep anger with the IRA among the Catholic community, who had traditionally looked to the IRA as their defenders of last resort. Cahill was among a group of veterans who demanded that the Belfast IRA leadership break with the Dublin leadership and form a separate 'northern command'. A compromise was reached but eventually broke down. As steps were taken by Cahill and other republican dissidents in mid-December 1969 to form a separate northern command, they were contacted by Sean MacStiofain, IRA director of intelligence, who had just left an IRA convention at which a motion had been passed ending the traditional republican policy of abstentionism (the policy of, if elected, abstaining from taking seats in the British parliaments or the two Irish parliaments, which republicans considered illegitimate and refused to recognize). MacStiofain and other traditionalist southern republicans had vehemently opposed dropping abstentionism, and having broken with the official Dublin leadership were now organizing an alternative 'provisional' IRA. It was on this alliance between Belfast 'defenders' and southern traditionalists that the Provisional IRA was founded. In January 1970 Cahill attended the first Provisional IRA army convention and was elected to the army council. His first major mission was a trip to the USA with Leo Martin that November. He was well received as his traditional and 'defenderist' version of republicanism was more in harmony with conservative Irish-American supporters of the republican movement than that of the left-wing Official IRA. During this trip, the first of many for Cahill but his only legal one until 1994, Noraid, which became the main source of American money for the Provisional IRA, was established. 
Cahill rose to public prominence in the wake of the introduction of internment when, on 13 August 1971, as Belfast IRA commander, he appeared at a press conference in Belfast designed to demonstrate that internment had failed to capture the IRA leadership. Cahill hit the headlines again in September when he was detained for a week in New York, having been denied entry to the USA. He, with other leading Provisionals, met Harold Wilson, then in opposition, twice for private talks in Ireland in 1972. He was also part of a republican delegation, including Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness, which secretly met William Whitelaw, the Conservative secretary of state for Northern Ireland, in England in July 1972. None of these talks produced tangible results. 
Cahill became chief of staff of the Provisional IRA in late 1972, replacing Sean MacStiofain. MacStiofain had been opposed to an IRA campaign in England, but Cahill was to sanction such operations. In January 1973 he travelled to Libya at the invitation of the Libyan leader, Colonel Gaddafi. Gaddafi gave the IRA an arms shipment that was taken back to Ireland on the 'Claudia'. However, when it was attempted to unload the vessel off the co. Waterford coast the Irish navy and police were waiting and seized the ship, arresting all on board, including Cahill. For his part in the 'Claudia' incident Cahill was sentenced to three years' penal servitude in May 1973. In Mountjoy prison he took part with eleven other IRA prisoners in a hunger-strike that resulted in IRA prisoners being granted special category status. He was released on medical grounds in January 1975. He was later to suffer several heart attacks. Despite ill-health he served in various positions on the IRA army council, including quartermaster-general and adjutant-general, and is believed to have been a member of that body until the 1990s. He was elected to Sinn Fein's ard comhairle (national executive) in the late 1970s and later served as Sinn Fein national treasurer until 1995 when he was made honorary vice-president for life. In 1988 he was diagnosed as suffering from colon cancer, but recovered. While in hospital he reportedly kept the Sinn Fein account books under his mattress. 
Cahill supported the new Adams-McGuinness leadership's dropping of abstentionism in relation to the Dail in 1986, and later backed their peace process strategy. His main role in the peace process was immediately before the first IRA ceasefire in August 1994 and consisted of reassuring Irish-American supporters that republicans were not 'selling out'. This task was considered so important that the taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, intervened directly with the White House to obtain a visa for him. Cahill's life can be summed up in a comment he made to his biographer: 'I was born in a united Ireland and I want to die in a united Ireland' (Anderson, 15). His wish was not granted. Following a brief illness he died from renal failure and pyelonephritis at his home, 30 Andersonstown Crescent, Belfast, on 23 July 2004. He was survived by his wife, Annie, and their seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93835


Blow, David Mervyn (1931-2004), crystallographer and biophysicist, was born on 27 June 1931 at 4 Claremont Road, Handsworth, Birmingham, the younger son of Edward Mervyn Blow, Methodist minister, and his wife, Dorothy Laura, 'nee' Sanders. After a peripatetic early education he and his brother Ralph were educated at Kingswood School, Bath, where he developed his interest in physics. His entry to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, on an open scholarship was delayed by two years' national service (1949-51). These he spent in the RAF training as a glider pilot. He had several brushes with death. At Cambridge he read physics, graduated in 1954, and was encouraged to stay on to do research. He was awarded his PhD in 1957. On 3 August 1955, at the Methodist church in Windsor Road, Ealing, he had married Mavis June Evelyn Sears, a 23-year-old schoolteacher, and daughter of John Charles Sears, a technical assistant for London Transport. They had a son, Julian, and a daughter, Elizabeth. 
Blow had arrived at the Medical Research Council unit for the study of molecular biological systems, Cambridge, in 1954 as a slightly uncertain PhD candidate who preferred radio astronomy but who had heard that there were funds in biophysics. When he discovered what Max Perutz and his colleagues were doing his enthusiasm was captured and he began research for his doctorate as Perutz's student and assistant. It was a good time for able physicists to do research in biology as it was the techniques in physics and chemistry that were equipping biochemists and biologists to penetrate the complexity of living systems. The explosive growth of biological sciences from the 1950s onwards in part arose through X-ray crystallography, a discipline pioneered by Perutz and John Kendrew in this laboratory that revealed the positions of the atoms in the large and complex biologically active molecules. It was about the time of Blow's arrival at the unit that Perutz made the critical discovery that it was possible to react a mercury atom with haemoglobin without removing its ability to bind oxygen and without damaging the crystal. Perutz realized that heavy atom binding like this was not only the way into the determination of haemoglobin's atomic structure but was also a general route for the determination of protein structures. The problem that Blow addressed was to formulate mathematical routines that computed the best phases from the changes in the intensities of the X-ray reflections of native and heavy atom-reacted haemoglobin crystals. It was essential that these routines could be transferred to computers, given the tedium of evaluating probabilities for each reflexion and the huge size of the data sets. Blow derived a rigorous procedure that at the time of his death remained the basis for the calculation methods for determining phases. The project attracted the interest of Francis Crick and together he and Blow produced a definitive paper on the treatment of errors in the isomorphous replacement method. 
After a relatively unproductive spell as a Fulbright scholar at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1957-9), Blow was offered a research position back at Perutz's unit in Cambridge, which he very happily accepted. This move brought him to a laboratory whose research was still growing in impact. He found himself sharing a room with Michael Rossmann, another young crystallographer just back from the United States. As sometimes happens, they just hit it off and began a remarkably creative collaboration on developing a new way of determining phases and solving protein structures. The Blow and Rossmann partnership became a legend. Though the two men were profoundly different in their mental and emotional make-up they shared strong moral principles and had a similar nonconformist upbringing. In their research Blow's rigour and analytical mind was a perfect foil for Rossmann's imaginative and energetic leaps. Together they effected a new and fundamental approach to protein structural analysis. Proteins, for example haemoglobin, often consist of similar or identical subunits and Blow and Rossmann recognized that this repetition of structure puts constraints on the phases. In principle if one knew how the identical subunits were related in the crystal this information could be used in deriving phase information. Conceptually this insight was a landmark, and the huge expansion of protein crystallography in later years gave it immense practical importance. It turned out that the molecular replacement method pioneered by Blow and Rossmann was very powerful in locating similar structures in different crystals. Since there is a limited repertoire of chain folds in the protein population the Blow and Rossmann approach of molecular replacement became the principal method for solving unknown protein structures. 
Blow and Rossmann moved with Perutz's unit when it merged with another led by Fred Sanger to form the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge. By 1964 they were doing encouraging calculations with the molecular replacement method. One protein studied was chymotrypsin whose specificity and mechanism was a major focus in biochemistry and biology. When in 1964 Rossmann moved to the USA Blow continued the research, establishing a small group that contained Paul Sigler, Brian Matthews, and others. This young team worked with blazing enthusiasm, solving the structure of chymotrypsin (only the second enzyme structure to be solved) in just three years, a remarkable achievement. 
In 1977 Blow moved to Imperial College, London, to hold a newly created chair of biophysics. Typically he was responding in this move to the intention of the Medical Research Council that its staff should move into the university sector and stimulate research there. He established his biophysics laboratory in the physics department; this suited him since he remained a physicist in many ways. His research continued to concentrate on enzymes, and in particular he worked closely with Brian Hartley and Alan Fersht on chymotrypsin and tyr-tRNA-synthetase. These structural and mechanistic studies were often linked to the innovative mutagenesis experiments being undertaken by Alan Fersht that led to the very powerful technique called 'protein engineering'. Other enzymes Blow studied included isomerase, cholesterol oxidase, HIV reverse transcriptase, and carboxy-peptidase G2. These were all biologically and medically important, but two of them proved extremely difficult to crystallize. This experience prompted Blow to establish research into protein crystallization -- which led to the development of a useful automated micro-batch system -- as well as crystals. Throughout he maintained his penchant for theoretical aspects of X-ray analysis and a continuing commitment to crystallographic methods. Indeed his last two papers in 2002 and 2003 were on crystallographic theory. 
Blow's authority in crystallography, the breadth of his interests, and his grasp of physics made him a valuable member of the international community of crystallographers. It was often Blow who ensured that technicalities in the subject were discussed properly and he would on occasion play an influential role in resolving more general issues. There were for example worrying occasions when wrong structures got published. He had the ability and convictions to ask the right questions, a very important attribute in exposing what Perutz called 'error'. Fortunately his credentials and his engaging and straightforward manner usually reduced the tensions that can accompany the correcting of mistakes. One of his important initiatives was the founding in 1982 of the British Crystallographic Association, an organization that included all the different fields of the subject. This was a big commitment that required energy and time, and Blow gave them cheerfully and effectively. 
As an academic and scientific colleague Blow combined his serious approach with warmth and consideration. His commitment to research set an influential example; he took teaching seriously and had a wonderful enthusiasm for it. He recognized the need for administration, which he did well. At Imperial he inevitably assumed increasing responsibility, being for a considerable period the dean of science and later head of the physics department (then the largest department at Imperial). In all his dealings he was utterly honest and without personal ambition, and characteristically he was always active on behalf of others. 
The importance of Blow's crystallographic and biochemical research was recognized by his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1972 and by many awards, including the CIBA medal in 1967, the Charles Leopold Meyer prize in 1979, and the Wolf Foundation prize for chemistry in 1987, shared with David Phillips. Naturally he became the president of the British Crystallographic Association, a position he filled with great distinction from 1984 to 1988. 
Blow took early retirement in 1994 owing to problems with his heart. He moved to Appledore in Devon, where he had family roots and where he and his wife joined enthusiastically in village life. As a physicist he recognized that students or beginners from the biological sciences and even chemistry needed education in the concepts, theory, and practicalities of crystallography. To answer this need he wrote the excellent 'Outline of Crystallography for Biologists' (2002), which was warmly welcomed by his fellow experts and by students attracted by its thoughtful format and the remarkably clear and beautifully illustrated text. In the final year of his life he wrote a short science fiction novel, 'Live-Net', which connected the immense extent and complexity of the world wide web and evolution, a natural follow up of his research. He died on 8 June 2004 at his home, 26 Riversmeet, Appledore, of lung cancer, and was survived by his wife, Mavis, and their two children. In 2006 a new chair in biophysics at Imperial College was named after him. 




@@@@@


doc= 93836


Buckeridge, Anthony Malcolm (1912-2004), schoolmaster and author, was born on 20 June 1912 at 4 Marlow Villas, Birkbeck Road, Mill Hill, Middlesex, the only son of Ernest George Buckeridge, bank clerk, and his wife, Gertrude Alice, 'nee' Smith. His early life was overshadowed by the First World War. Buckeridge's father, who nurtured a private interest in poetry, was called up, sent out to the western front in 1917, and killed within half an hour of arriving at Arras. His widow took a job as a bank clerk. Young Anthony was educated by the Bank Clerks' Orphanage Fund, which sent him to board at Seaford College, Sussex. This, Buckeridge recalled, in typically quiet tones, was 'not a very rewarding experience. No music, no drama, no art and I remember always being hungry' ('The Guardian', 29 June 2004). Perhaps it was not an entirely wasted experience: ahead of him in the school was the 'mildly eccentric' Diarmaid Jennings, whose schoolboy scrapes stuck in his imagination ('The Times', 29 June 2004). 
On leaving school Buckeridge worked in a City bank for two years but he was ambitious to act and had a spell in weekly repertory. The taste for amateur dramatics never left him; much later, in retirement, he would play walk-on parts with Glyndebourne Opera. Meanwhile the life of the jobbing actor was too precarious and, after taking a degree at University College, London, he began to teach in various home counties preparatory schools while simultaneously contributing light, humorous pieces to magazines and the radio. On 14 April 1936 he married Sylvia Goulden, daughter of John Brown, a physician, with whom he had a son and a daughter. Just before the Second World War Buckeridge joined the staff of St Lawrence College, Ramsgate; in 1939 he enrolled with the National Fire Service. His refusal to enlist was probably influenced by the revered memory of his father whose 'war had lasted half an hour and whose death achieved nothing' ('The Guardian', 29 June 2004). 
After the war Buckeridge went back to St Lawrence College, where he was head of English from 1944 to 1949, and continued to flirt with the stage. His biggest success as a playwright for adults was with 'Draw the Line Somewhere', a light comedy. At school he was remembered as a mild, enthusiastic, and engaging teacher who seldom became upset. AWB, as he was known, began to tell bedtime stories in the dormitories of St Lawrence about a schoolboy character named Jennings. Subsequently he transferred the adventures of Linbury Court (his fictional school) to BBC radio play scripts. The producer of 'Jennings Learns the Ropes' was so impressed by Buckeridge's writing that he commissioned a series for 'Children's Hour'. A total of sixty-two episodes were broadcast over the next sixteen years. At one time Jennings was played by Peter Asher, brother of the actress Jane Asher. Such was the popularity of these broadcasts that Buckeridge recast his material into a classic English school story, 'Jennings Goes to School', published by William Collins in 1950. Some twenty-one Jennings stories followed, with many appearing in translation. In the French edition Jennings became Bennett, in the German Fredy, and in the Norwegian Stompa. Buckeridge tried to keep up with the times and wrote four Rex Milligan books (1953-61) set in a state school, but these did not succeed. His gift was for the affectionate portrayal of the nearly extinct educational ecosystem of the English boys' preparatory school, with its dotty slang ('frantic bishes' and 'fossilised fish-hooks'), and for the farcical adventures of the irrepressible J. C. T. Jennings and his loyal, though dim, ally Darbishire. Every episode of these well-crafted tales was also burnished with Buckeridge's inimitable turn of phrase, so evocative of school: 'you prehistoric clodpoll'; 'you gruesome specimen'; 'you newt-brained shrimp wit'. 
As his books suggested, Anthony Buckeridge was a man of modest, rather winning, demeanour whose self-portrait was encoded in the character of Mr Carter and his 'shrewd knowledge of the youthful mind'. At odds with his career in private education, he was a lifelong socialist who had demonstrated against Franco as a young man and later supported the Sandinistas with the donation of a signed Jennings first edition. In retirement he lived at Barcombe Mills, Lewes, Sussex, with his second wife, Eileen Norah Selby, a teacher, whom he married in 1962 following his divorce from his first wife; they had a son. Buckeridge published a memoir, 'While I Remember' (1999), and in 2000 gave his blessing in a radio interview to the Harry Potter phenomenon, though he felt that J. K. Rowling's appointment as OBE was 'way over the top'. He himself was appointed OBE in 2003, but typically did not list it in 'Who's Who'. He once wrote: 'If I'd been an undertaker, I'd probably have written funny stories about funerals' ('Independent', 8 Dec 1991). He died of heart failure on 28 June 2004, at East Crink, his home in Lewes, and was survived by his second wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93837


Ewbank, Inga-Stina (1932-2004), literary scholar and translator, was born in Baltak, near Tidaholm, Sweden, on 13 June 1932, the daughter of Gustav Ekeblad (1889-1974) and his wife, Ingeborg, 'nee' Lindstrom (1891-1953), both schoolteachers. She went to school and university in Tidaholm and Goteborg before in 1950 winning a scholarship to Carleton College, Minnesota, where she took her first degree and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Though she spoke only Swedish until attending Carleton College, she soon became an accomplished linguist who read widely in English, German, and French as well as in the Scandinavian languages that came to her by birth. On graduating she returned to Sweden to take her degree at the University of Goteborg. During her course it was hinted that some senior members of her faculty thought that it was somewhat inappropriate that a native-born Swede, taking an English and literary history degree, should present herself at her final, entirely oral, examination while speaking English with a pronounced American accent. She took a year 'in absentia', went to Sheffield, and took an MA under William Empson. As her talents came to be recognized she obtained research posts, first at Liverpool, where she was William Noble fellow from 1955 to 1957, and then at the Shakespeare Institute of Birmingham University, from 1957 to 1960. During the later part of this period she also taught at the University of Munich at the invitation of the doyen of German Shakespeare scholars, W. H. Clemen. In 1959 she married Roger Ewbank ('b'. 1931), a distinguished vet with special interests in animal behaviour. They had three children, Jane, Christopher (Kit), and Emily. 
Inga-Stina Ewbank's early research centred on Elizabethan and Jacobean drama. She wrote notably on George Peele and Thomas Middleton, and was the author of seminal articles on John Webster. But she read widely. Her interest in women's literature was demonstrated in her pioneering (and only) book, 'Their Proper Sphere' (1960), a study of the Bronte sisters as early Victorian female novelists. She returned to Liverpool as lecturer in 1960, becoming senior lecturer in 1970. In 1972 she became reader in English at Bedford College, London, where she took up the prestigious Hildred Carlile chair in 1974, becoming dean of arts and vice-principal. A distinguished predecessor was Una Ellis-Fermor, an expert on Ibsen whose work, along with Shakespeare's, figured prominently in Ewbank's intellectual life. Her inaugural lecture, 'Shakespeare, Ibsen and the unspeakable', linked these interests, and the move to London facilitated involvement with the theatre. She held strong views on the failure of many translators to render the essentially poetic qualities of Ibsen's language, and was delighted to collaborate with Peter Hall on a translation of 'John Gabriel Borkman' (1974, published 1975) for the National Theatre, and to work with Dame Peggy Ashcroft and Sir Ralph Richardson on its production. Later she and Hall jointly translated Ibsen's 'The Wild Duck' (Phoenix Theatre and published, 1990) and she collaborated with John Barton on Ibsen, Katie Mitchell on Strindberg, and Adrian Noble on Ibsen's 'Brand'. 
Deeply unhappy about the merger of Bedford and Royal Holloway colleges, in 1985 Ewbank accepted a chair at the University of Leeds, where she served as head of the school of English. In spite of continuing to live in London she accomplished a prodigious amount of work, much of it in the small (and not so small) hours, some of it on trains. She was famous for her ability to go without sleep as she marked essays and prepared lectures. In great demand as a lecturer and at overseas conferences, she travelled widely, with spells as a visiting scholar at Harvard and other American universities, as Alexander lecturer at Toronto in 1987, and from 1982 to 1997 as a member of the University Grants Committee for Hong Kong. She received an honorary doctorate from Lingnan University, Hong Kong, and the governor's Bauhinia silver star in 1999. Indefatigable in the service of others, she was a working member of the board of the journal 'Shakespeare Survey' (published by Cambridge University Press) and of the International Shakespeare Conference, editor of several volumes of essays and a contributor to numerous learned journals, and a member throughout her career of innumerable university and other committees. Her distinction as an Ibsenite was recognized by election to the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters in 1991 and the award of honorary doctorates by the universities of Oslo in 1998 and Goteborg in 2001. She worked increasingly on Ibsen in both England and Norway during her later years and had agreed to edit a volume of his plays for Penguin books at the time of her death. 
As a teacher Inga-Stina Ewbank was unsurpassed. She dedicated herself to her students' welfare, personal as well as intellectual, with an unselfconscious generosity that won their affection. She could entrance audiences at every level with the Swedish lilt of her voice, her gentle smile, her confidingly humorous manner, and her ability to convey complex thoughts with total clarity. A compulsive and unrepentant smoker who needed constant potations of strong black coffee, she was thin and nervy, a wittily articulate talker, and a sensitive listener. With her fair hair tied back, her sunken cheeks, and her big eyes, she looked a little like Virginia Woolf. Her admirers might have wished her to take more time off to write the books, especially on Shakespeare's language and the Jacobean drama, for which she was uniquely qualified, but her utter unselfishness stood in the way of personal ambition. Amusing and amusable, irredeemably optimistic, totally without self-importance, unsentimentally charitable, capable of suffering fools with at least apparent equanimity, she enhanced the lives of these who encountered her. After retiring as emeritus professor in 1997 she edited 'Catiline' for the Cambridge edition of Ben Jonson. She died of cancer at her home in Ealing, London, on 7 June 2004, and was survived by her husband, Roger, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93844


Richards, Alun Morgan (1929-2004), author and playwright, was born on 27 October 1929 at Oak Villa, King Edward Avenue, Caerphilly, the son of Megan, 'nee' Jeremy, daughter of Thomas Jeremy and his wife, Jessie. His father, Edward Morgan Richards, a commercial traveller, abandoned his mother three days after his birth. He was brought up in a strict but loving and comfortable home by his maternal grandparents, who were shopkeepers, chapel-goers, and Welsh-speakers, although Welsh was not passed on to him. Although he was to reject both religion and the language, being 'a fatherless child' was the making of him as a writer, as he explained in his autobiography, 'Days of Absence' (1986): 'I learned at an early age to lie low, to watch, to gauge a mood, to know when it was time for me to speak. I also learned to listen, to eavesdrop, gathering what bits and pieces of information I could. I listened from corners, behind doors, on tramcars, to hushed voices drifting out of the vestry after chapel, to the gossip of neighbours talking in the street... I kept these phrases to me, hugging them in the secret place. (pp. 1-2)' Richards's time at Pontypridd Boys' Grammar School, one of the best of its kind in the whole of Wales, was marked by rebelliousness and a bare minimum of academic endeavour. 'I was 31st when I went into the school and I've kept it up', he told his grandmother, still putting a brave face on things ('Days of Absence', 57). His relationship with E. R. Thomas, known among the boys as Piggy, was at first fraught, but the martinet of a headmaster came to serve as the father Richards never had. A strange bond grew between these two and eventually the quick-thinking, loquacious lad became the head's 'Goldflake boy', a coveted status because it meant being able to nip out to his grandmother's shop in the middle of the school day to buy the headmaster's tobacco and thus choose the lessons he wanted to miss. 
It was Thomas who wrote the glowing reference that enabled Richards to enter the Monmouthshire Training College for Teachers at Caerleon, where he spent three years. He then served with the Royal Navy, latterly in the rank of instructor lieutenant. So began a fascination with the sea that was to remain with him for the rest of his life, and which he was to make one of the main themes of his writing. He wrote extensively about ships and sailors, notably in two novels set in maritime Swansea, 'Ennal's Point' (1977) and 'Barque Whisper' (1979). He also edited two anthologies, 'The Penguin Book of Sea Stories' (1977) and 'Against the Waves' (1978), and contributed many scripts to the popular television series 'The Onedin Line'. For his books about the lifeboat service he was presented with the Royal National Lifeboat Institution public relations award. 
After returning in 1955 to Wales from London, where he had been a probation officer for three years, Richards became desperately ill with tuberculosis and was admitted to the sanatorium at Talgarth in Brecknockshire, where most of his fellow patients were silicotic miners, many in the last stages of the disease. The two years he spent in hospital as 'a witness once more of 'homo sapiens' with his trousers down' ('Artists in Wales', 63) were a dreadful but enriching experience. Almost blind and left for long stretches in a semi-coma on account of his resistance to streptomycin, he was sustained by the courage, humour, and comradeship of the older men, who kept an eye on him, fed him with bacon from their own plates, placed bets on horses for him, read to him, and helped nurse him back to health. Again the writer in him found inspiration in the experience. 
On 8 June 1957, at St Mary's Church, Cadogan Street, Chelsea, Richards married (Barbara) Helen Howden, probation officer and daughter of George Bruce Howden; they went on to have three sons and a daughter. In the same year he took up a post teaching English at a secondary school in Cardiff. He taught for ten years, but then was able to become a full-time writer and settle in Mumbles, a seaside suburb of Swansea, where his wife was a teacher and where he was to spend the rest of his life. He earned his bread and butter, and the occasional dab of jam, writing for television, including adaptations of Simenon, Maugham, and Wells, and for theatres in Leatherhead, Coventry, and Nottingham, though seldom in Wales, where he never tired of detecting prejudice against him among the Welsh-speaking sanhedrin at BBC Wales and in the subsidized theatre. Four of his stage plays were published in a substantial volume entitled 'Plays for Players' in 1975. From time to time he took up fellowships at universities in Wales and Australia and he was awarded a Japan Foundation fellowship in 1984. 
Richards's greatest achievement was in writing novels and short stories. The most important of his novels were 'The Elephant You Gave Me' (1963), 'The Home Patch' (1966), 'A Woman of Experience' (1969), and 'Home to an Empty House' (1974). His stories appeared in 'Dai Country' (1973) and 'The Former Miss Merthyr Tydfil' (1976); his 'Selected Stories' was published in 1995 and a small selection of stories, 'Scandalous Thoughts', in 2003. Social pretension and flawed relationships were usually at the heart of his plots and, almost invariably, it was the female characters who were the truth-tellers. He also edited two editions of 'The Penguin Book of Welsh Short Stories' (1976 and 1993), which were much admired for their quality and range. Whereas Welsh writers of the inter-war years had been able to write about the life of pit, steelworks, and Sunday school, Richards found his material in the valleys of south-east Wales which, thirty years on, were more prosperous, hedonistic, and socially mobile, less concerned with religion, politics, and working conditions, but still with enough fierce pride in community to distinguish them from the rootless, middle-class suburbia of Cardiff. In one of his funniest stories, 'The Scandalous Thoughts of Elmyra Mouth', the pulchritudinous heroine, whose ambitious husband wants them to move down valley to be near his job as an assistant cameraman with BBC Wales, refuses to do so with the ultimatum 'Travel, you bugger. You'll not move me an inch'. 
A connoisseur of rugby, Richards published 'A Touch of Glory' (1980) to mark the centenary of the Welsh Rugby Union, and in 1984 a memoir of the rugby player and coach Carwyn James -- a very different kind of Welshman, Welsh-speaking and a leading member of Plaid Cymru, with whom he had an unexpected affinity. Richards always bristled when the Welsh language was used as a badge of Welsh identity. His own Welshness was ebullient and unequivocal, and the basis for some of his best writing, but it had less to do with language than with the qualities he associated with the proletarian communities of south Wales, especially a sense of humour in the face of adversity and the absence of deference on grounds of social class. 'I am Welsh', he wrote in 1971, 'and the rest is propaganda' ('Artists in Wales', 66). After suffering a heart attack he died in Singleton Hospital, Swansea, on 2 June 2004, and his remains were cremated at the city's crematorium nine days later. He was survived by his wife, Helen, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93849


Young, Percy Marshall (1912-2004), music teacher and writer, was born on 17 May 1912 at 12 David Street, Northwich, Cheshire. His father, William Joseph Young, was a clerk in a chemical works and was twice mayor of the town, and his mother, Annie, 'nee' Marshall, was later a Conservative Party councillor. He was educated at Sir John Deane's Grammar School in Northwich before winning a scholarship to Christ's Hospital, near Horsham, Sussex. In 1930 he went as an organ scholar to Selwyn College, Cambridge, where he read English, history, and music, graduating BA in 1933 and MusB in 1934. His first job was as director of music at the Stranmillis teacher training college in Belfast. On 7 August 1937, at Loughbrickland, co. Down, he married Anna Letitia (Netta) Carson, the daughter of James Carson, schoolteacher; they had three sons and a daughter. In the same year the family left Northern Ireland following Young's appointment as music adviser to the local education authority of Stoke-on-Trent. He stayed until 1944 when he was appointed director of music at Wolverhampton College of Technology. There he not only developed a choir specializing in some of the lesser-known works of Handel but began a series of choral and orchestral concerts together with broadcasts on the BBC on music in schools. It was during the twenty-two years he spent at Wolverhampton that he began a writing and publishing career that produced over fifty books, many of them brought out by the publisher Dennis Dobson, with whom Young formed a lasting relationship. 
An early work was the volume on Handel in Dent's 'Master Musician series' (1947), which was followed by books on a range of composers including Thomas Arne, Ralph Vaughan Williams, Robert Schumann, Zoltan Kodaly, and Arthur Sullivan. He also produced 'A Concise History of British Music' (1974) and many short guides for younger readers whose subjects included Beethoven, Britten, Handel, and Mozart. His 'The Bachs, 1500-1850' (1970) was a substantial work. Young had a long-standing fascination with Edward Elgar that was reflected in his life and works study, 'Elgar OM' (1955), and underlined when he edited two collections of Elgar's letters, the first published in 1956 and the second in 1965. He also produced a volume of the lectures that Elgar delivered while professor of music at the University of Birmingham. He wrote a biography of Elgar's wife, 'Alice Elgar, Enigma of a Victorian Lady' (1977), and worked for many years from the brief notes and jottings that Elgar left to complete his unfinished opera 'The Spanish Lady', which was performed for the first time, to mixed reviews, at the Cambridge Elgar Festival in 1994. When the 'New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians' was launched Young not only contributed several of the entries but was also commissioned to write an accompanying biography of its Victorian founder, Sir George Grove, published in 1980. 
For much of his time at Wolverhampton Young was also actively engaged in composition. At least twenty of his works were published, including a concerto for two pianos (1954), a 'Festival Te Deum' (1961), and the 'Elegy' for string orchestra. This last work was commissioned for the 1960 Zwickau Festival in Germany and was played at the composer's ninetieth birthday celebrations in 2002. A good orchestrator and arranger, Young was still producing scholarly works up to his death, including a catalogue of the musical holdings of Lichfield Cathedral and a two-volume edition of the Gilbert and Sullivan opera 'HMS Pinafore'. 
But music was not Young's only passion. In football it had a competitor for his enthusiasm, especially during the first six decades of his life. Young had supported Northwich Victoria in the Cheshire league as a boy in the 1920s. Living in Staffordshire for much of his life gave him the opportunity to follow Port Vale, Stoke City, and eventually Wolverhampton Wanderers. He liked to stand on the terraces but how he could do that and read Somerset Maugham at half-time on those packed grounds he never explained. He wrote his first two short books on the game in the early 1950s, at a time when football seemed unalterably working class. Sir Stanley Rous, secretary of the Football Association, was worried about the division between sport and culture and conscious that the educated elites had been deserting the sport. One reason was that, unlike cricket, it had not been buttressed by a literature that claimed it was an art. Young thought it was and in 'The Appreciation of Football' (1951) and 'Football Facts and Fancies' (1950) he began the sport's long day's journey into art. Young was football's Neville Cardus; he compared full-backs with bass singers, thought tenors like centre-forwards, and referees like orchestral conductors. His style was whimsical and he had a gift for the pungent anecdote. Later he would make the first attempt at a more serious history that placed football in its socio-cultural context or, as he put it, 'relating one national institution to every other sort of institution' ('A History of British Football', 1968, xii). It was one of thirteen books he wrote about the people's game. 
Percy Young had great energy and industry, producing a phenomenal amount of work in his long life. He was an organist, scholar, editor, composer, teacher, adjudicator, writer, and broadcaster; his astonishing output of books may not have achieved the height of scholarship reached by his successors but they were always readable and easy to digest. It is no criticism to say that he was a great popularizer who undoubtedly influenced, inspired, and nurtured many generations of musicians, and also many more general readers. He also found the time to be, briefly, a Labour Party councillor in Wolverhampton and an active school governor, and he chaired the local community relations committee. He was the recipient of many honours, including the freedom of Halle (2002), whose Handel Festival he attended consecutively for forty years, an honorary doctorate of music from the University of Birmingham (1985), and an honorary fellowship of Selwyn College, Cambridge (1998). Following the death of his first wife, in 1969 he married Renee Morris. He died on 9 May 2004 at York Hospital, having contracted pneumonia after an operation on a broken thigh. He was survived by his wife and his four children from his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 93850


Servants of Samuel Pepys (act. 1658-1703) are mostly known through their appearances in the private diary kept by their employer between 1660 and 1669. The fact that they are presented there in a light controlled by the many-sided egotism of Samuel Pepys's personality does not prevent his record of his own, and his household's, day-by-day existence from illuminating the lives and occupations of a number of predominantly young people, whose activities seem usually to have been typical of those of male and female servants in early modern London, but which are seldom preserved for posterity with such vividness of detail. From 1656 until her death in November 1669 Pepys shared the management of his household with his wife, Elizabeth Pepys. Thereafter until the end of his life he had the assistance of his mistress, Mary Skinner. The fact that there were numerous domestic concerns that were customarily directed by the householder's wife or partner inevitably means that Pepys observed or recorded them as an outsider. On the other hand, he had at least some personal experience of domestic service, and knew what it was like to be at the disposal of others. In his early twenties he had occupied a position in the London household of his cousin Edward Montagu, later first earl of Sandwich, that seems to have been somewhere between that of a minor officer and a favoured servant, but was probably closer to the latter -- in 1655 he had received a letter from Montagu addressed 'For my servant Samuel Pepys at my lodgings in Whitehall' (Wheatley, 35). It was probably an experience that taught him the rudiments of household management, a skill that tended to prevail over his sympathies during his later life. 
It has been estimated that some 13 per cent of the population of late seventeenth-century London consisted of servants, among whom women outnumbered men in the ratio of approximately 4:1. Pepys began to tap this labour supply in 1658, when he and his wife first occupied a home of their own, renting a house in Axe Yard, off King Street, in Whitehall. With them was their servant 


@@@@@


doc= 93851


Bowker, Agnes (b. 1541/2), servant and alleged mother of a cat, was the daughter of Henry Bowker, a yeoman or butcher of Market Harborough, Leicestershire, and suffered from fits of 'the falling sickness' or epilepsy. Although she described being once sent to live in London, she was usually employed as a servant in parishes along the border of Leicestershire and Northamptonshire, where in summer 1566 she witnessed the progress of Elizabeth I. In varying accounts of her sexual history, pregnancy, and remarkable parturition, Agnes blamed the Market Harborough schoolmaster Hugh Brady for her seduction at the time of the royal progress, then named another servant, Randal Dowley, as the father of her child. Interrogated by neighbours, clergy, and magistrates, she also claimed to have had sexual relations with creatures in the likeness of a cat, a dog, and a bear, and to have given herself wholly to the devil. Late in her pregnancy in 1568 she twice attempted suicide by hanging and by drowning, but eventually proceeded to term. 
Concluding her labour at Harborough on the night of 16 January 1569, the 27-year-old Agnes allegedly gave birth to a cat, prompting the midwife Elizabeth Harrison to cry out 'What have we here?' The women attending the birth accepted that the creature had come from Agnes's body, crediting it as an unusual though not impossible occurrence. Some of their male neighbours were more sceptical, and performed tests to determine that the cat had formerly been alive and had food in its gullet. Rumours flew concerning the incident, encouraging some to believe that the birth of the cat conveyed auguries of 'alteration of kingdoms' and portents of 'destruction of princes', while others suspected that the whole business was a cover-up for infanticide. A printed pamphlet, now lost, related a version of the story. 
Six days later the affair came into the court of the archdeacon of Leicester. Baffled but suspicious, and also angered by inaccuracies in the pamphlet, Anthony Anderson, the archdeacon's commissary, sent transcripts of the case to Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, along with a life-size, blood-red depiction of the cat. An annotation to the illustration observes 'there is nothing so secret that shall not be made open', but though two JPs (one of them Randal Dowley's employer) also looked into the business, certainty proved impossible. Huntingdon relayed the package to the queen's principal secretary, Sir William Cecil, who referred it to Edmund Grindal, bishop of London, for further advice. Grindal reported in August 1569, 'for the monster, it appeareth plainly to be a counterfeit matter; but yet we cannot extort confessions of the manner of doings' ('Remains', ed. Nicholson, 306). Eventually the documents were filed among Cecil's papers (BL, Lansdowne MS 101). 
Nothing more is known of Agnes Bowker after 1569, but characters in the London physician William Bullein's 'Dialogue... against the Fever Pestilence' (1573 edition) recall her story: '
ROGER: What a world is this? How is it changed. It is marvelous, it is monstrous. I hear say there is a young woman, born in the town of Harborough, one Bowker, a butcher's daughter, which of late, God wot, is brought to bed of a cat, or have delivered a cat, or, if you will, she is the mother of a cat... 

CIVIS: It is a lie, Roger, believe it not; it was but a cat. It had bacon found in the belly, and a straw. It was an old cat, and she a young quean; it was a pleasant practice of papistry, to bring the people to new wonders. 
(Bullein, 106-7)' 



@@@@@


doc= 93854


Anand, Mulk Raj (1905-2004), author, was born in the city of Peshawar, North-West Frontier Province, India, on 12 December 1905, a kshatriya (warrior) by caste. His immediate ancestors were coppersmiths and silversmiths, though his father, Lal Chand, had broken away to become a clerk in the (British) Indian army. His mother, Ishwar Kaur, came from a traditional peasant background, so that on both sides Anand was of humble stock, brought up imbibing folklore and customary beliefs. Though his parents both professed the Ismaili faith, they were not ardent in their practice and in 1913 Lal Chand severed his links with Ismailism. Anand grew up in an atmosphere of religious questioning, which was to lead to his own lifelong attitude to faith as an evasion of social action. 
Anand was initially educated at cantonment schools, before moving to Khalsa College, Amritsar, part of the University of Punjab, when he was sixteen. He described his early education as 'a spurious, imitative, fruitless grounding, mainly through a foreign language' ('Prolegomena to a new humanism', in 'Lines Written to an Indian Air', 1949, 3), but this knowledge of English was to stand him in good stead when in 1925 he was admitted to University College, London, embarking on a PhD on the thought of Locke, Hume, Berkeley, and Russell. These years of transition from his orthodox Punjabi upbringing to a metropolitan student life at the heart of the British empire were to feed Anand's work. He was still writing about them towards the end of his long life, in his uncompleted sequence of 'bildungsroman' novels, 'The Seven Ages of Man'. Nor were his new horizons only British. In 1926, for example, he made an exploratory trip to Moscow to acquaint himself with communism first-hand. Though he was never formally a member of the Communist Party, his left-wing sympathies, combined with his popularity in Russia once he was established as a writer, led many people to conclude that he was. 
Anand's first stay in London lasted four years. He was persuaded by his father to come back to India in 1929, though he never intended to remain there. He used the period of his return well, spending three weeks at Gandhi's Sabarmati ashram in Ahmadabad cleaning latrines (and being gently chided by Gandhi for his Anglicized appearance), attending a session of the Indian National Congress at Lahore, visiting tea plantations in Assam, and seeing as many ancient monuments as he could. These experiences either wove themselves directly into his fiction or were to have a profound influence on his political and aesthetic development. Anand could not imagine, however, that his now well-formed desire to be a published writer could be realized in India. Though Bankim Chandra Chatterji, Toru Dutt, and Sarojini Naidu, among others, had written in English, and Rabindranath Tagore's works had been widely translated from Bengali after the award to him in 1913 of the Nobel prize for literature, Anand felt that there was no serious engagement with contemporary realities in the intellectual ambiance of his own country. If, as he put in a subsequent essay, 'Apology for Heroism' (1945), he was ever to 'link himself with the disinherited, the weak and the dispossessed, as a human being and as an artist with special talents, to transform society', it would have to be from London, centre of the world's publishing industry and a forum for endless political and social discourse. 
Back in Britain within a few months, Anand was befriended by Virginia and Leonard Woolf, who found him work at their Hogarth Press. He undertook research for the critic Bonamy Dobree. He was invited to lunch by T. S. Eliot and given an opportunity to contribute to his magazine 'The Criterion'. He became friendly with the sculptor Eric Gill and met D. H. Lawrence, W. B. Yeats, G. B. Shaw, and E. M. Forster. It was the last of these who was to prove most useful in securing him his first opportunity to publish a novel. Without Forster's advocacy, in the form of a preface to the book that has always been published with it, Anand's 'Untouchable' (1935) would never have seen the light of day. The novel had been turned down by nineteen other publishers before Lawrence and Wishart accepted it, partly because of Forster's recommendation. Forster wrote of it, '
'Untouchable' could only have been written by an Indian and by an Indian who observed from the outside. No European, however sympathetic, could have created the character of Bakha, because he would not have known enough about his troubles. And no Untouchable could have written the book, because he would have been involved in indignation and self-pity. Mr. Anand stands in the ideal position. ('Untouchable', 1935, 9)' 
'Untouchable' depicts twenty-four hours in the life of an eighteen-year-old sweeper boy in an Indian city. Anand had remembered his own experiences clearing out the latrines while staying at Gandhi's ashram, as a result modifying the book, a first draft of which already existed when he was there. His simple tale, though evoking the stenches and confusion of urban humanity, breathed fresh air into Indian fiction in English. Before 'Untouchable' no Indian writer in the English language had taken the outcasts of his society and made them quietly heroic. The book eschewed sentimentality, but it was compassionate and wise, recognizing, for example, that the face of modern India could be changed by the coming of flushing lavatories. The book was never out of print during Anand's lifetime, and at his death had been translated into over forty languages. It is almost certainly the best-known of all Anand's novels, and the one most often cited as a modern classic. 
The success of 'Untouchable' encouraged Anand to pursue a writing career. After completing his doctorate in 1929 he had been determined to dedicate his life to two objectives, the alleviation of India's poverty and the attainment of her independence. He saw the first as dependent upon the second. In 1934 he was elected president of the newly founded All-India Progressive Writers' Association. Whenever he could find the means to do so he participated in political conferences, including the Anti-Fascist Writers' Conference in London in 1936, and another similarly motivated in Spain in 1937, where he witnessed enough of the fall-out of the civil war to haunt him as he set to work on his great war novel, 'Across the Black Waters' (1940). His subject in this was the treatment of Indian sepoys in the trenches of Flanders in the First World War, but he undoubtedly portrayed the horrors of war so graphically partly because of what he had so recently seen in Spain. 
From 1930 onwards Anand accepted whatever writing commissions came his way, eager not only to be more financially solvent but also to win a reputation. There was, however, a third objective, aesthetic rather than strictly literary. He wanted both his fellow countrymen and the Westerners among whom he was living to appreciate the glories of ancient Indian architecture, painting, and sculpture. This was a passion that stayed with him all his life. His first publications were 'Persian Painting', which accompanied an exhibition at Burlington House in London in 1930, and 'The Hindu View of Art' (1933). Back in India in 1945 he helped form a group called the Modern Architects' and Artists' Research Group, and from that year until 1981 he edited its magazine, 'MARG', which grew into one of the most influential standard bearers for Indian art. 
Though living in London or in nearby Buckinghamshire throughout the 1930s and in the first half of the 1940s, Anand returned to India in 1935 and again in 1938, determined not to become deracinated. Had the Second World War not intervened it is probable that he would have gone back for good earlier than 1945, despite his marriage on 21 June 1939 to a British citizen, Kathleen Gelder (a 39-year-old actress known as Kathleen van Gelder, and daughter of William Bagnall Gelder, artist), and the birth three years later of his only child, Rajani, known from childhood as Sushila (1942-2007). He was by now a well-established novelist, following 'Untouchable' with its companion piece 'Coolie' (1936), 'Two Leaves and a Bud' (1937), which exposed the exploitation of workers on tea plantations, and his trilogy, 'The Village', 'Across the Black Waters', and 'The Sword and the Sickle' (1939-42), which have the same central character, Lalu, a young peasant caught up in the changing circumstances of early twentieth-century India. The last of this trilogy was Anand's most overtly political fiction. The sickle is the vast mass of India's labour force and the sword is that capitalist and imperial power which seeks perpetually to subjugate their free individuality. 
Detained in London by the war, Anand, who had been a pacifist when it began, changed his view of the conflict when Hitler invaded Russia. In 1942 he agreed to George Orwell's suggestion that he should join the Indian Section of the BBC. With Orwell, Eliot, and other prominent writers he regularly broadcast a 'voice magazine', often composing his piece in a nearby pub. His intention, however, was still to return permanently to India, and this he did almost the moment the war was ended. He abandoned his wife and daughter, in circumstances that made them permanently bitter about him, and set up a new home, initially in Lahore but then for the rest of his life in Bombay. Though he had been in England for twenty years he immediately threw himself into Indian cultural politics and in the years following India's independence was frequently consulted by Jawaharlal Nehru and his successors. His first marriage having ended in divorce, in 1950 he married Shirin Vajifdar, a classical dancer. 
In 1951 'Seven Summers' appeared. This was planned to be the first part of a seven-volume sequence of autobiographical novels which would lightly fictionalize Anand's own life, and which he intended to call 'The Seven Ages of Man'. It was the most disciplined part of the project, a tender evocation of childhood. Later volumes, 'Morning Face' (1968), 'Confession of a Lover' (1976), and 'The Bubble' (1984), were increasingly unwieldy and some would say inchoate, but they made use of Anand's actual correspondence, which was prolific, and they re-visited relationships and crises of his earlier life. Eventually the sequence petered out, though fragments would appear from time to time, sometimes in the form of short plays that read like the dialogue of novels stripped of their context. 
Anand did, however, write one great book after his return to India, 'Private Life of an Indian Prince' (1953). It was the last of his books to be published outside India. It marked a new departure, for the main characters were no longer the villagers and untouchables of his other fiction but a maharaja and his court. Anand's subject matter here was partly the fate of the princely states following independence, but he was also interested in the borderlines between sanity and breakdown. In Victor, the prince presiding over a diminishing state and a collapsing personal life, he created his most profound character study. 
Short stories, essays, speeches, editorials, letters, and campaign polemics continued to pour from Anand's pen. In his later decades he espoused many causes and campaigned vigorously for peace initiatives, but there was a feeling that his great contribution to Indian literature had lain in his being the first voice in fiction to agitate on behalf of the poor. He continued to travel widely, visiting London for the last time when he was over ninety. For most of his life after he returned to India he lived quietly in the ground-floor apartment of a massive ornamented house in Cuffe Parade, central Bombay (or Mumbai, as it became in 1995), attended by his wife, Shirin, and his friend Dolly Sahiar, the former art director of 'MARG'. He made frequent trips to his home at Khandala in the hills behind Bombay and he had a property in New Delhi which became an arts centre. He was from 1965 to 1970 fine art chairman at Lalit Kala Akademi, the National Academy of Arts. He died at Pune on 28 September 2004, and was survived by his wife, Shirin, and daughter Sushila, a historian. He died intestate and his estate became the subject of a protracted court case. 


@@@@@


doc= 93866


Callender, Sheila Theodora Elsie (1914-2004), physician and haematologist, was born on 5 April 1914 at Inverard, High View Road, Sidcup Hill, Sidcup, Kent, the youngest of the four children of Thomas Marshall Callender, general practitioner, and his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth Marie Rose, 'nee' Hoysted. Her father was of Scottish and her mother of Irish descent. After a broad secondary school education she received the Scottish universities' entrance board certificate in April 1932 and enrolled to study science and medicine at St Andrews University, from which she graduated BSc in 1935 and MB ChB in 1938, with commendation and a gold medal as the best student of her year. 
After holding a number of junior hospital posts at Dundee Royal Infirmary, Callender obtained a Rockefeller travelling research fellowship which enabled her to train with Carl Moore, the distinguished American haematologist, at St Louis, USA. On her return from the USA she joined Leslie Witts as house physician in the newly formed Nuffield department of clinical medicine at Oxford University, where she remained for the remainder of her career. In 1947 she was appointed May reader in medicine at Oxford, and from 1954 onwards was first assistant and later clinical reader in the department. On 9 February 1957 she married Ivan Gyula Arpad Monostori, a 27-year-old medical student who had come to Oxford as a refugee following the Russian invasion of Hungary. They established beautiful homes in Oxford (latterly in Butts Road, Horspath) and Scotland, where they shared their interest in country life, gardening, fine wine, and a collection of rather terrifying mastiffs. They had no children. 
Sheila Callender had an extremely distinguished career as a doctor and clinical scientist with a particular interest in diseases of the blood. In 1944 she received the degree of MD at St Andrews University, with a gold medal for her work on the anaemia of pregnancy. She was elected FRCP in 1962 and made DSc by the University of Oxford for her published works in 1970. Among her seminal contributions to the understanding of blood diseases were the first identity of the Lutheran and Willis blood groups in collaboration with Rob Race, an improved method for the determination of the lifespan of red blood cells, and many extremely important observations about how iron is absorbed and the effects of iron overload in a wide variety of diseases. Her work on iron absorption was of particular importance, reflecting as it did completely new approaches to the considerable technical problems of assessing iron absorption in human beings and in developing approaches to measure iron balance. She also made important contributions to the management of iron overload and to an understanding of the pathogenesis of some of the common forms of anaemia due to iron, vitamin B12 or folic acid deficiency. When Leslie Witts became chairman of the Medical Research Council's leukaemia trials committee she played a crucial role in helping him to develop some of the early and extremely successful studies of different drug regimes for the treatment of leukaemia. Throughout her research career she was an excellent supervisor of young clinical scientists in training, many of whom went on to develop successful careers in academic medicine or haematology, including J. M. Biggs, R. M. Bannerman, J. S. Malpas, J. M. Holt, A. L. Turnbull, and M. J. Pippard. 
Undoubtedly, while at the peak of her scientific career Callender could have been appointed to almost any chair of medicine or haematology in the UK that attracted her. However, she was a retiring person who never wished to be in the limelight or to direct a large clinical academic department. Rather she preferred to devote her time to her patients and to her clinical research activities, together with a major teaching load. Hence she was of enormous support to the three Nuffield professors of medicine under whom she served. Sheila Callender was one of the last of the line of general physicians and haematologists who, on both sides of the Atlantic, did so much to establish and develop the field in the period after the Second World War. Her broad-based approach to medical practice made her an extremely popular teacher, an accomplishment which was helped by her warm personality and care for the progress of her students. Her wide background of interests, including music and literature, and, above all, her deep and sympathetic understanding of the problems of sick people, were reflected in her excellence as a clinician; her death, at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 17 August 2004, of leukaemia, was mourned by generations of her patients and students. She was survived by her husband, Ivan. 


@@@@@


doc= 93867


Calcutt, Sir David Charles (1930-2004), barrister and college head, was born on 2 November 1930 at Berkeley Nursing Home, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, the only child of Alfred Henry (Harry) Calcutt (died 1972), pharmacist, and his wife, Christine Linda, 'nee' Young. His early life was shaped by his musicality. A chorister at Christ Church, Oxford, he was a music scholar at Cranleigh School, and a choral scholar at King's College, Cambridge. At university he achieved a unique simultaneous double of a BMus and an LLB, an achievement only faintly impaired by his position in the third class in law. 
This inauspicious start proved no handicap to Calcutt's successful legal career, which was fuelled by a combination of a fine voice and robust common sense. After national service in the army, during which he attained the rank of captain, he was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1955. He took silk in 1972 and four years later became the head of his chambers in Lamb Building in the Temple which he ran until 1988 as, in the words of a senior colleague, a 'despot but as benevolent a despot as one could find' ('The Independent', 14 Aug 2004). His most notable case was before the European Court of Human Rights in 1981 when he appeared for three railwaymen dismissed by British Rail for refusing to join a union, a breach of article 12 of the European convention on human rights which guarantees freedom of association but also, as he successfully argued, freedom not to associate ('Young v. UK', 1981). In 1970 Calcutt became deputy chairman of the Somerset quarter sessions and he was a recorder between 1972 and 1989. Chairman of the Bar Council (1984-5), he served as treasurer of the Middle Temple in 1998 and between 1978 and 2000 was a judge of the Courts of Appeal of Jersey and Guernsey. 
Nomination to the Channel Islands appellate judiciary is conventionally accorded to those destined for a seat on the High Court bench or to those who have had, but rejected, that opportunity. Calcutt was one of a small but growing number in the second category who saw the benefits of a portfolio life outside the confines of the law courts, and indeed beyond London. In 1986 he was appointed as master of Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he had taught law courses during the 1970s. During his six highly successful years as master he led the college, the last in Cambridge to have an all-male membership, to become co-educational. He compensated for waning fee income by waxing fund-raising, and extended the college estates on both sides of the River Cam. Above all he had a natural affinity with the young that was noteworthy given that his marriage -- on 23 August 1969, to Barbara Ann Walker ('b'. 1929/30), a psychiatric social worker and daughter of William Vivian Walker, businessman -- was childless. Both Calcutt and his wife attached great importance to Magdalene's undergraduates, and the quality of their time at the college: 'It's the kids who matter here; they come first', was a typical comment ('The Independent', 14 Aug 2004). 
While Calcutt's college duties took precedence in the late 1980s and early 1990s, they were not exclusive. His reputation for fairness and his authoritative presence made him a natural choice for important quasi-judicial posts. He had previously acted as an inspector for the Department of Trade (1974-7) in the wake of the secondary banking crisis and as chairman of the Civil Service Arbitration Tribunal (1979-84). In 1984 he conducted his first government inquiry into a fire at a hospital in the Falkland Islands, followed by reports on security procedures in Cyprus and Northern Ireland. While master of Magdalene College he was appointed president of the Lloyds of London Appeal Tribunal (1987-97), chair of the City Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (1989-2000), and a member of the Interception of Communications Tribunal (1986-2001), and later sat on the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (2000-04). For twelve years from 1989 he was the Home Office's assessor of compensation for miscarriages of justice -- a position where the absence of guiding precedent compelled the exercise of a responsible judgement that he possessed in full measure. In that capacity he awarded almost $1 million to Patrick Hill, one of the Birmingham six who was held to have been wrongly convicted in 1975 for the bombing of two public houses the previous year, and released on appeal in 1991. Calcutt sought to explain every award, even if his explanations did not always satisfy either the beneficiaries or the public -- proof, it may be said, of his even-handed approach. He also fixed compensation for victims of crime on behalf of the Criminal Injury Compensation Board, though his own fee of $20 per case was scarcely an incentive to perform this complex function. 
During the 1950s Calcutt had supplemented his income as a reporter for, and later editor of, 'The Times' law reports. In 1989 he revived his connection with the press when he became chairman of the committee on privacy and related matters, which was set up in response to concerns over media intrusion and calls by some MPs for laws to protect personal privacy. Calcutt's report called for the creation of a new offence of invasion of privacy (which was not accepted by the government) and the establishment of a self-regulatory body, the Press Complaints Commission, which came into being in 1991. Calcutt was conscious that press liberty could become press licence, and that self-regulation ran the risk of becoming self-preservation. Eighteen months later he undertook a review of self-regulation in action. Critical of what he saw as a body 'set up by the industry... dominated by the industry... and over-favourable to the industry', he recommended that the commission be replaced by a statutory tribunal ('The Times', 15 Jan 1993). His proposal, which drew strong criticism and some personal attacks in the press, was again not taken up by the government. 
Alongside law, music remained Calcutt's passion throughout his life. In 1956 he co-founded the Edington music festival in Wiltshire, and was its director until 1964, as well as the deputy chairman of the Royal College of Music (1988-90). A practising member of the Church of England, he served as chancellor of the diocese of Exeter and of Bristol from 1971 and of Europe (formerly Gibraltar in Europe) from 1983. He was knighted in 1991. In his later years he suffered from Parkinson's disease and he died at his home, Twitchen Cottage, Porlock, near Minehead, Somerset, on 11 August 2004 from a gastrointestinal haemorrhage. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 93872


(Edith) Olive Checkland (1920-2004), historian, was born on 6 June 1920 at 20 Lyndhurst Avenue, Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, the daughter of Robert Fraser Anthony, a process engraver's traveller and former Royal Navy cook, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Philipson, whose father John Philipson had been high chief ruler of the temperance society the Independent Order of Rechabites. In search of work her father moved the family to Birmingham, where she was educated in a local school before studying geography at Birmingham University from 1938. By the time of her marriage to Sydney Checkland she was employed as a secondary school teacher. In the last stages of the war she made a significant contribution to her husband's recuperation following the injuries he had suffered during the Normandy landings; the couple also had five children in the period before Sydney was appointed to a chair at Glasgow University in 1957. Olive Checkland played a very active part in the formation of her husband's new department, managing his working day, assisting with his research, and shaping the nature of staff-student relations through such innovations as a Christmas party at which staff were expected to participate in charades and dancing. During the family's twenty-five year residence in Glasgow she also played an important part in helping to salvage and collect the records of Glasgow companies. In 1980 she published her first book, 'Philanthropy in Victorian Scotland', which won the Scottish Arts Council book award; this was followed in 1982 by 'Health Care and Social History, the Glasgow Case' (co-written with Margaret Lamb), and two years later by 'Industry and Ethos'. In these years the Checklands also undertook research on the exchange of knowledge between Scotland and Japan, and it was on this subject that Olive Checkland specialized after her husband's death. Technical transfer, and the acquisition of manufacturing knowledge, was the subject of her most distinguished work, 'Britain's Encounter with Meiji Japan, 1868-1912' (1989), and of a later work, 'Japanese Whisky, Scotch Blend' (1998). Anglo-Japanese relations were also the subject of two further books, 'Humanitarianism and the Emperor's Japan, 1877-1977' (1993), a study of the Japanese treatment of British prisoners of war, and 'Building Cultural Bridges' (2003). On four occasions she was a visiting professor at Keio University, Tokyo, and her work on Anglo-Japanese relations was recognized by the Japan Society in 2001. She also acted as an associate editor for nineteenth-century east Asian subjects for the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography', to which she contributed five biographies, including that of her maternal grandfather, John Philipson. After leaving Glasgow she lived in Cambridge. She died of heart failure on 8 September 2004 at Swansea, while staying with one of her daughters. She was survived by her five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93878


Clough, Brian Howard (1935-2004), footballer and football manager, was born on 21 March 1935 at 11 Valley Road, Middlesbrough, the sixth of the nine children of Joseph Clough and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Hunter. His father worked as a sugar boiler in a local sweet factory and it was his mother who was the focus of family life. Brian was the only one of the eight surviving children to fail the eleven-plus. He went to Morton Grove secondary modern school, leaving without qualifications in 1950, and eventually took a job as a messenger boy, working for one of the local factories of the chemical manufacturer ICI. He had already shown some talent as a footballer and was soon playing for Great Broughton in the Cleveland league against men older and bigger than himself. It probably helped that four of his brothers were also team members. His goal scoring began to be noticed and he played a few games for Billingham Synthonia in the northern league towards the end of the 1952-3 season, by which time he had already signed amateur forms for Middlesbrough. His first professional contract brought him a retainer of $1 per week and $7 if he played for any of the club's three teams. It is unlikely that he had many $7 wage packets because between 1953 and 1955 he did national service in the RAF and was posted to Somerset. He was a regular member of his station side but was never chosen for an RAF team, whose selectors had many older and more experienced professionals from which to choose. 
Back in Middlesbrough Clough made his debut for the first team in the second division of the Football League but injuries and a lack of form restricted him to nine appearances, though these included his first three league goals. It was in the 1956-7 season that he made his name, scoring thirty-eight goals in forty-one league games. The club's next highest scorer only managed ten. The following season Clough played forty league games and averaged a goal in each of them and in 1958-9 he played in every league game, and scored forty-three goals. These were impressive figures by any standards and yet the team was often unconvincing and rarely looked like regaining its first division place. This led to some frustration among players and staff. Middlesbrough had made a profit of $10,000 in 1957-8 and $30,000 was spent on new players for the following season but again there was no real challenge for promotion, and 1959-60 saw an almost identical performance. Clough, who by now had been made captain, scored thirty-nine goals in his forty-one games but the team only finished fifth. In fact Middlesbrough scored enough goals but were conceding too many. Clough's criticism of his team mates, and especially the defence, led to nine of them submitting a complaint to the management that was leaked to press and public. Clough said he was not seeking a transfer to another club but then allowed a national newspaper to say that he was. In the event, he stayed and retained the captaincy but several players left the club. The unrest simmered through the summer when three players, including Clough, refused to re-sign for the 1960-61 season. He went without summer wages for five weeks before eventually re-signing in August, but missed the first two games and lost the captaincy. None the less he still managed to score thirty-four goals in forty league games in that season. 
In July 1961 Clough was finally transferred, to local rivals Sunderland, who had missed promotion to the first division by a point. On Boxing day 1962 he suffered a serious knee injury which caused him to miss the whole of the 1963-4 season, in which Sunderland won promotion. Clough returned to play his only three games in the first division and to score one goal. At the age of twenty-nine he had to accept that he was never again going to be fit enough to play professional football. 
An assessment of Clough the player is not easy. His record as a goal scorer cannot be ignored: in 274 league games he scored 251 goals and reached 250 goals in a shorter time than anybody else. But he did not do it against the best teams in the top division. Nor did he become a successful international player. He made three appearances for the England under-23 side, scoring one goal, and one appearance for England B (one goal). He played twice in ten days for the full England side in October 1959, in a draw with Wales in Cardiff and a defeat at home by Sweden. He was not selected for the 1958 world cup. It is said that he alienated Walter Winterbottom, the England manager, by singing his own praises while criticizing the play of rivals. It seems clear that he had a reputation for being abrasive and arrogant. This might have been managed if he had scored the goals for which he had been selected. When he failed, the conclusion that he was not quite good enough was easy to draw, though he was probably unlucky not to be in England's world cup party in 1958. 
His playing career cut short by injury, it was not surprising that Clough became angry and depressed. On 4 April 1959 he had married Barbara Beatrice Glasgow ('b'. 1937/8), a 21-year-old shorthand typist and daughter of Henry Glasgow, clerical worker. He now had a young family to support and the compensation money would not keep them for long. He was young, frustrated, and found solace in drink. But he was not without drive and ability and when the former Middlesbrough player George Hardwick became Sunderland's new manager he suggested to Clough that he qualify as a Football Association coach and run the Sunderland youth team. It reached the semi-finals of the FA youth cup but when Hardwick left the club Clough was sacked. He had only been out of work for three months when in October 1965 he was appointed manager of the perennially struggling fourth division club, Hartlepools United. At the age of thirty he was the youngest manager in the English league. 
This was new and difficult terrain for Clough, although he was not without ideas picked up from Alan Brown, his former manager at Sunderland. But what he really needed was a colleague who could share the burden and he realized that Peter Taylor was the man. Taylor had been the goalkeeper at Middlesbrough during Clough's goalscoring years. He had previously played at Coventry, where he had been influenced by their experienced manager Harry Storer, and Taylor and Clough had formed a close relationship at Middlesbrough. Taylor, six years older, admired Clough for his brashness and ability, and both liked to talk football. Taylor was certainly interested in management and was in charge of Burton Albion in the southern league when he was persuaded to join Clough at Hartlepools, taking a pay cut to move north. It seems that they seamlessly identified a division of labour between them, with Taylor responsible for the training and the search for new players while Clough concentrated on man management and public relations. He visited local working men's clubs to encourage support, persuaded a local brewer to sponsor the team, and even, it is said, painted the stands and drove the team bus. He also persuaded the club's board to replace an obstructive chairman. It was the first example of Clough as manager getting more attention than his players. At the end of the first Clough-Taylor season Hartlepools finished eighteenth. The next season they were eighth and in 1967-8 the club (renamed Hartlepool) was promoted to division three. But by then Clough and Taylor had moved to division two and taken over another team of under-achievers, Derby County. 
At the end of the first season, as at Hartlepools, Derby finished eighteenth. The next year, 1968-9, they won the championship and promotion to the first division, where they finished fourth, ninth, first, and seventh in the next four seasons. How was it done and why did it come to a sudden end during the 1973-4 season? Clough had already persuaded the Derby board that Taylor must come with him and that money would be needed to improve the team. He apparently told the existing Derby players that they had three weeks to make an impression and changed the personnel both on and off the field, retaining only four of the first-team players. He brought in John O'Hare who had been in his Sunderland youth team and John McGovern who had been at Hartlepools, and signed such seasoned but still ambitious professionals as Alan Hinton and Willie Carlin. Clough also signed the young Roy McFarland, a centre-half, who would later play twenty-eight times for England, but his biggest coup was to persuade the Scottish international midfielder Dave Mackay to come from Tottenham Hotspur. Mackay was seemingly at the end of his career and about to return to the Edinburgh club Hearts. Clough wanted his skills and powers of leadership and persuaded him that he could change from midfield to a sweeper role in defence. The team that Clough and Taylor built won the second division championship in 1969 by seven points, losing only five games (and Mackay was voted joint footballer of the year). From the 1969-70 to the 1972-3 season Derby were serious competitors in the first division, yet in 1973, with a second new team under construction, Clough and Taylor resigned. Sporting journalists called it the biggest own goal of Clough's career. 
Brian Clough could be charming but also rude and outspoken. Moreover, he was unpredictable, which was a further difficulty for anyone who had to cope with him. He had a low opinion of the directors of football clubs and expected them to underwrite what he wanted to do. In fact, he distrusted all authority except his own. These attitudes made him enemies in the boardroom. At first he seemed to have a good relationship with the Derby chairman, Sam Longson, whom he perhaps took for granted. He signed Colin Todd from Sunderland, for a British transfer record, while Longson was away on holiday. A joint FA and Football League commission found evidence of financial irregularities and fined the club as well as banning it from European competition for a year. Clough tried to buy from Nottingham Forest a player who had already signed for Manchester United, even parading him in front of the crowd at a Derby home match. But more seriously he became a media personality, not only putting his name to a weekly column in the 'Sunday Express' but by 1973 becoming a regular contributor on London Weekend Television's 'On the Ball' and 'The Big Match'. It was easy to see why journalists and broadcasters liked him. He could be informative and witty, was lively, always stimulating, and generous with his hospitality. The result was a string of regularly quoted comments and observations, ranging from relations with players ('We talk about it for twenty minutes and then we decide I was right') and the importance of ball control ('If God had wanted us to play football in the clouds, he'd have put grass up there') to his own performance ('I wouldn't say I was the best manager in the business, but I was in the top one'). Again, he amused many but alienated others. When Jimmy Hill left London Weekend to front BBC Television's 'Match of the Day', Clough was offered his job. He must have been tempted. He was spending so much time in London at weekends that the Derby board felt he was not giving enough to the job of management. He was asked to limit his television commitments and told that he must seek the prior approval of the board before he could appear. They also wanted to read his newspaper articles before publication. Both Clough and Taylor threatened to resign and then did so. Much to their surprise, on 15 October 1973 their resignations were accepted. 
The decision to accept Clough and Taylor's departure was not unanimous and Clough used some of his supporters on the board to oppose it. He also rallied the Derby fans and before long a protest movement had begun with banners, marches, meetings, and petitions calling for reinstatement of the management team. The players, and even their wives, got involved, the players having tried but failed to persuade Dave Mackay not to take the vacant position. Eventually it was accepted that their charismatic manager was not going to return, though it is unclear when Clough also came to this conclusion. Initially he took a job at Brighton and Hove Albion while the furore over the resignation continued. Then in July 1974 he was offered, and accepted, the vacant managership of the most successful team in England, Leeds United. This was surprising because it was well known that Clough was antipathetic both to the architect of their success, Don Revie, who had left to become England manager, and the way that success had been achieved on the field. Barely a year before, the Leeds players had been given a suspended fine for their unruly behaviour on the pitch and Clough had attacked them in his 'Sunday Express' column. Almost his first act at Leeds was to meet the players and tell them to throw away their medals because they had been won by cheating. He lasted only six league games and forty-four days at the club before he was sacked. He did, however, negotiate a very favourable financial settlement that provided long-term security. 
In January 1975 Clough was appointed manager of Nottingham Forest, then an unfashionable second division club whose best days appeared to be behind them. But in only two full seasons Clough -- now reunited with Taylor -- produced a promotion winning side that then won the first division championship in their first season back in the top league (1977-8). Clough thus emulated Herbert Chapman, the only other manager to win the first division title with two clubs. This feat was followed by an even more surprising one, two successive European cup victories in 1979 and 1980. It was done by a mixture of improving the players who were there when Clough arrived and some judicious operations in the transfer market, notably the signing of the England goalkeeper Peter Shilton and the central defenders Larry Lloyd and Kenny Burns, who was voted player of the year in the championship season by the Football Writers' Association. It was during this period that Clough was interviewed by the Football Association for the post of England manager. He was probably the people's choice, and certainly the press would have voted for him, but the combination of his powerful personality and erratic behaviour and a cautious FA meant that he was not offered the position. 
Clough remained at Nottingham Forest for eighteen years and although they were never champions again they were runners up once, third three times, fifth twice, and only once outside the top ten; under his management there were also four league cup victories between 1978 and 1990. No one predicted Forest's relegation from what was now the premier league in 1993. The partnership with Peter Taylor, so vital to both careers, ended in 1982 when Taylor returned to Derby County and the rift that was caused was not repaired before Taylor's death in 1990. In this period Clough also saw his son Nigel become a successful member of the Forest side and an England international. Clough's teams played attractive, simple football. At his peak he was a shrewd manager of men who could be brutal -- there is a well-known story of him punching a player in the stomach -- but he did not rule by fear alone. Clough offered understandable solutions to players' on-the-field problems and he was especially adept at relaxing them before important matches. Perhaps he should have retired earlier. British football had long been known for its drinking culture and Clough became one of its victims. He could be brash, conceited, intolerant, and rude. On the other hand, he was the provider of many acts of kindness, both inside football and out, and once talked out of suicide a man he encountered on a bridge over the River Trent. He had a powerful personality full of contradiction, leaving many unsure as to what he would say or do next. This goes some way to explain his interest to writers such as Steven Lowe, author of the biographical play 'The Spirit of the Man' (2006), and David Peace, whose novel 'The Damned United' (2006) focuses on Clough's forty-four days at Leeds. Peace's novel was adapted for the cinema in 2009 with Michael Sheen in the title role. 
In 1991 Clough was appointed OBE, and maintained that the letters stood for Old Big 'Ead, a self-appointed nickname that he enjoyed. Two years later he was given the freedom of the city of Nottingham, followed by that of Derby in 2003. Suffering from liver disease and given only several months to live, he underwent a liver transplant in January 2003. He died from stomach cancer on 20 September 2004 in Derby City General Hospital and was survived by his wife, two sons and one daughter. On 16 May 2007 a statue by Vivien Mallock was unveiled in Albert Park, Middlesbrough; in November of the following year Les Johnson's statue of Clough was unveiled in central Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 93881


Cook, Sir Alan Hugh (1922-2004), physicist and college head, was born on 2 December 1922 at 5 Garnett Villas, Felsted, Essex, the eldest of the six children of Reginald Thomas Cook (died 1954), a customs and excise officer, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Saxon (died 1986), who held various positions in the Congregational church. The family were active churchgoers and Cook was to remain deeply committed to the Christian faith throughout his life. His primary education was first at the village school at Felsted and then at West Leigh School. In 1933 he came top in the entrance examination to Westcliff High School for Boys, where he received an excellent education, particularly in the physical sciences, and he began his lifelong interest in the earth sciences. In 1939 he won a major entrance scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, which he entered the following year to read the natural science tripos, taking geology as his additional experimental subject. 
After taking his BA degree in 1943 Cook was drafted into the Admiralty signals establishment as a temporary experimental officer, where he was involved in electronic counter-measures. After his war service he returned to Cambridge, where he studied for a doctorate under the supervision of Edward Bullard and B. C. Browne. The topic of his dissertation was precise measurements of gravity in the British Isles, which was to lead to an interest in a very wide range of problems in precision measurement in the physical sciences. These were to form the core of his most distinguished scientific work. On 30 January 1948 he married Isabell Weir Adamson, a 23-year old hospital cook, and daughter of James Lamb Adamson, engineer; the couple had a son and a daughter. 
Cook's first published papers concerned the gravity surveys of the British Isles and anomalous effects due to different geological formations. After a period as a research assistant at Cambridge he followed Edward Bullard to the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington, south-west London, where he carried out a number of innovative and important experiments stimulated by his geophysical interests. These included the absolute measurement of the density of mercury, which is essential in order to obtain precise estimates of atmospheric pressure. Cook's measurements established the density of mercury to one part in a million. This was a brilliant achievement and remained the standard result for many decades. Cook's interest in precise gravity measurements continued with his clever experiments to measure the absolute acceleration of falling bodies, which achieved an accuracy of one part in 10 million by 1965. It also led to his interest in using the precisely known orbits of the Sputnik satellites to determine in detail the earth's gravitational potential. 
Another important interest was precision measurement for time standards, in particular the use of the hyperfine lines in the spectrum of cadmium as time and length standards. With Dick Rowley, Cook became involved in interference spectroscopy, which enabled these delicate experiments to be carried out with very high accuracy. In turn these experiments resulted in the use of laser interferometry for precise distance measurements. Cook's interest in masers and lasers led to a new direction of research with the discovery in 1965 of extremely high brightness sources of microwave radiation of the hydroxyl radical by radio astronomers at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1966 he wrote a seminal paper in which he interpreted the radiation as beamed maser emission under interstellar conditions. His long-standing interest in masers resulted in his textbook 'Celestial Masers' (1977). 
In 1966 Cook was appointed superintendent of the quantum metrology division at the National Physical Laboratory and in 1969 was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London. He returned to academic life in 1969 with his appointment as professor of geophysics at Edinburgh University, where he set up the geophysics department, recruited three lecturers, and introduced geophysics into the university's science courses. He remained only three years in Edinburgh before being appointed Jacksonian professor of natural philosophy at the Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge. His principal scientific achievement in Cambridge was to set up the laboratory astrophysics group, which continued his interests in precise measurements in astrophysics and geophysics. Innovative experiments in microwave spectroscopy were carried out by Cook with Bob Butcher, and tests of the inverse square law of gravitation at short distances were performed with Y. T. Chen and Alan Metherell. An ambitious attempt to develop a large-scale version of the Cavendish experiment to determine the constant of gravitation was sadly abandoned with the early death of Cook's collaborator, Antonio Marussi of the University of Trieste. The culmination of his interests in experimental gravitation was his book, co-written with Chen, 'Gravitational Experiments in the Laboratory' (1993). 
Cook took a very active interest in university affairs and became head of the Cavendish Laboratory in 1979. In 1983 he was appointed master of Selwyn College, the first head of the college not to have taken holy orders. This was a position he greatly enjoyed and which he carried out for ten years with characteristic humour, dignity, and humanity. He was also chairman and member of numerous national science committees during a period of considerable financial stringency, among them the Science and Engineering Research Council's astronomy, space and radio board. For his many services to science, he was knighted in 1988. Following his retirement in 1993 from the mastership of Selwyn much of his energy was devoted to the history of science. The culmination of this interest was his biography of Edmund Halley (1997) whose biography -- among others -- he also contributed to the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography'. In 1996 he became editor of 'Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London', the society's main journal in the history of science. He enjoyed this role and contributed numerous articles and editorials. He died from cancer on 23 July 2004 at Arthur Rank House, Cambridge. He was survived by his wife, Isabell, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93883


Crick, Francis Harry Compton (1916-2004), molecular biologist, was born on 8 June 1916 at Holmgarth, Holmfield Way, Weston Favell, near Northampton, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Harry Crick (1887-1948), director of Crick & Co., boot and shoe manufacturers, and his wife, Annie Elizabeth (1878-1955), daughter of F. W. Wilkins, director of Wilkins and Darking Ltd, hatters and general outfitters. As a young boy he was intensely curious and obviously bright. His mother was very ambitious for her firstborn and keen that he should be brought up well mannered and well educated. She was a strong character, a teetotaller, well organized, and, as a trained nurse, very concerned about health and hygiene. 
Crick's maternal aunt, Ethel M. Wilkins, a schoolteacher, taught him to read and his parents, finding his persistent questions more than they could handle, bought him Arthur Mee's 'Children's Encyclopedia'. Here he found clear and engaging expositions of such subjects as 'What is water made of?', 'The making of other worlds', and 'Can chemistry build up life?'. He was not patronized, but made to feel the excitement of big mysteries to be solved, like the 'riddle of the ether, for it comes into every scientific question, and is the unanswered problem at the bottom of everything. Yet there is reason to hope that the problem is not insoluble, and its solution will be the discovery of all time. ('Children's Encyclopedia', 5.2886)' Crick was inspired by this look into the future and anxious to make a big discovery himself one day, but worried that all the important ones would have been made by the time he grew up. His family called him Craxie, on account of his volubility, and his school friends gave him the nickname Crackers. 
Crick enjoyed his time at Northampton grammar school (1922-30) and thereafter as a boarder and scholar at Mill Hill School (1930-34), where he sang in the chapel choir and in light opera. In 1932 he won the mathematics and the physics prizes for his performance in the higher certificate, but failed two years later to win a scholarship to Oxford or Cambridge. Instead he entered the physics course at University College, London (1934-7). Although the course was not inspiring and his degree disappointing (second-class), he stayed on to do research under Edward Neville da Costa Andrade. When war broke out in September 1939 the complicated apparatus he had been building for his research on the viscosity of water above 100 degree C was nearing completion. But then the college moved to Wales, leaving his apparatus behind. 
In 1940 Crick was recruited to work for the Royal Navy, as a temporary experimental officer. He worked at the Admiralty research laboratory in Bushy Park, Teddington, until November 1941, when the physicist Harrie Massey was given the task of revitalizing the mine design department at Havant, close to Portsmouth. For this assignment he took with him three mathematical physicists and one experimental physicist -- Crick. The importance to Crick of working with this high-powered group in Havant should not be underestimated. It was Crick's first close encounter with brilliant theoretical physicists and mathematicians. It was also the first time of working under constant challenges. There was a desperate need to catch up with and move ahead of the enemy in designing mines that could not be cleared with minesweepers, constructing mines that would destroy the Germans' powerful 'Sperrbrecher' sweeps, creating the element of surprise, and, in short, outwitting the enemy. These challenges brought out Crick's nascent powers of efficient organization and authority. Put in charge of designing the mines, and concentrating on diverse firing mechanisms, his enthusiasm and confidence swept the work along. The science was nothing fancy, but its application to mine design demanded sound common sense and inventiveness, laced with a good supply of lateral thinking. The latter was essential in formulating strategies of surprise and anticipations of responses. After the war the British naval mine programme in Europe was judged to have been twice as effective as that of their opponents, despite the technical proficiency of the German scientists. Crick's designs for magnetic, acoustic, and sonic mines proved five times as effective as the standard British contact mines. 
It was as a research student at University College, London, that Crick had first met (Ruth) Doreen Dodd (1913-2011), a student of English literature, and the daughter of Samuel Dodd, engineer. On 18 February 1940 (by which time she was working as a clerk at the Ministry of Labour) they were married at St Pancras register office and went to live in Twickenham. In November 1940 they had a son, Michael Francis Compton Crick. A year later they moved close to Havant for Crick's new assignment. For the family the years at Havant proved difficult, and by 1944 the marriage had broken up, Michael going to live with his grandparents in Weston Favell. 
Crick remained at Havant until 1946, when he was transferred to the Admiralty in London to work in the naval intelligence division, where he was appointed to a permanent position. Even so he could only afford the rent on a flat he found in St George's Square in Pimlico by sharing the cost with a fellow lodger. First came his war-time friend, the mathematical logician Georg Kreisel, and after him the broadcaster Robert Dougall, whom he had met during the war. 
Now Crick could shake off his conventional and provincial past and plan his future. Intelligence work on weapons did not appeal in the long term. Physics had moved on so far that it would be hard indeed to catch up. He could not complete his doctoral research because in 1941 a land mine had destroyed the complex apparatus he had assembled. Instead he turned to the borders between physics and other disciplines. Now what, he asked himself, do I chat to other people about? The answer was chromosomes, viruses, and penicillin. This 'gossip test', as he called it, pointed him in the direction of biophysics -- the application of physical techniques to biological problems. He described his particular interest as 'the division between the living and the non-living, as typified by, say, proteins, viruses, bacteria and the structure of chromosomes' (Crick, application for studentship for training in research methods, 7 July 1947, TNA: PRO, FD21/13). He wanted to attack the subject at the molecular level, for clues to the nature of life must surely lie there. He called it 'the chemical physics of biology' (ibid.), and it would target the proteins wherein the mystery of life was, he believed, to be found. Behind this choice lay his desire to banish mysteries still serving to shore up religious beliefs. For, he argued, if 'detailed scientific knowledge' had rendered untenable some religious beliefs, why should science not do likewise to other religious beliefs? (Crick, 'Mad Pursuit', 11). This scepticism towards religion was longstanding. He could trace it back to his boyhood, at about the age of twelve. It was this force, allied with his intense curiosity, that maintained his passionate commitment to research until the very end of his life. 
In the immediate post-war period there was no master's course in biophysics. Crick had instead to find himself a laboratory, and apply to the Medical Research Council (MRC) for a studentship for training in research methods. He was strongly advised that he needed to become acquainted with biological material -- living cells -- before working on extracted material, and the advice was to go to Cambridge. But only one of those who saw him there offered him a place -- Honor Fell, director of the Strangeways Laboratory and a pioneer of tissue culture. She and her colleague Arthur Hughes had just the problem that needed his knowledge of the physics of liquids and his laboratory experience in measuring viscosity. 
Situated just outside Cambridge, the Strangeways Laboratory was a leading biomedical research institute. Among its research programmes was the study of cell division, a mysterious and fundamental process -- especially that remarkable 'dance' of the chromosomes known as 'mitosis' that precedes the formation of the two daughter nuclei and the laying down of the cell walls between them. Cell division was also of major interest to medical researchers, for if uncontrolled it would very likely lead to cancer. One hypothesis was that forces in the semi-liquid content (cytoplasm) of the cell might be controlling the movements of the chromosomes. Hence the desire to establish the physical nature of the cytoplasm. Crick had to record thousands of tiresome measurements under the phase contrast microscope to yield for the first time a reliable figure for 'the order of magnitude' of the cytoplasm's elasticity. What could be inferred as to the nature of the cytoplasm? In this, his first scientific paper (with Arthur Hughes) he wrote: 'If we were compelled to suggest a model we would propose Mother's Work Basket -- a jumble of beads and buttons of all shapes and sizes, with pins and threads for good measure, all jostling about and held together by colloidal forces' (Crick and Hughes, 'The physical properties of cytoplasm: a study of the magnetic particle method', pt 1, 'Experimental', 'Experimental Cell Research', 1, 1950, 78). 
Crick had no illusions about the rather trivial and unexciting nature of this work. But it gave him the time to read widely in the biological sciences and formulate his ideas. Being gregarious by nature, he soon established friendships with scientists in the university and in other research units, and these friends elected him to membership of the Hardy Club, formed in 1949 to discuss research in biophysics. Protein chemistry was also very much on Crick's and the club's agenda, and it was Frederick Sanger's work on the constitution of the polypeptide chains in the haemoglobins and in insulin that fired his imagination. How could such large three-dimensional 'globular' molecules, composed of several long chains, be replicated? It seemed inconceivable that a copy of the internal structure of such an object could be achieved in the manner that a sculptor makes a replica of his work, for the sculptor's mould follows only the external form of the original. One-dimensional templates must be essential to order the particular sequences of the amino acids on the chains that constitute the molecule. And for each protein these sequences should be distinctive, as Sanger's research was beginning to show. 
This brought Crick back to Erwin Schrodinger's little book 'What is Life?' (1944) that had so excited him when he and his friend Kreisel read it in 1946. Conceiving the gene at the molecular level, Schrodinger explained that making a copy of the hereditary codescript of the gene was not just 'the dull device of repetition', as in a crystal of salt, but the replication of a unique 'aperiodic' structure. 'We believe', he declared, 'a gene -- or perhaps the whole chromosome fibre -- to be an aperiodic solid' ('What is Life?', 61). Here, surely, lay the secret of the hereditary transmission of the remarkable specificity found among the proteins. Witness the body's response to invading bacteria, foreign blood, and organ transplants: the gene must contain a specific sequence or pattern that determines the one-dimensional sequence of the building blocks (amino acids) constituting the framework (polypeptide chains) of a specific protein. These chains then fold up to form the three-dimensional molecules we know in the 'globular' proteins like haemoglobin, our antibodies, and the numerous enzymes we possess, each very specific in its action. But the hereditary transmission of this specificity must be one-dimensional. 
Crick's move to Cambridge distanced him from the woman who was to become his second wife, Odile Speed (1920-2007), daughter of Alfred Valentine Speed, jeweller. They had first encountered each other at the Admiralty in 1945. Although brought up in King's Lynn, Odile had benefited from the cultural influence of her French mother and her experience as an art student in Vienna (1936-8) and her years in Paris living with her grandmother (1932-4 and 1938-9). She was a cultivated young woman, smart, fun-loving, and beautiful. When Crick first met her she was translating German documents for the Royal Navy's department of torpedoes and mines. Later she took up fashion design, but of science she knew nothing. Meanwhile Crick's divorce had been granted in 1947, but it was not until January 1949 that he and Odile became engaged. The marriage took place at Kensington register office on 13 August 1949. They had two daughters, Gabrielle ('b'. 1951) and Jacqueline ('b'. 1954). 
As Crick's research at Strangeways drew to a close he became increasingly impatient to leave cell studies behind and turn to molecular structure. Kreisel had introduced him to Max Perutz in 1947. Now two years later Crick wanted to join his group and get to grips with the X-ray crystallography of proteins. He sought an interview with the secretary of the MRC, Sir Edward Mellanby, and persuaded him to agree to fund the move. In June he was appointed to an 'unestablished' position within Perutz's unit, the MRC unit for the study of the structure of biological systems, in Cambridge University's Cavendish Laboratory, with a salary of $700 per annum. Unestablished posts would normally be reviewed after three years, leaving the situation open-ended as to whether or not the council would consider offering further contracts. 
The plan was that Crick should learn the methods used by Perutz and John Kendrew in their attempts to unravel the structure of the haemoglobin and myoglobin molecules. Then he should find a different protein that he could call his own, and begin to work out its structure. Crick dived into the literature to teach himself the theory behind these methods and worked through Perutz's papers on haemoglobin. To his amazement he judged that his own boss had been unjustified in the conclusions he had drawn from his data. So he wrote up a critique entitled 'The determination of the structure of proteins by X-ray crystallography: prospects and methods'. In this he attacked the assertion that proteins, although huge molecules, must have a simple structure, and that consequently solving their structure is not an impossible task. He found this a 'most dangerous argument'. For 'what is 'simple' for the organism, may not necessarily appear simple to anyone looking at protein structure' ('Determination of the structure of proteins', Mandeville special collections, University of California at San Diego, MS 600, 10A-2, p. 4). Just consider the complex biochemical pathways involving hosts of enzymes that biochemists have unearthed. (Crick, the colleagues around him all biophysicists, was arguing like a biologist.) Subsequently he gave the substance of this critique in a talk entitled 'What mad pursuit', at a conference held at the Cavendish Laboratory in 1951. Perutz had a model for the haemoglobin molecule rather like a hatbox or a cigar box, with the chains of the molecule like cigars lying parallel to one another in the box. Crick demolished this simple picture, concluding that the structure would prove to be more irregular and would best be represented by 'a three-dimensional framework, and may need a perspective drawing to show its main features' (Crick, 'The height of the vector rods in the three-dimensional Patterson of haemoglobin', 'Acta Crystallographica', 5, 1952, 386). 
Always concerned about the reliability and the limits of research methods, Crick had correctly assessed what information could be won from the X-ray data and what could not. The diffraction patterns produced by a crystal through which X-rays have passed cannot be focused because no lens can handle such tiny rays. Consequently the pattern is like a very out-of-focus picture constituted of numerous spots, the location and intensity of which are not sufficient to permit determination of the structure producing them -- unless there is knowledge of the 'phases' of the diffracted rays involved. Without the phases, however, one has only half the required information. Crick concluded by stressing that for large molecules such as haemoglobin the only promising way to discover the phases was to attach a heavy metal like mercury to the haemoglobin and use it as a 'flag' and to classify the phases of the other spots in relation to the flag. Then one could identify the constituents of the diffraction pattern (using Fourier analysis) and from these construct the molecule (Fourier synthesis). 
In the absence of such knowledge it had become popular to calculate a Patterson map, also known as 'the poor man's Fourier', because it was constructed without the phases. This gave the directions and distances (vectors) between the strongly scattering regions, but involved making convolutions of the data, meaning that all these vectors were superimposed on the same origin. In the light of this knowledge, it is hardly surprising that errors of interpretation can occur. Moreover, when dealing with fibres, there may be an easier and more economical route to take. This was to be precisely Crick's approach to DNA. 
This theoretical work was all very well, but not, in Perutz's opinion, very suitable for a PhD. Therefore it was time for Crick to find a protein that he could call his own and whose structure he could study. In 1950 Perutz had pressed Crick to enter the PhD programme and had arranged for the MRC to cover the costs. Although Crick went through all the laboratory procedures and explored several possible proteins, the results were disappointing. Then there were diversions that drew Crick away from this bench work. One such was the conformation of the polypeptide chains in fibrous proteins like keratin, and collagen. In 1950 Sir Lawrence Bragg, Cavendish professor of physics, had with Kendrew and Perutz published a number of molecular structures for them, all composed of helical chains, none of them convincing. But when Linus Pauling at the California Institute of Technology challenged Bragg and his colleagues with the publication of his greekLetteralpha-helix a year later there was consternation in Cambridge, for, unlike their models, Pauling's looked right, and Perutz quickly found crucial evidence in its support. This event left an indelible impression on Crick. Like the Cambridge group, Pauling had arrived at his proposed structure by model building, but using a purpose-made construction kit based on the accurate distances between atoms and limitations on the orientations of their bonds that his group had established. 
Later that year Crick was one of three authors (the others being William Cochran and Vladimir Vand) who used Fourier theory to derive the features of the diffraction pattern a helical molecule should yield. This proved to be a landmark for the study of both industrial and biological fibres, for it made possible the interpretation of the diffraction pattern of fibrous substances directly in terms of the structure of the molecules present. This, Crick's first significant achievement, together with two papers supporting Pauling's greekLetteralpha-helix using their helical diffraction theory, demonstrated his ability and originality as a theoretician in the world of X-ray diffraction. 
The relation between Crick and his colleagues in the unit could be difficult. Kendrew and Perutz wished he would not spend so much time talking. Bragg could not stand his laugh and did not approve of the manner in which he involved himself in the work of others. At times Crick could become impatient, and if he lost his self-control an impetuousness would show. At a seminar he would interrupt the speaker, even -- though very rarely -- telling the unfortunate victim that the talk was terrible. Indeed, a confrontation he had with Bragg in 1952 over a method to determine phases seemed to have spelt the end of his hope to continue with the unit after completing his doctoral thesis. 
Nevertheless Perutz greatly admired Crick and supported him consistently. After Bragg had complained to the MRC about Crick, Perutz wrote to calm troubled waters. He assured the council that the unit 'profits from Crick's astute criticism and his many suggestions' (Perutz to J. G. Duncan, 11 Jan 1952, TNA: PRO, FD21/13). Perhaps, suggested Perutz, in order to concentrate Crick's attention on his own work, the next increment to his salary should be withheld until he received his PhD. The MRC's response was a definite 'no'. Later that year Perutz reluctantly acquiesced with Bragg's view that Crick should look for a university position in a year or so. 
An incident that contributed to Bragg's displeasure had emerged from Crick's collaboration with James D. Watson, a post-doctoral student from America. Arriving in October 1951 to learn X-ray crystallography, he and Crick found common ground in their desire to discover how, in terms of molecular structure, the genetic material duplicates itself and performs its other functions. Watson was convinced, Crick not quite so convinced, that the hereditary material is not a protein, as had been formerly believed, but the nucleic acid DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), a major constituent of the chromosomes. 
Full of confidence, Crick felt that there was a good chance that he and Watson could discover the structure of DNA if they followed the approach Pauling had used to discover the greekLetteralpha-helix. Once discovered, the structure might then reveal the secret of its power of duplication. The thesis research was put aside as they built a three-chain model that proved to be an absolute disaster, leading to the imposition of a moratorium, putting DNA off limits to them. The account of how they returned to make a successful attempt just over a year later, in the early months of 1953, was subsequently told many times, but most amusingly by Watson himself in 'The Double Helix' (1968). 
In April 1953 the brief paper in 'Nature' announcing Crick and Watson's model for DNA did not cause wide interest, being too technical for the non-specialist. But Bragg became very enthusiastic, his whole attitude to Crick changing from considering him a nuisance to appreciating his qualities. Pauling, although he had recently published a model for DNA himself, without delay judged the Watson-Crick model broadly correct. Their model consisted of two sugar-phosphate chains on the outside of a helix and, as Crick proposed, one of the chains running in the opposite direction to the other. Attached to the chains were the four bases, adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine, all flat ring structures lying across and within the cylindrical molecule. But as Watson discovered, the bases from one chain could be fitted neatly with those from the other only if adenine on one chain was always paired by weak hydrogen bonds with thymine on the other, and guanine likewise with cytosine. They noted that 'the sequence of bases on a single chain does not appear to be restricted in any way. However, if only specific pairs of bases are formed, it follows that if the sequence of bases on one chain is given, then the sequence on the other chain is automatically determined' (Watson and Crick, 'A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid', 'Nature', 171, 25 April 1953, 737). 
The general reaction to Watson and Crick's second paper on DNA, 'Genetical implications of the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid', written almost entirely by Crick, and again published in 'Nature' in 1953, was much more positive. Here the reader could begin to appreciate how suggestive was their structure for the manner in which the genetic material might carry the genetic information, duplicate itself, and mutate. In the first paper Crick had inserted the sentence: 'It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing that we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material' (Watson and Crick, 'A structure', 737). In their second paper this point was developed. As they explained: 'Now our model... is, in effect, a pair of templates, each of which is complementary to the other. We imagine that prior to duplication the hydrogen bonds are broken, and the two chains unwind and separate. Each chain then acts as a template for the formation on to itself of a new companion chain, so that eventually we shall have 'two' pairs of chains, where we only had one before. Moreover the sequence of the pairs of bases will have been duplicated exactly. (Watson and Crick, 'Genetical implications of the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid', 'Nature', 171, 30 May 1953, 966)' Basking in the good fortune of this incredible discovery, Crick lectured visitor after visitor as they came to see the model. To those on the floor above it was as if steam were rising such was the excitement below, and above it all Crick's excited voice could be heard as he directed his expository skill to yet another visitor. Watson became irritated by Crick's unending enthusiasm. After all, their model was a proposal, not an established fact, and it might prove wrong. Crick was more confident and went ahead with a broadcast about the model for the BBC's Overseas Programme in Europe that summer. Watson refused to permit the broadcast to be put on the air in the UK. Nevertheless over the next few years it became clear that Crick's confidence was indeed well placed, and both Watson and Crick received accolades for their pioneering work, culminating in the Nobel prize for physiology or medicine in 1962, awarded jointly to Crick, Watson, and Maurice Wilkins. 
Bragg's change of heart towards Crick came too late for Crick to alter his plans for the forthcoming academic year. He had already accepted an invitation to spend a year in David Harker's protein structure project at Brooklyn Polytechnic, and the family would be setting sail for New York in the 'Mauretania' on 22 August, just four days after Crick's oral examination for the PhD. He had accepted Harker's offer because his future at that time was uncertain. Now Perutz was suggesting that Crick might return to the unit after Brooklyn. Crick forthwith made clear to the new secretary of the MRC, Sir Harold Himsworth, how attractive was this suggestion. At thirty-seven years of age, he pointed out, he needed to give serious consideration to his professional future, and added: 'after making one career for myself in the Admiralty, I gave it up at the age of 30, and with the help of the M.R.C. started again, in biophysics, as I believed my interests lay there rather than in making weapons. I now have to decide whether I should attempt to enter academic life proper. This would mean, in effect, starting at (or near) the bottom once again, as I have no academic experience at all. This, as you can imagine, I am most reluctant to do. (Crick to Himsworth, 15 June 1953, TNA: PRO, FD21/13)' Crick proved his worth at Brooklyn and Harker sought to persuade him to stay, but Crick declined, and he did not pursue the offer of work with Linus Pauling in Pasadena. Instead, when it finally arrived, he accepted the offer of a seven-year contract with the MRC in Cambridge. 
During the year at Brooklyn Crick visited many centres in America and laid the basis for what was to become a very considerable reputation there. But for Odile and their first daughter, Gabrielle, transplanted from the cosiness of Cambridge to the drabness of a suburb of Brooklyn, it had been hard. Their second daughter, Jacqueline, being due in March 1954, Odile and Gabrielle returned to England and lived with Odile's family in King's Lynn, where Jacqueline was born. Thirteen-year-old Michael enjoyed his time in Brooklyn, attending the local Quaker school, and staying on with his father after Odile and Gabrielle had departed. 
Perutz was anxious to have Crick return to the unit in 1954, not just because of what he might achieve himself, but because of the stimulation he would provide and the assistance he would give to others in the group. No matter what subject was raised, Crick would take an interesting, often novel approach in response. He would be there in the front row at seminars ready to challenge the speaker and open up discussion. His very presence gave zest to the research environment. He was shrewd and his advice was often sought. 
Most of Crick's research was carried out in collaboration with others. On collagen it was Alexander Rich, on viruses it was Watson, on ribonuclease, Beatrice Magdoff. In 1957 Sydney Brenner, working on bacterial viruses (or phages), gave up his lectureship in Johannesburg to come to the unit, so that he could collaborate with Crick. That same year brought two friends from America, the leading experts in phage genetics worldwide, Seymour Benzer and George Streisinger. Their presence strengthened the phage genetics programme at the unit. Then came the biochemist Mahlon Hoagland to set up a tiny biochemical laboratory in a vacant room in the Molteno Institute nearby, and to work at the bench with Crick. The unit that had begun life with X-rays in the physics department was now in 1957 expanding into other fields and other buildings. This called for a change of name to 'the MRC unit for molecular biology', and in 1962, 'the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology'. Crick, meanwhile, had not quite yet forsaken his role as an experimentalist. 
The reason for the expansion of the agenda was to answer some of the questions raised by the DNA structure of Watson and Crick. Here the sequences of bases on one of the chains, they suggested, specify the sequences of amino acids on the polypeptide chains that constitute proteins. What, then, are the rules that govern the translation from the 'language' of the bases into the 'language' of the amino acids? In short, what is the genetic code? This was part of 'the secret of life', contained, Crick claimed, in the structure of DNA, for all life depends on proteins, and it is the DNA surely that specifies the kinds of proteins that are made. Several approaches were used to seek the answer. The least demanding of bench work was to treat it as a problem in cryptography. Many attempts were made, including an attractive one by Crick and his colleagues called 'The commaless code'. But as Crick demonstrated, they all failed because they imposed too many restrictions on possible nearest neighbours in the polypeptide chains. Nature is not thus limited. 
In the years 1956 to 1961 Crick (who was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1959) sought experimental approaches to the problem aggressively. Working with him were the chemist Vernon Ingram, and from 1957 the biologist Sydney Brenner. These were the halcyon years laying the foundations of molecular biology. By the summer of 1961 Crick and Brenner's programme in the genetics of phage had reached an exciting stage. During Brenner's temporary absence Crick took over the experimental work. Running two series of experiments per day, working through the weekends and taking Mondays off for washing the equipment, he and the technician, Leslie Barnett, capped the evidence they already had that three bases (or a multiple of three) code for one amino acid; that these triplets are read in one direction only along the DNA chain, starting at a fixed point; and that mutations (hereditary variations) are produced not only by a change in a base, but by the deletion or addition of bases. 
Excitedly Crick ended his and his colleagues' paper on this and other work declaring: 'If the coding ratio is indeed three, as our results suggest, and if the code is the same throughout nature, then the genetic code may well be solved within a year' (F. H. C. Crick, L. Barnett, S. Brenner, and R. J. Watts-Tobin, 'General nature of the genetic code for proteins', 'Nature', 192, 1961, 1232). In fact it took until 1966, when Crick reached his fiftieth birthday. Then, as the plenary speaker at the Cold Spring Harbor symposium on the genetic code, he could produce his table of the assignment of all twenty amino acids (the vocabulary of proteins) to their respective base triplets. The remarkable power subsequently enjoyed by scientists to manipulate the genetic material at will was based on this fundamental achievement, and the human genome project later identified the vast sequences of bases in the DNA of humankind and many other species. 
Knowing the rule book for translating the messages in the genes into proteins did not answer just how these messages in the cell nucleus reach the site of protein synthesis, known to be outside the nucleus, and find their appropriate amino acids. Crick faced this challenge in an essay he wrote in 1955 that was circulated but not published and in a celebrated talk, 'On protein synthesis', given in London in 1957. Here he set out the ground rules for discussion of the subject, enunciating two principles: the sequence hypothesis and the 'central dogma' that for many years served to shape the development of the subject. 
When Crick had arrived in Cambridge in 1947 he had had high hopes of what he would find, but had became somewhat disillusioned. The democratic administration of the university seemed unwieldy, the inertia of tradition stifling, and the influence of the Anglican church was still permeating the colleges and their traditions. Up to this point he had not aired his agnosticism publicly, but his experience in Cambridge changed his mind. His lectures to the Cambridge Humanists, reported in the local press, helped to establish his reputation as a controversial figure and opponent of established religion. 
Crick had been 'smuggled' into Gonville and Caius College early in his career at Cambridge, and on entering the PhD programme in 1950 he became a member of the university. In 1956 an attempt was made by his friends in King's College to obtain a fellowship for him, but his advocates, Brenner among them, were informed that sufficient funds were not available. Apparently his work on DNA was considered a passing fad. Although Crick had so far avoided any teaching duties at Cambridge, in 1957 he was encouraged by the retiring professor of genetics, Sir Ronald Fisher, to apply to become his successor. Fortunately, he recalled in retrospect, his application was turned down since he was considered not to be a geneticist. Thus he was never employed by the university, although he was once asked to give a series of lectures. He replied stating his fee, then heard no more. Offered an 'extraordinary' fellowship at Churchill College in 1960, he accepted until the decision was made to build a college chapel, whereupon he resigned. Five years later, when tempers had cooled, the college offered him an honorary fellowship, which he accepted. 
The masters of Gonville and Caius College had for many years been scientists, and when Joseph Needham retired from the position in 1976 Crick was approached to ask if he would put his name forward. He consented, but after serious consideration withdrew. At that point he became an honorary fellow of the college. He was then also in the middle of negotiating a sabbatical at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, California. Retirement was close at hand, but for several reasons -- changes in the taxation of overseas earnings for one -- he wished to continue earning. Nor was he ready for retirement. His association with the Salk Institute went back to the very beginning when Jonas Salk was formulating its legal constitution in 1960. Two years later Crick became a visiting fellow and attended the annual meetings each February. When arranging the sabbatical it was therefore natural to think of the Salk Institute, but he had had no thought of making a permanent move from England. It was the institute's president, Frederic de Hoffmann, who raised the possibility, and when the Cricks were settled in La Jolla for the year he made such a reasonable offer for the future that it was difficult to refuse. Then as Kieckhefer distinguished professor, from 1977, he began to consider seriously his long held wish to explore the brain and consciousness. 
Crick followed his usual rule of avoiding any formal responsibility for planning and administration at the Salk Institute, but behind the scenes he was very influential in guiding the policy of the nascent institute and seeking candidates for fellowships. He lived to see it become second to none in the neurosciences. In making an entry into the field himself he decided first to learn as much as he could about the brain in general. Then he turned to vision, for vision is the foremost of our senses and intensively researched. He explored a variety of approaches -- the computational approach of artificial intelligence, the parallel distributed processing (PDP) approach of the group at the University of California at San Diego, close by the Salk, and the functional anatomy of Harvard University's David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel. From these experiences he came away most attracted to functional anatomy because it delved into the machinery within the brain. 'Black box' approaches could be suggestive, but so many of the imaginative models dreamed up by cognitive psychologists had no semblance of biological realism. Modelling with the computer was fun, but the brain is not a serial processor, and although so much of the brain's wiring is in parallel, it is not a parallel processor of the kind envisioned by the PDP group in San Diego. Crick enjoyed debating with philosophers, but he criticized those among them who had no desire to learn anything about the neurons -- the essential hardware of the brain. Listen to the interesting questions they raise, but not to their answers, was his advice. 
It was not until 1979 that Crick began to publish on neuroscience, and a further decade before he focused on consciousness. It resulted from his growing collaboration with the young neuroscientist Christof Koch. During some fourteen years of close collaboration they worked to make consciousness a subject worthy of experimental analysis and accepted as respectable science. Admitting the difficulty of conceiving how physiological events in the brain can give rise to subjective mental experiences ('qualia'), they argued that the first step was to discover the 'neural correlates' of consciousness: what processes, not normally present during mental activity, are active in states of conscious experience, and what parts of the brain are particularly active in those states? Crick did not at his time of life expect to achieve in neuroscience what he had achieved in molecular biology, but he 'hoped to build bridges between the scientific disciplines, all of which studied the brain from one point of view or another... I thought I might interact fruitfully with younger scientists'. In any case he reckoned he had at his time of life 'a right to do things for my own amusement, provided I could make an occasional useful contribution' (Crick, 'Mad Pursuit', 152). 
Tall, slightly stooping in later years, with an inquisitive face, bushy eyebrows, and searching blue eyes, Crick was memorable for his body language, a half wink at the hidden meaning of a phrase, a smile and suppressed snigger, catching his breath at the amusing side of an incident. Those who met him could sometimes feel as if they were in court for cross-examination. He seemed to some to know what they were going to say before they had finished speaking and was already waiting politely for them to finish, his response prepared. For he was one of the world's greatest listeners, and his concentration was remarkable. But rare were the occasions when he was not in control of the situation. Above all it was Crick's friendly, outgoing, jovial, and immensely kind nature that was noticeable. He disliked pomposity, pretentiousness, and stupidity, and to those who displayed it he could be devastating. Equally to the incompetent he could prove ruthless. 
Crick was at the centre of the revolution in biology of the twentieth century. He and his circle were for twentieth-century biology what Darwin and his circle were for the nineteenth. He wrote four books: an attack on vitalism entitled 'Of Molecules and Men' (1966), an imaginary scenario for life arriving from a distant planet, 'Life Itself: its Origin and Nature' (1981), his autobiography, 'What Mad Pursuit' (1988), and his introduction to the brain and consciousness, 'The Amazing Hypothesis' (1994). Besides the Nobel prize he received many awards and honours, including the Royal and Copley medals of the Royal Society (1972 and 1975), and the Order of Merit (1991). 
Crick was just finishing a paper on a region of the brain he believed to be particularly associated with consciousness, the claustrum, when his three-year struggle with colon cancer came to an end and he died in the Thornton Hospital in San Diego on 28 July 2004. He was survived by his wife, Odile, and his three children. A private funeral was held in La Jolla and Crick's ashes were scattered in the ocean. There followed a memorial meeting at the Salk Institute at which his close associates, together with his daughter Jacqueline and his son Michael, paid tribute to his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 93885


Dalton, Katharina Dorothea (1916-2004), chiropodist and physician, was born at Delaporte Gardens, Muswell Hill, London, on 12 November 1916, the second of five children of Johannes Kuipers, provision merchant, and his wife, Anna, 'nee' Knoester. Her parents were Dutch emigres. She was still young when her father died but, as he had been a freemason, she was educated at the Royal Masonic School in London. Her childhood ambition was to become a doctor but she won a scholarship to the London Foot Hospital in the early 1930s and trained as a chiropodist. She practised chiropody for over a decade, during which time she published her first book, 'Essentials of Chiropody for Students', in 1938 (the last and sixth edition of this book was published in 1968). She married Wilfred Thompson in 1939 but three years later he was killed in action while serving in the RAF during the Second World War. Despite being a war widow with a young son she was determined to fulfil her childhood ambition and was accepted to study medicine at the Royal Free Hospital in London in 1943. A year later she married Thomas Ernest (Tom) Dalton, with whom she subsequently had three more children -- one son and two daughters. After five years of medical study she qualified on 7 July 1948, the day the National Health Service started. She then became a trainee general practitioner in north London. 
In her first month of practising Dalton was called out to a patient with a severe asthmatic attack. The patient's husband informed her that the same thing happened each month. Linking this with her own experience of monthly migraines that disappeared when she was pregnant, she became interested in the menstrual cycle and started to chart the patients who visited her surgery at regular times each month. Thus began her research interests that paralleled her career as a GP. Following discussions and advice from a former teacher and endocrinologist, Raymond Greene (Graham Greene's brother), she began to treat some of her patients who complained of cyclical physical and psychological symptoms with natural progesterone. This work led to the first publication by Dalton and Greene on the premenstrual syndrome, which appeared in the 'British Medical Journal' in 1953. Although premenstrual tension had first been described by Robert Frank in 1931, Dalton realized that there were both physical and psychological symptoms associated with the approach of menstruation and thus coined the term 'premenstrual syndrome' (PMS). In 1957 she opened the first PMS clinic at University College Hospital in London, which she ran and directed for over thirty years. Her first book on women's health, 'Premenstrual Syndrome', was published in 1964, the same year that she took rooms in Wimpole Street seeing private patients. During her career she spent more and more time there, eventually giving up her NHS position as a GP. 
Dalton's research on PMS also took her to Holloway prison, a women's prison in London, where she interviewed newly committed prisoners and found that 49 per cent had been sentenced for crimes committed in the four days prior to or during menstruation. As a consequence of her research she was often approached by lawyers defending women accused of crimes such as murder, arson, and theft. Often her evidence was part of a successful defence taking into consideration that crimes were committed during the premenstrual period and thus at a time of diminished responsibility. An expert witness in about fifty trials, she refused to act on behalf of defendants unless they showed cyclical repetitive symptoms that responded to treatment. 
Dalton's innovative work in defining PMS and her view on its treatment with natural progesterone and a diet to maintain blood-sugar levels were not universally accepted by the medical profession. Her studies were criticized for not being properly controlled, and her research remained controversial for decades despite the fact that she convinced many doctors that PMS was a real disorder. She later turned her attention to depression after childbirth and again she advocated that natural progesterone (not the synthestic progestagen used in oral contraceptives) could alleviate symptoms. With her son Michael she also studied the toxicity of vitamin B6, which was then being used by some doctors to treat PMS. Their study was used as part of the basis on which in 1997 the UK Committee on Toxicity restricted the sale of vitamin B6 to doses of 1 mg or less per day. 
During her career Dalton produced more than a hundred articles and research papers on PMS, post-natal depression, the importance of maintaining blood sugar levels, migraine, and vitamin B6 toxicity. She also wrote eight popular books on women's health including 'The Menstrual Cycle' (1969), 'The Premenstrual Syndrome and Progesterone Therapy' (1977), 'Once a Month' (1978), 'Depression after Childbirth' (1980), 'PMS' (1994), and 'The PMS Bible' (2000). Her books were translated into seventeen different languages and some stayed in print for over twenty years. 
In 1970 Dalton served as the first female president of the general practioners' section of the Royal College of Medicine, and in 1982 she was made a fellow of the Royal College of General Practitioners, of which she had been a founder member. In 1983 she helped to establish the National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome (NAPS). In her later years she suffered from severe arthritis but still worked and drove her buggy round Harley Street until she retired at the age of eighty-four in 2000, eight years after the death of her second husband, Tom Dalton. She moved to Hereford and then Poole, Dorset. 
Described as outspoken, warm, and motherly, with an infectious sense of fun, Dalton worked very much on her own. She retained her belief in the therapeutic effects of natural progesterone despite medical doubts and lack of vigorous clinical evidence regarding its efficacy. Her contributions to women's health, however, were significant, and many felt that her achievements were never really recognized or acknowledged during her lifetime. Whether or not her dogged belief in natural progesterone stood up to clinical scrutiny, she did define PMS and brought many aspects of women's health into the public domain. She died at Canford Chase Nursing Home, 40 Western Road, Branksome Park, Poole, Dorset, on 17 September 2004, of atrial fibrillation and hypothyroidism. She was survived by her four children, two of whom were doctors. 


@@@@@


doc= 93893


Farmer, Frank Taylor (1912-2004), medical physicist, was born on 18 September 1912 at Warbrick, Mount Road, Bexleyheath, Kent, the younger son and youngest of three children of Robert Crosbie Farmer (1877-1960), research chemist, and his wife, Maud Mary, 'nee' Sharpe. After education at Eltham College he read electrical engineering at King's College, London, graduating with first-class honours in 1933. He then spent four years at Clare College, Cambridge, where his research, under the supervision of J. A. Radcliffe, on radio-wave propagation in the ionosphere, led to a PhD in 1937. He was continuing this line of work as a research engineer at the Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company in Chelmsford at the outbreak of the Second World War. By this time, always testing the Christian faith imbued in him by his evangelical parents, he had become a convinced pacifist. In 1940 he applied for exemption from military service and resigned from his position with Marconi to take up a post as assistant physicist in the radiotherapy department at the Middlesex Hospital. In doing so he became one of the few physicists appointed to hospitals at that time to deal with the many problems associated with using X-rays and radium for the treatment of cancer. He began working on the measurement of X-rays which culminated in the design of the Farmer dosemeter. This rapidly became the standard instrument for calibrating X-ray machines and measuring X-ray doses in radiotherapy departments across the world. 
In 1945 Farmer was appointed physicist to the radium centre based in the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle upon Tyne. The rapport he established there with C. J. L. Thurgar, the chief radiotherapist, resulted in both radiotherapy and hospital physics flourishing over the following years in the northern region. With his experience in radio wave propagation and in the practical problems of radiotherapy he helped in the design of a linear accelerator for cancer treatment. As a result, in 1953 Mullard installed the first such gantry-mounted machine in the world in the Newcastle department. Its highly penetrating X-rays could treat deep-seated tumours while avoiding the severe skin damage of earlier X-ray treatments. Farmer's way of enabling the patient to be observed (before the days of closed circuit television) from outside the treatment room with its protective concrete walls up to three feet thick was to install a periscope bought at bargain price from a naval scrapyard. 
Farmer was a self-effacing, reserved man, but with drive and energy and remarkable technical skills and creativity. He enjoyed fixing things and relished prolonging the useful life of apparatus. The Mullard accelerator treated patients for over twenty years. The throwaway society was anathema to him. Despite this he was acutely aware of new technical or scientific developments and keen to explore any that would help clinicians with investigation and treatment of patients. He was quick to start research into the clinical uses of the radioisotopes that became available after the Second World War from the nuclear reactors at Harwell and Amersham. The radioisotope tracer technique offered research and diagnostic opportunities in almost every branch of medicine. As a result he introduced a radioisotope service based in the medical physics department that won strong and enduring support from the senior medical staff of all specialities. A happy consequence of his interaction with medical staff was his marriage on 15 September 1960 to Marion Bowie Bethune, a 45-year-old paediatric cardiologist, and daughter of James Bethune, civil servant. There were no children of the marriage. 
From the start of his appointment at Newcastle, Farmer thought in terms of providing medical physics services to the whole northern region, either on a peripatetic basis, as with radiation physics, or by inviting referral of patients. He built up an expert centre, attracting and leading a team of specialists in radiation physics, radioisotopes, electronics, ultrasonics, cardiology physics, audiology, and computing, making what were then scarce resources available across the whole northern region. A multidisciplinary approach to problems was his hallmark, as was his insistence that the research he encouraged in his department be clinically relevant. Its academic standing was recognized by his appointment as professor of medical physics at Newcastle University in 1966. He encouraged his staff to be active in the wider medical physics world, as he was. Over the years he served on the International Commission on Radiological Units and numerous other radiological and research committees. He was president of the Hospital Physicists' Association in 1959-60, and of the British Institute of Radiology in 1973-4. In 1974 he was appointed OBE for services to physics applied to medicine, and in 1977 he was awarded the Barclay medal for his outstanding contributions to the 'British Journal of Radiology'. Even his hobby gained international recognition. Ever since his university years he had been a keen radio 'ham', making friends across the world via his short-wave radio, and in 1977 the Wireless Institute of Australia awarded him its Cook bicentenary award for his contacts that year. 
Farmer retired in 1978. His pioneering work in the application of physics to medicine, particularly the practical aspects of radiotherapy, had won international renown and, from being the sole hospital physicist in the northern region, he had established the northern regional medical physics department with a staff of seventy as a centre of excellence. Throughout, his Christian convictions, in particular his pacifism, remained central to his life. Happily he found a soulmate in his wife, Marion. For many years he served on the central committee of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, an ecumenical body promoting non-violence and international peace, and the local group met regularly at the Farmers' home. He involved himself wholeheartedly in the controversies of nuclear power and nuclear weapons, and strongly supported the United Nations Association. In his retirement he carried on his ten-year chairmanship of the Newcastle Hospitals' Ethical Committee. He joined the Society of Friends and in addition to his peace work he devoted time to helping the underprivileged in Newcastle, becoming involved in a scheme called Baseline helping young people who were struggling to escape their past and re-establish themselves, and acting as handyman and helper in the People's Kitchen, which provided shelter and food for the lonely and homeless. All this he continued after his wife died in 1991. He moved into a small upstairs flat, 41 Goldspink Lane, in the Sandyford area of Newcastle. Passionately concerned about the exploitation of the earth's resources, he set an example by installing a solar panel in the roof, living frugally, using a bicycle for local journeys (elastic bands serving as clips), and delighting in repairing clocks, bicycles, and all manner of domestic goods. He remained as active as ever until only a few weeks before his death, from pancreatic cancer, on 16 July 2004 at St Oswald's Hospice, Regent Avenue, Newcastle. He was cremated at West Road cemetery and crematorium, Newcastle, on 23 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 93894


Feilden, Geoffrey Bertram Robert (1917-2004), engineer, was born on 20 February 1917, at 31 Meadway Court, Golders Green, London, the oldest of five sons of Captain, later Major, (Robert) Humphrey Feilden, an officer in the Royal Field Artillery, and his wife, Olive, 'nee' Binyon. His father was the victim of a gas attack on the western front later in the First World War; this led to his being medically advised to take up residence in the beneficial climate of British Columbia, western Canada. The family settled on a ranch near Mara, where Feilden first attended school. As a young boy he showed an interest in elementary technical science, experimenting with a defective telephone system and spending time exploring Leclanche cells. After the death of his father while bathing in a nearby lake, in 1925 Feilden was sent to England to continue his education. He attended school in Hampstead, was a scholar at Bedford School, and was an exhibitioner at King's College, Cambridge. Between Bedford School and Cambridge he worked as an apprentice at the engineering company British Thomson-Houston, in Rugby; he also attended a course in engineering drawing at Rugby Technical College. He went up to Cambridge in 1936 to read for the mechanical sciences tripos. During the university long vacation of 1937 he joined the engineering firm of Brown Boveri, in Baden, Switzerland, on a two-month vocational apprenticeship. For the following year's long vacation he was sent to serve as fifth engineer on a tanker to gain experience of large, low-speed marine diesel engine problems. He gained a first-class honours degree in 1938 then, seemingly to expand his industrial and managerial knowledge, stayed on for a further year taking the economics part 2 tripos, in which he obtained second-class honours. He came to doubt the value and wisdom of trying to secure profound knowledge of industrial management by taking an economics degree -- a not uncommon disappointment at that time. 
After leaving Cambridge Feilden joined Unilever in Port Sunlight as a technical trainee, but soon after the outbreak of the Second World War he was seconded to Power Jets Ltd -- seemingly in view of his recent experience working on gas turbines at Brown Boveri Ltd. He came to manage engine test programmes and in April 1941 the new W1 engine he had helped develop was flown for 200 yards. This went on to be bettered until full confidence in its future was well established by the successful trial flight of the Gloster-Whittle E28/39 in May 1941. Production of the engine was thereafter revolutionized, but with inspection and experiment being closely monitored by Feilden's group. The strong limitations of time-honoured diesel engines were exposed and then surpassed, with air transport now able to become revolutionized. Feilden moved on from Power Jets in 1946 but only after a tour delivering repetitions of Whittle's Thomas Hawksley prize lecture of 1945, which stimulated widespread interest in improving industrial gas turbines. 
Feilden joined Ruston and Hornsby Ltd of Lincoln in 1946 (the year of his marriage to Elizabeth Ann Gorton, with whom he had a son and two daughters), his reputation having been urged on the company in order to develop industrial gas turbines. As chief engineer he worked on engine designs which could cope with fast changes of load and temperature. Start-up times of 1 minute were soon achieved, and the response from across the country, especially the oil industry, was immediate. Prospects of great reductions in the weight of equipment were soon envisaged. Feilden left Ruston and Hornsby early in 1959 to become managing director of Hawker Siddeley Brush Turbines Ltd, then a company building steam and gas turbines but one deficient compared with Rustons. It seems that it was a transfer decision he regretted. Two years later he moved to Davy-Ashmore Ltd as group technical director but this appointment also gave rise to no prodigious technical breakthroughs. 
In recognition of the quality and quantity of his scientific work and publications, Feilden had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1959. He proved a valuable member of the society, serving two periods on its council and making substantial contributions especially on its official visits overseas, such as to the Soviet Union in 1963 and India in 1967; the former country was helped to overcome its technical isolation and the latter was looking for advice regarding the expansion of its own gas turbine establishment. He also visited China (twice) and Brazil under Royal Society auspices. With the former, views were exchanged about international standardization; with the latter Feilden discussed expansion of its automobile industry. 
The so-called 'Feilden report', 'Engineering Design', was published in 1963; it had been called for by Lord Hailsham, when minister of science. Some 10,000 copies were published. An encapsulating phrase frequently used in it was that 'In [engineering] design, everything matters'; the importance and value of good design, and of design education for engineers, were heavily underlined. As a consequence of the report a design advisory service was created by the Design Council and forty-three guides were offered regarding diverse subjects. For his work in connection with the report Feilden was appointed CBE in 1966. Two years later he became deputy director-general of the British Standards Institution, becoming director-general in 1970 and holding that post until 1981. As director-general he sought to improve design through a ten-year programme of metrication and in anticipation of the problems confronting a European Common Market. Recommendations for the development of design quality assurances, nationally, were started in 1979. Meanwhile, his first marriage having ended in 1961 in divorce, on 27 December 1972 he married (Elizabeth) Diana Angier, a 53-year-old widow, and daughter of Percy Charles Lloyd, solicitor. 
Following his retirement from the British Standards Institution, Feilden moved from Henley-on-Thames to a house at Painswick, Gloucestershire -- a region where he had long desired to live. His new property was large and included a swimming pool; he was also able to indulge himself in many other favourite outside activities, especially photography. He continued to tackle issues such as those raised by standards unification, with occasional visits to South Africa, Canada, and mainland Europe. He also now found time for his great personal interest in mechanical rotating machinery, and enjoyed the company of his neighbour Alex Moulton, a prolific inventor. Furthermore, he was able to set up his own company, Feilden Associates Ltd, for consultancy work. Opportunities to continue old and treasured friendships with former colleagues from the Royal Society and the Academy of Engineering were also made the most of. He was disappointed at not being elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts. However, with the Royal Society he helped instigate several professional lectures on design. He also helped set up, from 1998, an annual prize award at the Institution of Mechanical Engineers for young engineers writing on 'aerospace propulsion'. He died in the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital, Gloucester, on 1 May 2004, and was buried in Gloucester Cathedral. A memorial service was held at St Paul's, Wilton Place, London, on 28 September 2004. He was survived by his wife, Diana, the three children of his first marriage, and three stepchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 93911


Hounsfield, Sir Godfrey Newbold (1919-2004), engineer and inventor, was born on 28 August 1919 in Sutton-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, the youngest child in the family of three sons and two daughters of Thomas Hounsfield, farmer, and his wife, Sophia Blanche, 'nee' Dilcock. His upbringing on a farm was a major factor in the way his life developed. From a very early age he began doing experiments using the sort of resources that can only be found on a farm. He exploited haystacks as the launch platforms for hang gliding investigations, and had access to barrels in which he performed some chemical experiments which, it is not unlikely, could have terminated his interest in science at a very early age. At Magnus grammar school, Newark, he was enthused only by physics and mathematics. He seems to have had an interest in electronics from a very early age, however, and many of his projects, such as the construction of his own audio recording system, involved this then embryonic subject. 
When he left school Hounsfield worked for some time in a builder's design office before volunteering for the RAF in 1939, at the outbreak of the Second World War. His electronics experimentation led to his being accepted as a radio mechanic, passing the entry examination without taking the preparatory course. He received specialist radar training, and was sent first to the RAF-occupied Royal College of Science in London, then to Cranwell as a radar instructor, and promoted to corporal. While at Cranwell, he passed the City and Guilds radio communications examination in his spare time. In 1946 he was demobilized and, funded by a grant awarded on the recommendation of Air Vice-Marshal J. R. Cassidy, went to Faraday House Electrical Engineering College in London to study for the diploma in electronics which that college awarded. At the time electronics was regarded academically as a minor offshoot of physics, and was allocated very little course time by university departments. He graduated from Faraday House in 1951, and joined Electrical and Musical Industries Ltd (EMI) at Hayes, Middlesex. 
EMI was an immensely innovative company, which had been responsible for many of the most important developments in sound recording and electronics in the period between the 1920s and the 1950s. Apart from the stereo recording of sound, the most significant was the development by Alan Dower Blumlein at the Central Research Laboratory, under the leadership of Isaac Shoenberg, of cathode ray tube-based television (which was chosen in preference to the mechanically scanned method proposed by John Logie Baird). It was predictable, therefore, that the company should become involved in the development of computers as soon as the potential significance of these devices became apparent. After some initial work on radar and guided weapons, Hounsfield headed a group developing the first British transistor-based computer, which was marketed as the EMIDEC 1100. Subsequently he worked on computer storage systems before moving on to investigate automatic pattern recognition in the Central Research Laboratory. 
Hounsfield was asked to devise new topics for research, and suggested trying to reconstruct a picture by sampling it from a large number of different angles. As he studied this, he began to consider how one could determine the contents of an opaque box. Legendarily he developed the idea of computerized tomography (CT) during the long walks he took most weekends at Burnham Beeches, the nearest really attractive woodlands to Hayes. Initially he did not think of his problem in medical terms at all, but that may have evolved as he considered the kinds of radiation that might make it possible to achieve what he wanted, and it became apparent that an X-ray source was the most appropriate available. From that conclusion, it was only one more step to the idea of computerized tomographic (CT) X-ray imaging. The thoughts that he matured during these times led to a research proposal to the Central Research Laboratory in 1968. In this he suggested that highly accurate values might be expected for the absorption coefficients of various tissues, leading to high discrimination between them, and potentially useful diagnostic results. He requested $10,000 for the programme, which the company persuaded the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS) to join it in providing. This funding was later increased, in spite of scepticism as to the idea's feasibility voiced by a leading academic mathematician who was asked to evaluate the concept. 
The initial demonstration of the possibility of imaging using computerized tomography was based on an old lathe bed, which was modified to provide the mix of lateral translation and rotation necessary to obtain the huge number of individual 'edge' values needed for the reconstruction process. (The lathe bed is now in the care of the British Institute of Radiology, London.) Initial studies used a gamma-ray source and photomultiplier detector, but acquiring the data for a single image using this combination took nine days, and one of the funding increases that were sought (and agreed) was for an X-ray source with which the data for an image could be obtained in nine hours. 
EMI had many demands on its resources, and the possibility that it might stop funding scanner development was very real. Medical electronics was not part of the company's portfolio at the time, and the operating divisions felt that they had first claim on any available resources. The Central Research Laboratory, led by its then director of research, W. E. Ingham, approached the DHSS again seeking help to continue the work. They were fortunate in that the men who had charge of the appropriate department of the DHSS at the time were Cliff Gregory and Gordon Higson. The latter, in particular, had an appreciation of medical electronics and its potential which was many years ahead of his time. Higson was both a patriot, with a belief that British manufacturing industry was worth protecting and encouraging, and that the DHSS, through its support, could help with this aim, and a scientific administrator with an extraordinary ability to detect a good idea. Gregory and he were quickly persuaded that the case for supporting the development of the scanner was good, and they were largely instrumental in organizing the purchase on behalf of the DHSS of five of the new devices (one being for engineering development and the other four for installation in hospitals). EMI devised a specification for the machines against which their performance could be measured, and Higson ensured the order was placed. He also funded some of the research and development of the new scanner in return for a small royalty per machine to be paid to the DHSS. This research funding was critical in keeping the project going. In order to overcome scepticism about the value of the new equipment, Higson organized a group of three wise men -- distinguished radiologists -- to assess its clinical utility. Two of the three (James Ambrose and Louis Kreel) ultimately received respectively the first head and body CT scanners, while Frank Doyle, at the Hammersmith Hospital, would be charged nearly ten years later with the evaluation of the first clinical Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner, which had also been supported by Higson. At the same time as they developed the first group of machines EMI also designed and built a prototype machine for the American market. The whole project was implemented by a tiny team working very long hours, with Hounsfield involved in every aspect. The CT scanner was to an unusual degree the work and inspiration of one individual. 
The first CT scanner was installed at Atkinson Morley's Hospital in Wimbledon for evaluation by James Ambrose of its potential for imaging the head and brain, with immensely promising results. The first patient, a lady presenting with a possible brain cyst or tumour, was scanned on 1 October 1971. The results of the initial clinical trials were startling. The many sceptics, who had expected computerized axial tomography (or CAT), as the method was by then known, to be no more than a somewhat distracting sideshow, were won over overnight, and when EMI formally unveiled the new machine at the annual congress of the British Institute of Radiology in April 1972 it was greeted with enthusiasm. Ambrose's presentation at the Radiological Society of North America's annual meeting in Chicago at the end of November, in which he described his initial clinical results, was given a standing ovation. American radiologists clamoured for machines, and, quite extraordinarily quickly by later standards, EMI began shipping machines to the USA by jumbo jet plane. The initial machines were sold as head scanners, but a whole body machine was launched by EMI in 1975. 
The impact of the new machine on radiology was both extraordinary and fundamental. Patients benefited from the very beginning, with previous techniques (such as the very uncomfortable pneumoencephalography procedure) being discarded almost overnight, and with improved diagnosis and better patient care becoming ever more widely available. It was extraordinary, too, in the swiftness of the response of radiologists in all kinds of hospital to the opportunity it offered them. It was fundamental in that they demonstrated that they could generate the resources needed to acquire and operate the scanners, and that the additional knowledge and capability it gave them could raise their significance and power relative to those of other practitioners. The impact of the scanner on EMI was dramatic also. The company had thrived during the 1960s on the worldwide euphoria surrounding the Beatles. By the 1970s it needed an equally spectacular successor. EMI's managers certainly believed they had found it, and for some time the sale of CT scanners and licensing agreements with other manufacturers provided a steady stream of income, but they underestimated the determination of their competitors, their willingness to infringe the mass of patents EMI had accumulated, and the preparedness of governments to ignore the rules of free trade if it would benefit their own manufacturers. By the end of the 1970s, with both the record and medical companies in difficulties, the company was clearly vulnerable to being a takeover victim. It was bought in 1979 by Thorn Electrical -- a supplier, predominantly, of domestic appliances. 
Thorn-EMI (the result of the merger) began its withdrawal from the medical electronics business at once, and finally quit it in 1981. Hounsfield continued to work as a consultant at the rebuilt Central Research Laboratory after his retirement in 1986, involving himself in a variety of projects with medical imaging. In addition to his work on CT X-ray machines, Hounsfield had developed a great interest in MRI during the time EMI was actively investigating this imaging modality in the Central Research Laboratory, between 1974 and 1981. After his retirement he spent one or two days of every week working on MRI in the Cardiac MRI unit at the National Heart and Lung Institute at the Brompton Hospital. This unit had been founded, and was driven, by Donald Longmore, a charismatic and very able cardiac surgeon and physiologist with a voracious appetite for new things, and a willingness to invest huge energy in making them happen. Longmore was intensely interested in the use of MRI for cardiac investigations -- with the real target being the replacement of X-ray based coronary angiography by its MRI equivalent. Hounsfield joined enthusiastically, inventively, and productively in the endeavour to achieve really good magnetic resonance images of the coronary arteries. 
Recognition of the extent of Hounsfield's achievement came quickly. EMI received the MacRobert award for the development of the CT scanner in 1972. This was the most prestigious British engineering award, made to a company, represented by those involved, rather than to any individuals. Hounsfield himself was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1975, was appointed CBE in 1976, and received (jointly with Allan M. Cormack, an American-based South African mathematician) the Nobel prize for physiology or medicine in 1979. He was knighted in 1981, and made an honorary fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 1994. He received many other honours including six honorary degrees, and over forty awards from scientific institutions around the world. 
Hounsfield never married, and lived very quietly all his life. His principal hobby was walking, both in the mountains and around the countryside nearer his home. He played the piano in, as he put it, a self-taught way. He lived very modestly, with few possessions. When, as in his later years, he did receive large prizes, he tried to invest them in further scientific studies. Indeed, he is said to have wished to use his Nobel prize to fund an MRI system for his own work, and was somewhat put out when it was pointed out to him that he had nowhere to put it, as he was then living in lodgings. As a result he was persuaded to buy a house (in Twickenham), one room of which he turned into a laboratory. Even then he spent little on himself, so that at one stage in his latter years he was diagnosed as suffering from malnutrition. He worked on consistently until ill health prevented it a couple of years before his death, at the New Victoria Hospital, Kingston upon Thames, on 12 August 2004, of heart failure. He left an estate valued for probate purposes at just over $1 million. 
Godfrey Hounsfield was an unassuming electrical engineer, with an imagination, intuitive insight, and persistence that ultimately lifted him high above his peers, though his qualifications were superficially much less good then theirs. His working life was very simple. He worked for practically all his career for one company, and for most of his working life he lived in various forms of rented accommodation. By later standards he was something of an enigma -- a self-contained man who was perfectly happy doing the job he was paid to do, and quite unimpressed by the fame that ultimately became his. He was a unique man, with unique working methods. His intuitive insights were invariably correct, even if he often could not explain rationally the process by which he reached the conclusions he had. He was genuinely interested in the things he was investigating, and widespread recognition with its requirements for travel, talks, and presentations seemed to him a slightly irritating distraction from things that were really important. He focused all his energies on what he was investigating at the time, and anything else simply got in the way of that. He wrote very few academic papers, and declined invitations to many events where he might have had to speak or receive an award, because they were all distractions that could be avoided. He was often quite vague about the details of what had happened in the past (as the American lawyers challenging EMI's patents in the latter part of the 1970s were to find out). He was always much more interested in the future, and, above all, in what he was currently working on. 
By the time of Hounsfield's death CT scanners were part of the standard equipment of most hospitals in the developed world, and it has been estimated that the world market for CT scanners was by then valued at around $500 million annually. Nevertheless it can be argued that Hounsfield's impact on medicine extended far beyond the invention of the CT scanner, and was even more significant and had a much greater and more far-reaching effect than that huge achievement. Quite simply, he showed the medical community that computers could do things and deliver capabilities that were impossible without them. It is significant that, apart from traditional X-ray machines and ultrasound, all the other imaging modalities which were either in use or being investigated by the time of his death were first proposed in the three or four years after the announcement of the scanner. MRI, for example, was first described in recognizable form (actually using the same data acquisition strategy as the original CT scanner) in 1973, Positron Emission Tomography in 1974, and microwave and optical imaging soon after. Others (most notably John Mallard at Aberdeen, who developed a tomographic nuclear medicine system -- later widely applied as the method known as SPECT) were working along parallel lines to Hounsfield, but it was his achievement that made people start to take all the other possibilities seriously. The 'all digital' hospitals which were emerging by the time of his death can truly be said to have had their genesis in Hounsfield's lathe bed rig in Hayes, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 93917


Jennings, Sir Robert Yewdall (1913-2004), jurist, international lawyer, and judge, was born on 19 October 1913 at 25 Sherborne Villas, Town Lane, Idle, near Bradford, Yorkshire, the only son of Arthur Jennings and his wife, Edith Schofield, 'nee' Brotherton. He was brought up in solid but simple circumstances. His mother was a mill worker; her father, a butcher, could neither read nor write, but was a lively character with an affectionate relationship with his grandson. His paternal grandfather was a clerk at the mill, and his father, Arthur Jennings, though describing himself with a degree of pride on the birth certificate as 'manager', in fact worked for a small company making paper tubes for wrapping yarn with only a few other men under his supervision, and never earned more than a modest salary. He had himself left school at fourteen, but had internationalist leanings which he shared with his son. He was a Methodist lay preacher, another avocation shared by his son in his early years. 
Jennings was endowed by nature with exceptional intelligence and with a fair quantity as well of Yorkshire obstinacy and grit, the first evidenced by the fact that he made it his own ambition to get not just to university, but to Oxford or Cambridge, and the second by the fact that he saw the purpose through from the unpromising starting place of Belle Vue secondary school (which had never before sent a boy to Oxbridge) after having turned down a place at Bradford grammar school because he wanted to stay with the boys he knew. The stubbornness must however have been laced with a tinge of fantasy, because his first choice was Trinity, Oxford, on no better basis than that he'd read about its fine avenue of lime trees. Trinity, to its credit, gave him an interview and in due course the offer of a place, but no scholarship, which was in his circumstances the essential prerequisite. The choice therefore fell back on Downing College, Cambridge, on the more pragmatic ground that its fees were relatively cheap, and in due course Downing obliged with a scholarship. It was not until Jennings arrived to take up residence, in the autumn of 1931, that the blow fell: a lordly senior tutor informed him that times were hard, so the scholarship would be for the honour only. A crisis family conference followed; the county was profoundly uninterested in funding the outlandish idea of Jennings studying in Cambridge rather than locally in Leeds. His father undertook, however, to scrape together enough to keep him for one year. With his whole future depending on it, Jennings duly took a starred first in part one of the law tripos, which earned him a Squire scholarship, and graduated with another starred first in part two in 1935 and yet another in the LLB a year later, collecting the Whewell and Cassell scholarships along the way. If the choice of law remains hard to explain (nothing in his background suggesting it), the focus on international law from the outset of his career is accounted for by the spell cast over him as an undergraduate by Sir Arnold McNair, who remained a lifelong influence, and the closest there could be to a hero for Jennings. Jennings later wrote McNair's entry in this dictionary. 
At the urging of Henry Hollond, reader in English law at Cambridge and dean of Trinity College, Jennings put in for, and won, a Choate fellowship to Harvard for the year 1936-7, which proved a happy and fulfilling time, opening his eyes as well as his mind, and leaving him with a lasting respect for the United States and its people. His duties at Harvard consisted of little more than to read, and that he did widely and assiduously. After returning to London in 1937 he kept himself by teaching at the London School of Economics and lecturing to bar students at the Inns of Court school of law. Two years later he successfully applied for a Cambridge fellowship, at Jesus College, but the Second World War intervened before he could get into his stride. 
Following the outbreak of the war Jennings's romantic idea was to join the navy, but the recruiting office in Cambridge was manned by a former Jesus College porter, who wisely thought otherwise, and in 1940 Jennings duly found himself recruited into army intelligence. A good deal of the work, which appealed to him, involved the study of maps and aerial photographs, leaving him in turn with a fascination for the geographical which later came into play in his studies of territory and boundary disputes in international law. The work was centred in Oxford, which gave him the opportunity to eat his dinners at Lincoln's Inn and to get called to the bar in 1943 (although nothing like a legal practice developed until much later). A short final period of military service abroad, in India and Ceylon, preceded his demobilization in 1946, with the rank of major. It was then back to Cambridge, to his fellowship at Jesus and a university lectureship. 
The teaching Jennings hugely enjoyed, and he had a talent for it, including getting his meaning across to returning undergraduates older and more senior than himself. His lectures were marked by a quiet exposition, but one which masked a degree of theatre as he built up to the main points he wanted to convey. Other duties, however, soon thrust themselves on him in an unexpected way. He was prevailed upon by his colleagues at Jesus to fill in at short notice as senior tutor, and then to accept the position substantively in 1949 when the prospective appointee fell by the wayside. It was a demanding post, one whose functions would later have been spread between several college officers, and must have been doubly demanding for someone who had so recently arrived at the college himself. He deployed his bargaining position to plead for a secretary, which was grudgingly granted in the form of one for all the fellows, though she could sit in Jennings's outer room (so long as he himself provided the furniture). The happy side-effect was the arrival to fill the post in due course of Christine Dorothy Bennett, whom, after a long, shy courtship, Jennings married on 4 August 1955. She was the daughter of Henry Bernard Bennett, inspector of taxes, of Exmouth, Devon, and fourteen years younger than her husband. It was a partnership of lasting and enduring happiness, and growing pride in the accomplishments of their three children, Richard ('b'. 1956), Philippa ('b'. 1958), and Joanna ('b'. 1962). 
The year 1955 proved an 'annus mirabilis' for Jennings, as it also marked his election to the Whewell chair in Cambridge on the translation of the holder, Hersch Lauterpacht, to the International Court of Justice. The question that prompts itself is why the choice fell, for this post of the highest prestige in international law, on a young scholar not yet widely known in the field, whose academic output remained modest. Several answers may be offered. One is that in those days scholarly attainment weighed less heavily, appointments tended to be internal, and the internal competition was not all that strong (the only real contender being even younger than Jennings). But there are positive reasons that outweigh those rather negative ones. Jennings was a diligent and popular teacher, to whom students responded well. Unusually for the time in Britain he had set out to specialize in international law from the outset, rather than moving across to it from some other legal field. Among the electors Jennings would have had the firm support of Hollond and McNair, reckoning (accurately) on his professorial potential, but the view must have been shared by Humphrey Waldock (from Oxford) and by Sir Eric Beckett (the former legal adviser to the Foreign Office), even though Jennings would not have been Lauterpacht's own first choice. Another positive factor -- though one more difficult to assess -- is the regard Jennings had gained in the university as a whole, not for his scholarship but for his administrative ability. His college senior tutorship had branched out, in turn, into membership of the university's council and general board, and chairmanship of the important needs committee, all of which he much enjoyed, and was evidently good at because it led to pressure on him (which in the end he resisted) to take on the full-time position of secretary-general of the faculties. This aspect of his reputation spread far further afield: he was approached by the University of the Witwatersrand when it was making an international search for a new vice-chancellor, and likewise by Leeds whose offer, though he was much tempted, he declined, so that he was still in place when the Whewell vacancy came along. Later still there were four occasions on which he might have become head of house, twice at Jesus itself, and he served as its president in the 1960s and again in the 1970s. 
The Whewell electors' choice was a sound one, vindicating the assessment of potential, anchoring Jennings firmly to Cambridge for the rest of his life, offering him a base from which his particular talents could flower, and providing the university with an unbroken twenty-five-year stint of fostering the teaching and study of international law. This period saw the publication of his only book-length work, 'The Acquisition of Territory in International Law' (1963), but also the beginning of his lengthy collaboration with a former pupil, Arthur Watts, on the monumental ninth edition of 'Oppenheim's International Law', which eventually appeared in 1992. He was in addition joint editor of the 'International and Comparative Law Quarterly' (1956-61) and of the 'British Year Book of International Law' (1960-82). This period also saw the quiet emergence of his legal practice, under the particular patronage of the City solicitors Coward Chance, and of the international law adviser to the Shell Group of companies, John Blair, much of this practice having to do with international boundary disputes, on sea as well as on land. The high spots were the 'Buttes Gas case', which went as far as the House of Lords; the arbitrations between the United Kingdom and France on maritime delimitation (where he was responsible for the Channel Islands section) and between Dubai and Sharjah on their land frontier; the Tunisia-Libya maritime case before the International Court of Justice at The Hague; and notably the two boundary arbitrations between Chile and Argentina. All of these offered scope for his patient concern with the facts of complex geographical situations, and gave rise to memorable excursions to the scene, including two visits to Tierra del Fuego, as well as to an extended relationship as adviser to the government of Jersey. He took silk in 1969 and was made a bencher of Lincoln's Inn a year later. 
In 1981 Jennings reached the statutory retirement age. The question of what should come next then solved itself through another stroke of providence. Waldock, by then the British judge on the International Court of Justice, died suddenly in office, and the choice of candidate to succeed him fell on Jennings. Again the choice was not an obvious one: the field was exceptionally strong, and Jennings had far less in the way of practising experience, including before the court itself, than some of his competitors, and no judicial experience whatever. But once more the independent nominating body -- two senior judges, Lord Wilberforce and Lord Scarman, and Sir Francis Vallat -- backed potential. Unusually the UN security council postponed filling the vacancy for some months, so that Jennings faced, not a relatively straightforward by-election for a 'British seat', but competition over five of the fifteen seats on the court which were falling vacant. To his surprise, he took to the degree of gentlemanly electioneering required, inasmuch as it gave full reign to his naturally courteous interest in people of all origins. The Foreign Office, in its official campaigning, encountered around the world a whole clan of Jennings pupils now in influential positions in government, whose continuing regard for their former professor meant that their support was a matter of course. He comfortably surmounted the electoral hurdle in both the security council and general assembly, and took up a nine-year term in 1982, having earlier that year been knighted. 
Jennings liked the court, and the court liked him. He also, unlike some among his colleagues, thoroughly enjoyed living in The Hague, which he discovered to be not that far distant from Cambridge; the practical, rational, nonconformist Dutch proved much to his Yorkshire taste, and the Haagsche Club became a satisfactory substitute for a college common room. Although the evidence is not entirely clear, as his term drew to an end the Foreign Office certainly encouraged him to think of standing again, and it began to appear as if sentiment among the judges was turning towards Jennings as their next president, rather than (as Jennings himself expected) his staunch friend the Italian judge. His re-election followed with the same ease as before, and was duly crowned by the presidency, which he assumed for a three-year period in 1991. That saw him pass his eightieth birthday, still in excellent form physically as well as mentally, so that he faced retirement with increasing reluctance. But good sense prevailed, and he resigned from the court a decent interval after the conclusion of his presidency, thus paving the way for the election of one of his former pupils in his place. 
After returning to Cambridge Jennings found his forebodings of inactivity quite misplaced. He was welcomed back with open arms by Jesus College, and in the university more generally, which had conferred on him an honorary doctorate in 1993; the same honour was bestowed by Oxford in 1996. Other academic honours flowed as well, most notably the Manley O. Hudson medal of the American Society of International Law in 1993. All that failed was the life peerage to which his presidency of the International Court of Justice ought to have entitled him; a proposal to that effect, although backed strongly by the lord chancellor, foreign secretary, and attorney-general, foundered in John Major's 10 Downing Street, and the House of Lords lost what would have been a thoughtful and distinctive voice. 
Jennings's services continued, however, to be in demand after his retirement. He presided, with characteristic courtesy and grace, over the arbitral tribunal established to decide the territorial and boundary dispute between Eritrea and Yemen in the Red Sea (1996-9). The most striking demonstration, though, of the high regard in which he was held and of his undiminished skill came with his appointment, not long before his ninetieth birthday, to a delicate mission of investigation and conciliation by the World Bank, confronted with an awkward dispute with a senior staff member. His death at the age of ninety came as the result of complications arising out of an unnecessary fall, not from illness or infirmity. 
As an international lawyer Jennings founded no 'school', nor indeed did he belong to one. Law, he believed, was a craft as well as a science, and enlightened pragmatism was enough, in enabling the rules not just to be properly understood, but usefully applied. His abiding concerns were those of his generation, what internationalists used to call 'the problem of peaceful change'. He was impatient, though, of the naive view of the time that the panacea lay in the universal compulsory judicial settlement of international disputes; but equally impatient of the more modern fantasy (and its cynically 'realist' converse) that failed to grasp either that the judicial process need not be the whole part of settling an individual dispute, or that, even if not the whole, it could still be an essential step in clearing the way for a political settlement (as with the Beagle Channel). For him 'peaceful change' entailed three necessary elements, of which judicial settlement was only one, the others being codification of the rules and, even more important, adequate methods for adapting or changing them to meet new challenges or circumstances. This theme appeared in his earliest published writings with a precocious firmness and a strikingly enduring relevance. How international law could be ascertained and shaped as it developed was a constant preoccupation. Influenced without a doubt by what he observed of the mammoth endeavour of the third UN conference on the law of the sea, he made the famously waspish remark that 'most of what we perversely persist in calling customary international law is not only 'not' customary: it does not even faintly resemble a customary law', but left the matter there, without offering either a better description or a better theory (Jennings, 'The identification of international law', in B. Cheng, ed., 'International Law: Teaching and Practice', 1987, 3). 
Jennings's voice was plain and unassuming, direct, clothed in language deceptively simple for the way it concealed the labour that had gone into the making, the result clear, but above all precise. The flavour was captured in the title for a visiting lecture, subsequently published: 'What is international law, and how do we tell it when we see it?' -- at first sight almost bathetic, on closer examination englobing exactly the existential question most international lawyers (including judges) wrestle with for most of their working lives. Behind the simplicity lay always a youthful idealism that never died, though it attached itself to different causes as time went by. His writings, whether or not thought sparse for a lifelong academic, were among the items that readers returned to again and again. 
On the International Court of Justice, Jennings's belief was that the essential function was the effective -- but principled -- management of the particular dispute, not an elegant restatement of the law. Although the practice of the International Court of Justice allows individual judges to append their own concurring or dissenting opinions to the judgment of the court, Jennings's sole voice was seldom heard; he was most often with the majority, and never sought to express a separate concurring opinion. He reserved his own voice for the few cases where he disagreed with his colleagues, most often because he suspected them of distorting sound judicial principle in order to reach a desired result, as in the highly controversial 'Yakimetz', 'Nicaragua', and 'Lockerbie' cases. But the fact that he was so often with the majority made him available for the drafting committee, and he was much sought after in that role. It was as president that his powers of conciliation flowered, most notably in his adroit handling of the sensitive 'Chad-Libya boundary case', which marked the first Libyan step towards normalizing its relations with the international community. It was Jennings who introduced the practice under which the president addressed the annual session of the UN general assembly on the year's work by the court, and he did so with a discreet shrewdness that dispelled at once the fear that it might become the occasion for attempts to politicize the court's judicial function. He held strongly to the value of institutional memberships as an aid to civilized living 'especially to be recommended', as he put it, 'at a time like the present which seems to be so good at cultivating loneliness' (Hopkins, 72), an aphorism he would have applied to states as much as to people. 
Jennings's life is a story of the unforeseeable, even improbable, advance to high position and worldwide reputation of a straightforward man of simple origins. It illustrates that, even in inter-war Britain, movement across the social and intellectual classes was possible, given high ability and industry, the cachet of an ancient university, and -- at key moments -- patronage based on esteem, not rank. He died, at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 4 August 2004, and was buried as he wished in the churchyard in Grantchester, after a funeral service on 11 August for which he had left precise instructions, which conveyed his deep respect for language, liturgy, and music (and his equally deep detestation of fashionable 'improvements' in any of them). He was survived by his wife, Christine, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93918


Jewell, Norman Limbury Auchinleck (1913-2004), submariner and naval officer, was born on 24 October 1913 in the Seychelles, the elder son of Norman Parsons Jewell, colonial medical officer, and his wife, Sydney. He was educated at Oundle School from 1926 to 1931. In 1933 he joined the Royal Navy as a midshipman, serving on HMS 'Royal Oak' in the Mediterranean. After promotion to sub-lieutenant he became a submariner in 1936, serving in HMS 'Clyde', then HMS 'Dwarf', a service vessel. Following the outbreak of the Second World War he was transferred as first lieutenant to HMS 'Otway', then HMS 'Truant', being much inspired by the commander of the latter, Lieutenant-Commander Hugh Haggard, whose daring exploits included penetrating the dense minefield off Tripoli in order to harass Italian shipping. In 1941 he passed the 'perisher' course (the submarine commanding officers' course) at HMS 'Dolphin', and was given command of HMS 'L27', then of HMS 'P219', shortly renamed HMS 'Seraph'. His command of the latter almost came to a premature end in July 1942 when, off Norway, the submarine was mistaken for a German vessel and strafed by the RAF. 
Assigned to the Mediterranean in the autumn of 1942, during the build-up to operation Torch (the allied invasion of north Africa), Jewell was given the task of transporting the American general Mark Clark and his staff, accompanied by a small detachment of Royal Marines, to Algeria for clandestine negotiations with the Vichy French commanders. Clark's negotiations proved disappointing, mainly because of the chaotic and faction-ridden nature of the Vichy command structure, and Jewell had to effect a hasty rescue of the general and his party after their presence had been betrayed. Jewell and 'Seraph' were then chosen to extricate General Henri Giraud from Vichy France, where he was in hiding after escaping from German internment. Giraud was thought by Clark to be the key to uniting and winning over the Vichy forces in north Africa. Nevertheless, such was Giraud's dislike of the British that he had insisted on being picked up by an American vessel. As a consequence HMS 'Seraph' was renamed USS 'Seraph', and put under the nominal command of an American, Captain Jerauld Wright. After a hair-raising five-night wait off the coast of southern France 'Seraph' picked up Giraud and took him to a rendezvous with a Catalina flying boat, Jewell and his crew all the while doing their best to speak in American accents. Jewell was appointed MBE in February 1943 for his role in this operation. (Much later he was also awarded the Legion d'honneur and the Croix de Guerre with palm.) 
In April 1943 Jewell was entrusted with one of the most secret operations of the entire war, when he and 'Seraph' were given a key role in operation Mincemeat, the allied plan devised by Ewen Montagu to deceive the Germans about the forthcoming invasion of Sicily. Jewell took delivery on the Clyde of a metal container, which he told his crew contained special optical instruments. In fact it contained, packed in dry ice, an unidentified corpse dressed as a Royal Marines officer, 'Major William Martin', handcuffed to a briefcase containing forged documents purportedly showing that the attack on Sicily would be a feint, designed to draw attention from the 'real' allied landings in Corsica, Sardinia, and Greece. The corpse was given other, supposedly authentic, documents, including theatre ticket stubs and letters from a father and girlfriend. Jewell took the container to a designated point off the coast of southern Spain then, after ordering his crew -- except his second-in-command, David Scott, and two others -- below deck, opened it and, after an impromptu funeral service, dumped the body, together with an upturned RAF dinghy, in the sea. The body was duly washed ashore at Huelva. The British authorities were informed, death notices appeared in the British press announcing that Major Martin had died as a result of an aircraft accident, the body was buried in Huelva with full military honours, and the man's girlfriend sent a wreath. The briefcase was duly returned, but only after the Spanish authorities had copied its contents to the Germans. The ruse worked spectacularly: fortifications on Corsica were built up, a Waffen SS brigade was moved to Sardinia, General Rommel was sent to Greece to bolster its defences, and -- by order of Hitler himself -- two Panzer divisions were withdrawn from the battle of Kursk to prepare to move to Greece. Two and a half months later the allied invasion of Sicily met far less resistance than had been anticipated; here 'Seraph' again played an important role, laying marker buoys for the incoming vessels -- a dangerous operation for which Jewell was subsequently awarded the American Legion of Merit. Operation Mincemeat remained clouded in secrecy for many years, and Jewell made no mention of it in his one book, the wartime 'Secret Mission Submarine' (1944). Nevertheless Duff Cooper's novel 'Operation Heartbreak' (1950) fictionalized the episode (much to the chagrin of the Admiralty), and in 1953 it was the subject of two books, Ian Colvin's 'The Unknown Courier' and Ewen Montagu's 'The Man Who Never Was'. The latter, which sold over 2 million copies, was turned into a film, in 1956, in which Jewell was played by William Squire. 
Throughout his time in command of 'Seraph' Jewell was also engaged in more conventional submarine operations, and by the time he relinquished command and was given home leave, at the end of 1943, it was estimated that he had sunk 7000 tons of enemy shipping and damaged a further 10,000 tons. He was awarded the DSC in April 1944 for his Mediterranean patrols. He spent two months in Washington, DC, attached to the naval staff, and was promoted lieutenant-commander in August 1944; he then commanded the submarines HMS 'Seanymph' and HMS 'Trespasser' in home waters until the end of the war. On 18 November 1944 he married Rosemary Patricia Galloway, a 25-year-old Women's Royal Naval Service officer, and daughter of William Galloway, shipping merchant. They had two sons and a daughter. 
After the war Jewell commanded several submarines, and in 1948 (promoted commander) was given charge of the 3rd submarine flotilla. He was promoted captain in 1953. His subsequent career included spells as commanding officer of the Rhine flotilla, director of the Royal Naval Staff College at Greenwich, and on the staff of Lord Mountbatten, first sea lord and chief of the defence staff. From 1962 to 1963 he was naval aide-de-camp to the queen. He retired from the navy in 1963 and for many years worked for Mitchell and Butler, the Birmingham brewery, while also serving as life president of the Submarine Old Comrades' Association. His wife died in 1996, and in 1998 he suffered a fall which broke his neck and confined him to a wheelchair. His last years were spent at the Royal Star and Garter Home in Richmond, where he died on 18 August 2004. He was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93923


Jowett, Alfred (1914-2004), Church of England clergyman, was born on 29 May 1914 at 49 Hastings Road, Ecclesall, Sheffield, the only son of Alfred Edmund Jowett, pawnbroker and jeweller, without whom 'the poor would have starved', and his wife, Phoebe Margaret, 'nee' Drabble, who loved literature. His parents' concerns for the deprived and for culture became central to Jowett's life. He was educated at High Storrs grammar school, Sheffield, and then gained a second-class degree in English in the Leavis era at St Catharine's College, Cambridge. He taught English at Ecclesfield grammar school, Sheffield, from 1936, and then Poole grammar school, Dorset. On 3 August 1939 he married Margaret Mabel Benford, a 30-year-old history teacher, and daughter of St Clair Benford, statistical clerk. Her rationality complemented his religious wisdom, and in later life her public office as a JP and Labour city councillor reinforced his civic commitment. They provided the hospitality of an extended family wherever they lived. They had four children, Nicholas, later ordained, Rosalind, Sonya, and Celia. 
As a conscientious objector with pacifist and socialist beliefs Jowett was forced to leave teaching soon after the outbreak of the Second World War and work on the land. He was then supported by Bishop Leslie Hunter of Sheffield, an inspired selector of future church leaders, to train for the ordained ministry at Lincoln Theological College in 1943, under Eric Abbott's guidance. He developed lifelong commitments to the ecumenical movement, the welfare state, a less class-ridden society, and a united Europe. Formative years in education were augmented by developing the church's ministry in the post-war redevelopment of northern cities. Beginning as curate at St John the Evangelist, Goole (1944-7), he was summoned by Bishop Hunter to be secretary to the Sheffield Anglican and Free Church Council, and to the Sheffield Marriage Guidance Council (1947-51), in which posts he proved innovatory. Hunter then tested him in parish ministry, as vicar of St George with St Stephen, Sheffield (1951-60), close to the university and deprived areas. There he developed a mixed community of university families, and people of need and talent. The latter included Ted Wickham, industrial mission pioneer, and Alan Ecclestone, priest and Marxist writer of contemporary spiritual classics. Jowett's pioneering work on the Sheffield Africa Committee and family service unit, and a part-time lectureship in Sheffield University's education department (1950-60), were rooted in an open house and church community with innovatory Sunday worship and parish breakfast. He then moved to be vicar of Doncaster (1960-64), the 'church of the Coal Board', and honorary canon of Sheffield Cathedral, quickly engaging in civic life. 
Jowett's formative years in education, church, and civic life prepared him to lead Manchester Cathedral from 1964 to 1983 as one of the outstanding urban deans of the twentieth century. Supported by a strong chapter, including Ronald Preston, the leading Christian social ethicist, and Frank Wright, an adult educationist and adviser to Granada TV, he developed his pioneering civic and public ministry. His contributions included service on city and national church education committees. His work focused on community (or race) relations in Britain, initially in Manchester, then on a wider stage after he was chosen by Harold Wilson to be a member of the Community Relations Commission in 1968, becoming deputy chairman from 1972 to 1977, and working full-time for the commission for two years. Such work encouraged the Church of England as a whole to take a stand against racism. It also allowed Jowett to serve on the side of the underprivileged. His choices were prophetic of later global concerns, as were his commitments to women's ordination, and homosexual rights. In addition, linking to Manchester University's extramural department, Jowett used the cathedral for teaching adults, particularly connecting theology, spirituality, and contemporary literature. The cathedral was also the venue for an arts festival, including performances by Sir John Barbirolli and the Halle Orchestra, and provided an early home for the Royal Exchange Theatre. In recognition of his civic contributions Jowett was appointed CBE in 1972, and a member of the order of St John in 1979; he received the honorary degree of DLitt from Sheffield University in 1982, and was made a freeman of the city of Manchester in 1984. 
Jowett's addresses to schools, civic gatherings, and memorials were of a high order, combining literary skills with contemporary theology and relevance. For a headmasters' conference he characteristically linked Christ and Camus, Golgotha and Vietnam. Particularly innovatory was his commitment to European and Christian unity through twinning the cathedral with Toulouse and the basilica of St Sernin. He led the chapter to commission Tony Hollaway, a designer and maker of stained glass, to build a complete west end of five great windows using modern designs. Inspiring all these contributions was his belief, like William Temple, an earlier bishop of Manchester, that Christianity was the most material of all religions. Jowett's only publication (as part-author), 'The English Church: a New Look' (1966), elaborated this theme further, as did sermons as select preacher at Oxford University in 1964 and 1979. After a life of public service in church and city, he retired to Sheffield in 1983, contributing to St John's, Ranmoor, until his death on 28 July 2004 at the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield, of aspiration pneumonia following a stroke. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93924


Keith, Kenneth Alexander, Baron Keith of Castleacre (1916-2004), merchant banker and industrialist, was born on 30 August 1916 at the Wicken House, Castle Acre, Norfolk, the elder of the two sons of Edward Charles Keith (1877-1972), farmer and natural history author, and his wife, Gertrude May, daughter of William Suffield Telfair of Mauritius. He was educated at Rugby School and then trained with the City chartered accountants Peat, Marwick and Mitchell. Upon the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 he was commissioned in the Welsh Guards and served in north Africa, Italy, France, and Germany and spent time as a prisoner of war. He was mentioned in dispatches and finished the war as a lieutenant-colonel on the intelligence staff at supreme allied headquarters and then spent a year as deputy head of the Foreign Office's political intelligence department. 
In April 1946 Keith joined Philip Hill and Partners, one of a handful of Mayfair-based so-called 'West End finance houses'. On 25 April he married Lady Ariel Olivia Winefred Baird (1916/17-2003), daughter of John Lawrence Baird, first Viscount Stonehaven; the couple had one son and one daughter. Philip Ernest Hill, the founder of the eponymous firm, was a tireless, buccaneering financier and company promoter who lived by his motto: 'start early and work late' ('DBB', 3.238). Philip Hill and Partners had been established in 1932 with backing from Eagle Star Insurance, of which Hill was a director from 1929. It specialized in conducting initial public offerings on behalf of new British industrial and commercial companies. As the economy recovered from the slump the firm was instrumental in financing a host of iconic inter-war businesses: the Beecham group, the largest British proprietary medicines company, aircraft manufacturer Hawker Siddeley, Brylcreem, Woolworths, Odeon cinemas, and the Olympia exhibition hall. However, other flotations were more dubious and Hill was regarded with hostility by Montagu Norman, governor of the Bank of England, and the City establishment, as a speculator and market manipulator. 
Hill died in 1944 but it is just possible that he met Kenneth Keith, who in many ways was a fitting successor, since he did some work for Philip Hill and Partners as a young accountant just before the war. Keith's entry into the firm came about through his friendship with a fellow prisoner of war, Brian Mountain, whose family controlled Eagle Star. Thus Mountain was able to provide an opening for Keith, at a time when partnerships in financial firms were largely confined to scions of City dynasties. Keith quickly emerged as the post-war driving force at Philip Hill, being appointed managing director in 1951. In an internal memorandum of early 1950 he outlined his strategy of buying up prestigious merchant banks that had fallen on hard times with a view to turning the small, and not wholly reputable, firm into 'one of the leading financial institutions of the City' (quoted in Kynaston, 39). His first move, in June 1950, was a merger with Higginson & Co., an estimable but unprofitable City house, and the combined entity, Philip Hill Higginson, took offices in the Square Mile. In 1955 British Shareholders Trust was acquired and incorporated into Philip Hill Investment Trust (established in 1936), and so enhanced the firm's asset management activities. The same year Keith joined the board at Eagle Star, reinforcing that relationship. An establishment acquisition of a different sort was John Colville, diplomat and private secretary to Sir Winston Churchill, who added lustre to the management following Churchill's resignation as prime minister in April 1955. But mostly Keith recruited accountants and lawyers, forging one of the City's most well-qualified -- and pushy -- merchant banks of the 1950s, along with Warburgs, which did likewise. 
Kenneth Keith and Siegmund Warburg were the foremost City revolutionaries of the two decades after the war. Both insisted on professionalism and hard work, and disdained the gentlemanly amateurism, idleness, and incompetence that were commonplace in the old City. According to Paul Ferris, who profiled a set of top European financiers in the late 1960s, Keith and Warburg both shared 'the same contempt for inertia' (Ferris, 'Men and Money', 137). Anthony Sampson, who interviewed Keith in 1962, found him 'a tough, casual, feet-on-the-desk banker with swept-back grey hair and a brisk way of talking' (Sampson, 'Anatomy', 387). Ferris later described him as 'A large man, physically restless behind his desk, as though it might trap him between visitor and window... he attracted adjectives like 'electric' when City journalists wrote about his business coups, as they often did' (Ferris, 'Gentlemen of Fortune', 240). Keith's dynamic, restless, unconventional, hectoring, sometimes bruising manner and conduct meant that he was not to everyone's liking. John Kinross of the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation (ICFC) (later 3i), who met him in January 1950 just as he was assuming control at Philip Hill, recalled that 'none of us took to Keith. It was clear that the possibility of any meaningful business relationship was remote and so it proved to be' (Kinross, 145). 
During the 1950s the assets and profits of Philip Hill Higginson more than quadrupled under Keith's forceful leadership. In summer 1959 the firm was admitted to the Accepting Houses Committee, the City's inner forum whose members enjoyed privileged borrowing rights at the Bank of England. Building up the firm's banking business was the strategic logic for the almost simultaneous takeover of Erlanger, another eminent but commercially becalmed City merchant bank. The combined firm, Philip Hill Higginson Erlanger, undertook three distinct activities -- corporate finance, asset management, and banking. This threefold combination of activities became the standard business model of the London merchant banks in the 1960s and 1970s. Other marriages among City firms that achieved the same end at the turn of the 1960s included the creation of Schroder Wagg, Kleinwort Benson, and Lazards' absorption of de Stein. 
In 1965 Keith negotiated yet another merger, this time with a major and successful merchant bank, M. Samuel. Hill Samuel, the combined firm, was the largest London merchant bank, fulfilling the goal Keith had set himself a decade and a half earlier. Following the merger the leading executive from the Samuel side, Lord Melchett, was quickly outmanoeuvred by Keith and left the firm, as did others. There was also discontent on the part of First National City Bank of New York, a friendly minority shareholder in M. Samuel whose chairman, James Stillman Rockefeller, expressed his unhappiness to Leslie O'Brien, governor of the Bank of England. O'Brien noted: 'They thought that Samuels' were their kind of people. They had been somewhat surprised with the link-up with Philip Hill and very displeased with the new attitude which followed that. As Mr Rockefeller put it, this was not the girl we married. Clearly this dissatisfaction centred on Mr Keith who, Mr Rockefeller said, thought more about his own interests than those of his customers.(quoted in Kynaston, 338-9)' Soon after, First National City Bank quietly disposed of its shareholding. 
The new offices occupied by the swollen combined firm had none of the trappings customary at City merchant banks; they were described by 'Management Today' as being as 'anonymous as a Labour Exchange' (May 1970). The dour utilitarian building reflected Keith's disdain for the City's gentlemanly traditions and his focus on cost control and the bottom line. The merger and acquisition boom of the second half of the 1960s was good for Hill Samuel and in these years profits rose from $230 million to $440 million. Keith was a long-standing business associate of Charles Clore and his firm acted for Clore in his high-profile bid for Selfridges in 1965 and other acquisitions. In 1967 it orchestrated and won an acrimonious landmark takeover bid by Arnold Weinstock's GEC for Associated Electrical Industries (AEI). But there were reverses too, notably Keith's backing for flamboyant fraudster Bernie Cornfeld, whose mutual fund business Investors Overseas Services collapsed in 1970. 
As a member of the Accepting Houses Committee, Keith was notionally part of the City establishment, though, as ever, he tried to make it on his terms. In 1963 Lord Cromer, governor of the Bank of England, asked him to represent the City in discussions with the Treasury about boosting the Square Mile's contribution to the UK's balance of payments. The following year, under Harold Wilson's Labour administration, Keith was appointed to the National Economic Development Council and he became an enthusiast for the establishment of a corporatist entity to represent the City along the lines of the Confederation of British Industry and the Trades Union Congress. This proposal was opposed by most City firms and especially the Bank of England, which saw such a body as a threat to its authority. Cromer's successor as governor of the Bank of England, Sir Leslie O'Brien, even suspected that Keith was trying to establish his own rival City power base. Matters came to a head in 1968 and Keith was forced to back down. The following year he received a knighthood from Wilson's government. 
Having created the country's biggest merchant bank, Keith's ambition shifted in the late 1960s to the formation of the City's first full-blooded financial conglomerate. To this end Hill Samuel acquired Lamberts, a leading shipbroker, and in 1969 Noble Lowndes, an innovative pension and life-assurance broker. Then in late June 1970 came the announcement of an agreed merger between Hill Samuel and Metropolitan Estates and Property (MEPC), Britain's second largest property company. 'There is a premium on size,' Keith told the press. 'The merchant banks are too small and their future lies overseas, where big muscle is needed. A company with a $200m market capitalisation provides a unique springboard.' Sir Charles Hardie, MEPC's chairman, enthused that the joint venture would mean 'a sensational change in City structure, creating a unit in international terms of sufficient size to enable the City to make a great impact' ('The Times', 1 July 1970). 
The proposed merger aroused opposition from MEPC's institutional shareholders, who anticipated the depreciation of their investment because of dilution of their prime property assets by a riskier, lower-rated merchant banking business. Moreover, the host of small, specialist merchant banks and stock exchange firms took fright at the prospect of competition from a vastly larger financial conglomerate. City opposition was voiced in an alarmed letter to 'The Times' from James Scrimgeour, a leading stockbroker, who warned that 'separate and individual activities would be submerged in vast corporations generally controlled at the top by a diminishing number of 'businesscrats'' (13 July 1971). The traditional City establishment engineered a rival bid for MEPC from Commercial Union and Keith's attempt to create a financial colossus collapsed. 
Keith's belief in scale led him to enter further merger talks with a number of banks in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In the summer of 1969 he held serious discussions with Sir Siegmund Warburg about uniting their firms to create 'the most powerful merchant bank on the London stage' (Fraser, 324). However, opposition from Henry Grunfeld, Warburg's right-hand man, scotched the idea. Then it was Morgan Grenfell's turn to receive an approach, again rebuffed, to the effect that Hill Samuel wanted to merge so that it could take over the management. Around the same time Hill Samuel was itself on the receiving end of an inquiry about a link up from NatWest Bank, but this time it was Keith who recoiled, fearful of the stifling embrace of a bureaucratic clearing bank. In April 1973 an astonished City learned that a merger had been agreed between Hill Samuel and Slater Walker, the brash investment group that had been built up by the controversial financier Jim Slater. With combined assets of $1.5 billion the proposed firm would have towered over the rest of the sector, and 'The Times' hailed the move as 'probably... the most fascinating City development since the war' (27 April 1973). However, investors took fright and the shares of both banks plunged. Moreover, Keith and Slater soon fell out and it became plain that it would be impossible for them to work together: 'fundamental differences of work-style and personalities' were cited in the press statement announcing the termination of the merger talks ('The Times', 20 June). 
Keith's frustration at his repeated failure to pull off a deal that would put Hill Samuel in a class apart was exacerbated by the slump in share prices and the sharp downturn in domestic City activity in 1974-5. Euromarket business boomed after the oil price rises of 1973, but Hill Samuel saw no benefit because it was not active in those markets. In fact, Keith admitted that he did not understand the euromarkets and his failure to grasp their significance and potential was arguably his greatest strategic shortcoming. He stood down as chief executive of Hill Samuel in 1976, though remaining non-executive chairman. In 1980, even more convinced that the firm was too small to compete in the global market place, he tried to engineer its acquisition by Merrill Lynch to create a transatlantic financial giant. But the other directors, whom he had not consulted, rejected the deal and Keith resigned as chairman. 
Hill Samuel never fully recovered from the downturn of the mid-1970s, and it handled the challenges of the 'big bang' deregulation of the London securities industry in the mid-1980s with uncertainty. In 1986 the rudderless bank became 'in play' with the accumulation of substantial shareholdings by speculators. In October 1987, following the collapse of a proposed acquisition by Union Bank of Switzerland, Hill Samuel was bought for $777 million by Trustee Savings Bank (TSB), which had recently been floated and was eager to enter investment banking. As it became clear that TSB had overpaid and that Hill Samuel had a poor fit with TSB's retail banking activities, Keith's creation was broken up. Thus the newest and biggest became the first of the major merchant banks to disappear, but it was soon followed by most of the others, including Morgan Grenfell and Warburgs. 
In 1972 Keith accepted an invitation from Edward Heath's Conservative government to become chairman of aero-engine maker Rolls-Royce, following its financial collapse in 1971 and controversial nationalization. Keith relished the role and oversaw the completion of the crucial RB211 engine and the restoration of morale. He became an effective high-level salesman for the company, especially in the United States. Following the return of a Labour administration in 1974, he clashed bitterly with the National Enterprise Board, which he once called a 'bureaucratic contraceptive', and with the secretary of state for industry, Tony Benn, who recorded in his diary that Keith spoke like 'the most arrogant right-wing Tory boss' ('The Guardian', 4 Sept 2004). Keith retired as chairman in 1980 and was rewarded with a life peerage, as Baron Keith of Castleacre, by Margaret Thatcher, the new Conservative prime minister. Keith had many other business interests. In the 1980s he was non-executive chairman of Beecham group and Standard Telephones and Cables (STC). At various times over his long career he was a director of British European Airways, Eagle Star Insurance, Times Newspapers, National Provincial Bank, and the Bank of Nova Scotia. Other activities included serving as a governor of the National Institute for Social and Economic Research and of Manchester Business School. 
A contentious and controversial City figure for four decades, Keith's business career came to an end in 1989 when he stepped down as chairman of STC. In retirement he found time to serve as president of the Royal Norfolk Agricultural Association, the British Standards Institution, and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, and to pursue his pastimes which he named as farming, shooting, and golf. After divorce from his first wife in 1958 he married, on 22 June 1962, the 44-year-old (Nancy) Mary Raye Hayward (died 1990), daughter of Edward Gross, banker -- from whom he was divorced in 1972 -- and on 1 August 1973, as his third wife, the 54-year-old Marieluz Muffet (Marie) Hanbury (died 2001), daughter of Denniston Webster, naval officer. Keith fleetingly re-entered public view on 2 February 2002 when he married the 79-year-old interior designer Penelope Ann de Lazlo, daughter of Gerald Steele. He died from pneumonia on 1 September 2004 at Queen Elizabeth Hospital, King's Lynn, Norfolk. He was survived by his fourth wife and his two children, and left an estate valued for probate purposes at over $23 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 93925


Kelly, Margaret (1910-2004), dancer and businesswoman, was born on 24 June 1910 at the Rotunda Hospital, Parnell Street, Dublin, the daughter of James Kelly and Margaret O'Brien. Three weeks after her birth her mother handed her over to a priest, saying she would be going abroad for three months; the baby was put into the care of Mary Murphy, an unmarried dressmaker, and the parents were never seen again. She was a frail child, with spindly legs, who did not walk until after her third birthday; her doctor, struck by her clear blue eyes, called her his little 'bluebell', and that was how she was known for the rest of her life. In 1916 Mary Murphy, who had adopted the child, moved with her to Liverpool, and she grew up in the suburb of West Derby. She attended Leyfield convent school, and at the age of eight started Saturday morning dancing lessons with Mme Cummings in Liverpool, in order to strengthen her legs. She showed such talent that Mme Cummings chose her to be one of the 'six little darlings' to perform in the Christmas pantomime 'Babes in the Wood' in Newquay, Cornwall, when she was twelve. She helped to pay for her dancing lessons by working as a caddy at a golf club, picking potatoes, and delivering milk, and after two years at St Paul's, a local co-educational Catholic school, she left at fourteen to join the Hot Jocks, a Scottish touring company recruiting young dancers to do tap dance routines between performances of traditional ballads. She toured Scotland with the Hot Jocks for nine months, performing in music halls, village halls, and church halls. 
In 1925 Kelly was auditioned by Alfred Jackson, a dance company manager, and joined the Jackson Girls, his troupe of thirty chorus girls at the Scala theatre in Berlin, doing high kicks to the beat of a tambourine. The girls performed in Berlin for five months of the year, and she was also a member of his group that toured Europe for the rest of the year. Jackson also had a troupe at the Folies Bergere, the first and most famous of the Paris music halls, at a time when music-hall entertainment was at its peak, with spectacular revues featuring exotic stage sets, tableaux of nude showgirls, and lines of chorus girls in lavish costumes with feathers, sequins, and rhinestones, wearing high heels and elaborate headdresses. In the summer of 1930 Bluebell was sent to the Folies Bergere as a holiday replacement for a month, and again in 1931, when she was asked to remain permanently as captain of the troupe. A few months after the Alfred Jackson Girls were dismissed, later that year, because the management could no longer afford to pay them, Kelly was invited by Paul Derval, director of the Folies Bergere, to form her own troupe of twelve dancers for a new show, 'Nuits de folies'. The debut of the Bluebell Girls, billed on the poster as 'The Blue Bell's Girls', took place on 5 November 1932. Engaged for the following season to perform in 'Folies en folies', the Bluebell Girls were sacked after a disagreement with the star, Mistinguett (Jeanne Bourgeois), but were invited back for the 1934-5 season to dance in 'Femmes en folie', and appeared in every show, including 'En super folies' with Josephine Baker in 1936-7, until the Folies Bergere closed in 1939 at the beginning of the Second World War. 
Meanwhile, after the row with Mistinguett, the Bluebell Girls were offered a job by Jacques-Charles at the new Paramount Cinema in the boulevard des Italiens: 'Les Blue Belles Paramount Girls' performed between the film shows. Bluebell managed a troupe there for three years as well as forming her new troupe at the Folies Bergere, and in 1935 started a new troupe to tour Italy, and later other European countries, though not Nazi Germany. It was at this point that she decided to engage tall dancers, and made 5 feet 9 inches the minimum height; the average became 5 feet 11 inches. She also decided to recruit mainly English girls, because she thought they were better dancers and would work better as a team. She liked to take sixteen-year-olds, often girls who had been classically trained but had grown too tall for ballet. Although she no longer danced with the girls, concentrating on managing and choreographing the three troupes, she did take part with the Paramount and Folies troupes in a number of musicals filmed in the 1930s, including 'Dede' (1934), 'Avec le sourire' (1936) with Maurice Chevalier, and 'Barnabe' (1938) with Fernandel. 
Kelly married Marcel Leibovici (1904-1961), a Rumanian Jewish musician, leader of the orchestra at the Folies Bergere, on 1 March 1939; they had three sons and one daughter. After the outbreak of war, as the Germans advanced on Paris, they attempted to leave France from Bordeaux, but the boats were full and they returned to Paris where in November 1940 she was arrested as an enemy alien and interned in Besancon. She was released on the grounds that although she held a British passport she was born in Ireland, a neutral country, after her husband had persuaded the Irish ambassador to intercede on her behalf. But Leibovici was later arrested himself, as a foreign Jew, and sent to Gurs, a transit camp in the Pyrenees: he escaped, and for two and a half years hid in an attic in Paris, supplied with food by his wife, who bribed the concierge not to betray him. Although the Folies Bergere reopened during the German occupation, she refused to perform before a German audience, and survived by managing a troupe of French dancers at the Chantilly theatre in Montmartre, remaining there until 1947. 
Although she had returned briefly to the Folies Bergere after the liberation of Paris in 1944, Kelly and her Bluebell Girls became permanently associated with the Lido nightclub in the Champs Elysees from 1948, when the manager, Pierre Louis-Guerin, invited her to form a troupe. In partnership with Donn Arden, an American choreographer from Las Vegas, she created the spectacular 'Paris by Night' dinner shows. The first of these, 'Confetti', opened in April 1948, with the Bluebell Girls and the Kelly Boys, a troupe of male dancers (who had to be at least 6 feet 2 inches tall). With her husband acting as business and finance manager, Kelly began to send troupes on tour, extending her organization to Las Vegas, where in 1958 she and Arden opened a version of the Paris Lido show at the Stardust Hotel. By the end of the 1950s they were running a worldwide organization from their headquarters in their flat in Paris, with permanent troupes in Paris and Las Vegas, and other troupes touring all over the world. 
After her husband was killed in a car accident in 1961, Kelly took control of the business. When the MGM Grand Hotel opened in Las Vegas in 1974 she was put in charge of over 100 dancers and showgirls in the 'Hallelujah Hollywood' show, created by Arden. When the hotel reopened in 1981 after having burned down, she and Arden put on 'Jubilee', with a cast of 135. The show at the MGM Grand Hotel in Reno, 'Hello, Hollywood, Hello', was even more lavish. In Paris the Lido had moved to a former cinema on the Champs Elysees and reopened in 1981 with a new show with four groups of Bluebell Dancers, including the topless Bluebell Nude Dancers and the Kelly Boys: Kelly had relaxed her views on nudity and allowed those who wanted to dance topless to do so. She had always been very strict with her girls and worked them very hard, determined that they should be the elite among dancers, with an unimpeachable reputation: she vetoed the suggestion in Las Vegas that the girls should mingle with the clientele after the show. According to the ballet dancer Anton Dolin 'the Bluebell girls have a quality of their own. They are dignified. You can tell a Bluebell girl just as you can tell a Balanchine or an Ashton ballet' (Castle, 125). A tough businesswoman, Kelly preferred to work from home rather than have an office at the Lido, to make it clear that it was she who was the girls' employer: they worked for her, and not for the management of the Lido. A perfectionist, she watched both performances of the show at the Lido every evening until her retirement in 1989 and continued to dine once a week at the Lido for many years. She lived in a flat off the Champs Elysees and became part of Parisian society. 
A television drama series, 'Bluebell', based on Kelly's life, was screened in 1986. She took French citizenship in 1948 and was elected a chevalier des arts et des lettres and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur: she also received a 'medaille d'honneur' from the city of Paris. She was appointed OBE in 1996. She died on 11 September 2004 in Paris; she was survived by two sons and a daughter, one son having predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 93930


Levin, (Henry) Bernard (1928-2004), writer and broadcaster, was born on 19 August 1928 at University College Hospital, London, the only son of Philip Levin, journeyman tailor, and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Racklin. His father left the family when Bernard and his elder sister, Judith, were small and as a result they were brought up mainly by their maternal grandparents, who had arrived from Lithuania at the turn of the century. As an adult Levin would recall their stories about Russia and reading to them in Yiddish. In 1995 he wrote: 'My home was not a religious one; my grandfather read the scriptures to himself silently and struggled through a little English; my grandmother, who could speak no English at all, lit a candle on the appropriate days, as did my mother, although for her it was not really a religious sign. ('The Times', 6 Oct 1995)' The family lived in Camden Town, and Levin, encouraged by his mother, won a London county council scholarship to Christ's Hospital in Sussex. There he felt somewhat alienated as a Jewish child in a Church of England establishment, and also as a self-styled communist surrounded by pupils from a very different background. Small stature and a lack of sporting ability did not help. Jeers put iron in his soul. He found the London School of Economics a more sympathetic environment, surrounded as he was by talented peers who shared his spirit of left-wing idealism and iconoclastic enquiry, and coming under the influence of brilliant minds like Harold Laski and Karl Popper. There he began to hone the journalistic and debating skills that were to turn him into one of the most brilliant and controversial polemical journalists of his generation. He wrote for the university newspaper, 'The Beaver', and magazine, 'Clare Market Review', including articles about opera, a lifelong passion. 
After graduating from the LSE in 1952 Levin took a lowly job with the BBC North American Service, but the moment of truth -- literally -- came in 1953, when he read an advertisement for editorial staff in the weekly paper 'Truth'. The editor, George Scott, allegedly gave Levin a job because he was Jewish and he wished the paper to be seen in a different light. He must never have regretted this whim, because Levin soon showed outstanding ability. His first article was about his disillusion with the Labour Party, and, sharing an office with journalists of the calibre of Philip Oakes and Alan Brien, Levin developed still further that enthusiastically combative streak that was to become the chief characteristic of his journalism. He joined 'The Spectator' in 1956, invited by the proprietor-editor Ian Gilmour to write about politics. So he began to write under the pseudonym Taper, which was to make his reputation as a lacerating wit who divided politicians into good and bad with no shades of liberal grey in between. Brian Inglis (who was to become a lifelong friend) succeeded Gilmour as editor and Levin became his deputy, a role he held until 1962. Meanwhile he had begun a parallel career as a theatre critic at the 'Daily Express', and from 1962 to 1970 he worked at the 'Daily Mail' in the same capacity, excoriating indifferent plays with the same vigour he had employed on pompous politicians. He loved the theatre (and dressing up to attend performances) but became disillusioned with modern examples of the form from those he saw as young men with nothing to say. He himself went on finding much to say, and for five years wrote a column for the 'Daily Mail' on five days a week. 
While still on 'Truth', Levin had been invited by the 'Manchester Guardian' to write a Saturday television column, where he was notably punchy in his criticism of a form with which, in truth, he never had much sympathy. When in 1963 he became a television star himself on 'That Was the Week That Was' he was on the receiving end of a very public punch that delighted those who had come to dislike his abrasive monologues on the people and issues that most annoyed him. On live television a member of the audience confronted him over a bad review of his actress wife, and Levin was knocked off the high stool that was his trademark. He climbed straight back and continued. At Levin's memorial service Sir David Frost remembered those years, and how his fellow presenter chose to deal with irritating correspondents, beginning his letters with 'I felt I should let you know that an unregistered lunatic has obtained a supply of your notepaper'. 'That Was the Week That Was' turned Bernard Levin into a household name as journalism alone could never do. 
During the week of the 1970 general election Levin wrote impartially on both sides then nailed his colours to the mast, advising his 'Daily Mail' readers to vote Labour. Thrice was he summoned by increasing ranks of his superiors and asked to change his copy, in response to which he defiantly reminded them all of his contract, in which it was stated that he should have complete freedom. In the end he resigned, was inundated with offers, and chose 'The Times', edited by William Rees-Mogg. He was to stay with the newspaper until the end of his career, finding its conservative-liberal position on most issues in tune with his own -- even though at first he feared he would be too radical for its pages. Rees-Mogg would later recall how Levin's disillusion with some of the ideals he had embraced rendered him a 'true Whig' like himself. Offered an office of his own, Levin refused its isolation but chose a desk in the anteroom to the editor's office -- thus placing himself securely at the centre of things. He became, Rees-Mogg wrote, 'an advisor of the kind that most editors need but few are lucky enough to find' ('The Times', 16 Aug 2004). That was the unofficial side of a writer whose columns, three times a week for many years, once a week from 1995, attracted a huge following. 
Introducing his first collection of journalism ('Taking Sides', 1979) Levin explained his remit: 'My own complete liberty to choose my subject has enabled me to indulge to the full (some would say to the brimming over) my devotion to the pursuit of hares of the most extraordinary diversity. It is just as well that there is no alleyway too narrow, ill-lit or obviously without issue for me to feel impelled to wander up it; I could not possibly write a general column three times a week if I were not inquisitive, to the point of impertinence, about almost everything.' Levin's style reflected the energetic, sceptical, passionate nature of a mind that accepted only the constraints of classical grammar, using its complex and lengthy structures of clause and sub-clause to express subtlety of thought, knockabout invective, and barely harnessed emotion. Whether he was writing about his own mother's tussles with the North Thames Gas Board, or excoriating Chairman Mao, the Soviet Union, or the apartheid regime of South Africa, or defending the free speech of those he profoundly disagreed with, Levin's many readers admired his ability to surprise (praising popular films like 'E. T.' and 'Crocodile Dundee') and inspire (when he wrote about Beethoven, Shakespeare, or any great art) as well as provoke. His 'Times' column appeared for twenty-six years (with one or two periods off) and, despite his initial reluctance to collect what he saw as 'ephemera', he republished many of his columns in 'Taking Sides' (1979), 'Speaking Up' (1982), 'The Way We Live Now' (1984), 'In These Times' (1986), 'All Things Considered' (1988), 'Now Read On' (1990), 'If You Want My Opinion' (1992), 'I Should Say So' (1995), and the last volume, rather poignantly entitled 'Enough Said' (1998). At that point he calculated that he had written some seventeen million words. 
Levin did not, however, consider collections of journalism 'proper' books. His first in that category was 'The Pendulum Years' (1970), an entertaining and perceptive analysis of the 1960s. In 1980 he visited twelve music festivals around the world to make a series of broadcasts for the BBC, which journeys also turned into a book, 'Conducted Tour' (1981), that was part travelogue, part appreciation of the music. Naturally he returned to the subject of music in the book that some friends considered his best, 'Enthusiasms' (1983), an eclectic journey of the mind around those things -- from food to Shakespeare -- in which the author took most delight. Levin held this book to be his closest to an autobiography. In the 1980s he made three travel series for Channel 4, each of which was accompanied by a book: 'Hannibal's Footsteps' (1985), 'To the End of the Rhine' (1987), and 'A Walk up Fifth Avenue' (1989). Levin had never had much time for television, and watched very little, but enjoyed the camaraderie of the television crew perhaps more than the writing of books -- since, as he grew older, he regarded writing as something of a chore, even it was the means of earning what proved to be a very good living. His last 'whole' book was an investigation of utopian dreams: 'A World Elsewhere' (1994), but the writing of it was made more difficult by the onset of illness. In 1990 he was appointed CBE. 
Levin never married, although he came closest to that state in his long relationship with the Greek writer and socialite Arianna Stassinopoulos ('b'. 1950), and for the last ten years of his life found contentment with the journalist Elisabeth Jane (Liz) Anderson, who was his devoted companion until the end. He fell in love very easily, and admitted that his occasional love affairs with married women were a convenient means of avoiding commitment, even if they caused him pain. His great gift was friendship with both men and women; he was the most loyal and attentive of friends and would readily acknowledge how love, friendship, and music were the only things with the power to keep the 'black dog' at bay. On hearing friends' family stories in all their complexity, his habitual comment 'Oh, we bachelors', accompanied by a wry smile and a shake of the head, disguised a deep regret that he had never had children, although in his prime he was a generous godparent. 
Marylebone High Street was Levin's haunt; he lived in two elegant flats just off that thoroughfare (in Devonshire Place, then Nottingham Street) for most of his adult life, surrounded by antiques, pictures, his beloved books, and unlikely soft toys (the gifts of godchildren and friends), including a large, white, furry cat which was his substitute for the real thing. He habitually dined well, was known in London's finest restaurants (and in many further afield as well), and prided himself on his 'professional' knowledge of wine and of cheese. He disliked restraint applied to any of his enthusiasms, in particular rejecting with mockery anything that urged prudence in matters gastronomic. He was an old-fashioned bon viveur; it matched his predilection for the opera cloak and the white tie in an age that (to his great regret) favoured the fast and casual. 
Levin began to notice memory lapses in the early 1990s. He knew his powers were failing but did not know why, and it frustrated him. From September 1995 his 'Times' column appeared once weekly instead of twice, and in January 1997 the editor, Peter Stothard, a great admirer, took the reluctant decision that it should cease, although Levin continued to write occasional pieces for the paper. The painful truth was not that he had written himself out, as some thought, but that the onset of Alzheimer's disease made writing (and reading) more and more difficult, and ultimately impossible. Friends would watch in anguish as the master wordsmith would grasp for the simplest noun, and his own despair at the cruelty of his fate was terrible. He was cared for in his final years by his partner, Liz Anderson, to whom he dedicated his last collection of journalism. He died on 7 August 2004 at the Butterworth Centre, Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, Westminster, and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 13 August, three days after his funeral service at Holy Trinity, Sloane Square, the delay due to the indisposition of the gravedigger. In his prime Levin would have been amused at the almost-Shakespearian black humour of this. He would certainly have enjoyed the celebration of his life on 21 October 2004 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Trafalgar Square -- full of poetry, music, and his own words. 


@@@@@


doc= 93931


Levy, Allan Edward (1942-2004), barrister, was born on 17 August 1942 at Bury Infirmary, Bury, Lancashire, the only child of Sidney Levy, a radio engineer, and his wife, Mabel, 'nee' Lewis. The family lived at Prestwich and Levy attended Bury grammar school and Hull University, where he graduated LLB (honours) in law. After attending the Inns of Court School of Law he was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1969. 
Levy chose to practise in family law. His start at the bar was slow but he built up a heavy practice, mainly in public law cases and adoption, much of it at appellate level. In several important cases he lost before the trial judge and in the Court of Appeal only to succeed in the House of Lords or in the European Court of Human Rights. These included the case of Keith Barrett, who sought compensation from Enfield borough council for his treatment as a child in their care homes; dismissed by the Court of Appeal, Barrett's claim for negligence was upheld by the law lords in 1999. Levy was an early member of the Family Law Bar Association and sat on its committee between 1987 and 1997. He was for two years a committee member of the Bar Council and from 1988 he sat on the council of Justice. Appointed queen's counsel in 1989, he was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1993, and sat as a recorder from 1993 to 2001. 
Levy first came to public notice in 1987 when he represented for the official solicitor the interests of a seventeen-year-old girl with Down's syndrome who faced a sterilization operation. In the same year he again represented the official solicitor in a case in which a university student attempted to prevent his former girlfriend from having an abortion. In 1990 he was asked by Staffordshire county council to co-chair an inquiry into abuses at a number of children's homes in the county where children had been subject to a 'pindown' regime of isolation and other punishments. On his request he was joined by Barbara Kahan, chair of the National Children's Bureau. They took evidence from 153 witnesses over seventy-five days and in 1991 produced their finding as 'The Pindown Experience and the Protection of Children: the Report of the Staffordshire Childcare Inquiry'. The report, which offered extensive and important recommendations, stated firmly that the punishments -- intended to 'pin down' the problem of disruptive children -- were 'unethical, unprofessional and unacceptable' and 'a fundamental abuse of human rights'. The report made Levy a national figure and he became much in demand as a speaker at family law conferences within the United Kingdom and internationally. He managed to combine his commitments as a speaker with his two passions of travel and watching sport, his engagements occasionally coinciding with international cricket events in the West Indies and Australia. 
Levy was a passionate advocate for the rights of children and strongly opposed all forms of corporal punishment. Notable cases included his representation in 1995 of five children who had been abused by their parents and who claimed compensation against the local authority that had done nothing to protect them. In 1998 he also took up the case of a boy whose stepfather, having severely beaten the child, had escaped prosecution for actual bodily harm on the grounds of necessary and reasonable chastisement. In both cases Levy was successful on appeal at the European Court of Human Rights. Levy's championing of children's rights led him to become a member of the Gulbenkian Foundation commission on children and violence (1994-5) and the Howard League commission of inquiry into violence in penal institutions for young people (also 1994-5). From 1990 until his death he was honorary legal adviser to the National Children's Bureau and a patron of the Children's Legal Centre from 1999. He was an obvious choice to chair the British Medical Council's steering group that in 2000 published its practical guidance, 'Consent, Rights and Choices in Healthcare for Children and Young People'. 
Allan Levy was an outstanding media communicator on legal issues. Despite his busy practice as a QC, he found time to give frequent radio and television interviews. He showed exceptional skill in explaining in clear and simple terms those cases, whether family or criminal, which attracted public attention. He made an enormous contribution to raising awareness of childcare issues and throughout his life fought children's battles through his cases, his writing, and his work as a broadcaster. In later years he became increasingly involved in cases that raised wider issues of medico-legal ethics, most notably an adult's right to refuse life-saving treatment, and from 1990 he sat on the council of the Medico-Legal Society. In addition to newspaper and journal articles, he was the author of studies including 'Wardship Proceedings' (1982), 'Adoption of Children' (10th edn, 1985), 'Focus on Child Abuse' (1989, as editor and contributor), 'One Scandal Too Many' (1993), and 'Medico-Legal Essentials in Health Care' (1996). His work also brought him international commitments that included chairing the Inter-country Adoption Lawyers' Association (1991-5) and the International Bar Association's meeting at the Hague Conference on Private International Law (1992), which focused on inter-country adoption. In the same year he became a fellow of the International Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers. He was a visiting professor at Washburn Law School, Kansas, in 2001. 
Levy was sociable, friendly, and generous, with a delightful sense of humour. From 1993 he was head of chambers at 17 Bedford Row, London, where he always found time to help younger members. He had a large circle of friends among bench and bar and, while he loved entertaining, he was also a very private man and seldom spoke of his upbringing or his life away from the law. He was essentially a city man and said that the only exercise he needed was from the kerb to a taxi. He was a member of the Reform Club and a devoted supporter of Manchester City Football and Lancashire County Cricket clubs. His main extravagance was collecting paintings by L. S. Lowry. He often said that he could never move from his flat in Belsize Grove, north London, because his collection of books was too large. He died from cancer of the oesophagus on 26 September 2004 at Edenhall nursing home, 11 Lyndhurst Gardens, Camden, London. He was unmarried and had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93939


McKane, William (1921-2004), biblical scholar, was born on 18 February 1921 at 42 Church Street, Dundee, the son of Thomas McKane, textile engineer, and his wife, Jemima, 'nee' Smith. Though 'dux' (leading scholar) of Stobswell School, he left at fifteen to follow his father into the local jute mill of H. and A. Scott, serving as a clerk. Born into the Original Secession church, he decided to enter its ministry. His study for university entrance was completed towards the end of his war service in the RAF (1941-5). He matriculated at St Andrews University in January 1946, and graduated MA in 1949 with honours in philosophy and English, having also secured a football blue in that year. During his three summer vacations he had also studied for the ministry at the Bible Training Institute in Glasgow and in 1949 he was ordained in the Original Secession church at Kilwinning, near Irvine. While minister there he travelled into Glasgow University daily, and in 1952 graduated MA with first-class honours in Semitic languages. 
In Kilwinning McKane met Agnes Mathie Howie, a hospital nurse and daughter of a retired farmer, James Howie. They were married in his church on 3 July 1952, and later had three sons and two daughters. In the following year he took up an assistantship in Hebrew in Glasgow University, and completed a PhD in 1956 with a dissertation on 'The old Israelite community and the rise of the monarchy'. That same year the Original Secession church rejoined the Church of Scotland, which it had left in 1733. McKane had supported the move and became a Church of Scotland minister, although his former congregation did not follow his lead. 
Promoted lecturer (1956) and then senior lecturer (1965), McKane prepared four substantial publications while at Glasgow. His first book, 'Al-Ghazali's Book of Fear and Hope' (1962), translated part of the Arabic 'Revival of the religious sciences' by a late eleventh-century Islamic philosopher and mystic. The next two volumes had a wide readership. 'I and II Samuel' (1963), in the 'Torch Bible Commentary' series, may have looked back to research for his doctoral dissertation, but it also led on to 'Prophets and Wise Men' (1965), which distinguished sharply between the empirical rationality of Israel's early sages and the more charismatic intuitions of its prophets, and laid a foundation for substantial works to follow. The first of these, 'Proverbs: a New Approach' (1970), substantially prepared in Glasgow, provided equally rigorous treatment of the 'sentence literature' that makes up so much of that book, as of the more extended 'instruction literature' prominent in the opening nine chapters. 
McKane was appointed in 1968 to the chair of Hebrew and Oriental languages at St Andrews University, where he taught until his retirement in 1990. His 'Studies in the Patriarchal Narratives' was prepared earlier in that period (1979), 'Selected Christian Hebraists' (ranging from Origen to Alexander Geddes) in 1989, while the essays in 'A Late Harvest' (1995) grew in part out of the seminar on 'Old Testament' theology that he conducted for much of his time at St Andrews. However, the most substantial component of McKane's academic legacy was represented by the two volumes on 'Jeremiah' in the prestigious 'International Critical Commentary' series (1986 and 1996). These embodied the fruits of a relentless interrogation of the ancient witnesses to a text that has come down to us in two remarkably different forms, as well as of medieval and modern commentators on these witnesses; and they themselves are an immensely rewarding and often stimulating -- but not an easy -- read. After 'Jeremiah', he published a commentary on the prophet Micah (1998); and until his death he was working on a commentary on 'Job'. 
Thoroughly appropriately, two published obituaries of McKane used in their assessment a typically Scottish double negative, 'did not shirk': one noting his refusal to avoid administrative responsibilities; the other his willingness to confront deep textual and theological problems. The distinction of his many-sided contributions was widely recognized in the St Andrews years. He served as dean of the faculty of divinity (1973-7) and as president of the Society for Old Testament Study (1978), was elected a fellow of the British Academy (1980) and of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1984), and served as the principal of St Mary's College (1982-6). In 1984 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Edinburgh, received the British Academy's Burkitt medal a year later, and was presented with a Festschrift, 'A Word in Season', on his sixty-fifth birthday (1986). During 1987-8 he was a fellow at the National Humanities Center, North Carolina, and he became a corresponding member of the Gottinger Akademie der Wissenschaften in 1997. He served on the advisory board of 'Zeitschrift fur die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft', and from 1980 acted as chairman of the Peshitta committee of the International Organization for the Study of the Old Testament. 
McKane remained an enthusiastic sportsman. He played cricket for the staff teams in Glasgow and then St Andrews into his sixties, supported the university and Scottish national rugby teams at Murrayfield, was a member of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club, and a keen hill walker. These, with music and literature, but most of all his family, gave him much greater pleasure than his several honours. Though to his family he was 'Dad in his study as usual', he could not resist coming out to kick a ball whenever grandchildren were around. He had never been a patient in hospital until he was taken to Ninewells, Dundee, the day before his death there of a heart attack on 4 September 2004. He was buried in Cameron church, just outside St Andrews, and was survived by his wife and their five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93948


Morton, Sir (Robert) Alastair Newton (1938-2004), businessman, was born in Johannesburg, South Africa, on 11 January 1938, the son of Henry Newton Morton, an oil executive who had emigrated from Scotland to South Africa, and his Afrikaner wife, Elizabeth Martino, daughter of Vintcent van der Bijl of Cape Town. His parents divorced while Alastair was still a child. Educated at St John's College, Johannesburg, and the University of the Witwatersrand (he was admitted when only sixteen), he left South Africa to study law at Worcester College, Oxford, on a De Beers scholarship. He graduated with a second-class degree in 1959. 
Morton's early career until 1963 was spent in mining finance with the Anglo-American Corporation of South Africa, working in the Central African Federation. When the federation collapsed he eschewed the apartheid policies at home and moved to the United States. On 6 June 1964 he married Sara Bridget Stephens, a 25-year-old secretary of Rowington, Warwickshire, and daughter of Leon Edgar Stephens, a local politician. The couple, who met in Rhodesia, had a son and a daughter. After a short period as a graduate student at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1964 he joined the World Bank's International Finance Corporation in Washington, where he was involved in providing support to the emerging French-speaking states of west Africa (mastering French was to prove useful in his later involvement with the channel tunnel project). 
Morton moved to London in 1967, and worked for the Wilson government's innovative Industrial Reorganisation Corporation, which was given the somewhat thankless task of trying to revive under-performing British firms by rationalization and merger. Morton was part of a small cadre of young executives given a comparatively high level of autonomy, an experience that undoubtedly helped to advance his career. Leaving the corporation as it became a casualty of the change of government in 1970, he joined the 117 Group of companies (later Drayton Corporation) at 117 Broad Street, London, then led by the merchant banker Philip Shelbourne. He fell out with his boss and was effectively demoted when asked to head Draymont Securities, a joint venture with Samuel Montagu (1972-6). But in this post he enjoyed a reputation for rescuing engineering companies in distress, and also found time to serve as a board member of the Royal Ordnance factories (1974-6). He first attracted national attention as the founding managing director of the state-owned North Sea oil and gas company, the British National Oil Corporation, in 1976, when he was only thirty-eight. Headhunted by the chairman, Lord Kearton, for whom he had worked at the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation, he revealed an aptitude for tough negotiating when finding finance for, and welding together, a new organization, which became one of the largest crude oil wholesalers. However, the appointment of his former adversary Shelbourne in succession to Kearton hastened his departure from the company. 
In 1982 Morton emerged from the comparative wilderness of consulting and non-executive directorships (including British Steel Corporation and Massey Ferguson) when the Bank of England asked him to become chief executive of the ailing conglomerate Guinness Peat, which had acquired the respected merchant bank Guinness Mahon. He again rescued an ailing organization through a ruthless policy of rationalization and refinancing, much to the discomfort of its founder, Lord Kissin. By the time he became chairman in 1987 he had gained a reputation as a 'City dynamo' and was highly regarded by Bank of England officials as having an appropriate blend of leadership and management skills. However, he was unable to ward off the hostile takeover of Peats by Equitycorp. 
Morton's efforts at the British National Oil Corporation and Peats made him a candidate for the problematic channel tunnel project, and in February 1987 he became British co-chairman (with Andre Benard, and from 1994 Patrick Ponsolle, as French co-chairman) of Eurotunnel. His appointment was not welcomed unequivocally -- indeed many others had been approached before him -- and commentators thought that he might fail to resolve an extremely difficult situation. In the event his contribution was both critical and controversial. Morton's energy, enthusiasm, and appetite for public relations stood him in good stead when engaged on the relentless round of seeking equity and loan capital from worldwide markets. He was also able to recruit engineering heavyweights to his board. On the other hand, he was prone to take opposition badly, and his ebullience was less effective when negotiating with contractors, ministers, and civil servants. When he joined Eurotunnel confidence in the fledgling company was low. Expertise, particularly in the transport field, was in short supply, and three senior executives had left in the space of a week. Construction had not started, but already it was apparent that the interests of Transmanche Link (TML), the contractors, were beginning to diverge from those of longer-term investors. Morton elected to work full-time and quickly acted to turn the project round. Combining leadership of the board with the post of chief executive from 1990 to 1994, he succeeded in raising substantial tranches of equity and loan capital in 1987, 1990, and 1994, weathering the storms that these financial operations brought with them. 
Morton's prime achievement came in November 1987, only nine months after his appointment. He launched a $770 million issue of share capital ('equity 3'), despite the gloom created by the 'black Monday' stock market crash on 19 October, and master-minded a $5 billion credit agreement with a 200-strong banking syndicate. Also important was the railway usage contract of July 1987, which specified the terms on which the British and French railways would have access to the tunnel. Morton accelerated negotiations that had been drifting for some time. The deal he was able to reach transferred much of the commercial risk from Eurotunnel to the British and French governments. Revealing what was to become a characteristic appetite for brinksmanship, he leaned hard on both the British government and British Rail. At a decisive point he warned John Moore, secretary of state for transport, that the railways must be allowed to make a deal without government interference. 'Absent that', he said, 'and the Channel Tunnel may be dead within a fortnight' (Gourvish, 302). 
Morton's battles with the contractors during the construction stage (1987-93) proved less satisfactory, however. Delays and escalating costs were legitimate concerns -- indeed, they threatened the tunnel's viability at several points, but Morton's tactics cut less ice with hard-bitten contractors such as Jack Lemley of Transmanche Link. Equally fraught were his efforts to alter the terms of Eurotunnel's relationship with the two governments. Further financing in 1990 and 1994 required the active if rather covert support of the British government, but Morton antagonized civil servants with his complaints about the cost of excessive safety requirements. Patience ran out, particularly at the Treasury, when he and Benard demanded compensation from the governments in 1992-3, an action that culminated in an extension of the tunnel concession from fifty-five to eighty years. 
The tunnel eventually opened in May 1994, a year later than planned, and with construction costs of $4.5 billion (in 1985 prices), 64 per cent higher than anticipated in 1987. These overruns were acceptable when compared with other similarly large projects in the twentieth century, but the story did not end there. With project costs totalling $10 billion, twice the original estimate, the debt-servicing burden was heavy. Traffic forecasts proved hopelessly optimistic, the ferries continued to compete fiercely for the short-sea market, and Morton and Ponsolle were soon pressing the governments for more help. In 1996 they were able to secure the basis for a revised financial plan and a further extension of the concession to ninety-nine years (signed in 1998), at which point Morton stepped down as co-chairman. There is no doubt that he had achieved much. However, he left a company with an uncertain future, continuing financial difficulties, and disgruntled shareholders. Furthermore, he had operated in an atmosphere of high drama and with almost continuous litigation, elements that did not help Eurotunnel's broader reputation. On the other hand he ensured that there was a channel tunnel. The company had been close to failure many times, and a lesser figure would have succumbed to the enormous pressures. In 1987 the journalist Ivan Fallon had forecast that 'a hungry, ambitious and ruthless man with a dominating personality, and a huge desire to make his mark, might pull it off' ('Sunday Times', 22 February 1987). This Morton did, though financial viability remained a problem to be tackled by those who followed him. 
Morton was less comfortable in his next, and last, big job. After acting as a government adviser on private finance (1993-5) and on the faltering channel tunnel rail link (1998), he was appointed by John Prescott, secretary of state at the Department for Environment, Transport and the Regions, to lead the new Strategic Rail Authority (SRA) for three years with effect from April 1999. As head of the SRA Morton was ostensibly charged with rescuing the newly privatized railway system, planning long-term investment, and awarding franchises. However, this time he was in his 'creaky sixties, rather than supple early forties' (Morton, draft article), and, beset by thyrotoxicosis and a bad heart, his capacity for long hours was beginning to wane. The post was heralded by the department as one for a 'high-profile champion' of rail users, and Morton wanted the SRA to be a highly competent body: 'I refuse to be in a position', he told ministers, 'where a Treasury whippersnapper can claim more refined judgement than the SRA because it is full of anoraks and single-issue campaigners' (Morton to MacDonald, 10 Sept 1999). Operating as 'de facto' chairman and chief executive, he tried to lead from the front, as he had at Eurotunnel. And taking his brief from Prescott's $63 billion ten-year plan of July 2000, he called for 'investment, investment, investment' (Morton, speech, 30 June 1999). His vision included twenty-year franchises with investing train operators, special financing arrangements, and a reformed Railtrack (which owned and was responsible for the railway's infrastructure). For a time he seemed to have the backing of government. But it was clearly an immense challenge to lead strategically an industry without having executive authority, and Morton, who had little time for Whitehall, soon became frustrated. The high-profile railway accidents at Ladbroke Grove (1999) and Hatfield (2000) exposed Railtrack's frailties and were followed by a massive escalation in infrastructure costs, a situation which crowded out the prospect of enhancing the network. 
Morton had little interest in budgets and failed to produce a strategic plan. Civil servants were soon criticizing him for stirring up unreasonable expectations. On the other hand, for much of his time at the SRA he was forced to operate in 'shadow' form, since statutory powers were not obtained until February 2001, nine months before his early resignation. His failure should also be laid at the door of those who appointed him. He was clearly the wrong man, notwithstanding the impossibility of the job. His initial, optimistic expectations of Railtrack's ability to act as an efficient provider of capital for the railways soon gave way to a perceptive diagnosis of its emerging difficulties, though he persisted with the idea of a public-private partnership with the company for network enhancement. Morton's belief that the train-operating companies would be willing and able to come up with long-term investment funds was equally misplaced. By 2001 he cut a rather sorry figure, sounding off about the inadequacies of civil servants, arguing with the rail regulator, Tom Winsor, about jurisdictional matters, and complaining with a degree of paranoia about the numerous leaks to which the industry was prone. Encouraged by John Prescott to believe he could make a real difference and would get the resources to make significant improvements to the railways, he was thwarted by the disjunction between investment aspirations and Treasury-driven reality. When Railtrack went into administration in October 2001 he left soon afterwards, recommending that his successor should be 'young, fit, wily and ambitious' (Morton to Byers, 7 June 2001). Like Peter Parker before him, Alastair Morton was attracted by the possibilities of public-private partnership, and was involved in such combinations with the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation, British National Oil Corporation, SRA, and of course the channel tunnel. Between 1993 and 1995 he was chairman of the Treasury's private finance working group responsible for identifying ways to engage private finance in the transport sector, which led to the creation of the private finance initiative. 
While the overall verdict on Morton's career was that he talked a good game and often promised far more than he was able to deliver, he will always be remembered for the part he played in steering the channel tunnel project to a successful conclusion. His sheer commitment to the venture while costs rose, timetables slipped, and the bankers grew ever more nervous evoked admiration, and the fact that he received a knighthood in the midst of the battle (in 1991) was testimony to his achievement, as was the award of the Legion d'honneur in 1994. A man of extraordinary drive and persistence, coupled with generous measures of charisma and wit, he was also highly adversarial, volatile, and even bullying. It was said that if you had breakfast with him you negotiated whether the toast was to be brown or white. An inveterate speechmaker -- while chairman of the SRA he admitted to a 'habit of making a policy speech every three months or so' (Morton to Corbett, 5 April 2000), he was in equal measure scathing in his criticism of others and extravagant in his ambitions. Yet behind the facade of the fearsome warrior he could be both kind and convivial, nowhere more in evidence than when he stayed to share a barrel of Young's beer after a locomotive naming ceremony. He loved sailing and walking, and was chairman of the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain, 1994-2004. He died suddenly of a heart attack on 1 September 2004 at Deep End Cottages, Lower Hone Lane, Bosham, Chichester, Sussex. He was survived by his wife and his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93951


Nicolson, Nigel (1917-2004), politician, publisher, and author, was born on 19 January 1917 at 182 Ebury Street, London, the second son of Sir Harold Nicolson (1886-1968), diplomat, politician, and author, and his wife, Victoria Mary (Vita) Sackville-West (1892-1962), poet, novelist, and gardener. His preparatory school was Summerfields, Oxford, and in 1930 he followed his elder brother, Lionel Benedict (Ben) Nicolson, the future art historian and editor of the 'Burlington Magazine', to Eton College. 
In 1930 Nicolson's mother bought an Elizabethan ruin, Sissinghurst Castle, near Cranbrook in Kent. She and Harold Nicolson collaborated on its transformation into a complex family home, and on the ambitious planning and planting of the gardens, which became famous. While devoted to their sons -- Nigel was affectionately known as Niggs -- and to each other, both Nicolson's parents had numerous affairs with members of their own sex, and spent much time apart. Their intimacy was sustained by an almost daily exchange of letters. The family, like Sissinghurst itself, evolved as a grouping of separate units, which affected Nicolson's mental and emotional formation. Vita was shy and undemonstrative with him, and he rarely intruded upon her in the tower at Sissinghurst where she worked. His father was a far more accessible parent. 
From 1935 Nicolson read modern history at Balliol College, Oxford, where he organized a branch of the National Labour Party, of which his father was then a member, and achieved a disappointing third-class degree. Like his father, he flirted briefly with fascism, but on the declaration of war in 1939 took a commission in the Grenadier Guards; his first book was the official history of the Grenadier Guards at war (1949). In 1944 the brigade in which he was a captain fought its way through Italy, reaching Austria on VE-day. His brigade was involved in the handover to the Red Army of anti-Soviet Cossacks and, to Tito, of anti-Tito Yugoslavs. When in 1989 Count Nikolai Tolstoy accused Lord Aldington, who had been staff officer, of consigning the Cossacks and Yugoslavs to an inevitable fate, Nicolson gave evidence in court for Tolstoy, using his own diary notes and confessing to his complicity in the betrayal, while defending Aldington, who won the case, against ultimate responsibility. Nicolson's scrupulous honesty in this distressing affair was emblematic of his moral courage and of his integrity. He was a trustee of the fund established to help the Tolstoy family, bankrupted by legal debts. 
After the war Nicolson stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative candidate for West Leicestershire, and then for Falmouth and Camborne, before entering parliament as the member for Bournemouth East and Christchurch in 1952. He was re-elected in 1955. In 1956, characteristically following his conscience, he seconded a Labour private member's bill to abolish capital punishment, and in the same year abstained in a vote of confidence in the government over the Suez crisis. The Bournemouth Conservatives were outraged, and he was ousted in a postal ballot. He retired from the Commons at the election of 1959. In the same year Weidenfeld and Nicolson published Nabokov's 'Lolita' -- against Nicolson's judgement, but with his support. 'Lolita' was phenomenally successful. Nicolson had co-founded the publishing house with George Weidenfeld in 1949, with the help of family loans. He worked in the firm -- full-time only from 1960 -- until his resignation in 1964, and remained an outside director until it was sold in 1992. 
Authorship took over from publishing. After his mother's death in 1962 Nicolson discovered, in a locked Gladstone bag in her tower, her account of her passionate three-year love affair with Violet Trefusis, which began when he was about eighteen months old. This document formed the basis of his bestselling 'Portrait of a Marriage' (1973), which incurred the bitter disapproval of some members of the family and considerable public controversy. But he felt his mother would have wished it to be published, and presented the story as a hard-won confirmation of the love and commitment that underpinned his parents' unorthodox marriage. In the same year he published 'Alex', the biography of Lord Alexander of Tunis. His reputation was reinforced by 'Mary Curzon', which won the Whitbread prize for biography in 1977. In the following years he wrote, 'inter alia', books about Fanny Burney, Napoleon, and Jane Austen. He was a lucid, vigorous writer, without stylistic mannerisms. A convinced European, he spoke French, Italian, and German. 
The love of Nicolson's early life was Shirley Morgan, daughter of the novelist Charles Morgan. She married the marquess of Anglesey in 1948, but they remained lifelong friends. On 30 July 1953 he married Philippa Janet Tennyson-d'Eyncourt (1928-1987), daughter of Sir Eustace Gervais Tennyson-d'Eyncourt, second baronet, who shared with him at Sissinghurst the care of his widowed father in his last illness. They were divorced in 1970. She later married Sir Robin McAlpine. Nicolson remained extremely close to their three children, Juliet, Adam, and Rebecca. Although he became fond of several distinguished and attractive women, he did not marry again. 
Sissinghurst was transferred to the National Trust in 1967, with the family retaining the right to live in a generous part of it. There Nicolson was a modest, hospitable host. He enjoyed the popularity and prestige of the famous garden -- though no gardener himself -- and was supremely courteous in his reception of interested visitors and of countless students, biographers, and scholars. Tall and lean, constantly with a cigarette until his last years, he cut an elegant figure at London parties, but was essentially diffident and a loner. He did not inherit his parents' predilection for smart society, though by virtue of who he was, and of his unassuming and charming demeanour, he had every access to it. As a young man, he acquired three uninhabited Hebridean islands, the Shiants, as a haven of solitude, which he passed on to his son. 
Like his parents Nicolson was a copious letter writer, and like them he kept diaries. In order to offset the expenses of his father's illness he edited his father's letters and diaries in three volumes (1966-8) and, later, his parents' correspondence ('Vita and Harold: the Letters of Vita Sackville-West and Harold Nicolson', 1992). For years, before the originals were sold to American universities, he lived surrounded by his parents' letters and diaries, just as, seemingly, he lived in their shadow as their son. He chose to see this not as a disadvantage or a burden, but as a privilege and a fortunate legacy. His parents and their circle, including the Bloomsbury group, became his main subject and he edited, with Joanne Trautmann, 'The Letters of Virginia Woolf' in six volumes (1975-80). He was an immaculate and ingenious editor. Woolf, whom he had known since childhood as the intimate friend of his mother, was the frequent subject of Nicolson's successful public lectures worldwide. He published a short biography of her in 2000, and a one-volume edition of his father's diaries in the last year of his life. 
In his later years Nicolson wrote a regular column, 'Long life', for the 'Spectator' magazine, and another, 'Time of my life', for the 'Sunday Telegraph'. His autobiography, 'Long Life', was published in 1997. He was appointed MBE in 1946 and OBE in 2000, and was a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. His father had longed, in vain, for a peerage; by a chance of genealogy, Nicolson became heir presumptive to his grandfather's barony of Carnock, an expectation that passed to his son Adam. He had been suffering from myelodysplastic syndrome and died at Sissinghurst Castle, Cranbrook, on 23 September 2004; he was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93955


Pateman, Jack Edward (1921-2004), aviation engineer and businessman, was born on 29 November 1921 in West Somerton, Norfolk, the son of William Edward Pateman, head gamekeeper, and his wife, Lucy Varley, 'nee' Jetten. After attending Great Yarmouth grammar school he served in the RAF from 1939 until 1946. He then joined Belling and Lee as a research engineer. He began his life's career on joining Elliott Brothers' circuits division in 1948. Elliott Brothers (London) Ltd, under Leon Bagrit, was an industrial automation pioneer, and Pateman foresaw how computer technology could also benefit systems for aircraft. Typical of the Elliott organization were specialist divisions as profit centres. At the age of thirty Pateman founded Elliott Brothers (London) Ltd Aviation Division, at Borehamwood. On 27 August 1949 he had married Cecily Hope (Cicely) Turner ('b'. 1924), the daughter of Alfred Ebenezer Turner, tailor. They had a daughter, Susan, and a son, John. 
One of Pateman's earliest tasks at Elliott Brothers was to manufacture the automatic pilot for the Jindivik target drone. This was followed by the design and manufacture of an autopilot for the Lightning interceptor, Europe's first for a supersonic aircraft. Other major projects included automatic flight control systems, a field in which Pateman was at one time a patent holder, for the Harrier, the Tornado, and the European Typhoon fighter, and for the VC-10, BAC One-Eleven, Concorde, and Boeing 777 airliners, the 777 being the first Boeing aircraft with 'fly-by-wire' flight control. Secondary flight controls were also produced for various models of the European Airbus. Among the company's most outstanding products were aircraft head up displays, air data computers, and airborne radar, antisubmarine sonar, and automatic landing systems. 
Pateman's avionics company won six queen's awards for technological achievement and eight for export, principally in the highly competitive American market. At its peak, 16,000 people were employed worldwide. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, when many industries were declining, a growing need for suitable engineering graduates meant recruiting from Australia. Avionics, which Pateman promoted as an industry in its own right, became the most valuable part of collaborative military aircraft projects, but governments would not support UK avionics against competition from subsidized European companies. Pateman was in 1979 one of the founding sponsors of the Industrial Avionics Working Group, to enable UK companies to compete successfully on European aircraft projects. 
Throughout Pateman's career aviation experienced successive industrial regroupings and mergers. Elliotts merged with English Electric, and hence Marconi, in 1967, which in turn was taken over by Arnold Weinstock's General Electric Company in 1968. Throughout Pateman showed a genius for his company's survival, becoming deputy chairman and joint managing director of Elliott Flight Automation from 1962 to 1971, and a director of GEC Computers Ltd from 1971 to 1989 (chairman, 1978-82). He was a director of Canadian Marconi (1971-87), GEC-Marconi (China) Ltd (1979-89), Marconi Electrical Devices Ltd (1980-87), GEC Avionics Projects Ltd (1980-89), GEC Information Systems (1982-6), GEC Avionics Projects (UK) Ltd (1984-9), GEC-Marconi Ltd (1987-9), and GEC itself (1986-8). He retired in 1989, after which his avionics organization became part of BAE Systems Ltd. 
Pateman was one of a breed of British engineering originals: imaginative technicians themselves, who also pioneered new industries and created world-class businesses. Despite the scale, diversity, and complexity of the businesses he ran, he was always approachable, and his calm and caution inspired his directors and senior managers. Faced with problems, he never put subordinates into the firing line. In stoutly defending the team which developed the controversial Nimrod early warning radar he attracted public criticism to himself, which those who knew him realized had damaged his reputation unfairly. He hated flamboyance and never looked for accolades, although many were bestowed. He was appointed CBE in 1970 and was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Aeronautical Society in 1981. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering the same year. After retirement, he became chairman of the Kent County Engineering Society (1989-96). 
Pateman's lifelong recreations were gardening and sailing. His sloop, 'Oenanthe', regularly cruised in France, Holland, and the east coast of England, including the River Blackwater, to support annual dinghy races between the Rochester team and the Marconi Sailing Club, of which he was president for several years. Many colleagues sailed with him. A golden rule was never to discuss business on board. In his latter years this would be called bonding. He would have scoffed at that and called it having fun. He died at Maidstone Hospital on 28 August 2004 of multiple organ failure after an emergency operation. After cremation at Tunbridge Wells a memorial service was held at St Peter's Church, Ightham, on 15 September. He was survived by his wife, Cicely, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 93958


Phillips, Andrew Kelvin (1940-2004), lighting designer, was born on 30 December 1940 at 18 Sydney Road, Cradley Heath, Staffordshire, the son of William Thomas Phillips, Baptist minister, and his wife, Kathleen Angove, 'nee' Willis. He was educated at Dr Challoner's Grammar School in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, and then trained as an actor at Florence Moore's studio in Brighton, though he actually wanted to be a writer. As a student he formed his own theatre company, Group One, in 1959 and was subsequently described by the 'Brighton Evening Argus' as 'a handsome twenty-year-old who smokes a good deal and dresses like Marlon Brando' (quoted in 'The Independent', 22 Sept 2004). In 1961 the company took two shows to the Edinburgh Festival, where its production of the radical 'Fringe of Light' by the actor-playwright Bill Owen caused a stir. Phillips's succinct summary of the company's fate was that 'it went bust, as they all do'. 
The company's debts were taken on by Phillips, who was struck how, in his opinion, the only people making any money from theatre in the late 1950s and early 1960s were the technicians. In 1963 he began work in London as a prop-maker and stagehand, and later that year joined the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) at the Aldwych Theatre, becoming the 'young man' electrician working alongside a crew who had served together in the Second World War. There, and on tour with productions like Paul Scofield's 'King Lear', he started to learn what he always described as the craft, rather than the art, of lighting. It was Phillips's practical experience that brought him to the attention of the Royal Court Theatre in 1965. Buoyant since the success of 'Look Back In Anger', the Royal Court was the home of new British drama. It also became Phillips's home for seven years and would shape his career for the rest of his life. The Royal Court's artistic director, William Gaskill, challenged his new chief electrician to invent a 'house style' of lighting. Phillips did exactly this, working with directors including Lindsay Anderson, Bill Bryden, John Dexter, Peter Gill, and Anthony Page, and designers such as Jocelyn Herbert. Starting with the Royal Court's driving principle -- subordination to the playwright's words -- Phillips subordinated himself to the actors and interpreted his job as supporting them in telling the play's story. As he later remarked, 'My job was to light them... It's a craft that requires a lot of application, experience and patience' ('The Independent', 22 Sept 2004). 
The style Phillips created came to be known as 'white light'. This rejected what was then the orthodox practice of combining different coloured spotlights and instead used correction filters to remove the warmth of the tungsten light sources. He worked with the set designers, and carefully contrived concealment was swept away; the lighting equipment was left in full view, rigged to reflect the stage design below. Phillips also rejected the established way of working and refused to begin lighting until the actors were on stage. 'I'm not lighting the floor or the scenery, I'm lighting six feet above the floor: I'm lighting faces' ('The Independent', 22 Sept 2004). 'He told me that he lit the whites of the eyes', wrote the dramatist Edward Bond after Phillips's death ('The Guardian', 25 Sept 2004). Phillips had complete control of his craft and was able, as John Dexter described, to generate a lighting effect that 'defines the space and forces the actors to dominate it. It has a clarity which gives weight to space and has the effect of giving the actors height and structure' ('The Independent', 22 Sept 2004). Bond similarly recalled how Phillips rose to the challenge presented in his play 'Lear' (1972), in which Lear's eyes are removed. 'I wondered what Phillips would do. He seemed to concentrate the light on the hands. Uncannily, I became aware of Lear's fingernails' ('The Guardian', 25 Sept 2004). 
The Royal Court's schedule -- runs of three to six weeks, a show ending on Saturday then the new set and lighting installed overnight in time to start 'teching' on Sunday morning -- placed great demands on Phillips, who lit eighty consecutive plays. The actress Judy Liebert ('b'. 1945/6), whom Phillips met in 1969, recalled being 'bowled over by this dynamic guy, who always said exactly what he thought and had the stamina of an ox' ('The Guardian', 25 Sept 2004); the couple married on 28 November 1969, and had a son, Sam. Phillips left the Royal Court in 1972, but continued to work with the theatre's collaborators, most notably the director John Dexter; Phillips's two Tony award nominations in New York came from shows with Dexter, 'Equus' in 1974, and 'M. Butterfly' in 1988 (the latter lit in intensely monochromatic deep colours, quite belying his white light tag). During the 1970s he co-founded a lighting supply company named, inevitably, White Light. He was divorced in 1974 and began a seven-year relationship with the actress Glenda Jackson ('b.' 1936), whom he met on an RSC production of 'Hedda Gabler' (1975), which he lit and in which she starred. 
Phillips was well known in the theatre for his strong opinions and contrariness, as well as his search for perfection and readiness to experiment. In 1989 he met Jenny King, a theatre producer with the feistiness to stand up to him. They became partners in work and in life, collaborating as Centreline Productions on shows such as 'Auntie and Me', seen in London in 2003. By this time Phillips, a long-time drinker and smoker, was already battling throat cancer, yet continued to produce fine work on shows as diverse as 'Honeymoon Suite', his final work at the Royal Court, and in summer 2004 'Mercy' at the Soho Theatre, London, another company with new writing at its heart. He died on 18 September 2004 at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Chelsea, London, of cancer of the throat, having, as one obituary noted, carefully poured and consumed his last drink, a Baileys on ice, a few days previously ('Daily Telegraph', 22 Sept 2004). He was survived by Jenny King and by his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 93966


Richardson, John Samuel, Baron Richardson (1910-2004), physician, was born on 16 June 1910 at 105 Osborne Road, Ecclesall, Sheffield, the elder son of John Watson Richardson (1882-1917), solicitor and company director, who was killed in action during the First World War, and his wife, Elizabeth Blakeney, 'nee' Roberts (died 1969), only daughter of Sir Samuel Roberts, first baronet, politician. His forebears on both sides of the family had connections with the steel industry and Richardson was proud of his Yorkshire heritage. He was educated at Charterhouse School and Trinity College, Cambridge, and did his medical training at St Thomas's Hospital, London. On 6 June 1933 he married Sybil Angela Stephanie Trist (1904-1991), an art student who trained at the Slade School of Fine Art and the Royal Academy, and daughter of Ronald Arthur Trist, merchant. Richardson tried, unsuccessfully, to keep this a secret as marriage was thought to impede a medical career. After graduating MB BChir at Cambridge in 1936 he served as a house physician at St Thomas's and briefly as a registrar. He and his wife had two daughters, Elizabeth ('b'. 1937) and Susan ('b'. 1940). 
Richardson joined the Royal Army Medical Corps in August 1939, a month before the outbreak of the Second World War, took part in the Dunkirk evacuation, and was later posted to north Africa as a medical specialist with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. There he was nominated 'physician in attendance' to George VI when the latter visited the troops in 1943; he treated the king for sunburn, for which he was appointed LVO. He then travelled with the royal party to Malta, and on board ship met Harold Macmillan, an event that was to have a considerable impact on his professional life. 
Richardson went back to St Thomas's after the war and, thinking it wise to have a chest radiograph though he had no symptoms, was horrified to find a cavity in the left lung due to tuberculosis. A year's intensive treatment enabled him to return to work, and in 1948 he was appointed consultant physician; he spent his entire career at Thomas's, retiring as senior physician in 1975. Because of his patrician appearance his first students nicknamed him 'Sir John'; later (when he was Sir John) he was universally known as 'JSR'. Among the last of the truly general physician-teachers, he had little appetite for research or writing scientific papers, though he edited the 'British Encyclopaedia of Medical Practice' (1970-74) and published a text on rheumatic diseases. He was physician to hospitals in Watford and Wembley, the King Edward VII Hospital for Officers, the Metropolitan Police, and London Transport, and honorary consultant physician to the army. He practised privately from 33 Devonshire Place and lived at 1 Hillcrest Road, Ealing. 
Harold Macmillan began to seek the opinion of Richardson -- 'who looked after me so well in Africa' ('Diaries', 190) -- in the early 1950s, and soon treated him as his personal physician. The close friendship and trust that developed between them was the result of the patrician outlook and political nous they shared. Macmillan was prone to hypochondria and tended to suffer from episodes of ill health brought on by overwork; the doctor provided the reassurance of the wise physician. Richardson accompanied Macmillan on trips abroad between 1957 and 1963, and continued to look after him when he retired from office. When Richardson went on holiday, staff at St Thomas's had strict instructions to contact him in an emergency: it was all the more surprising therefore that when Macmillan developed prostate trouble and retention of urine in 1963 while Richardson was in the Lake District, other specialists were called in and advised an operation. There was talk of possible cancer, and Macmillan decided to hand in his resignation. Although Richardson raced back to London and said he thought the prime minister could carry on after a suitable convalescence, there was no turning back. Having been knighted in 1960, Richardson was created a baronet in Macmillan's resignation honours of 1963. 
Richardson's quick grasp of essentials, shrewdness, and ability to manipulate -- his critics inevitably labelled him 'devious' -- made him a natural choice to head numerous medical bodies. He was president of the International Society of Internal Medicine (1970), the Royal Society of Medicine (1969-71), and the British Medical Association (1970-71), and master of the Society of Apothecaries (1971-2), having served on their governing bodies. He was particularly pleased with his role as chairman of the influential Joint Consultants' Committee (1967-72), set up to spearhead much-needed modernization of medical organization in hospitals. 
Richardson's skill in promoting change was seen at its best when he succeeded Lord Cohen of Birkenhead as president of the medical profession's disciplinary body, the General Medical Council, in 1973. The government had already bowed to calls for a public inquiry into its function; Richardson quietly set about dismantling outmoded formalities and ceremonial and replacing the forbidding court of law that was the disciplinary committee with a more informal discussion among peers, so that by the time of the inquiry report (in 1979) he had already made all the recommended reforms, apart from those requiring legislation. Michael O'Donnell, editor of 'World Medicine', a member but also a fierce critic of the council, in an article entitled 'What was the old devil up to?', admitted that 'few people outside the Council appreciate how remarkable was his achievement' (O'Donnell, 31). On retiring in 1980 Richardson said that he had greatly enjoyed himself, especially his meetings with the combative secretary of state for social services, Barbara Castle. In contrast, a particular disappointment was that he never became president of the Royal College of Physicians, being runner-up on at least two occasions, because fellows were suspicious of his motives. He derived some comfort from being asked to deliver the Harveian oration in 1978. This was the most prestigious lecture in the gift of the college, and Richardson chose as his title 'Harvey's exhortation' to reaffirm the physicians' duty to discipline themselves. 
Richardson, who was made a life peer in 1979, as Baron Richardson, of Lee, in the county of Devon, was a tall, commanding figure, with a firm step; he was always immaculately dressed. His manner was aloof and rather forbidding, but beneath the austere exterior was a man of considerable charm and compassion, who endeared himself particularly to patients and students. Colleagues admired his great intellect but were suspicious of his enigmatic behaviour. During his long retirement in north Devon he was active in the House of Lords on medical matters and especially those connected with his alma mater. He was a keen gardener, and when asked about his hobbies and interests said that 'he was interested in most things' (Royal College of Physicians archives). He died of bronchopneumonia on 15 August 2004 at Tyspane Nursing Home, Braunton, Devon. After cremation his ashes were buried in Mortehoe cemetery, near Ilfracombe. He was survived by his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 93969


Smeathman, Henry (1742-1786), explorer and entomologist, was born in Scarborough, Yorkshire, on 9 February 1742, the youngest of eight children born to William Smeathman, a distiller and brandy merchant, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Redhead. William and Alice had married on 29 January 1732 at St Benet Paul's Wharf, London, and had later moved to Scarborough. Henry Smeathman was baptized on 13 February 1742 at the Old Meeting House, the Independent chapel in Scarborough, as were his four brothers and three sisters: William (1734), Charles (1735), Rebecca and Alice (1737), Thomas (1738), Alice (1740), and John (1741). From an early age Henry Smeathman showed an interest in natural history and sketching, and according to his sister-in-law, Elizabeth (married to his brother Thomas), he was keen to learn and improve himself. After the early death of his father, Smeathman was educated by a curate in Scarborough, and after the curate's death was taken under the care of Philip Sharp, a friend of his late father's. He worked at various jobs, among them cabinet-making and upholstery, and at some time worked as an insurance broker. He then went to live with his brother Thomas and his wife, Elizabeth, and studied theology (Pettigrew, 252). At some point during the 1760s Smeathman undertook a course in elocution and grammar with Mr Rice, which he later practised, and recommended to others in the pages of 'Philosophical Transactions' (1781). By 1768 he had obtained a post as a tutor for a gentleman's family in Birmingham. By this time he had met the naturalist John Abbot, and seems to have made contact with members of the Aurelian Society, in particular Dru Drury. 
The second Aurelian Society was formed in 1762, with the artist and entomologist Moses Harris as secretary. As well as Drury, members included the Linnaean-trained naturalist Daniel Solander, the gardener and nurseryman James Lee, the naturalist Emanuel Mendes da Costa, and Smeathman. This society, dedicated to the study and collection of insects, continued until 1766 and its members witnessed the word 'entomologist' enter common usage. By cultivating relationships with natural historians from the society, Smeathman was able to benefit from their expertise, and gain access to prestigious eighteenth-century entomological collections. In 1771 Smeathman was sponsored to make a journey to Sierra Leone and the Guinea coast, primarily for the collection of specimens, in particular, insects. His main sponsors were Dr John Fothergill, Dru Drury, and Joseph Banks. Margaret Cavendish Bentinck, duchess of Portland, later became a sponsor. 
Smeathman left England on 26 October 1771, on board the 'Fly', a trade ship carrying barrels of rum to West Africa. He spent the years 1771 to 1775 based in Sierra Leone; his main residence being on the Banana Islands, off the coast of Sierra Leone. The Banana Islands were the home of James Cleveland, an African-European slave trader who supplied hospitality and became Smeathman's protector. During his years in Sierra Leone, Smeathman collected thousands of specimens -- mainly insects -- which he dispatched, to Drury, aboard the trade ships departing from Bunce Island, the British slave-trading establishment in the Sierra Leone River estuary. Smeathman also sent plants to Linnaeus in Sweden. While in Sierra Leone Smeathman explored the coastal and riverine areas; he also travelled to the Isles de Los. He kept a journal and regularly corresponded with Drury and other naturalists. He undertook a territorial surveillance of the region and made a number of geographical, botanical, zoological, and ethnographic observations, which he recorded in his journals and letters. He studied termites, experimented with rice cultivation, and planted a botanical garden. He married (by native custom) into one of the African-European slave-trading families in the Sherbro district of Sierra Leone; no further details of his wife are known. He was known as the Flycatcher, a term which was used to describe insect collectors. His account of the difficulties connected with collecting, preserving, and transporting specimens in tropical countries is related in Dru Drury's 'Illustrations of Natural History' (vol. 3, 1782), which also figures some of Smeathman's specimens. 
Smeathman left Sierra Leone, and his wife, in early 1775 and travelled aboard a trade ship 'en route' to England via the West Indies. He arrived in Tobago as the American War of Independence was beginning. An American vessel captured the ship in which he was returning home and Smeathman lost his books and collections. He remained in the West Indies for a further four years, studying plantation agriculture, collecting specimens, and attempting to eradicate cane ants which were causing devastation to the sugar plantations on certain islands. Large rewards were offered at the time for ridding the islands of these ants. Smeathman proposed using 'train oil', oil made from the blubber of large whales, as a means of killing the ants and the aphids they feed on. Like other proposed remedies, this did not work, and it was the hurricane of 1780 that eventually destroyed this particular blight or 'blast' of sugar pests. 
Smeathman returned to England in August 1779. He proposed to publish an account of his travels in Africa and the West Indies, and a printed prospectus for this unpublished work is in the British Library. During the late 1770s and early 1780s debating societies flourished in London, and Smeathman not only gave lessons in oratory, but also opened his own debating society, the Lyceum, in 1781. At the beginning of that year he presented his treatise on tropical termites to the Royal Society. His address at this time was Clements Inn. Published in 'Philosophical Transactions' in February 1781, Smeathman's 'Some account of the termites found in Africa and other hot climates' was the first detailed account of tropical termites, their life cycles and habits. Smeathman's hand-coloured sketches of the internal structure of the termite mound, the royal chamber, and the different types of termites accompanied his handwritten account, and these sketches were engraved by James Basire for the 'Philosophical Transactions'. Smeathman's treatise on tropical termites demonstrated his expertise in entomological knowledge at a time when entomology was developing into a separate and distinctive field of study within the wider discipline of zoology. This groundbreaking treatise later earned him the title of Father of Termitology (M. Maeterlinck, 'The Life of the White Ant', 1929, 19). It was published as a separate volume by John Nichols in 1781; a French translation appeared in Paris in 1786, and a German in Gottingen in 1789. 
Apart from his interest in natural history and, in particular, entomology, Smeathman was concerned with the possibility of creating a settlement in Sierra Leone. Having, as he said, seen 'equinoctial lands in a state of nature' in Sierra Leone, and Caribbean islands in 'high cultivation' ('Works of John Fothergill', 580), in 1783 Smeathman proposed a settlement in Sierra Leone for former slaves and other free men, based on plantation agriculture. He had continually made connections and comparisons across tropical regions -- between termites, polyps, edible insects, cultivation, and people. Thus human colonies built on plantation agriculture in the Caribbean, he reasoned, could be replicated in Sierra Leone (though without the need for slave labour). He wrote to the Quaker physician Thomas Knowles regarding his proposal; but his Quaker friends, as pacifists, were unwilling to support his plan as it involved the settlers being supplied with arms. Smeathman was unable to find British sponsors for his 'plan of settlement' and by the end of 1783 he was in Paris, lecturing on termites at the (French) Royal Society of Physicians, seeking subscribers for a proposed book on his voyages and travels, and sponsors for his settlement plan. While in Paris he took part in balloon experiments and drew a design of a Montgolfier balloon with wings. He hoped to finance his African plan with proceeds from his invention of an aerostatic vessel, which could be directed in flight. Unsuccessful in obtaining sponsorship for any of his projects, Smeathman returned to England at the end of 1784, and in 1785 he obtained the post of secretary to the newly formed (and short-lived) General Chamber of Manufacturers of Great Britain, whose chairman and founder was Josiah Wedgwood. 
In 1786 Smeathman's plan of settlement for Sierra Leone was published. The Committee for the Relief of the Black Poor and Granville Sharp championed Smeathman's plan, which in May 1786 the Treasury agreed to finance. Smeathman himself was appointed agent for the enterprise. The settlers were to be drawn mainly from London's black poor population, many of whom were freed slaves. The project was regarded as philanthropic, and was supported by many abolitionists and evangelicals. Smeathman died of fever on 1 July 1786, at his apartments in Cannon Street, London; he had previously suffered from malaria in Sierra Leone and the Caribbean. Smeathman's dual role in the worlds of natural history and colonial policy was reflected in his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. His death delayed the expedition to Sierra Leone for some months; eventually Smeathman's clerk, Joseph Irwin, was appointed agent, and the first ship of settlers arrived in Sierra Leone in May 1787. The settlement, in and around Freetown, was taken over by the Sierra Leone Company in 1790 and in 1808 Sierra Leone became a crown colony. Thomas Winterbottom's 'An Account of the Native Africans in the Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone' (vol. 1, 1803) included Smeathman's 'Some account of the termites' as an appendix. 
Smeathman's collecting activities resulted in thousands of specimens being transported from west Africa to Europe, to enhance the cabinets of his sponsors and other naturalists and collectors. Joseph Banks named a species of passion fruit tree after him ('Smeathmannia'), and Johan Christian Fabricius named a species of moth after him ('Pyralis Smeathmanniana'). Smeathman's unpublished papers at the Linnean Society include a paper on the Sierra Leone tarantula (with an illustration by Moses Harris); a paper on polyps; an account of the harmattan wind; and a table of the weather at the Banana Islands. His unpublished journals and correspondence, together with a paper entitled 'Useful hints for those who intend to visit or settle in Africa and other hot climates', were later transcribed by Adam Afzelius, a pupil of Linnaeus who followed in Smeathman's footsteps in Sierra Leone, and are contained in the library of Uppsala University in Sweden. 
Smeathman was a pioneer in African entomology at a time when African insects were rare in British cabinets. He combined natural history investigation with an agrarian improvement programme, and his plan of settlement for Sierra Leone laid the blueprint for what was to follow in that country's colonial history. 


@@@@@


doc= 93975


Sams, Eric Sydney Charles (1926-2004), musicologist and literary scholar, was born at 3 Cedars Avenue, Walthamstow, Essex, on 3 May 1926, the only child of Henry Sydney Sams (1897-1968), a petty officer in the Royal Navy, and later a clerical officer in the General Register Office, and his wife, Violet Lois, 'nee' Hill (1901-1990). He demonstrated his remarkable intellect at Westcliff high school, where he acquired an encyclopaedic knowledge of music, as well as of English, French, and German literature, which he could thereafter quote at length. At sixteen he won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. However, he first joined the army intelligence corps, where he worked on decoding enemy messages during the Second World War. He also saw service in Palestine. Only in 1947 could he take up his Cambridge scholarship, graduating with a BA in French and German in 1950. In the intelligence corps he had met Enid Mary Tidmarsh (1920-2002), a pianist, and daughter of Walter James Tidmarsh, a retired sales representative. They married on 30 June 1952, and settled in Sanderstead, south of Croydon. They had two sons, Richard ('b'. 1955), later a Japanese translator and chess expert, and Jeremy ('b'. 1957), later a theatre director, translator, and composer. 
After Cambridge, Sams joined the civil service, where he became a principal officer in the department of employment. Despite professional and family duties he found time to pursue his consuming interest in music and language, especially as fused in classical song. In 1961 'The Songs of Hugo Wolf', providing text, translation, and detailed analysis of each of Wolf's songs, won high praise, and a similar book on Schumann's songs followed in 1969. His work also led to the discovery of Schumann's extensive use of cipher, which he demonstrated in 1965-6, to sometimes sceptical readers, in articles in the 'Musical Times'. His Wolf and Schumann publications brought the award of a doctorate by Cambridge University. Sams's remarkable musical and literary knowledge, combined with his ability to write lucidly and humorously (with brilliantly witty plays on words), also led to articles and reviews for the 'Musical Times' on not only German romantic music but a wide range of other musical subjects. These included, in 1970, articles on Edward Elgar's use of code, with a projected solution of the 'Enigma'. Sams was also a frequent radio broadcaster, between 1976 and 1978 was opera critic of the 'New Statesman' and reviewer for 'Gramophone', and in 1976-7 he was visiting professor at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario. He also wrote major articles for the 'New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians'. 
In 1978 Sams took early retirement from the civil service. In 1980 he published a detailed analysis of Schubert's final illness, and he also became recognized as an authority on historical shorthand, decoding the messages of such diverse figures as William Clarke, secretary to Cromwell's army, and Sir John Thompson, prime minister of Canada in 1892-4. However, his overwhelming preoccupation in retirement was Shakespeare studies. To these he brought the disciplines that had stood him in such good stead in music, most particularly the rejection of traditional beliefs unsupported by hard evidence. This also lay behind his own atheism. Sams recognized that Shakespeare, far from being a late developer springing fully formed as conventional wisdom maintained, would like any other creative artist have improved and revised. Thus variant versions of the plays, customarily classified as 'bad quartos' or 'memorial reconstruction', were more logically early versions from the 'lost years' unaccounted for by Shakespearian orthodoxy. He supported his theories by painstaking comparison of words or usage in these disputed plays with those in plays acknowledged as Shakespeare's own. Besides a flood of articles and letters in the 'Times Literary Supplement' and elsewhere, Sams published (with attributions to Shakespeare) editions of 'Edmund Ironside' in 1985 and 'Edward III' in 1996. In between came 'The Real Shakespeare: Retrieving the Early Years, 1564-1594' (1995), presenting a revolutionary chronology of Shakespeare's early career. His attribution of 'Edward III' (mooted by Edward Capell in 1760, but discounted by later scholars) soon gained endorsement, though his more radical ideas gained little ground with those whose reputations were built on twentieth-century Shakespearian traditions. 
In 1989 Sams addressed a wider audience in a television film, 'Code and Cipher in Music', and in 2000 he followed his studies of Wolf and Schumann (which had meanwhile gone into revised editions) with 'The Songs of Johannes Brahms'. However, a projected companion volume on Schubert never materialized. Moreover, his wife's death and his own ill health prevented completion of a planned book on Shakespeare's later years, but the extant material was published online in 2008 on a website dedicated to Sams's writings. 
The incisiveness of Sams's intellect could be daunting, and his barely disguised contempt for certain academics hardly helped his Shakespearian cause. His writings on German song, though, remain unchallenged as masterpieces of insight and clear expression. Sams was a kindly, considerate, witty, and entertaining companion and correspondent, and he would go out of his way to provide practical help and encouragement to those in whom he saw promise. He died in Highgate Nursing Home, Islington, London, on 13 September 2004, of pneumonia following a stroke, and was cremated at Islington crematorium on 22 September. He was survived by his two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 93989


Steel, Sir David Edward Charles (1916-2004), oil company executive, was born on 29 November 1916 at 5 Overstrand Mansions, Battersea, London, the second son of Gerald Arthur Steel, private secretary to the first lord of the Admiralty, and his wife, Ellen Price, 'nee' Edwards. His father later entered business and became general manager of the British Aluminium Company. David Steel was the third generation of his family to be educated at Rugby School, and went on to read jurisprudence at University College, Oxford. At both, he was a keen sportsman, playing cricket and rugby. Having graduated from Oxford with a second-class degree in 1938, he embarked on solicitor's articles with the London firm Slaughter and May and played rugby for the Harlequins club. When the Second World War broke out he was commissioned in the 9th Queen's Royal Lancers, a tank regiment. He was sent to France, where his brother, also a 9th lancer, was killed in action. Steel had a reputation for fearlessness, but his bravery was matched by his modesty, and he was reticent about his meritorious wartime exploits, which won him the DSO (1940) for his part in the rearguard action following the Dunkirk evacuation, the Military Cross (1945) as part of the Eighth Army in northern Italy, and three mentions in dispatches. After the war he resumed his articles with the London firm of solicitors, Linklaters and Paines, qualifying as a solicitor in 1948. 
In 1950, in a career move that would define his future, Steel joined the newly formed legal department of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, one of the small band of major western oil companies which dominated the international oil industry. He could not have joined at a more crucial juncture. While Anglo-Iranian was coming unstuck in Iran, where its assets were nationalized by Mohammed Mussadeq in 1951, Steel quickly found his feet in his new working environment. Apart from his legal skills, his other qualities quickly shone through, in particular his exceptional diligence, conscientiousness, and all-round abilities as a team player. His potential to advance to the top of the company (renamed British Petroleum (BP) in 1954) was quickly spotted, and he soon moved on from legal work to a succession of general management posts in Britain, America, and the Middle East, becoming president of BP North America in 1959 and managing director of the Kuwait Oil Company in 1962. As he moved around the world and made his way up the company hierarchy, Steel found great happiness in family life after his marriage in 1956 to Ann Wynne Price (died 1997), daughter of a Canadian army officer, C. B. Price. They had one son and two daughters. 
After Steel joined BP's main board of directors in 1965, his attention was devoted increasingly to high-level oil diplomacy, in which he demonstrated the combination of patience, tact, and firmness that was his hallmark. He personally led a series of tense negotiations with the shah of Iran, whose demands on the oil companies threatened to destabilize their lucrative oil concessions in the Middle East. In 1972 Steel climbed still further up the corporate ladder, becoming the company's deputy chairman, and in 1975 he was appointed chairman and chief executive. 
Steel inherited the top job at BP at a time when the company was in the throes of transition. Most of BP's rich oil concessions in the Middle East had by then been nationalized by the increasingly assertive producing countries, and BP's future in the oil industry looked insecure. But Steel had two aces up his sleeve. One was the company's large stake in the giant Prudhoe Bay oil field in Alaska, which came on stream in 1977, the year that Steel was knighted. The other was BP's interest in North Sea oil, in which Harold Wilson's Labour government, which was then BP's major shareholder, demanded increased state participation. The encounters between the mild-mannered capitalist, Steel, and the outspoken socialist, Tony Benn, who was secretary of state for energy, were among the most memorable moments in Steel's career, as he succeeded in virtually neutering state participation, as well as warding off Benn's demands for increased state control over BP. This was Steel's greatest achievement at the helm of BP. He proved less successful in other initiatives, particularly attempts to diversify BP into non-oil businesses such as coal, minerals, and computing. Indeed, while Steel excelled in political and diplomatic skills, he lacked the commercial instincts of more intuitive businessmen. Throughout his career, he remained a great believer in consensus, a company man whose concern for staff welfare, sense of fair play, and sheer decency, deservedly won him the loyalty of colleagues. It was for these qualities, rather than his business acumen, that he was admired. He was, in essence, a gentlemanly capitalist. 
Steel's retirement from BP in 1981 was in that sense timely, for he would not have been comfortable with the world of mass redundancies, hostile takeovers, and corporate restructurings which came to the fore in the 1980s. He remained, nevertheless, active as a director of the Bank of England (1978-85) and Kleinwort Benson (1985-92), as president of the London Chamber of Commerce (1982-5), and chairman of the Mermaid Theatre, London. Between 1982 and 1989 he was chairman of the Wellcome Trust and in 1986 took the controversial and much contested decision to float the pharmaceutical business on the stock market in order to secure the trust's wealth; a subsequent takeover saw the Wellcome Trust's assets increase to $15 billion. He died on 9 August 2004 at the Lister Hospital, Westminster, following a stroke, and was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94002


Weightman, John George (1915-2004), French scholar and critic, was born on 29 November 1915 at Burn Close, Callerton, Northumberland, the son of Lance Weightman, coalminer, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Robson. He was proud of his working-class roots in the north-east and still spoke with a trace of regional accent in later life. His father, a conscientious objector and Methodist preacher, died from tuberculosis contracted in the mines when his son was fourteen; Weightman was thereafter brought up by his mother in impoverished circumstances. He had won a scholarship to Hexham grammar school, where he encountered an inspiring teacher of French and ideas. Although encouraged to put in for Cambridge, he characteristically opted for King's College, Newcastle. There he gained a first in French, intermitting a year's study at the Ecole Normale in Poitiers. 
Weightman's career encompassed several overlapping fields -- broadcasting, journalism, and academic activity. In 1939 he made a successful application for a post with the World Service of the BBC as a translator and newsreader. Joining the BBC was a timely event in that it was soon followed by the occupation of France. During the Second World War Weightman became a valuable member of the foreign language service, translating and delivering news items in impeccable French, and relaying coded instructions to the resistance, as well as chairing discussions between British and French thinkers. On 15 June 1940 Weightman married (Jessie) Doreen Wade (1915-1985), whom he had met at university. The daughter of Gavin Wade, schoolmaster, and herself a schoolteacher, she later collaborated with him on a number of important translations, including the anthropological works of Claude Levi-Strauss. They had two children, a son and a daughter. 
After the war Weightman continued to work for the BBC in Paris until 1950. In these immediate post-war years he played a considerable part in acquainting the British public with Parisian intellectual movements. His work for radio lasted long after he left the BBC's employment, and he contributed to 'The Brains Trust' and to 'The Critics'. He also began to make a name for himself as an essayist. From the mid-1950s onwards he wrote articles for most of the leading journals and newspapers, such as 'Encounter', 'The Observer', the 'New York Review of Books', 'Twentieth Century', and the 'Times Literary Supplement'. As a critic of the contemporary scene he had a distinctive voice. Fascinated by modern developments, yet equally sceptical of their more extreme manifestations, he often displayed a wry sense of humour ('A bald man's view of 'Hair'' is a good example) which could even be quite impish, as in his invention of a book he would have liked to have written himself. His expertise as a reviewer gained official recognition in 1977 when he was invited to sit on Bernard Williams's committee on pornography and film censorship. 
Meanwhile Weightman had in 1950 been appointed to a lectureship in French at King's College, London. He was subsequently promoted to reader, and then in 1963 was offered the chair of French language and literature at Westfield College, where he remained until his retirement in 1981. Not surprisingly his forays into journalism met with the disapproval of some academic colleagues, especially as he tended to bring the same highly personal approach to his studies of the French literary canon. His early interest was in the Enlightenment, and his clarion call was for more critical insight: an essay, 'The quality of 'Candide'', is evidence of this, as well as his injunction to stop looking at Rousseau's laundry bills. Later on Weightman devoted himself almost exclusively to twentieth-century issues, which bore fruit in books on the avant-garde and the absurd. However, his values were firmly rooted in eighteenth-century clarity and reason, slightly modified by non-religious existentialism. He once described himself as an old-fashioned progressive: hence his frustration with much of postmodernist thought, in particular that of Foucault and Derrida. For his services to French culture Weightman was made a commander of the Ordre des Palmes Academiques. 
As a teacher Weightman was held in great esteem by his students -- 'all that brain crossing the Finchley Road', one of them was heard to remark (private information). They may have been irritated by his fussiness in matters of translation, but they were dazzled by his exposition of the ideas of Sartre and Camus. Indeed these two themes, language and absurdism, preoccupied him during his final years. After the death of his wife in 1985 he continued to be a most generous host at their house in Weech Road, Hampstead, his home for almost half his life. He remained in touch with his many friends, constantly ordered books from the London Library, set about learning Russian, and thoroughly enjoyed entertaining his grandchildren. Still alert to the problems of a world he never ceased to puzzle out, he died of cancer at Edenhall nursing home, Lyndhurst Gardens, Camden, on 14 August 2004. He was cremated at Golders Green, and was survived by his son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 94006


Woodward, David Alfred (1942-2004), historian of cartography, was born on 29 August 1942 at 51 Lillington Road, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, the third child of Max Wakerley Woodward, Royal Navy chaplain, and his wife, Kathleen May, 'nee' Beaty. After returning from war service as a chaplain his father ministered in various London parishes, and David attended Harrow county grammar school and Sir John Cass College, London, before taking a degree in geography at University College, Swansea, in 1964. He continued his study of geography at the University of Wisconsin at Madison under the supervision of America's foremost academic cartographer, Arthur H. Robinson. He graduated MA in 1967 and received the degree of PhD from the university in 1970. He was appointed a cartographic consultant to the Newberry Library in Chicago in 1969 and became curator of its map collection, and then in 1974 director of the recently established Hermon Dunlap Smith Center for the History of Cartography, a position he held for six years. In 1976 he became an American citizen, when Alfred was mistakenly dropped from his legal name. In 1980 he accepted Robinson's former cartography position in the geography department of the University of Wisconsin and was named Arthur H. Robinson professor of geography in 1995, a title he held until his retirement from the university in August 2002. On 27 July 1966 he was married by his father to Rosalind Lenice (Roz) Bailey ('b'. 1941), a nurse and daughter of Ronald Edwin Bailey, at Wesley Methodist Church, Queen's Road, Reading. They had three children, twin daughters, Jennifer and Rachel (who was killed in a railway accident in Italy in 1978), and a son, Justin. 
Woodward's principal contributions to scholarship lay in the historical study of maps and map making. In close collaboration with his colleague and friend J. Brian Harley he transformed the study from a dominantly antiquarian and connoisseur pursuit focused on individual (overwhelmingly European) maps, and driven by a historiography of scientific progress, to a global history of cartography as the integrated academic study of the content, context, and impact of maps and mapping across all eras. Seeking to broaden the scope of map studies and bring them into conversation with the humanities more generally, Woodward remained deeply conscious of the map itself as a material object, in part through his fascination with the processes of map making. He was an elegant calligrapher, an accomplished printer with a press in his Madison house, a world expert on sixteenth-century Italian paper, inks, and watermarks, and a skilled curator of historical maps. 
Woodward's unique combination of technical and scholarly concern with maps had been nurtured in Britain with part-time work as a cartographer at the Directorate of Overseas Survey and for 'Reader's Digest'. As a graduate he produced an innovative shaded-relief map of Wisconsin (his Wisconsin cartography generated a groundbreaking cartographic portrait of the state's cultural geography in 1996 and a painting of its outline on the flank of a dairy cow in 1984). His interest in Italian Renaissance printed maps was initiated during a Guggenheim fellowship year in 1977-8 and resulted in a catalogue of watermarks on sixteenth-century Italian printed maps (1996), detailed studies of the engraver Paolo Forlani, and other studies of Renaissance maps and map makers. Woodward's Panizzi lectures at the British Library in 1995 reinterpreted Italian Renaissance map making, distribution, and consumption. Interest in the map as both a technical and scientific artefact and a cultural expression generated Woodward's influential collection of invited essays 'Art and Cartography' (1987). Here maps were taken as complex cultural products, best understood in the broadest historical context, as Woodward's own contribution -- on the typographic traditions of map lettering -- demonstrated. 
It was this insight that underpinned Woodward's principal scholarly achievement, his editorial work on the multi-volume 'History of Cartography', publication of which began in 1987. Woodward had close links with the University of Chicago Press from his time at the Newberry Library, and he encouraged the publication of a series of important monographs on the cultural history of mapping. The first volume of the 'History of Cartography', jointly edited with Harley and devoted to 'Cartography in prehistoric, ancient and medieval Europe and the Mediterranean', was groundbreaking both conceptually and empirically. The editors' radical redefinition and extension of maps as 'graphic representations that facilitate a spatial understanding of things, concepts, conditions, processes, or events in the human world' (p. xvi) demolished conventional cartographic historiography. Woodward himself contributed a significant revisionist essay on the medieval 'mappa mundi', whose preparation initiated an important study of Roger Bacon's optics and mathematical projection in medieval Europe. 
After Harley's death in 1991, Woodward took on the tasks of funding, managing, and editing the 'History of Cartography' project himself, personally editing the 62-chapter volume on the European Renaissance (published posthumously in 2007). The task was undertaken with characteristic understatement of his own knowledge and ability, and with gentle good humour and intellectual generosity. Shy by nature, Woodward none the less left a lasting impression on those he met, taught, and worked with as a thoughtful listener and a generous host, who loved Italian wine and whose passions ranged from the Palatino font to flying small aircraft. His death from cancer, at home in Madison, Wisconsin, on 25 August 2004, prompted a global correspondence of appreciation, celebrating friendship and scholarship. Appropriately the distribution of his ashes mapped four loved places in Wisconsin and Wales. He was survived by his wife, Roz, and two of their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94011


Dower, John Gordon (1900-1947), architect and promoter of national parks, was born at 1 Ashburn Place, Ilkley, Yorkshire on 2 September 1900, the eldest child of Robert Shillito Dower (1870-1953), company director of George Depledge, steel merchant, Leeds, and a Methodist lay preacher, and his wife, Mary Amelia Cobb (Millicent), 'nee' Hearnshaw (1872-1916). After attending Ghyll Royd preparatory school, Ilkley, and the Leys School, Cambridge, he was a foundation scholar at St John's College, Cambridge, taking the historical tripos and examinations in architecture (1919-23). 
Articled to Sir Herbert Baker as an architectural assistant, Dower passed the examinations of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) by self-tuition. In 1931 he set up in private practice with, in his words, an 'almost accidental tendency to specialize in housing and town planning' (private information). He designed housing for the Shoreditch Housing Association, and experimented with steel and other new materials. As secretary of the RIBA aerodromes committee, he wrote two reports on the design of aerodromes, their buildings, and their relationship to their surroundings and other forms of transport. An active member of the Town Planning Institute and of the pressure group Political and Economic Planning (PEP), he became increasingly involved in discussions as to the extent and nature of national planning, presenting a paper on regional planning to the congress of the International Federation of Housing and Town Planning in Stockholm in 1939. He also lectured at the London Polytechnic. 
On 3 September 1929 Dower married Pauline Trevelyan (1905-1988). Her father, Sir Charles Philips Trevelyan, third baronet, had moved one of the early access to mountains bills as a young Liberal MP, and served as president of the Board of Education in the first and second Labour governments. Her uncle, George Macaulay Trevelyan, the social historian, was president of the Youth Hostels Association, and a major benefactor to the National Trust. As well as social work in the East End of London, Dower often joined the Trevelyan weekend parties at Wallington, walking over the Northumberland moors and becoming a keen fly-fisherman. He became master of the Trevelyan hunt in 1932, a grandly energetic, annual three-day manhunt over the western fells of the Lake District. 
Dower's involvement in rural planning developed through a partnership with the architect and planner (William) Harding Thompson (1887-1946), and more particularly extensive surveys of south-west England for local branches of the Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE) and Somerset county council. He designed youth hostels at Malham, Bellingham, and Eskdale in Cumberland. He was the drafting secretary of the CPRE's standing committee on national parks, and over 40,000 copies of his pamphlet 'The Case for National Parks in Great Britain' were distributed in 1938, accompanied by a vigorous press campaign and a series of public meetings. In 1939 he drafted a 'Summary of proposed provisions for a national parks bill', envisaging a national parks commission that would designate both national parks and nature sanctuaries, and act as the planning authority within those areas. War intervened before the draft bill could be publicized or promoted in parliament. 
As a member of the officer reserve, Dower joined the Royal Engineers as soon as war broke out, but he contracted virulent tuberculosis while surveying the Dover harbour installations, and was invalided out. In August 1942 the principal assistant secretary to the Ministry of Works and Buildings, (Harold) Graham Vincent (1891-1981), who knew Dower through PEP, appointed him to a small section charged with the physical planning of post-war reconstruction, with William Holford as its head. Dower was given oversight of rural policy successively in the Ministry of Works and Planning and the Ministry of Town and Country Planning. An assistant secretary in the Ministry of Works, (Francis) Blaise Gillie (1908-1981), later recalled him as a warm and attractive personality, with a real vision of the broader amenity problem (Sheail, 7). Dower was specifically asked to carry out a factual inquiry into 'the practical needs in certain (national-park) areas' (TNA: PRO, HLG 92/46). He recognized at once the outstanding opportunity for giving effect to the causes he had so long championed. With the strong endorsement for national parks given by Lord Justice Scott's committee on land utilisation in rural areas (1941-2), Dower was asked to prepare 'a report on the general issues backed by the specific information which he had obtained' (ibid.). His report was first circulated for comment among government departments in November 1943. Not only was there opportunity further to develop the earlier proposals of the standing committee on national parks, but the context was now much fuller. If over 80 per cent of the population of England and Wales was to live and work in towns and cities, with little or no further encroachment by way of suburbs, there must be greater opportunity to enjoy the amenities of the countryside. Where town and country must remain discrete, neither should be managed without close reference to the other. 
In a paper delivered to RIBA in March 1943 (published in the 'Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects', 50, 1943, 181-4), Dower argued that the holiday use of the countryside and coast, if generously encouraged and wisely directed, might become one of the most fruitful objectives of post-war reconstruction policy. It was second to none in giving physical, mental, and spiritual health and happiness to 'the whole mass of the people'. The large and rapidly growing demand, so visible before the war, stemmed from three movements. One was the increase in leisure time. A second was the ever-widening popular appreciation of 'natural landscape beauty'. The third and most obvious was the rapid advances in 'mechanical transport'. All three were popular, good, and irresistible movements, but a degree of control and direction -- in short, planning -- was needed. 
Dower now spoke both as a leading figure in the voluntary movement, and with the perspectives that came with the emerging powers and responsibilities of the Ministry of Town and Country Planning. As William Holford recalled, he wrote 'continuously and with increasing decision, as if he felt that the project could only be hammered out at white heat'. He was an administrative and technical committee in one, penetrating a maze of detail 'which was all put in order, and added to the argument'. Further drafts of his national parks report 'compelled the admiration of every officer that sat round the table' (Holford). 
During the last days of the wartime coalition government, in May 1945, the minister of town and country planning, W. S. Morrison, obtained the consent of the cabinet's reconstruction committee to publication of Dower's recommendations as the work 'of a member of his Department acting as consultant' (TNA: PRO, CAB 87/10). The publication of the 'one-man White Paper' (Holford) later that month, 'National Parks in England and Wales', was of pivotal importance in finally establishing the principles by which national parks were to be designated. Whatever their meaning in North America and Africa, the words 'national park' signified in England and Wales an extensive area of beautiful and relatively wild country in which, for the nation's benefit and by appropriate national decision and action, four objects were met. The characteristic landscape had to be strictly preserved; access and facilities for public open-air enjoyment were amply provided; wildlife, and buildings and places of architectural and historic interest, were suitably protected; and 'established farming use' was effectively maintained. 
Dower's report recommended the establishment of a preparatory national parks commission. The cabinet's reconstruction committee authorized instead the appointment of a national parks committee, under Sir Arthur Hobhouse (1886-1965), to investigate further the practicality of a series of national parks and their administration. In spite of failing health Dower exerted considerable influence over the drafting of its report, published as a white paper in July 1947. Dower died of pulmonary tuberculosis on 3 October 1947 at his home, Cambo House, Cambo, Morpeth, Northumberland. His ashes were scattered on Ilkley Moor. 
Dower had the trained mind of an administrator, the skill of an architect with a good eye for country, and enthusiasm, incisiveness, and lucidity with the pen, which conveyed an effective vision of the broader questions at a critical juncture in twentieth-century land-use planning. The 'National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act' of 1949 provided the statutory basis for national parks in England and Wales, of which ten were declared in the first ten years. Dower would, however, have been disappointed as to the advisory, as opposed to executive, status conferred on the National Parks Commission. His widow, Pauline Dower, was one of the pioneers who gave effect to national parks and the concept of areas of outstanding natural beauty, serving as a commissioner for sixteen years (latterly as deputy chairman) and as a member of the Northumberland National Park Committee for ten years. They had a daughter, Susan, and two sons -- Michael, a town and country planner, who served as national park officer of the Peak District (1985-92) and as director-general of the Countryside Commission (the successor body to the National Parks Commission) from 1992 to 1996, and Robin, an architect who served as a countryside commissioner from 1982 to 1991 and as a member of the Northumberland National Park Committee. The Countryside Commission's headquarters, when opened in Cheltenham in 1975, were given the name John Dower House. The youth hostel at Malham is the John Dower Memorial Hostel. 


@@@@@


doc= 94015


Morgan, Joan (1905-2004), actress, was born on 1 February 1905 at 13 St Germans Road, Forest Hill, London, the only child of Sidney Arthur Morgan (1874-1946), property owner, but soon also a prominent film director, and his wife, Evelyn, 'nee' Wood, actress. At the age of eight her blonde beauty attracted the attention of the American film producer Charles Urban, who cast her in 'Little Lord Fauntleroy', to be made in Kinemacolor. Elaborate costumes had been completed when Urban received notice from the solicitor of Frances Hodgson Burnett that he was in breach of copyright. The project was abruptly cancelled. She was given a role in another colour film, made in Marseilles, and was subsequently hired by the producer Joe Bamberger at a considerable drop in salary -- 30 shillings a week instead of 50. Like most children in show business she had a patchy education, but her father passed on to her his enthusiasm for literature. An essay of hers was rejected by 'The Times', whose staff refused to believe it had been written by a child under ten. 
During the First World War Sidney Morgan sent his wife and child to America. The voyage was an enormous risk; the 'Lusitania' had been torpedoed only six months before. Joan Morgan worked at the studios at Fort Lee, New Jersey, where she played in 'The Reapers' (1916), a film she remembered as outstanding. She and her mother returned to England so she could play Ellen Terry's granddaughter in 'Her Greatest Performance' (1917). She was then enrolled in the Italia Conti stage school, where Andre Charlot selected her for two revues; she recalled that these took place during air raids, and that she went on stage with the barrage going on overhead, announcing what the next sketch was going to be. 
When the war was over Sidney Morgan took over a tiny studio on Shoreham Beach in Sussex, where he was a producer for the Progress Film Company. In this glass house among the pebbles, Joan Morgan felt she did her best work as an actress of the silent cinema: 'Lady Noggs -- Peeress' (1920), 'about a bossy little aristocrat going around doing good', and 'Little Dorrit' (1920), a lovingly made adaptation that brought Morgan her most glowing notices. When the American Famous Players-Lasky firm opened a studio at Islington, London, they hired her -- at $30 a week -- to play with Bryant Washburn in 'The Road to London' (1921). She fell in love with him, and he helped persuade Famous Players-Lasky to offer her a five-year contract in America, worth $100 a week, but her father turned it down, fearing the break-up of the family and the loss of his star. Still aged only fifteen, she deferred to his wishes, though she continued to regard it as a missed opportunity. 
Morgan was hired by another American director to appear in Rider Haggard's 'Swallow' (1922), shot on location in South Africa. Her career failed to flourish in England, however, and she and her mother went to America in the unsuccessful hope of recapturing the kind of offer her father had rejected. Back in London, she was given stage roles, and her father cast her in 'Shadow of Egypt' (1924). The company went on location to Luxor, but she had to stay at home, her father being concerned about showing 'favouritism' to his daughter. The Shoreham studios burned down in 1922, her parents separated in 1926, and Joan lived with her mother. Her last important silent cinema role was in her father's 'Window in Piccadilly' (1928). She was only twenty-three. 
Sound pictures needed new faces, and although she made one 'talkie', 'Her Reputation' (1932), Joan Morgan was no longer in demand as an actress. She fell back on her talent as a writer, and wrote film scripts (of which the most successful was 'The Flag Lieutenant', 1932) under the pen names of Iris North and Joan Wentworth Wood. Her play 'This was a Woman' was a success in London in 1944 and in Paris in 1947. Her first novel, 'Citizen of Westminster', was published in 1940, as was 'Camera!', the best book about the early British film industry. While undertaking war work at the Ministry of Supply (1942-4) she wrote a book about evacuees, 'Ding Dong Dell' (1943). 
Between 1958 and 1977 Morgan specialized in property conversions -- she wrote about her experiences in 'The Casebook of Capability Morgan' (1965). Her account of the story of Mary Blandy, who was hanged at Oxford in 1752, 'The Hanging Wood' (1950), was adapted by the BBC in 1977 for their 'A Question of Guilt' series. Although engaged once or twice, she never married and lived alone in a tiny toll-house at Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire. She died at Thamesfield nursing home, Wargrave Road, Henley, on 22 July 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 94017


Wonfor, Andrea Jean (1944-2004), television executive and producer, was born at Upton Lodge nursing home, Alpha Road, Birchington, Margate, Kent, on 31 July 1944, the daughter of George Duncan, an army officer in the Buffs (Royal East Kent regiment), and his wife, Audrey Joan, 'nee' Player. She was educated at Simon Langton School for Girls in Canterbury and subsequently read history at New Hall, Cambridge. After graduating she was recruited in 1966 as a trainee by Granada Television in Manchester. Her father was from South Shields and the family spent time in the north-east as she was growing up. An early affection for the area blossomed into a lifelong bond when she joined Tyne Tees Television in 1969 as a researcher. Two years earlier, on 29 April 1967, she had married Patrick William Bussell Masefield ('b'. 1942/3), theatre director, whose father, Geoffrey, was a university lecturer. They had one daughter. She parted from her husband on moving to the north-east and the marriage was dissolved in 1973. She married her second husband, the film-maker Geoffrey Spencer (Geoff) Wonfor ('b'. 1948/9), son of Wilfred Wonfor, a security officer, on 15 January 1974; they had one daughter. 
Wonfor progressed smoothly at Tyne Tees to directing and in 1976 stepped onto the executive ladder as head of children's and young people's programmes. Her passion for spotting and unlocking the creative potential of those around her injected new zest into making programmes for young people. Her most daring and important contribution to this genre was launched in 1982 when 'The Tube' (broadcast on Channel 4) unleashed the anarchic and sometimes profane pairing of Jools Holland and Paula Yates on a live, Friday teatime audience. Accused by the industry's regulator of bad taste, and stalked by the tabloids, the show became a runaway success and at the same time placed Tyneside at an unaccustomed epicentre of youth and rock culture. 
In 1983 Wonfor extended her distinctive approach and personal trademark to the complete range of Tyne Tees's output as director of programmes. Her regard and ambitions for the region shone out of the programmes she made. After eighteen years with Tyne Tees she left to form Zenith North, a production company geared to nurture northern talent. There she came up with the idea of 'Byker Grove' (first broadcast in 1989), a series for the BBC that became something of a northern fame academy with Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly (better known as Ant and Dec) as two of its most notable alumni. 
In 1990 Michael Grade took Wonfor to Channel 4, initially as controller of arts and entertainment, then as deputy director of programmes. Her daring and ingenuity introduced a flurry of young discoveries, Chris Evans, Gaby Roslin, Caitlin Moran, and Johnny Vaughan among them. A canon of programmes swiftly emerged that dovetailed with the channel's provocative character -- 'The Word', the first up-to-the-minute sitcom, 'Drop the Dead Donkey', 'The Crystal Maze', 'Rude Women', 'Eurotrash', and 'Movie Watch'. But her boldest venture and her biggest impact was undoubtedly in the morning schedule. The tired and largely ignored 'Channel 4 Daily' was thrown out and Wonfor brought in Planet 24, the production company of Bob Geldof and Paula Yates. The result, from September 1992, was 'The Big Breakfast', which transformed the comfortable coffee table and sofa breakfast television scenario. Its brash, harum-scarum formula attracted new categories of viewers and trebled Channel 4's early morning audience. 
Wonfor took her golden touch back to Granada in 1993, where she became its first female director of programmes and subsequently joint managing director. Firmly established Granada favourites benefited from her individuality and she oversaw a string of new hits, including 'Prime Suspect', 'Cracker', 'The Royle Family', and 'Cold Feet'. In 1995 she was diagnosed with breast cancer. After surgery and six months of chemotherapy she was back at work, her energy and determination undimmed. Typically she had her experiences written into the storyline of 'Coronation Street', hoping that the resulting heightened awareness of cancer among women would encourage earlier detection. It did -- the Christie Hospital in Manchester reported a rise in cervical smear tests from 2000 a week to 2000 a day following the relevant episode. 
Within a year of her treatment Wonfor became the first woman to chair the Royal Television Society. As the Granada group grew larger, absorbing London Weekend and Yorkshire Tyne Tees Television, so too did her responsibilities. She became chair of Granada Production and then creative director with teams across the UK, as well as New York, Los Angeles, Berlin, and Sydney. In 2002 she took early retirement from Granada and co-founded the independent producer Liberty Bell, with which she had further successful programmes including 'Grumpy Old Men' (BBC2). She was appointed OBE in the 2003 new year honours list. Her illness returned just as the company was making its mark. But even as she fought cancer a second time she was active in new local theatre, film, and media ventures in the north-east. She also produced, alongside her husband Geoff, an intimate portrait of Stella McCartney for Alan Yentob's BBC1 'Imagine' series, and in the last week of her life was discussing further projects with major channels. She died of breast cancer at her home, Fell Pasture, Ingoe, Matfen, Northumberland, on 10 September 2004. She was survived by her husband and her two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94020


Woolrych, Austin Herbert (1918-2004), historian, was born on 18 May 1918 at 34 Albert Road, North Marylebone, London, the elder son and first of the three children of Stanley Herbert Cunliffe Woolrych, businessman, and his wife, May Gertrude, 'nee' Wood. Educated at Westminster School, he showed early promise of academic distinction but the family's straitened financial circumstances during the economic depression prevented him from going on to university. 
For four years Woolrych worked as a sales clerk in Harrods at the princely salary of $1 per week. Nevertheless his lifelong love of adventurous travel found early expression in 1938 when he rode a bicycle to Venice, covering 1100 miles in seventeen days and crossing four Swiss mountain passes. His dreary occupation came to an end with the outbreak of the Second World War. He had already joined the Territorial Army and so was drafted immediately to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. There Woolrych's abilities were swiftly recognized and he was commissioned into the Royal Tank regiment in March 1940. On 24 September 1941 he married Muriel Edith Rolfe (1916/17-1991), daughter of Walter Henry Rolfe; they had two children, Jane ('b'. 1945) and Richard ('b'. 1948). In 1943 Woolrych was promoted captain and posted to the Middle East. He fought at the battle of El Alamein, where he received a wound to his eye that might well have prevented his future career as a scholar. He served in the army for six years and for a time thought quite seriously of becoming a professional soldier. But although he never quite lost a military formality of manner, he realized that an army career would leave much to be desired. Moreover, an ex-service grant would enable him to acquire the university education he had missed ten years earlier. He applied therefore to read English at Pembroke College, Oxford. He was accepted, but was persuaded to study history instead, there being no English tutor at the college at this time. 
After only seven terms Woolrych graduated with first-class honours in history and went on to write a BLitt thesis on the last years of the Cromwellian protectorate. In 1949 he joined the history department of Leeds University and after fifteen years there was appointed founding professor of history at the new University of Lancaster in 1964. With characteristic modesty he later said that by modern standards his meagre list of publications at this stage of his career would not have qualified him for a chair. This may be true, but if so the loss to Lancaster would have been great indeed. From the beginning his workload was enormous. He was faced with designing and teaching new degree courses as well as attendance at committees whose wide-ranging agenda covered all aspects of the new university. His experience of army selection boards served him well when selecting staff and students for a rapidly expanding department and his preference was always for dedicated teachers who were also talented researchers. For four years from 1971 he was the university's pro-vice-chancellor for college and student affairs, an appointment he later described as 'a hot seat' that he was not sorry to vacate ('Pembroke historian's run of luck'). 
The price paid for these years of teaching and administration was that a number of intended books remained unwritten. Even so, in the early days at Leeds, Woolrych published 'Battles of the English Civil War' (1961) and a military biography of Oliver Cromwell (1964). His highly regarded introduction to Milton's prose works in the Yale edition of 1974 was written while he was head of the department in Lancaster. However, in the early 1980s he gained more time to write with his election as a visiting fellow of All Souls College, Oxford (1981-2), and a Commonwealth visiting fellow to universities in Australia and New Zealand in 1983. He published five times as many words during his last twenty-six years as he had in his first sixty. Despite there being a royalist ancestor among the Wolryches buried at Quatt in Shropshire, Austin's interest and sympathy continued to be Cromwellian. 'Commonwealth to Protectorate' (1982) rescued Barebone's Parliament from the royalist myth that it was merely a fanatical rabble, and five years later he published his study of the politicized Cromwellian army, 'Soldiers and Statesmen: the General Council of the Army and its Debates, 1647-1648'. In 1986 Lancaster awarded him the honorary degree of DLitt and in 1988 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. In the late eighties Woolrych's work was halted again by his wife's increasing ill health and he cared for her devotedly until her death in 1991. The next decade saw a return to research and writing on what he described as his 'blockbuster', 'Britain in Revolution, 1625-1660', on which he worked for fifteen years and which was published in 2002. In an article for 'History Today' timed to coincide with the book's publication he gave a masterly summing up of the shifting scholarly perspectives on the civil wars and revolution during the past fifty years. He staunchly defended the schools of narrative and military history -- practised by the likes of Veronica Wedgwood and S. R. Gardiner -- to which he himself belonged and helped to make respectable again. 'Today', he wrote, 'one need not be ashamed of telling a story, so long as it is as true as one can make it' ('Shifting perspectives'). 
For his eightieth birthday friends, former pupils, and fellow historians presented Woolrych with a book of essays, 'Soldiers, Writers and Statesmen of the English Revolution' (1998). The title was intended to echo one of his own titles, but it was also apt at a deeper level: he too had been a soldier in a fierce conflict, had needed statesmanlike qualities in handling the new order in the universities, and was a writer to the end of his life. The contributors to the volume were united to an unusual degree in their affection and respect for the rigorous scholarship and the unfailing kindness and courtesy of the man they honoured. Woolrych was fond of quotations -- 'old men ought to be explorers' from T. S. Eliot's 'Four Quartets: East Coker' was a favourite -- and in his old age he travelled the world from China to Peru, visiting five continents after his seventy-fifth birthday. But equally he loved and walked the Pennine and Lakeland hills among which he had made his home (at Burton in Kendal, near Carnforth). He had an extraordinary talent for friendship, a passionate love of music, and was a considerable connoisseur of wine. Another favourite quotation, from Oliver Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer', sums him up very well: 'I love everything that's old; old friends, old times, old manners, old books, old wines.' Austin Woolrych died from heart failure on 14 September 2004 while on holiday in Tias, Lanzarote, in the Canary Islands, and was cremated after a memorial service at St James's Church, Burton in Kendal. He was survived by his two children and was honoured posthumously at Lancaster University with an archive in the library, a student bursary, a memorial lecture, and a new courtyard all in his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 94024


Neagu, Paul (1938-2004), artist, was born in Bucharest, Romania, on 22 February 1938, the second of six children of Tudor Neagu, a craftsman shoemaker originally from Moldovia, and his wife, Rosalie, who came from a peasant background in Transylvania. Both parents were Baptist converts from Greek Orthodox families. Neagu's father, who as both a small employer and nonconformist Christian was doubly suspect in post-war Communist Romania, was a powerful presence in young Neagu's life; his obdurate independence of spirit was inherited by his son, as was his moral seriousness and ceremonious dignity. In 1947 the family moved to a smallholding at Timisoara, where Neagu completed his schooling at sixteen, and learned something of his father's craft. 
After leaving school Neagu was variously employed as an electrician, a railway cartographer, and a technical draughtsman before enrolling, at twenty-one, at the Nicolae Grigorescu Academy of Fine Art, Bucharest. This background in craft and technology can be traced in Neagu's enduring love of materials and in the intricacy and ingenuity of his design and workmanship as an artist-draughtsman and sculptor. His Baptist background prevented him from securing a much-desired place to read philosophy at the University of Bucharest, in spite of assiduous preparation. His reading of approved philosophers and Marxist texts, together with avid clandestine studies in biblical exegesis, Eastern philosophy, and mysticism, laid the basis for the deeply metaphysical cast of mind that informed his artistic life's work. 
Neagu specialized in painting at the academy, which placed a traditional emphasis on figurative realism, centred on continuous drawing from the figure, but also included rewarding studies of Romanian folk art and architecture. While researching in 1964 for his diploma presentation the following year, Neagu experienced an epiphany that remained central to his artistic life, a visionary apprehension of the great annual summer fair at Tirguil Gaina in central Romania, to which peasants from all points of the compass brought marriageable daughters and sons. The young Neagu envisaged this festive marriage market as a complex symbolic exchange of interconnecting affections and energies, a microcosmic image of the human universe, whose components, mineral, organic, corporeal, social, were aspects of a geometric cosmography. Henceforth his creative thinking, and the imagery it generated in his performances, drawings, sculpture, and painting, derived crucially from this human-centred cosmological vision. 
After leaving the academy in 1965 Neagu married Sybilla Oarcea, an actor, and quickly established himself in Bucharest as a central figure in the officially unacknowledged Romanian avant-garde. During this period he created small cellular box-like objects, often with hinged doors and lids, little tabernacles made out of found and ephemeral materials (matchboxes, fragments of mirror, leather, wood, and so on). After use in semi-ritualistic installations and interactions, these 'palpable objects' acquired the aura of quasi-sacred relics. In its performative and ritualizing aspects Neagu's work paralleled that of his older contemporary, the German Joseph Beuys. Much of his work of the late 1960s had an esoteric, ludic, and occasionally politically ironic, dimension. 
In early 1969, after showing in mixed exhibitions in Europe, and in two one-person shows in Bucharest, Neagu was invited by Richard Demarco to exhibit at his Edinburgh gallery with other leading Romanian artists. He stayed on to exhibit at Demarco's Edinburgh Festival exhibition that summer, where he created a darkened environment filled with tactile objects. These were later developed into figurative forms whose honeycomb structures were analogues for the energetic inner-outer, solid-and-void unity of the human body. In 1970, in Bucharest and again in Edinburgh, Neagu presented architectonic symmetrical cellular figures, lifesize and larger. He also created edible figures whose energy 'cells' were of gingerbread and waffle: for him art could involve intellect, emotion, and every bodily sense. Later collectively entitled 'Anthropocosmos', Neagu's figures, Vitruvian in inspiration, were influenced by the ideas of the French anthropological philosopher Gilbert Durand, who considered the human microcosm as a vital term of the social macrocosm, and vice versa. Neagu conceived the body as a cellular micro-structure related to progressively larger macro-structures, from the domestic house to the socio-political organism. 
In 1971, having been divorced in the previous year, Neagu settled permanently in the United Kingdom, becoming a British subject in 1977. The 1970s and early 1980s were a period of furious and prolific creativity, during which he performed and exhibited widely, in the UK and abroad, and was recognized as an outstanding teacher, first at Hornsey College of Art, and later at the Slade School of Art. His performances were remarkable for their repertoire of energetic symbolic actions requiring sustained physical effort: stilt-walking, jumping, whirling, running at and up walls. In 1972 he invented the Generative Art Group (GAG), an imaginary international collective of artists and writers, whose whimsical purpose was to allow him diversity of style and action, and more prosaically (and successfully) to secure Arts Council patronage. Its climactic event -- and unmasking -- was a 'group exhibition' at the Museum of Modern Art in Oxford in 1975. Neagu also had important performance-exhibitions at the Serpentine Gallery (1973 and 1976) and at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (1979), when his public performances ended. He continued to exhibit until the end of his life. 
At Oxford Neagu introduced a rectangular table with three legs, one extended outwards, configured as an isosceles triangle. This was the progenitor of his most characteristic sculptural form, the 'Hyphen', which featured in all his exhibitions thereafter, in many versions, created in diverse materials and dimensions. The 'Hyphen', signifying connectivity, and schematically combining the rectangle, the circle, and the triangle, can be seen as a symbolic image for a plough, a cross, a skull, a sled, an ark, an anchor, a cosmological ramp, a compass, or a fulcrum. A singularly original invention, it is a dynamically multivalent symbol as potent as Brancusi's 'Endless Column'. In the mid-1980s Neagu elaborated this basic 'alpha' in steel, adding arcs, flat plates, and incomplete stars in a concert of forms he entitled 'Nine Catalytic Stations'. 
Through the 1990s and after Neagu experimented with other materials and forms, including steel balls, animal hide, painted wood structures, and slatted wood forms. He continued to draw and project public works. After the fall of the Communist regime in Romania in 1989 he was able to take up dual citizenship, and, hailed in his native land as a major artist, he undertook two monumental public commissions, in Bucharest and Timisoara, and set up a studio. In his council flat in Holloway he lived and worked in the austere conditions of an ascetic. Afflicted by kidney disease in the late 1980s and by a stroke in 2002, his last years were shadowed by lack of recognition in his adopted country, and by poverty and illness borne stoically. In 1997 he married his second wife, Monica Omescu, but the marriage was short-lived, and ended in divorce in 2001. There were no children of either marriage. 
A handsome man of imperious intellect, Neagu remained in many respects a critically isolated figure in British art, his work animated by an idiosyncratic but entirely coherent metaphysical complex of thought, expressed in symbolic forms and actions. In this he belonged to an eastern European tradition, whose prime progenitors were Malevich and Brancusi, which conceives of the artist as a spiritual voyager and experimental philosopher. Within this great tradition he was without doubt a major international figure. He died on 16 June 2004 at the Middlesex Hospital, Westminster, of lobar pneumonia. 


@@@@@


doc= 94036


Foot, Paul Mackintosh (1937-2004), journalist, was born on 8 November 1937 in Haifa, Palestine, the son of Hugh Mackintosh Foot (1907-1990), later Baron Caradon, governor of Jamaica and Cyprus, and at the time an administrative officer in the Palestinian government, and his wife, (Florence) Sylvia (1910-1985), daughter of Arthur White Millar Tod, director of the Steam Navigation Company of Baghdad. The Foots were a famous west-country family deeply rooted in radical Liberal tradition; Paul's grandfather Isaac Foot was a Liberal MP and Methodist. Three of Foot's uncles were politicians. Michael Foot became leader of the Labour Party, Dingle Foot was solicitor-general under Harold Wilson, and John Foot was a Liberal life peer (as Baron Foot). Paul was educated at Shrewsbury School, which was to provide the founding spirits of the satirical magazine 'Private Eye', Christopher Booker, Willie Rushton, and Foot's lifelong friend Richard Ingrams. 'At Shrewsbury I was on Ingrams' coat tails', recalled Foot, who freely admitted to hero worship (Thompson, 43-4). National service followed and when, in 1958, at the end of his stint as a subaltern, he went to University College, Oxford, to read jurisprudence the first person he came across was Ingrams. 
In the late 1950s Oxford University's premier magazine, 'Isis', had been taken over by the 'new left' under the editorship of Dennis Potter, later to become one of Britain's most accomplished television playwrights. Foot, who had not yet made the journey from his family's traditional Liberal beliefs to the far left, invited him to speak to the University Liberal Club, of which he was president. Potter's speech was remarkable for the observation that when he saw a Rolls-Royce he spat at it (Ingrams, 'My Friend Footy', 22). Foot's radical juices began to race and, together with Ingrams, he took over 'Parson's Pleasure' magazine. It did not last long and was reborn, with the help of Rushton, Booker, and John Wells, as 'Mesopotamia'. This was the embryonic 'Private Eye'. Foot went on to be a short-lived editor of 'Isis' but the magazine was banned by the university proctors after he introduced critical reviews of lectures. He attacked the fascist leader Sir Oswald Mosley and resigned when 'Isis''s owners decided to apologize. In his last term he became president of the Oxford Union, where he honed his considerable oratorical powers, as well as fulfilling half his father's bidding, contained in a telegram that greeted his arrival in Oxford: 'Get a first and be president of the Union' (ibid., 12). A life of protest and campaigning against injustice and intolerance had begun. 
Foot's shift from the traditional Liberal politics of his family to the radical left was to find expression on Glasgow's turbulent streets. When he left Oxford in 1961 with a second-class degree in jurisprudence, his uncle Michael arranged for him to meet Hugh Cudlipp, then editorial chief of the Mirror Group. Foot was offered a post on the Glasgow 'Daily Record', where he was warned that his first job would be 'to sort out the Trots' who turned out to be shipyard apprentices and engineers. 'Their politics were entirely different to anything I had come across in formal education', he wrote. 'It seemed suddenly clear from what I read and saw that society was cut into classes, and that the classes were forever at war with one another' (Foot, x). Glasgow was a hotbed of left-wing thought, intrigue, and action and there he met an explosive cocktail of anarchists, Trotskyists, and Marxists, among them a future Labour minister, Gus Macdonald, who was organizing apprentice strikes in the shipyards. It was Macdonald who introduced Foot to the soapbox, suggesting that he got rid of his public school hairstyle, although there was little he could do about the upper-class accent. The hairstyle changed with the politics; neither was to change again for the rest of his life. When it was suggested he become editor of a new magazine in London -- this turned out to be 'Private Eye' -- Foot turned down the offer with the explanation to Richard Ingrams 'You see, I'm part of a movement now' ('Daily Telegraph', 20 July 2004). There were numerous far-left organizations to choose from in the Glasgow of the early 1960s, but Foot joined the (Trotskyite) International Socialists, later to re-emerge as the Socialist Workers' Party. He was to remain faithful to the cause until he died, in spite of the never-ending feuding among the faithful. Unlike many committed left-wingers, Foot was funny, able to laugh at himself, and to enjoy life. On 23 June 1962 he married Monica Eleanor Beckinsale, journalist and daughter of Robert Beckinsale, an Oxford tutor, with whom he had two sons. 
In 1964 Foot returned to London to join Hugh Cudlipp's newly launched but ill-fated newspaper 'The Sun', but disillusion set in quickly and he resigned after six months. He joined 'Private Eye' full-time in 1967 because, he said, he could not resist the challenge of two full pages to write whatever he liked. These pages quickly established themselves as the 'serious bit' of the 'Eye', a counterbalance to the scandal, savage gossip, and sharp satire that characterized the rest of the magazine. It was Foot's investigation of the affairs of the corrupt architect John Poulson that established both him and 'Private Eye' as a serious journalistic force. National newspapers had given the scandal scant coverage, even though the former chancellor of the exchequer Reginald Maudling and two other MPs were at the heart of the affair. Other campaigns by Foot also achieved national prominence. His belief in the innocence of James Hanratty, convicted and hanged for murder in 1962, led to the reopening of the case; this was an investigation that was to occupy Foot for the rest of his life. Even after DNA evidence appeared to confirm that Hanratty was indeed the killer there were so many inconsistencies in the police inquiry that questions were raised about the accuracy of the DNA testing. His first marriage having been dissolved in 1970, on 27 July 1971 Foot married Catherine Rosanne (Rose) Harvey, television presenter and daughter of Robert Wallace Harvey; they had one son. In October of the following year Foot left 'Private Eye' to join the 'Socialist Worker', where he became editor in 1974. The decade was pockmarked with industrial unrest and dominated by a serious economic decline, persuading many leftists that the long awaited socialist revolution was on the way. Foot continued to contribute to 'Private Eye', notably revelations about the Liberal leader Jeremy Thorpe and an alleged plot to murder Norman Scott, who claimed to have been Thorpe's gay lover. 
By 1979 the socialist revolution still had not happened; instead the Thatcherite one was beginning. Foot had left the 'Socialist Worker' and, while working part-time for 'Private Eye', was looking for a new challenge. This came with the 'Daily Mirror''s offer of a weekly column, which he accepted. It was a brave venture for both newspaper and columnist but one that was to be an outstanding success, bringing Foot numerous awards, including 'What the Papers Say' journalist of the decade for the 1990s. He quickly built up a devoted following among 'Mirror' readers, who found in him a distinctive voice available nowhere else in Fleet Street. His brief was a manifesto of his life in journalism: to take the side of the poor against the rich, public enterprise against private enterprise, Labour against tories, wrongly convicted prisoners against the judiciary. The only unspoken no-go area was his refusal to use the column as propaganda for the Socialist Workers' Party. His campaigning was relentless, on behalf of those wrongly convicted of IRA bombings in Guildford and Birmingham, or of Colin Wallace, a Ministry of Defence official who claimed he had been sacked because he had refused to take part in an MI5 dirty tricks campaign against the government and who was later convicted of manslaughter. It took fifteen years of relentless campaigning to clear him. Probably Foot's greatest triumph, because he did it virtually single-handed, was on behalf of four men convicted of murdering the newspaper delivery boy Carl Bridgewater in 1978. The three survivors were eventually cleared seventeen years after he began his investigation to prove their innocence. His books included a study of the Bridgewater case, 'Murder at the Farm' (1986), as well as 'Who Killed Hanratty?' (1971) and 'Who Framed Colin Wallace?' (1989). 
Foot and his column survived the Robert Maxwell years. The 'Mirror's' proprietor never interfered and only once threatened to sack him -- when Foot picketed Maxwell's Oxford home on behalf of striking employees in his private publishing company. However he did not survive Maxwell's successor, David Montgomery, who was appointed chief executive in the wake of the pension and company fraud unearthed after Maxwell's death. Foot refused to accept the wholesale sacking of 'Mirror' employees and wrote his weekly column on it, complete with numerous acerbic references to the chief executive which, unsurprisingly, the editor refused to publish. Foot took to the streets outside the 'Mirror''s Holborn headquarters and started handing out copies of the banned page. The sack, after fourteen years, was inevitable. 
Foot went back to 'Private Eye', but in April 1999 he suffered an aortic aneurysm and was unconscious for five weeks. He eventually returned to work, his brain unimpaired but walking with the aid of two sticks, and set about destroying the case against a Libyan intelligence agent convicted of the Lockerbie bombing. He continued at 'Private Eye' and contributed a column to 'The Guardian' until his death from a heart attack on 18 July 2004 at Stansted airport, Essex, when he was about to leave for a holiday in Ireland with his partner, Clare Fermont, with whom he had had a daughter. His funeral on 27 July attracted 2000 people who followed the coffin to Golders Green crematorium in north London, a tribute to the fact that in a world where allegiances, principles, prejudices, and beliefs change with easy cynicism, Foot remained a 'steadfast beacon of integrity' ('The Guardian', 20 July 2004). The funeral was attended by many of those for whom he had fought during his life and who would not have been free to attend without his unswerving support and belief in a justice they had been denied. 


@@@@@


doc= 94037


Friedlander, Albert Hoschander (1927-2004), rabbi and writer, was born on 10 May 1927 in Berlin, the son of Alexander Friedlander, textile broker, and his wife, Salome. He had a twin brother, Charles, and a sister, Dorrit, born two years earlier. The date and place of his birth meant that he grew up in what soon became Nazi Germany, and this was to affect not only the course of his life, but his life's work. This was typified by his experience on 9 November 1938 during 'Kristallnacht', the Nazi pogrom against Jewish properties throughout Germany, when he saw his synagogue go up in flames, and he and his father had to spend the night walking the streets of Berlin so as to avoid arrest. His parents made arrangements to leave Germany as soon as possible, and in May 1939 they left with all three children on the last refugee boat to Cuba. From there they made their way to the United States, eventually settling in Vicksburg, Mississippi. 
Friedlander attended Chicago University, where he graduated in philosophy in 1946, and then went on to study for the rabbinate at the Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati, Ohio, which was then the leading seminary within the Reform branch of Judaism. He was ordained in 1952 and became a congregational minister, first at the United Hebrew Congregation, Fort Smith, Arkansas (1952-6), and then at Temple B'nai Brith, Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania (1956-61). By then he had already established a reputation for both a formidable intellect and an engaging personality, which was suited to a more academic environment and metropolitan life. In 1961 he therefore moved to New York, where he combined being religious counsellor to students at Columbia University, heading a newly founded Jewish centre at the Hamptons, and working for his PhD. On 9 July the same year, at West London Synagogue, he married Evelyn Philipp, a 21-year-old British music student. It was a long and happy union that produced three daughters, Ariel, Michal, and Noam. 
One of Friedlander's teachers at the Hebrew Union College was Leo Baeck, who had become the leader of German Jewry in 1933 and, despite being sent to Theresienstadt concentration camp, had survived the war. Friedlander related strongly to Baeck's synthesis of German culture and Jewish scholarship, and in 1965 translated and edited his seminal work 'This People Israel: the Meaning of Jewish Existence'. His admiration for Baeck later resulted in a biography, 'Leo Baeck: Teacher of Theresienstadt' (1968). Without Friedlander, Baeck's life and teachings might not have reached such a wide English-speaking audience and influenced a new generation. Alongside his academic work he was also actively engaged in social concerns, especially the struggle for civil rights, and marched with Martin Luther King. 
In 1966 Friedlander moved to England where he took up the pulpit of Wembley Liberal Synagogue in Middlesex. His suburban congregational duties were supplemented by lecturing in Jewish history at the Leo Baeck College, London, which trained applicants for the Progressive (Reform and Liberal) rabbinate. His writing continued with 'Out of the Whirlwind: Literature of the Holocaust' (1968), which helped Jews and non-Jews alike to face issues that had largely been suppressed after the war, but which were now beginning to resurface. It was part of an international debate that benefited enormously from his calm and systematic approach. 
In 1971 Friedlander was chosen by Harold Reinhart to succeed him as minister of Westminster Synagogue, an independent Reform congregation, and was also appointed director of the Leo Baeck College. His long-standing interest in inter-faith work blossomed in the liberal climate that developed in the Christian world following the Second Vatican Council. He became renowned for his patient attempts to formulate a response to mass suffering and seek meaning in religious life after Auschwitz. Such was his reputation, especially as a post-holocaust theologian who was not only a fine teacher but also a living example of reconciliation, that he was in constant demand in both the United States and Europe as a lecturer. His teachings were particularly valued in Germany, where he became a regular speaker at the protestant church congresses, the 'Kirchentage'. His approach to the holocaust was a theme that dominated further publications, including 'The Six Days of Destruction' (1988), which he co-wrote with Elie Wiesel, 'A Thread of Gold' (1990), which argued the case for reconciliation, and 'Riders Towards the Dawn' (1993), which traced a religious journey from ultimate suffering to tempered hope. At the same time he was editor of 'European Judaism' (1982-2004), the foremost Jewish intellectual journal in Europe. 
In 1982 Friedlander retired as director of the Leo Baeck College but retained a role as dean. He retired from Westminster Synagogue in 1997 but still played a part in its affairs as rabbi emeritus. His retirement did not involve any lessening of pace in a life full of writing articles, travelling for speaking engagements, as well as more mundane pursuits such as his lifelong devotion to Queens Park Rangers football club. He was renowned for his personal kindness and his desire to find harmonious solutions to any problems, whether between institutions or individuals. In 1993 he received Germany's highest honour, the cross of merit, for his work in promoting inter-faith dialogue. He was appointed OBE in 2001. Two years later the Council of Christians and Jews decided that, in addition to its then sole Jewish president, who was always the chief rabbi, an additional president should be appointed to represent the Progressive synagogues in Britain. A public figure who also commanded wide communal respect, Friedlander was the natural choice. He died at the Royal Brompton Hospital, Chelsea, on 8 July 2004, of multiple causes. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium and his ashes were interred there. He was survived by his wife, Evelyn, and their three daughters, one of them a rabbi in the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 94039


Greene, Sidney Francis, Baron Greene of Harrow Weald (1910-2004), trade unionist, was born at 45 Warlock Road, Paddington, London, on 12 February 1910, the son of Frank James Greene, whose main, though not only, occupation was to drive a horse-drawn van, and his wife, Alice Susannah, 'nee' Kerrod. Unemployment struck intermittently. Greene would frequently refer to the fact that one of his pervading memories from boyhood was of his father going out early in the morning, saying that he hoped to get a job for the day. It was perhaps this memory that led Greene to be dismissive, sometimes contemptuous, of those who proposed to lead workers out on strike, at the drop of a proverbial hat, for no very good reason. 
In 1924 Greene left elementary school to become a messenger in the Great Western Railway goods yard at Paddington. Educating himself at evening classes, he became a Labour borough councillor for seven years in Paddington, but the National Union of Railwaymen (NUR), not the party, was the centre of his activity. On Boxing day 1936 he married Masel Elizabeth Carter (died 1993), the 24-year-old daughter of Benjamin John Carter, taxi driver; they had three daughters. On the outbreak of the Second World War, Greene wanted to go into the forces, but work in the London marshalling yards was a reserved occupation, and he was forbidden to do so. Appointed a junior union organizer in 1944, he proved himself so effective in the volatile London region of the union that in 1954 he was appointed assistant general secretary. 
When news reached the NUR's headquarters of the death in a car accident on an official trade union visit to Russia of James (Big Jim) Campbell, the union's ebullient general secretary, few thought that Greene would get the job, as he was considered a 'back-room' boy rather than general secretary material. However, as often happens, prominent heavyweight contenders cancelled each other out, amid bickering, and Greene was chosen as a compromise candidate to lead more than 500,000 workers. As general secretary of the largest rail trade union Greene was a pivotal figure, not only in the affairs of British Rail, but more widely in Britain's economic life from 1957 until 1974. He was a member of the TUC's general council from 1957 to 1975 (and its chairman in 1969-70), and chairman of its economic committee from 1968 to 1975. Among other appointments, he was a part-time member of the Southern Electricity Board (1964-77) and the National Freight Corporation (1973-7), and a director of the Bank of England (1970-78). 
Greene's most difficult period was in the early 1960s. Harold Macmillan's government had appointed Richard Beeching, a member of the main board of ICI, to be chairman of British Railways, with a brief to implement sweeping economies. In March 1963 Beeching, who, unlike Greene, believed that the railways should be run like a business and not as a public service, produced a report, 'The Reshaping of British Railways', which proposed a massive closure programme, involving a third of Britain's 18,000 miles of track, with the consequent loss of stations and the jobs of those manning them. Greene had to hold his members back from purely destructive reactions, and at the same time negotiate the best possible terms for those who were displaced. In the event the programme was carried out with comparatively little industrial trouble. This was undoubtedly due to a great extent to Greene's restraining influence, his civilized relations with Conservative ministers, and his skill in negotiating with the British Railways board. His approach did not endear him to Frank Cousins and Jack Jones of the Transport and General Workers' Union and Hugh Scanlon of the Amalgamated Engineering Union. The most dramatic single episode of his career came in a dispute over pay in 1972, when members of the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen, the Transport Salaried Staffs' Association, and the NUR were the first and last to be subjected to a compulsory ballot, under the 'Industrial Relations Act', to see if they supported their leaders in the imposition of what was then known as 'working to rule'. Greene insisted on observing the law, however repugnant he might privately have thought the law to be. 
Greene was knighted in 1970, and on his retirement in 1974 he was made a life peer, as Baron Greene of Harrow Weald. His maiden speech of 25 February 1975 on the incoming Labour government's 'Trade Union and Labour Relations Amendment Bill' encapsulated his view: 'I feel that there is too much heat in industrial relations. Basically it is something that should operate between men and women of good will, seeking to get agreement between one side and another' ('Hansard 5L', 357.707). He was much in demand for committee work and directorships. From 1975 until 1980 he was a director of Rio Tinto Zinc and of Times Newspapers. After Rupert Murdoch's takeover of 'The Times' and 'Sunday Times' in 1980 he became for two years one of six independent national directors of Times Newspapers Holdings. Though no great orator, he was an exceedingly effective if usually reticent committee man. He hardly ever made a contribution that was less than pertinent to the issue under discussion, or that he did not mean. 
Slightly built, neat of dress, pale of face, and unassuming in manner, with a cockney intonation in his speech, Greene was often underrated. In reality he served his members, and his country, well. He lived in retirement at Kynaston Wood, Harrow Weald, and died on 26 July 2004 at Westminster House nursing home, Wilsmere Drive, Harrow Weald, of cancer of the prostate. He was survived by his three daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94041


Hodge, Sir Julian Stephen Alfred (1904-2004), merchant banker, businessman, and philanthropist, was born on 15 October 1904 at 12 Vicarage Road, Camberwell, London, the son of Alfred Hodge, a journeyman plumber and gas fitter, and his wife, Jane Emily, 'nee' Simcock (died 1946). Hodge was entirely a self-made man who rose from extreme poverty to great wealth. His father had taken the family to Wales in search of plumbing work in 1909. They settled among the coal-mining community of Pontllanfraith, in the Sirhowy valley, where the newly emerging Labour Party dominated political life. One of eight children, Julian left school at thirteen. Without family money, connections, or qualifications, it was to be many years before he would make a significant impact on the south Wales business community. Meanwhile, he built his career and reputation slowly, steadily, and solidly. In his late teens he joined the Great Western Railway (GWR) as a clerk on 30's'. a week. He was eighteen when his father returned to London a broken man, and Hodge became the breadwinner with responsibility for supporting his mother and four younger siblings still living at home. 
Consistent with his mother's oft-expressed family motto, 'savoir est pouvoir', Hodge took evening classes at Cardiff Technical College and qualified as an accountant in 1930. While continuing to work for the GWR, he put up a brass plate -- 'Julian S. Hodge, Certified Accountant' -- outside his mother's terraced house and began to trawl the Welsh valleys for private and small business clients. 'Night after murky night Julian walked the streets in a bowler hat, with rolled umbrella and case full of leaflets and proposal forms, knocking on every door' (O'Sullivan, 23). By the mid-1930s he had built up a small accountancy practice and a thriving life assurance business, conducted through a number of branches which he opened in the valleys and co-ordinated from a head office in Cardiff from 1941. After the Second World War he sold cars to an eager public on hire purchase in a society and at a time when involvement with credit was not considered quite respectable. On 31 December 1951 he married Moira Thomas ('b'. 1924), a secretary in his Cardiff office and the daughter of John Oswald Thomas, colliery winder; the couple had two sons and a daughter. 
Hodge first came to prominence in wider business circles in the 1950s styling himself as a defender of the interests of the small shareholder in controversial takeover bids involving companies such as Singer Motors, the Ely Brewery Co., and Standard Motors. Through his interventions, Hodge won improved deals for the 'little man'. As one Singer shareholder put it: 'Mr Hodge has been doing what the board should have done, playing off both sides against each other in a most masterly fashion' (O'Sullivan, 46). Many grateful shareholders naturally turned to Hodge's own businesses to act as custodians for their savings and as the subject of their investments. More widely Hodge increasingly saw his business activities as an attempt to create an independent financial system for Wales. The south Wales economy, based on coal and steel, was in terminal decline at the start of Hodge's career, and it became his firm belief that Wales might have countered the socially damaging effects of the depression more successfully had it enjoyed the benefit of an indigenous financial infrastructure. His inspiration was, he claimed, an 1812 note from the now defunct Bank of Newport which prompted his vision of a national bank for Wales. It became one of his life's ambitions to wrestle some of the control of Welsh industries' finances from the institutions of the City of London. However the City did not smooth his way towards achievement of that goal. 
In the late 1950s Hodge's attempt to gain an issuing house licence was blocked by the London stock exchange. He refused to accept the decision and vigorously and successfully pursued the matter with the Board of Trade. In 1960 he formed Julian S. Hodge & Co. with powers akin to those of a merchant bank. His decision to establish a second bank for Wales in 1971 proved no more popular with the London-based financial establishment. At a meeting with members of the Bank of England, the Treasury, and the Board of Trade, the triumvirate agreed to Hodge's proposal conditional on an established bank taking a 20 per cent stake in the venture. As Hodge later put it -- 'they thought they were on to a winner... they did not imagine for one moment that I would get a bank to take up 20% of something which, at that time, was a bit of a pipe dream' (letter to Roger Mansfield, 11 Sept 2002, Hodge-Mansfield correspondence, priv. coll.). But they were wrong. Hodge secured a meeting with the chairman of the First National Bank of Chicago who, within thirty minutes, agreed to take up the necessary equity stake. The resulting institution was named the Commercial Bank of Wales after Hodge's preferred title, the Bank of Wales, had prompted objections from the Bank of England. In 1981 an application for full banking status was denied on the grounds that the Commercial Bank of Wales did not enjoy the required 'high reputation and standing in the financial community' ('The Times', 21 July 2004). This was a significant setback for Hodge, but also spurred him on; as Daniel Mullins, the former Roman Catholic bishop of Menevia, told the congregation at Hodge's memorial service, 'Sir Julian never shirked from a challenge -- indeed, I think he enjoyed them' (quoted in 'South Wales Echo', 29 Oct 2004). With characteristic resolve, this further slight from the authorities was overcome, and in 1984 the renamed Bank of Wales was given the status of a fully fledged bank and successfully floated on the London stock exchange. 'All Wales will rejoice', he declared on hearing the decision ('The Times', 21 July 2004). Hodge's final major business achievement was to found the Julian Hodge Bank (1987) where his son Jonathan served for a number of years as executive deputy chairman. 
In common with most successful businessmen, Hodge's career was not without mistakes and reversals. He did not foresee, and did not respond sufficiently quickly to, the high interest rate regime put in place by Harold Wilson's government after 1964. The discovery that a key company within his financial empire, Anglo Auto Finance Ltd, had extensive bad debts caused group profits and Hodge's personal prestige to plunge. Characteristically, he fought back vigorously and effectively. He secured financial backing from the Chartered Bank and, by the early 1970s, annual profits from Hodge's operations were in the region of $7 million. It was a measure of his financial astuteness, or good fortune, that he sold the group (renamed Chartered Trust in 1979) for $45 million to its backer, by this time called Standard Chartered Bank, in October 1973. Just a few days afterwards, the collapse of London and Counties Securities triggered the secondary banking crisis. Indirectly, this deal had further harmful implications for Hodge's public profile. Adverse press comment followed the discovery, soon after the takeover, that the Hodge group had lent money on second mortgages to immigrant investors who used it to finance a pyramid-selling cosmetic franchise that collapsed. Hodge denied any knowledge of such arrangements but, soon afterwards, attracted public opprobrium with allegations of excessive interest rates, sometimes linked with second mortgages, producing severe hardships for those who defaulted. Although he offered easier payments to those threatened with eviction, these events caused lasting damage to his reputation. Indeed, his financial expedients attracted unfavourable parliamentary comment, while the satirical magazine 'Private Eye' dubbed him 'the Usurer of the Valleys' (quoted in 'The Times', 21 July 2004). 
Having made his fortune, Hodge turned his attention to philanthropic work. Guided by his mentor, Sir Isaac Wolfson, he established the Jane Hodge Foundation (1962) in honour of his mother. The work of the foundation and his own charitable trust was extensive, and remained so in the early twenty-first century with, among other activities, support for homes for the elderly and the Ty Hafen children's hospice in Barry. He was 'never a casual distributor of largesse' ('The Independent', 26 July 2004) and applied the same concern with value for money as he showed in his business career. Where he gave money, he wished it to make a difference. He was a strong supporter of the Welsh Heritage Schools initiative and, reflecting his desire to encourage excellence in Welsh business education, he provided key financial inputs for his former college (by the 1960s known as the University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology or UWIST), and served as its treasurer (1968-76) and president (1981-5). He also played a significant role, behind the scenes, in ensuring its domination of the merger with the larger and older but financially riven University College, Cardiff, in the late 1980s. That merger saw the formation of the highly successful Cardiff Business School with which he remained closely associated right up until his death, funding chairs in finance, marketing, and international business and providing advice that was considered as valuable as his financial contribution. He also funded a chair in nursing and the university's Centre for Japanese Studies and Institute of Applied Macroeconomics. He was a practising Roman Catholic, and his offer of $3 million to build a new cathedral in Cardiff was not taken up. 
Hodge was also politically active. He made powerful friends among Labour's leading Welsh politicians, such as James Callaghan and George Thomas (Lord Tonypandy), and was knighted by Harold Wilson's government in 1970. Hodge remained loyal to the Labour Party at a time when few leading businessmen judged it in their interests to do so, though from 1997 he opposed the Labour administration's plans for regional government and funded the anti-devolution campaign claiming that 'Wales is being democratised to the point of exhaustion' ('Daily Telegraph', 20 July 2004). He was a resident of St Brelade, Jersey, from 1985, and it was from here that he orchestrated campaigns against a European parliament which he considered to be an assault on British sovereignty, and gave financial backing to Sir James Goldsmith's Referendum Party in the general election of 1997. 
Why did Hodge fail to achieve acceptance by Britain's financial establishment? Part of the problem may have been his lending strategies, but also relevant was his refusal to conform to accepted norms of City behaviour, partly reflected in his determination to develop Cardiff as a financial centre in its own right. He managed his businesses far better than he did his public profile, and there are no obvious signs that diplomacy was his strong suit. Hodge was a man who generated strong emotions and his business activities attracted a disproportionate amount of critical press coverage. However, throughout his career he demonstrated verve and courage and, in common with most successful entrepreneurs, he also enjoyed his share of luck. He not only created, almost single-handed, a financial sector for Wales, he also raised national morale, and his business and philanthropic activities had a major and positive impact on the country. 'The soaring Julian Hodge Building in Cardiff -- the Welsh capital's first high-rise block -- seemed to stand as a symbol of Wales's burgeoning commercial destiny' ('The Times', 21 July 2004). Although he had no appetite for the high life, Hodge enjoyed rubbing shoulders with his peer group -- the rich and famous. Isaac Wolfson introduced him to John Paul Getty with the following endorsement: 'This is my friend Julian. Do you know I have loaned him $35 million and never lost a penny nor had a sleepless night. He is fair. But he drives a hard bargain. In fact he is very much like me' ('South Wales Echo', 19 July 2004). A devoted family man and a very hard worker, in his limited spare time he was a keen gardener, an inquisitive reader and, during retirement, a regular player at Jersey's La Moye golf course. He died on 18 July 2004 at St Aubin, Jersey, of bronchial pneumonia and was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94042


Crawford, John (1775-1831), sailor and naval hero, was born on 22 March 1775 at a house on Thornhill Bank in the east end of Sunderland, co. Durham, the son of a keelman. At an early age Crawford also worked on the keelboats that carried coal on the River Wear. As a youth he served an apprenticeship on board a brig called the 'Peggy', which sailed out of South Shields, co. Durham. He volunteered for the Royal Navy at the outbreak of the French wars and is listed on the muster roll of the 'Venerable', flagship of Admiral Adam Duncan. 
On 11 October 1797 Crawford was on the 'Venerable' during the naval engagement later known as the battle of Camperdown. The Dutch, then allied to the French, formed the opposition. At the height of battle the mainmast of Duncan's vessel was struck by enemy fire and the admiral's blue squadronal standard brought down. (At the time the disappearance of the flag caused confusion elsewhere in the fleet as 'striking' the flag was usually a sign of surrender.) Either as a volunteer or under specific orders Crawford climbed the remnants of the mast with the standard and nailed it back where it was visible to the rest of the fleet. In the process he was hit in the mouth by a splinter and wounded. Crawford's act came at a crucial point in the battle, in which Duncan eventually proved victorious. In some quarters the restoration of the standard was seen as vital and the victory at Camperdown noted as marking the closure of the golden age of Dutch sea power. 
On disembarking Crawford was greeted as a hero both locally and nationally. In his native town of Sunderland he was presented with a silver medal marked 'for gallant service'. Before the end of the year he had been sketched in action and the resultant painting used as a basis for commemorative pottery. In Kings Lynn, Norfolk, a public house was renamed the Valiant Sailor in his honour. George III insisted on meeting him and Crawford received a pension of $30 a year. According to colleagues interviewed in later life Crawford himself was nonplussed by the attention and adulation. 'Never mind -- that's nowt (nothing)', he is recorded as saying. The same witnesses spoke of him as a typical hard-living and hard-working 'tar' of his day, generally quiet and unassuming yet generous to his closest friends. At the same time he was vociferous and active when he had taken a drink, and this led to numerous local tales of ribald activity. 
Crawford remained on active service throughout the French wars (1793-1815) with the exception of a break around the time of the brief peace from 1803 to 1804. He is noted in official records as both a rating and a gunner. After the 'Venerable' he served on the 'America' -- possibly for the remainder of his career in the Royal Navy. 
While in the navy Crawford married Sarah Laidler Longstaff, who had been baptized at Monkwearmouth, co. Durham, on 20 August 1788, and was the daughter of Simon Longstaff of Monkwearmouth, shipbuilder, and Ann, his wife. The wedding took place on 5 November 1807 at St Nicholas's Church, Deptford, Kent (beside the River Thames). There were three sons and a daughter. The eldest, John, was born in Deptford in September 1810 and later worked as a waterman on both the Tyne and the Wear. The other sons (George and William) went to sea and are thought to have settled in Australia. 
After the wars Crawford returned to Sunderland and resumed his work in the coal trade on the river. On 10 November 1831 he became the first male victim of the outbreak of cholera imported in a vessel from Riga, Latvia. He died in poverty at his home 'near the ferry landing'. His silver medal was in pawn and his annual pensions dissipated on entertainment. A tree marked his burial plot in the churchyard of Sunderland parish church until 1888, when a gravestone was erected with money collected by public subscription. Two years later a statue was unveiled showing him nailing the colours to the mast. This now occupies a prominent position in Sunderland's Mowbray Park and was central to the Trafalgar bicentenary celebrations in October 2005. 
Crawford's life is worthy of recall. He turned down the opportunity of fame and fortune on a number of occasions, most famously refusing to join in the Camperdown celebrations where a stand-in collected enough money to spend the rest of his life in comfort. He did, however, agree to walk in the procession at Horatio Nelson's funeral in January 1806, wearing his silver medal. A room in Sunderland Museum is dedicated to his memory and there are numerous displays of artefacts connected to him, including commemorative pottery and his medal. 


@@@@@


doc= 94046


Watson, Andrew (1856-1921), footballer, was born in Georgetown, British Guiana (later Guyana), on 24 May 1856, the illegitimate son of Peter Miller Watson (1805-1869), a sugar plantation manager, and Hannah Rose, a local woman. His Scottish father, who already had a daughter, Annetta, by the same mother, returned to Britain with both children and secured their future with a substantial legacy when he died, in London, in 1869. 
Watson was educated as a boarder from 1866 at the Heath grammar school, Halifax, then from 1871 at King's College School, London. In 1875 he matriculated at Glasgow University, studying mathematics, natural philosophy, and civil engineering. He left after one year and in 1877 became a partner in a wholesale warehouse business in Glasgow called Watson, Miller, and Baird. He married, on 6 November 1877, Jessie Nimmo Armour (1860-1882), daughter of John Armour, cabinet-maker. He described himself on the birth certificates of their children, Rupert Andrew ('b'. 1878) and Agnes Maude ('b'. 1880), as 'railway shareholder', indicating his independent means. 
Having played rugby football at school, Watson switched to the association game in Glasgow, initially with Maxwell Football Club, then with Parkgrove Football Club. He also participated regularly in local athletics meetings and won a number of prizes as a high-jumper. As a young black man, he might have expected to face discrimination but there is no contemporary evidence of racism on the part of fellow footballers or the football authorities, only praise and recognition for his sporting talent. He represented Glasgow against Sheffield in 1880, and was also due to take part in the first overseas tour by a Scottish team that summer, before the trip to Canada was cancelled because of the sudden death of the Scottish Football Association (FA) secretary, William Dick. 
As a further indication of his acceptance by the establishment, on 6 April 1880 Watson was invited to become a member of Queen's Park Football Club, the dominant club in Scottish football. Within weeks he won his first trophy with his new team, the Glasgow Merchants' charity cup, and his blossoming reputation was captured in the Scottish FA's 'Annual' for 1880-81, which described him as: 'One of the very best backs we have; since joining Queen's Park has made rapid strides to the front as a player; has great speed and tackles splendidly; powerful and sure kick; well worthy of a place in any representative team.' Watson was a mainstay in defence as Queen's Park swept to victory in the Scottish cup and charity cup, and was held in such high regard that he was appointed captain of Scotland for his first international cap, against England. That match in London, on 12 March 1881, produced an astonishing 6-1 score in favour of the Scots, still a record away victory, and two days later he helped Scotland to defeat Wales 5-1. The only note of discord came in the Scottish cup final, in which Queen's Park beat Dumbarton 3-1 after a protested match because of crowd encroachment; there was considerable ill feeling between the sides and Watson was struck by an opponent, William MacKinnon, who was forced by the Scottish FA to apologize. 
The following season was almost as impressive: Watson won another Scottish cup medal and was one of seven Queen's Park players in the national team that thrashed England 5-1 in Glasgow on 11 March 1882, his third and final cap. It would be well over a century before another black player played for Scotland. 
Watson had been appointed secretary of Queen's Park in November 1881, becoming the first black football administrator, but it was a short tenure as the following summer he moved to London. He joined Swifts, a team of former public school men, and represented them in three FA cup campaigns, while retaining his membership of Queen's Park. As a gentleman amateur of the highest ability he was much in demand and turned out for other London clubs including Pilgrims, Brentwood, and London Caledonians. More notably Watson was invited to join the elite and exclusive Corinthians Football Club, with whom he took part in tours in 1883 and 1884, the latter including an 8-1 win over Blackburn Rovers, the FA cup holders. His regular returns to Glasgow included two more Scottish cup victories with Queen's Park in 1884 (when Vale of Leven refused to play the final) and the 3-1 defeat of Renton in 1886, which turned out to be his last match for the club. 
As his football career wound down, Watson focused on his career as a marine engineer, and moved to the seaport of Liverpool, where he joined his last club, Bootle Football Club, in 1887. The club was investing heavily in new players and Watson was investigated by the FA on a charge of professionalism as he did not fulfil the residency requirements of the time; although exonerated, it is possible he was paid. He captained the team to the fifth round of the FA cup before his playing days ended abruptly through injury in March 1888, which prevented another success as Bootle won the Lancashire senior cup the following month, although he was photographed with the winning team. 
Watson's record as the first black international footballer is all the more remarkable as, while there were numerous plaudits for his abilities, there were precious few comments on his colour. Archibald Steel, who had played against Watson while with Rangers, later wrote of the 'dusky features and tall, athletic appearance of the West Indian' (Steel, 66) but virtually no other comments on his race have been found. His reputation was such that forty years after his career was over, the journalist James Catton named Watson in his best ever Scotland eleven (Catton, 208). 
Following the death of his first wife Watson married second, in Glasgow, on 10 February 1887, Eliza Kate Tyler (1861-1949), daughter of Joseph Tyler, East India merchant; they had two children, Henry Tyler ('b'. 1888) and Phyllis Kate ('b'. 1891). While the children from his first marriage remained in Glasgow with their grandparents, he settled with his second family in Liverpool. After retiring about 1910 Watson and his family moved to London and he died on 8 March 1921 at 88 Forest Road, Kew, Surrey, aged sixty-four. He was buried in Richmond cemetery on 11 March. He had by then disappeared from view and his death went unnoticed in the media. Because most commentators had focused on his ability rather than his race, Watson's significance as the first black international footballer went unrecognized until recent times, when his full life story was uncovered. 


@@@@@


doc= 94048


Hole, James (1819/20-1895), social reformer, was probably the James Hole recorded as baptized at Manchester Cathedral on 27 February 1820, the son of James Hole and his wife, Ann. Census returns indicate that he was born in Manchester in 1819 or 1820; his marriage certificate describes his father, James, as a tailor. By the 1830s he was working for a cotton manufacturer and attending evening classes in Manchester, before moving in the early 1840s to become foreign correspondent and confidential clerk to a firm of Leeds stuff merchants. He was a man who generally shunned publicity, and little is known about his private life. In the mid-1840s he married Elizabeth Mitchell (died 1884), with whom he had at least six sons and one daughter. Apparently an unsectarian and liberal Christian, he attended the Unitarian Mill Hill Chapel in Leeds and, among a number of translations, in 1864 he published anonymously the first English text of Ernest Renan's 'The Life of Jesus'. 
Hole was an important figure in progressive socialist, Owenite, and co-operative circles from the 1840s to the 1870s. His practical activism was largely confined to Leeds, where he was closely associated with the Leeds Redemption Society and influenced Samuel Smiles, but his writings gave him wider influence, and have been much quoted both for their insight into mid-nineteenth-century conditions and as examples of the contemporary critique of 'laissez-faire' attitudes. As a leading figure in the Leeds District Flour Mill Society, a forerunner of the Leeds Industrial Co-operative Society of which he was a director from 1849, Hole was at the forefront of the transition of co-operation in Leeds from utopianism to practical reform. He was one of a number of figures, among them George Jacob Holyoake, who, although indebted to Robert Owen's emphasis on social reform, were, under the influence of a variety of factors including Ricardian socialism and the ideas of Carlyle and Emerson, and of Louis Blanc and Mazzini, attracted to the philosophy of 'associationism', with its stress on practical reform through voluntary organization. His writings and lectures on association were collected in 'Lectures on Social Science' (1851). 
Hole consistently advocated greater government intervention in areas where the market was clearly inefficient, such as education, but was above all concerned with promoting collective effort. Hence, although he played a role in the national debates which preceded the 'Education Act' of 1870, his ''Light, More Light!': on the present state of education among the working classes of Leeds, and how it can best be improved' (1860) had greater impact on later accounts of the state of nineteenth-century education than on contemporary debates. His primary concern was always adult education. He was committee member and officeholder of the Leeds Mechanics' Institute (1847-65) and the Leeds School of Art (1856-65). His interest in 'technical education' as this emerged as a distinct field resulted in his service on the West Riding educational board in the early 1860s, and contributions at meetings of the Royal Society of Arts. However, his significance particularly rests on his long service as honorary secretary of the Yorkshire Union of Mechanics' Institutes from 1848 to 1867. His annual reports formed the basis for an 'Essay on the History and Management of Literary, Scientific and Mechanics' Institutes' (1853), which urged the importance of institute classes as a means of lifelong learning. In 1852 he started the Yorkshire Union Village Library, a scheme whereby book boxes were distributed to villages in Yorkshire. 
In 1867 Hole left Leeds to become organizing secretary of the Associated Chambers of Commerce, a position he held until his death in 1895, taking part in deputations to government, and in later years corresponding on behalf of the association with senior civil servants. He received a public testimonial in 1888. He was also a director and treasurer of Stubbs' Mercantile Agency. In 1893 he published 'National Railways: an Argument for State Purchase', which applied the social philosophy he had held consistently for most of his life to the position of the railways. He argued that 'laissez-faire' when applied to the railways was wasteful, competition between companies producing unnecessary duplication and excessive hours of employment, and advocated the principle of equal mileage rates (a suggestion which attracted little support). 
In London Hole continued to be active across a range of reforming movements. He served on the council of Henry Solly's Trades Guild of Learning in the early 1870s, and on the committee of management of the Central Co-operative Agency Society (1869-74), and was later a supporter of the Guild of Co-operators. From the 1870s he was honorary secretary (and, according to 'The Times', 26 February 1895, 'the most active promoter') of the Commons Preservation Society, which sought successfully to protect Epping Forest, Hampstead Heath, and various other London commons. He was also active in the Mansion House Council on the Dwellings of the People, which continued a long-standing interest in working-class housing, an interest which can be traced back to his participation in the founding of the Leeds Society for the Erection of Improved Dwellings. This organization purchased small plots of land and built model houses on them, before selling them on to working men at cost price. His 'Homes of the Working Classes, with Suggestions for their Improvement' (1866) provides further evidence of his overriding concern with practicality, and his willingness to see an extension in the powers of central government, but also his increased recognition of the role of philanthropic landlords. By the time of his death Hole had himself accumulated a number of properties in Fulham, Putney, Hammersmith, Bermondsey, and Peckham. 
After the death of his first wife Hole married, on 23 December 1887, Emma Salmon ('b'. 1846/7), a widow. He died relatively suddenly at his home, 9 Iddesleigh Mansions, Victoria Grove, Westminster, London, on 17 February 1895, aged seventy-five. He was survived by his second wife, and was buried on 21 February at Honor Oak cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 94050


Roberts, Edward (1845-1933), tidal computer, was born at the Broadway, Deptford, Kent, on 30 April 1845, the son of John Roberts, dealer in glass and earthenware, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Spearing. He attended Greenwich proprietary school, where he was taught by Thomas Goodwin, and gained many prizes mainly in chemistry and mathematics. After leaving school in 1860 he obtained a place on the staff of the Royal Greenwich Observatory through an introduction from the astronomer Robert Main. In addition to the routine work of computing and observing, G. B. Airy, the astronomer royal, engaged him on additional projects. On 8 February 1864 he married Louisa Mary Ann ('b'. 1845), daughter of George John Webb, a cooper, of Bermondsey, with whom he had eleven children. 
Roberts had been enabled to marry by his transfer in 1864, on Airy's recommendation, to the nautical almanac office of the Admiralty. He remained there until his retirement. On account of his numerical skill Roberts was commended to the pioneering work being undertaken by Sir William Thomson in the field of tidal prediction. In 1867 Thomson had advanced a theoretical solution to the problems of tidal prediction, but his harmonic method required an immense amount of calculation for the analysis and particularly for the prediction, a task of computation that Roberts undertook. The scale of these computations was an obstacle to the success of Thomson's solution and by 1872 he had concluded that a mechanical device (proposed earlier by a Cambridge mathematician, Francis Bashforth, in 1845) would resolve the problems, although none had yet been built. Roberts, after consultations with Thomson, who had procured funds from the British Association, produced in 1873 a two-component model with the instrument makers A. Lege & Co. This prototype summed two cosines. Months later, the British Association funded a ten-component machine to deal with the main computing part of Thomson's new method of tide prediction. Even this model was too small to deal with all the complex calculations, and most of the world's tides remained beyond reliable prediction. For its geodetic demands the Indian government then commissioned a twenty-component machine from Roberts and Lege, which was built in 1878, and became the key to the success of Thomson's harmonic method. When Roberts described this new machine as his own design, Thomson took exception, and snubbed him publicly, both in person and in exchanges in 'Nature' in March and April 1881. 
With Roberts as its computist, the astronomer John Couch Adams and the mathematical physicist George Howard Darwin headed this British research programme from 1879. Although they resolved tides across the globe, their main output was 'Tide Tables for the Indian Ports', of which Roberts was co-author from first publication in 1880 until 1906. In 1905 Thomson procured the relocation of the Indian tides work to the recently founded National Physical Laboratory, but the superintendent of the nautical almanac office regarded Roberts as too valuable to allow him to leave at the ordinary superannuation age, and obtained permission to retain him in the department for a further two years. Roberts retired as chief assistant in 1907 and was appointed to the Imperial Service Order. 
At his own expense Roberts commissioned Lege in 1906 to build a new predictor that was twice the size of the Indian machine. More than 2 metres high and several tonnes in weight, the machine was built and used at the Lewisham home of his son, Herbert William Thomson Roberts (died 1930), with whom he entered into the business of tidal prediction on a private basis. With this machine, which in 1908 won the Franco-British Exhibition grand prix, they computed tides commercially, continuing 'Holden's Liverpool Almanac' and gaining new contracts at the expense of the National Physical Laboratory. On the outbreak of war in 1914 Roberts was brought back within the Admiralty hydrographic department to compute the tides of German naval ports, Ostend, and Panama. During this period, in collaboration with the younger workers Harold Warburg and Arthur Doodson, he helped in the final perfection of Thomson's harmonic method. In 1926, with Roberts in old age and the health of his son in decline, the tide predictor machine was sold to the Liverpool Tidal Institute, of which Doodson was associate director, and where the machine was later used for predicting the D-day tides. 
Roberts served as secretary to the ships stability (Admiralty) commission 1871, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1872 and fellow of the Statistical Society in 1882. His meticulous numeracy was held in high regard. Airy had commended him to the nautical almanac office as 'the best for hunting out an error by irregular examination' (Royal Greenwich Observatory, 6/207/125). Thomson commented that 'He enters into the principle of the calculation in such a way as to give much more value to his work than if he were a mere calculator' (CUL, Add. 7656 K.169). Several admired the extraordinary neatness of his work and the beauty of his figures, both of which features he combined with extraordinary speed. He represented an important link in the development of modern tidal science: through Airy he knew the work of the first Admiralty tide tables of 1833; his twenty-component Indian machine (now in the Survey of India Museum at Dehra Dun) anticipated the advanced American machine of 1882, the highly independent Australian machine of 1897, and then crucially the copy made in Germany in 1915; while the machine made to his own final design (and now in the World Museum, Liverpool) influenced the best and last of the mechanical tide predictors built in the United States in 1911, Germany in 1938, and Britain in 1953. Together his machines constituted a pioneering family of functional analogue computers. 
In his later years a justice of the peace, Roberts died at 20 St John's Park, Greenwich, on 4 August 1933. The nuclear physicist Tony Hilton Royle Skyrme was his grandson. 


@@@@@


doc= 94070


Morishima, Michio (1923-2004), economist, was born on 18 July 1923 in Osaka, Japan, the son of Kameji Morishima, businessman, and his wife, Tatsuo, 'nee' Mikawa. Educated in Kobe and Osaka, he made a number of visits in the 1930s to Peking (Beijing), where his father was an airline executive. His university education in economics at Kyoto, at that time one of the largest and most traditional of universities, was interrupted by conscription in 1943 into the Japanese navy where he served as a radio operator and code-breaker. After the war he returned to Kyoto University, graduated in 1946, and then pursued postgraduate studies, latterly becoming a teaching assistant. On 31 March 1954 he married Yoko Tsuda, daughter of Isamu Tsuda, property owner. They had a daughter, Tokiko, and two sons, Akio and Haruo, and Yoko contributed to every aspect of Morishima's career. Appointed assistant professor at Kyoto in 1950, he moved in 1951 to Osaka. Becoming a full professor at Osaka in 1963, Morishima, together with Yasuma Takada, there established the Institute of Social and Economic Research, which was an important vehicle for the modernization of Japanese economics along Anglo-American lines, as was a newly established journal in conjunction with the University of Pennsylvania, the 'International Economic Review', of which he was a joint founding editor. 
From the outset of his undergraduate studies in economics, Morishima's intellectual internationalism was evident. He early on discovered John Hick's 'Value and Capital' (1939), a pathfinding work of general equilibrium analysis. It was a mathematization and theoretical extension of this that formed the subject of his postgraduate research, the fruits of which were published in Japanese in 1950 but not in English until, with other materials, they were published as his 'Dynamic Economic Theory' (1996). Articles in such leading international journals as 'Econometrica', however, began to be published from the early 1950s onwards, and such was his growing reputation that he was able to secure a year at All Souls College, Oxford, with John Hicks in 1956-7 and then again in 1963-4. He became in 1965 the first Japanese president of the Econometric Society. Pursuing what has been seen as a coherent research programme that was established early and developed throughout his career, Morishima was at this time developing a distinctive style of economics that combined fundamental contributions to theory with a commitment, eclectic in its reach, to connect contemporary economics to the discipline's canonical figures, initially Marx and Walras, but later including also Ricardo, Keynes, and von Neumann. The eventual result was a series of monographs, for Morishima was an unusual economist who published books as well as scientific papers: 'Marx's Economics: a Dual Theory of Value and Growth' (1973), 'Walras' Economics: a Pure Theory of Capital and Money' (1977), and 'Ricardo's Economics: a General Equilibrium Theory of Distribution and Growth' (1989), the subtitles of which indicate his central theoretical preoccupations. 
Meanwhile the publication of his first English-language book, 'Equilibrium, Stability and Growth' (1964), combined with his growing frustration with the conservatism of the Japanese economics profession, led Morishima to the next stage of his career: that of emigration to Britain, though he never became a British citizen. He was first appointed to a visiting professorship at Essex in 1968, moving in 1970 to a chair at the London School of Economics (LSE), becoming in 1984 Sir John Hicks professor of economics until his retirement in 1988, upon which he became emeritus professor and in 1991 received the rare distinction of an LSE honorary fellowship. Morishima's LSE years were highly productive, both personally and for his adopted institutional home. A former student, Sir John Morgan, described him as 'one of the most extraordinary teachers of mathematical economics of modern times' who, 'despite his limited English, with a piece of chalk and a blackboard... filled the lecture halls... to overflowing' ('The Times', 24 Aug 2004). Moreover, his textbook 'The Economic Theory of Modern Society' (1976), developed for his undergraduates, showed that his was a rare mathematical economics that incorporated explicitly sociological and political factors. His commitment to practical, policy-orientated economics found fullest expression and an enduring legacy in the LSE's Suntory Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines (STICERD), of which he was the intellectual founder, chief fund-raiser, and first chairman, from 1978. 
The move to Britain did not lessen Morishima's engagement with Japanese economics, society, and politics. He wrote prolifically in Japanese on Japan, becoming a public intellectual there as well as, in his English-language publications (most notably his 'Has Japan 'Succeeded'?', 1982, and 'Japan at a Deadlock', 2000), a conduit for greater understanding by foreigners of his home country. Somewhat idiosyncratic, but always elevating and commanding the deep affection of colleagues and students in Britain, Japan, and the USA, his was an academic life well lived. Awarded the Japanese Order of Culture (Bunka Kunsho, often described as the Japanese equivalent of a Nobel prize) in 1976 and made a fellow of the British Academy in 1981, he died on 13 July 2004 at Highwood Hospital, Brentwood, Essex. He was survived by his wife, Yoko, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94077


Shenfield, Dame Barbara Estelle (1919-2004), social scientist and voluntary worker, was born on 9 March 1919, at 207 Bearwood Road, Smethwick, Staffordshire, the youngest of the five children of George William Farrow (1878-1952), a mechanical engineer, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Hunt. She was born in the heart of the Black Country at a time of economic depression. Like his father, George Farrow was a director of Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds, a large engineering and steelmaking firm, and the family was reasonably wealthy. Barbara was raised in Smethwick and educated at Langley high school in Oldbury. The fact that both these areas were depressed in the 1920s and 1930s no doubt contributed to her awareness of the importance of social welfare, an issue that was to form the direction of her academic interests and public contribution to charitable causes throughout her life. 
As an undergraduate in social and political science at the University of Birmingham, Barbara met Gwilym Ivor Lewis, who was president of the university's Students' Union, and the son of Gwilym John Lewis, clerk of works. They married at St Germain's Church in Edgbaston, on 4 May 1941, when he was serving with the RAF. The marriage was short lived. On 12 August 1941, flying his Blenheim bomber with 226 squadron, Flight Lieutenant Gwilym Lewis was lost at sea, presumed dead. In April 1942 Barbara gave birth to a son, Peter. Bereavement and single parenthood at such a young age were both experiences which influenced and determined the causes she championed throughout her lifetime, together with the pragmatic and unsentimental approach which characterized everything she did. As a working woman and a working mother, both regarded as unfashionable at the time, she challenged the traditionally accepted stereotype of women's role. However, she was not a feminist in the political sense, driven rather by both the necessity of circumstance and her singular character and no-nonsense approach. She believed that women should have the same opportunities as men, but she also believed that women should be centrally involved in raising their children. She lectured in social studies at the University of Birmingham from 1945 to 1956, and later at Bedford College, University of London, from 1959 to 1965. 
On 14 September 1951 Barbara married 
Arthur Shenfield was born Asher Shenfield in Cardiff on 7 October 1909, the son of Mendel Shenfield, a rabbi. Following a state education he graduated from the University of Wales with a first-class degree in economics, then (after further education at Birmingham University) joined the London and Cambridge Economic Service under Frank Parish. Subsequently he lectured in economics and commerce. On 12 September 1940 he married Freida Muriel Cohen (died 2002), a 23-year-old secretary, and daughter of Maurice Cohen, house furnisher. They had one daughter, but the marriage ended in divorce. He was called to the bar by Gray's Inn in 1945 (while also active in Liberal politics) and was in practice, and had adopted the first name Arthur, by the time of his second marriage. In 1955 he was appointed as the economic director of the Federation of British Industries. He went on to become an influential academic economist in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s, working with thinkers like Milton Friedman at the University of Chicago; he held a string of visiting professorships at other American universities. He positioned himself as a classical liberal and published widely on the subject of the free economy and the free society. He was unafraid to court controversy by, for instance, opposing child labour laws, compulsory state schooling, affirmative action, and anti-trust legislation. He was president of the Mont Pelerin Society (1972-4), trustee of the Philadelphia Society (1977-9), director of the International Institute for Economic Research, and honorary vice-president of the Adam Smith Club. His published books and lectures included 'The Political Economy of Tax Avoidance' (1968), and 'The Failure of Socialism: Learning from the Swedes and English' (1998). Having moved back to England, where he was closely involved with the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA), he died of cancer of the bronchus on 13 February 1990 at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Chelsea. 
Following Barbara's marriage to Arthur Shenfield she accompanied him to America where she too took up several posts, including visiting professorships at Michigan State University, Temple University in Philadelphia, and Rockford College, Illinois. She continued in her commitment to improve both voluntary and public sector social welfare provision for the elderly and for single parents, through publication and practical involvement. The republication of 'Social Policies for Old Age' (1957) in 1973 and again in 2003 indicated the continuing relevance of its subject matter, as it explored the issues of work, pensions, housing, and residential care for the elderly. She published other papers on the subject including 'Policy for Poverty' (1970), the report of an IEA study group, written with Anthony Christopher, George Polanyi, and Arthur Seldon. In 1971 she became chairman of the national executive of the National Old People's Welfare Council (later Age Concern). In 1976 she became vice-chairman of the Women's Royal Voluntary Service, becoming national chairman in 1981. During the mid-1980s she also served on the Conservative government's review of social security legislation. She was appointed DBE in 1986. She served as the academic director of Britain's only independent university, the University of Buckingham, between 1972 and 1973, and was a member of its council until 1987, being awarded an honorary doctorate in 1987. 
After Arthur Shenfield's death in 1990 Barbara Shenfield characteristically threw herself into top gear. She was involved in the management of several charities and organizations, including as a trustee of the Social Affairs Unit (1990-2004) and as chairman of the Friends of the Imperial War Museum (1991-2004); the latter was, for her, a continuation of a cause that had affected her early life so tragically. One of her final projects was to draw together Arthur Shenfield's publications on economics into a book. In 1998, 'Limited Government, Individual Liberty and the Rule of Law: Selected Works of Arthur Asher Shenfield' (edited by Norman Barry) was published, and on both sides of the Atlantic was received with great enthusiasm. She also took on new causes that reflected the concerns of the time, including directorship of the Pornography and Violence Research Trust (1994-2002). 
Barbara Shenfield was a woman of indomitable spirit, and only weeks before her death was discussing and debating at a lunch at the IEA, where Jonathan Aitken was speaking on restorative justice. Her energy and enthusiasm never flagged. Totally self-effacing, never giving in to anything, certainly not to old age, nor to bone fractures sustained in falls in the winter months, she remained undaunted by the cancer which finally caused her death. Characteristically she kept this last illness to herself, getting on with it, willing herself forward so that she could attend the wedding of her son Martin. Attend it she did. As in life and in work, she left nothing unfinished. She died at the Lister Hospital, Westminster, on 17 June 2004, of colorectal cancer. She was survived by her two sons, Peter and Martin. 


@@@@@


doc= 94079


Simey, Margaret Bayne, Lady Simey (1906-2004), social scientist and local politician, was born on 4 January 1906 at Stepps, Cadder, Glasgow, the only daughter in the family of three children of John Aiton Todd, solicitor and educationist, and his wife, Margaret Bayne, 'nee' Turnbull. When she was young the family moved to London, where she attended St Paul's Girls' School. At eighteen she moved with her family to Liverpool when her father became head of the College of Commerce in Tithebarn Street. She had never felt at home in London, but something 'clicked into place', she said, when she moved to Liverpool (personal knowledge). In 1928 she became Liverpool University's first female social science graduate. In her formative years she fell much under the influence of Eleanor Rathbone, the first woman to be elected to Liverpool city council and later independent MP for the Combined English Universities. The settlement movement and the girls' clubs at this time made her a passionate advocate of civil society. Much of what she later wrote -- from her first book, 'Charitable Effort in Liverpool' (1951) -- was about how voluntary effort bound together individuals and communities and sustained democracy. Indeed in 'The Disinherited Society: a Personal View of Social Responsibility in Liverpool During the Twentieth Century' (1996) she wrote: 'I am my own visual aid' (p. 8), signifying a lifetime intertwined with Liverpool's fortunes, politics, and organizations. 
On 12 April 1935 Margaret married Thomas Simey ['see below'], a lecturer in public administration at Liverpool University. They had one son, (Thomas) Iliff Simey ('b'. 1938), who became an award-winning architect. The family spent most of the war years, from 1941 to 1945, in the Caribbean, as part of a small team of experts advising on social and economic development. Margaret and Tom Simey later collaborated on a biography of the Liverpool philanthropist and shipowner, Charles Booth (1960). 
In 1963 Margaret Simey was elected as Labour member for the Granby ward of Liverpool city council. She represented the same area after 1974 when the Merseyside metropolitan council was created. In 1981 she was elected chairperson of the Merseyside police authority at a time when deepening social and economic problems were affecting the poorest areas, and when the anger of those whom she represented was reaching boiling point. At the height of the Toxteth riots that year she said that if she was unemployed and black, she, too, would be rioting, and that her constituents would be apathetic if they didn't protest. These statements brought criticism from Margaret Thatcher, the prime minister, and much of the press, some of it abusive. For a time she became a hate-figure in the Conservative Party. This did not, however, dissuade her. Her criticisms of police methods, as well as her belief that the police had to be accountable to democratically elected representatives, caused a serious rupture with Kenneth Oxford, the chief constable, whom she tried unsuccessfully to have removed. She again reached national prominence during the miners' strike of 1984-5 when the police authority threatened to take Oxford to court to stop him sending reinforcements to the affected areas. 
In 1986 Simey retired as a councillor but she continued working with the voluntary sector and travelled long distances as a much sought-after conference speaker. She also continued to write, among her books being 'Democracy Rediscovered: a Study in Police Accountability' (1988). In old age she received an honorary doctorate from Liverpool University, which also made her an honorary senior fellow, a post she took seriously. When she became too incapacitated to leave her tall, handsome, but rickety Georgian house, the university sent students to her for tutorials. She was offered the freedom of the city of Liverpool but declined it. 
Simey disliked paternalism whether by Liverpool city council, Michael Heseltine, the Conservative environment secretary in the 1980s, or New Labour after 1997. In her latter years, when she turned her activity partly to housing associations, she found the same faults she found elsewhere: professionalization, managerialism, and a distancing from people. She saw the decline in industry, unemployment, increasing poverty, and official paternalism as loosening the bonds of community. When her son spent several years as a community worker in Lesotho she visited him and found there evidence of what post-industrial societies were losing: mutuality. 
Simey was possessed of great physical and emotional energy. She was noticeable by her tall, angular build, topped in later years by a bun of silver hair. She took pride in being 'a thoroughly awkward customer' -- a criticism once made of her. She always spoke of Liverpool and its citizens as 'us' -- if their voice was not listened to, then neither was hers. The big problem, she said once, was not unemployment, race, or the police -- it was 'us' not being listened to. In old age she railed also against her exclusion and that of her contemporaries from a society which she believed had no use for old people. Her spirit remained unquenched. When she was ninety she told an audience how Charles Booth, in his guise as shipowner, counselled his passengers to avoid sea sickness by keeping their eyes on the horizon. It was on that distant (but, to her, reachable) point that her sharp, blue eyes were for so long focused. She died on 27 July 2004 of pneumonia and heart disease at Broadgreen Hospital, Liverpool, and was survived by her son, Iliff. On 15 September a celebration of her life was held, following which her ashes were spread on the River Mersey from the ferry boat she had fought to save. 'From Rhetoric to Reality', her study of the life and work of Frederic D'Aeth, the founding lecturer in social science at Liverpool University, was published posthumously in 2005. 
Margaret Simey's husband, 


@@@@@


doc= 94084


Wilson, Sir Geoffrey Masterman (1910-2004), barrister, diplomatist, and public servant, was born at Winterbourne, Storeton Road, Tranmere, Birkenhead, on 7 April 1910, the third son and youngest child of Alexander Cowan Wilson, civil engineer, and his wife, Edith Jane, 'nee' Brayshaw. His parents were Quakers, his mother coming from a line of Quakers going back to the seventeenth century. They were deeply religious, lived frugally, and actively pursued a number of good causes. Their influence, except their austere mode of living, and the beliefs and principles of the Society of Friends remained with Wilson all his life. When Wilson was still young the family moved to Manchester, where he attended Manchester grammar school and won an exhibition in classics to Oriel College, Oxford. Like his elder brother Roger he became chairman of the Labour Club and president of the Union, skills he exercised as a member of the Oxford debating team that toured thirty colleges in the United States in 1932. Having graduated in 1932 with a second in 'literae humaniores', he won a Harmsworth scholarship to the Middle Temple, where he was called to the bar in May 1934. 
An enduring influence on Wilson's career was his friendship at Oxford with John Cripps, a fellow member of the Labour Club, which lasted until the latter's death in 1994. Cripps invited his friend to stay at Goodfellows, his family's country house near Burford in the Cotswolds, where he met John's father, Sir Stafford Cripps, a leading barrister and politician. Wilson visited Goodfellows often in the pre-war years and, as he later recounted, was more or less adopted by the family. When Wilson mentioned his plan to study for the bar, Sir Stafford offered him a seat in his chambers. On being called to the bar he joined the chambers of H. D. Samuels, and in the next five years appeared on common law cases at courts around London. But in 1934 Cripps retained Wilson as a junior in the inquiry into an explosion at the Gresford colliery in north Wales, which killed 266 miners. Cripps represented the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) without fee. Armed with detailed figures and charts assembled by Wilson, Cripps was able to demonstrate that the owners had been negligent despite warnings, and they were severely censured. Another explosion in 1938 killed seventy-nine men at Markham colliery in Derbyshire. Cripps again represented the NUM at the inquiry but left the case largely to Wilson, who became something of an expert on mine safety and addressed meetings on the subject. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Wilson resigned from chambers, unable as a Quaker to volunteer for the armed forces but unwilling to take on the work of colleagues who did. Once again Cripps made Wilson an offer that not only resolved his dilemma but set the direction of his future career. Cripps planned to visit India and China, and invited Wilson to go along as his secretary-companion. Judging that Indian independence was inevitable, Cripps foresaw the need for a constituent assembly and a constitution that would integrate British India and the princely states. In Delhi they stayed with Jawaharlal Nehru, who had been a frequent guest at Goodfellows, and also had talks with Gandhi, Jinnah, two important princes, and the viceroy. Nothing concrete emerged from the talks, however, largely because of the intransigent attitude of the viceroy and the India Office. From India, Cripps and Wilson left for China by the Burma Road. In Chungking (Chongqing), Chiang Kai-shek's headquarters, Wilson came down with jaundice and took no part in the discussions. But he recovered in time to accompany Cripps to Moscow for talks with Molotov, the foreign minister, on a proposal to set up a trade mission between the Soviet Union and Britain. They travelled on a hazardous route by way of Sinkiang (Xinjiang) without documents, directions, money, or knowledge of the local languages, and returned to Chungking after a month in Moscow. 
No sooner had Cripps and Wilson returned to Britain in April 1940 via America, after five months abroad, than they were asked to go back to Moscow to pursue the trade mission proposal. The United Kingdom had withdrawn its ambassador to protest against the Soviet invasion of Finland, and in response to a demand by Molotov that he would discuss the matter only with an ambassador, Cripps was appointed ambassador and Wilson third secretary. There was not much to do until the German invasion of Russia, when delegations began to arrive from Britain. Wilson took lessons in Russian. When the Germans threatened Moscow the entire diplomatic corps was evacuated to Kuibyshev some 530 miles away. After ten weeks they were able to return to Moscow, and later to leave for London in a British cruiser from Murmansk. 
In London Wilson was offered a post in the Russian department of the Foreign Office as a temporary third secretary, despite his decision to register as a conscientious objector. He worked in the department until VE-day and was the only member, apart from its head, Sir William Strang, who had ever visited Russia. One of his tasks was to translate Stalin's letters to Churchill: the Foreign Office had been receiving them in a bad English translation from the Soviet embassy and had requested the originals. Wilson made several more trips to Russia during those years, including one as a member of the British delegation to the Yalta conference. There Wilson sat behind Churchill in the plenary sessions and with Sir Edward Bridges took the minutes. He later recalled that his other main function was to empty Churchill's ashtray of his cigar butts. Wilson's last months with the Foreign Office were spent in the newly formed United Nations department. His main assignment was to act as secretary of an international group that toured cities on the American east coast exploring suitable sites for the UN headquarters. In personal terms the mission was notable for his meeting and in 1946 marrying Julie Stafford (Judy) Trowbridge in New York. 
In 1946 Wilson returned to the bar. His first job was for the Foreign Office, preparing a draft of principles for the newly established United Nations commission on human rights. He accompanied the British delegation to the commission's first meeting in New York (chaired by Eleanor Roosevelt) as legal adviser. But one swallow did not make a summer. He found the work of chambers rather dull after his war-time adventures. After contacting the senior British officials he had worked with then, he was appointed an assistant secretary at the Treasury, seconded to the Cabinet Office. His most interesting assignment was as secretary of the India committee, which supervised the preparations for Indian independence. He was also secretary of the complex of committees that dealt with trade and related problems arising from the inconvertibility of sterling, and with the negotiations over Marshall aid. 
In 1951 Wilson was appointed director of the Technical Co-operation Bureau newly set up by the Commonwealth in Colombo, Ceylon: not a major agency, but popular with the governments of the less developed members, which helped one another rather than seeking aid from rich countries. Wilson travelled extensively around the countries of south and south-east Asia and acquired an abiding interest in economic development. The family, which already had three children, added a fourth. Their two years in Colombo were among their most enjoyable. Recalled by the Treasury in August 1953, Wilson held a number of jobs during the next five years, including, on promotion to under-secretary, as head of the office of R. A. Butler, the lord privy seal. 
In 1958 Wilson was appointed economic minister at the Washington embassy, a post that included acting as alternate director of the World Bank. This was normally a two-year appointment, but the Treasury asked him to stay for a third year. Before it ended the bank's president, Eugene Black, invited him to join the bank's staff as director of the Asia department. He accepted, so renewing his contacts with the countries he had served in Columbo. In 1962 Black promoted him to be vice-president, responsible for the administration, budget, and financing of the bank, including the marketing of bank bonds and the soliciting of periodic contributions from the rich governments to the bank's soft loan affiliate for the poorest countries, the International Development Association. 
Wilson had expected to spend the rest of his career with the World Bank but did not get on with Black's successor, George Woods. Moreover, his Quaker conscience began to prick him. Life was too comfortable and his World Bank work did not sufficiently engage his inner drive to help the world's poor. So in 1966 he resigned and returned to England. After some searching he secured one of two posts as deputy secretary at the Ministry of Overseas Development. Two years later the permanent secretary, Sir Andrew Cohen, died and Wilson was promoted in his stead. He was knighted KCB in 1969, having been made CMG in 1962 and CB in 1968. He retired in 1970 on reaching the age of sixty. 
Wilson continued to pursue an active career. After some months as deputy secretary-general (economic) at the Commonwealth Secretariat, he took a final paid job as chairman of the Race Relations Board, which gave him great personal satisfaction. He held the post for six years until 1977, when it merged with the Commission for Racial Equality. Wilson's voluntary activities thereafter were almost all connected with development, as chairman of Oxfam (1977-83), which had a strong Quaker element, and a member of the boards of the Overseas Development Institute in London, the Institute of Development Studies at Sussex University, and the International Development Research Centre in Ottawa, whose quarterly meetings he attended until the age of seventy-five. He also joined, and in some cases helped start, a number of charitable organizations. As he grew older these activities fell away, although his mind remained as keen as ever. His first marriage was dissolved in 1979, but on 5 August 1989 he married Stephanie Adrienne (Steffi) Stainsby, a psychotherapist he had known at Oxfam; she was the widow of Charles Stainsby and the daughter of Harry Ross, a general practitioner. They settled in Oxford, where he died at St Luke's Nursing Home on 11 July 2004, of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He was survived by his second wife, Steffi, and the four children of his first marriage, Susan, Catherine, Peter, and John. 
Wilson had a hand in many of the leading events of the twentieth century. The leitmotif of his professional life after the Second World War was his dedication to improving the lot of the less fortunate. He pursued this impulse in a practical way through institutions devoted to that purpose. His wide experience, ability, and sometimes luck enabled him to serve at or near the top and thus help to shape their policies and practices. It also provided him and his family with a good living, a circumstance which did not escape his Quaker conscience. He had a keen sense of humour and looked on human foibles, including his own, with a quizzical eye. He was, in the words of a former civil service colleague, an 'unusual and thoughtful man, whose dry style and shrewd glance over those half-rimmed glasses masked... inner warmth and deep humanity' (The Guardian, 22 July 2004). 


@@@@@


doc= 94086


Stoneman, Walter Ernest (1876-1958), photographer, was born on 6 April 1876 at 9 Caprera Terrace, Plymouth, Devon, the youngest son and the thirteenth of fourteen children of Edwin Wills Stoneman (1835-1883), wholesale grocer, and his wife, Eliza Emma, 'nee' Serjeant ('b'. 1838). After studying at Plymouth College he chose not to join the family business, and decided at the age of fifteen to pursue a career in photography. 
By the age of twenty-one Stoneman was working as a junior photographer for the large established firm of J. Russell & Sons of 17 Baker Street, London. He also opened his own professional photographic firm, Heath and Stoneman Ltd, in Plymouth. One of his earliest successes for Russell & Sons was an image of Queen Victoria on her diamond jubilee, 21 June 1897, riding through the crowds in her gilded horse-drawn state landau. In his lecture 'Subjects interesting and otherwise' in December 1924 at the Croydon Camera Club, Stoneman recalled the momentous day: 'the firm had fourteen operators at various points on the route; ten with 12 x 10 cameras and four with whole plate'. As a junior he was given the smaller size, but was the only operator who managed to secure four snapshots of the queen. On the same occasion he captured Field-Marshal Earl Roberts leading the procession ('British Journal of Photography', December 1924). 
Stoneman not only photographed royalty at public events, but was also invited inside Buckingham Palace and Sandringham on several occasions for private portrait sittings with various members of the royal family, including Queen Victoria, George V, Queen Mary, Prince Albert, duke of York (later George VI), and Prince Henry, duke of Gloucester. 
Stoneman worked his way up at the firm of J. Russell & Sons, photographing society figures and distinguished Britons. By 1913, when the studio moved to new premises at 51 Baker Street, Stoneman had risen to the position of managing director. In 1914 he was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Photographic Society (having become a member the previous year). On 2 October 1915, at the Baptist Church, Haven Green, Ealing, Brentford, he married Kathleen Irene ('b'. 1892), daughter of George Herbert Stoneman, jeweller. They had one son. 
The year 1917 marked a turning point in Stoneman's professional career. He approached the director of the National Portrait Gallery, James Milner, with an ambitious idea for a national photographic record. He planned to photograph every eminent British person, with one photograph of each to be kept as a permanent record in the gallery's reference collection. James Milner was impressed by the proposal, and an initial contract was made between J. Russell & Sons and the National Portrait Gallery trustees for the period from 1 May 1917 to 24 June 1918. 
To ensure that no important figure was omitted, a list of categories of sitters was drawn up. It included peers of the realm, privy councillors, members of the House of Commons, grand commanders and knight commanders of all orders of British knighthood, members of the Order of Merit, heads of civil and diplomatic services, government ministers of state, admirals, field-marshals, generals, commanding officers of the navy and army, fellows of the Royal Society, fellows of the British Academy, members of the Royal Academy of Art, the academic committee of the Royal Society of Literature, chancellors of universities and heads of colleges. Notable early sitters for the national photographic record (NPR) included the prime ministers Arthur Balfour and Stanley Baldwin, the anthropologist William Halse Rivers, the artist Edward Poynter, and the writers J. M. Barrie and Rudyard Kipling. Additional categories were subsequently added, but the emphasis of the record remained political and military. 
Despite the controversy caused by working exclusively with one photographer, the gallery's trustees were pleased with the results, and Stoneman continued with the record for forty-one years, adding 100-200 portraits each year. Sitters received an invitation to book a portrait session with Stoneman, at no cost to themselves, at the studio of J. Russell & Sons at 51 Baker Street, which was renumbered 73 Baker Street in 1920 and moved to new premises at 63 Baker Street in 1932. Stoneman produced one postcard-sized bromide print of each sitter in a cream card mount for the record. The camera he used was a large wooden apparatus, operated by a bulb, 'as old as I am', he once said, which produced whole- and half-plate glass negatives ('The Times', 17 May 1958). The photographs are a uniform set of formal head-and-shoulders studio portraits, occasionally including the sitter's hands. Kathleen Stoneman played an important role in the compilation of the NPR, finding information about sitters and arranging appointments in the studio. 
The vast majority of NPR subjects were men, and in 1932 Stoneman decided that he would not photograph women again. He famously declared: 'Women do not make beautiful photographs. Men have more character in their faces. Lines come with age and character. The man does not bother about them. The woman does. She wants them obliterated, and often does this with cosmetics' ('Yorkshire Evening Post', 16 May 1958). However, he occasionally made an exception, and among the female sitters in the NPR are several politicians, including Nancy Astor (1921), Margaret Wintringham (1921), Dame Katharine Stewart-Murray, duchess of Atholl (1925), and Margaret Grace Bondfield (1930), as well as such leading figures in the arts as Myra Hess (1957) and Alice Meynell ('c'.1917). 
Stoneman's dedication to the NPR is evident in the vast number of portraits he produced; yet he still found time for other projects and frequently lectured on photography. In 1924 he provided twenty-one author portraits for the anthology 'Rosemary', a collection of poetry and prose dedicated to the memory of those who fought in the First World War, compiled by F. de Burgh. 
Stoneman's most iconic portrait is that of Winston Churchill standing in the cabinet room at 10 Downing Street. The photograph was not commissioned for the NPR, but was presented to the National Portrait Gallery by Stoneman who, sensing its historical significance, recorded the precise moment at which it was taken, 3 p.m. on 1 April 1941 (Rogers, 238). The image represented the power and determination of the nation, and it was circulated around the world; a copy of it stood on Stalin's desk in Moscow. 
The NPR images were not originally intended for exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery, but formed an important part of the reference collection. This did not prevent them from being displayed elsewhere. In January 1922 and December 1924 the Royal Photographic Society held exhibitions of Stoneman's photographs at their premises, 35 Russell Square. The J. Russell & Sons studio also held several shows to promote Stoneman's work. In February 1931 its exhibition 'Famous men', at 73 Baker Street, consisted of sixty-three portraits by Stoneman including Bernard Partridge, Ernest Benn, and John Lavery. Such exhibitions boosted Stoneman's reputation and brought more clients to the bustling studio. His fee was advertised as 3 guineas in the leaflet accompanying the exhibition 'Men of to-day by Stoneman', at Foyle's Art Gallery, 121 Charing Cross Road, in December 1943. The price included the studio sitting, submitting proofs, finishing and two signed photographs, with further copies at 1 guinea each. His commitment to the art of portrait photography was recognized in 1948, when he was made MBE. 
Stoneman was described as 'a stoutish, chin-bearded man with a twinkle behind his spectacles' ('The Times', 17 May 1958) and as 'a brisk, lively little man... always immaculately dressed' ('Christian World', 22 May 1958). His lifelong devotion to photography was matched by a devout Christian faith. A Congregationalist, he was a lay preacher for many years, and later in life was a member of the City Temple. With a strong attachment to his native Plymouth, he was vice-president of the London Devonian Association, as well as a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 
Stoneman continued to work until the week of his death, commuting to London from his home, Castalia, Ringley Avenue, Horley. He died on 14 May 1958 at Horley Cottage Hospital, Surrey. During his sixty-six-year career, he captured approximately forty thousand influential Britons, including five monarchs, nine prime ministers, twelve lord chancellors, eighty admirals and one hundred generals. The NPR had not, however, been a remunerative project for him, and after his death his widow suffered financially. She nevertheless reflected that it had been 'a deeply satisfying work and all his thought and energy were expended on it -- it was indeed his life' (Kathleen Stoneman to director of the NPG, NPG archives). He was succeeded as the official photographer for the NPR by Walter Bird in 1958 and by Godfrey Argent in 1967. The record, which closed in 1970, remains an important part of the National Portrait Gallery photographs collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 94088


Wolstenholme, Sir Gordon Ethelbert Ward (1913-2004), physician, charity director, and promoter of public health care, was born on 28 May 1913 at 22 Tapton Crescent Road, Ecclesall, Sheffield, the first son and third of five children of George Ethelbert Wolstenholme (1875-1940), chemical engineer and industrialist, and his wife, Clementina (1880-1955), daughter of Herbert Ward, forge master and steelmaker. Among his ancestors was Sir John Wolstenholme (1562-1639), who had been an incorporator of the East India Company, a patron of exploration by Henry Hudson and William Baffin, and an owner of Nostell Priory. Quebec's Cape Wolstenholme commemorates his association with Hudson. Ancestors on his mother's side included distinguished Sheffield forge masters, steelmakers, and master cutlers, and the founders of Thomas W. Ward Industries. Extending this tradition, Wolstenholme's father achieved prominence nationally and internationally in the pioneering promotion of stainless steel, which he claimed to have named. 
Educated at Repton School and Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, Wolstenholme initially prepared for a career in the diplomatic service, spending a year between school and university in Vienna (1931-2) advancing his German in preparation. However, re-evaluation of his ambitions following a first year at Cambridge drew him into medicine. Following medical studies at Cambridge (1933-6) and clinical training at London's Middlesex Hospital he qualified in 1939. On 1 June that year he married Mary Elizabeth Spackman (1915-1985), the daughter of the Revd Hubert Middleton Spackman. They had a son and two daughters. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War Wolstenholme joined the Royal Army Medical Corps. Service with the Cheshire regiment took him to France, but, adrift of the Cheshires in the confusion and carnage of the last days of May 1940, he was caught up in assisting a casualty-deluged field hospital, where his innovative attention to blood transfusion was noted by his superiors. Soon after his return to England the army blood transfusion service commandeered his services, drawing him into the war-pressurized pioneering of military and civilian blood transfusion services. In 1941-2 he masterminded and commanded blood transfusion services for north-western England and industrial Scotland. His success led to his appointment as officer commanding a new blood transfusion unit that was to support allied troops through the Sicilian and Italian campaigns of 1943 and 1944. For his expeditious and ingenious adaptations of the services of this small unit to the ever changing demands of these campaigns, and his strategic distribution of the first supplies of scarce penicillin within the central Mediterranean theatre of war, he was awarded a military OBE in 1944. With the rank of lieutenant-colonel he took charge of large general hospitals at Trieste and Udine at the conclusion of the Italian campaign. 
Wolstenholme remained in the medical corps until 1947, when he returned to house jobs at the Middlesex Hospital and the post-war challenges of advancing his clinical career on overcrowded promotion ladders. He intended to specialize in haematology, but as a registrar found himself shunted into dermatology. His first marriage had not survived the passion of wartime links with Dusanka (Dushanka) Nedic, 'nee' Messinger (1912-2006), a young Belgrade doctor of Hungarian origin serving the Yugoslav partisans. The daughter of Arthur Messinger, civil engineer, and estranged wife of Sava Nedic, she had attended one of the short courses in resuscitation and trauma care Wolstenholme had developed for doctors of allied forces. Dushanka, whom he married in London on 20 August 1948, and with whom he had two daughters, became a critical pacemaker of the rest of his life, her irrepressible vitality helping propel his career and direct it away from the blocked post-war channels of clinical medicine. 
Influenced by Dushanka, Wolstenholme chose to move into a medically related administrative role and in 1949 secured the executive directorship of the newly formed Ciba Foundation in London, a philanthropic and independent creation of the Swiss chemical company CIBA, intended to foster international collaboration among scientists, particularly across chemistry and the life sciences. The role was a risky sidestep into shaping a new and exploratory enterprise, but to this Wolstenholme brought the shrewd administrative skills and innovative commitment that had distinguished his wartime blood transfusion service. Over the next three decades, from 1949 to 1978, he established the Ciba Foundation as a leading promoter of international dialogue in scientific research, mainly through a successful style of symposium he evolved in the 1950s and his effectiveness in persuading eminent scientific visionaries to participate. 
Wolstenholme's symposia were finely prepared, intimate, international, two to three-day house-party style events, each involving approximately twenty-five leading scientists carefully selected and briefed to provide interdisciplinary interaction and perspective on a particularly opportune aspect of life science or clinical research. Initially, in the 1950s, he perceptively gave priority to pressing issues of endocrinology and the regulation of cell metabolism in his symposia, pursuing their revolutionary benefits to clinical medicine. In his thirty years at the helm of the Ciba Foundation he masterminded more than 200 symposia of high relevance to biological science and clinical medicine, each yielding a detailed report for dissemination. Most were held in the gracious comfort of the home of the Ciba Foundation at 41 Portland Place, London, where Gordon and Dushanka Wolstenholme also became legendary providers of open-house hospitality to members of the international scientific community. The American biochemist Abraham White described a Wolstenholme symposium as a twentieth-century version of a caravanserai, a gathering of travellers at an oasis where from dawn to dusk the time is spent matching ideas and intellects and trading viewpoints. 
Wolstenholme blended his Ciba Foundation commitments with prolific charitable service to other agencies dedicated to scientific and clinical advances, including the Renal Association of Great Britain, the Society for the Study of Fertility, the Arthritis Research Campaign, the National Kidney Research Fund, the Society for Social Medicine, the European Biological Foundation, and the International Society for Endocrinology, all of which he helped establish. He also gave long and distinguished service to the Worshipful Society of Apothecaries, of which he was master in 1979-80, the Zoological Society of London, the Nuffield Institute for Comparative Medicine, the Royal Society of Medicine, of which he became president in 1975-7, and the Royal College of Physicians, of which he was Harveian librarian from 1979 to 1989, following his retirement from the Ciba Foundation. (In this latter role he edited volumes 6-8 of the college's 'Munk's Roll'.) Among numerous honours he became a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1959 and a recipient of the star of Ethiopia in 1966. He was knighted in 1976. 
Facilitating advances in health care became the guiding principal of Wolstenholme's long career, which included advisory contributions to health care in Ethiopia (1963-74) and Venezuela (1969-78), and ultimately the establishment in 1988 of an international charity, Action in International Medicine (AIM), to promote better primary care globally. His greatest regret was in the failure of this organization to thrive through lack of financial support; it folded in 2001. Wolstenholme lived latterly at La Villiaze Lodge, rue de la Villiaze, Forest, Guernsey. He died on 29 May 2004 and was survived by his wife, Dushanka, and his five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94089


Younger, Alan Christopher Wyrill (1933-2004), stained-glass artist, was born on 13 March 1933 at 3 Princes Garth, Forest Hill, London, the second son of Henry Walter Younger, a provision buyer for the food retailer Sainsbury & Co., and his wife, Elizabeth Blakemore, 'nee' Wyrill. He was educated at Alleyn's School in nearby Dulwich and at Rossall in Lancashire, where the school was evacuated during the war. His national service years were spent in Egypt and there his prowess at cricket earned him a place in the Combined Forces Mediterranean team. After leaving the army in 1953 he enrolled part-time at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in Holborn, London. There memorable life-drawing classes were taught by Mervyn Peake. To earn a living Younger worked for the stained-glass artist Carl Edwards at his studio in the old mortuary above the Apothecaries Hall in Blackfriars. Younger researched coats of arms and historical detail as well as technical data needed by Edwards in the creation of new windows for war-damaged buildings including Liverpool's Anglican cathedral and the House of Lords. Six years spent in this way gave Younger invaluable experience in learning the techniques required to make stained-glass windows to a high professional standard. His first window was made under Edwards's supervision for the stairwell of the Temple Church, near Fleet Street. 
On 8 November 1957 Younger married (Hazel) Zoe Evans, a secretary and the 27-year-old daughter of Leslie Birchmore, a coalmining trainer. The couple moved to Forest Hill to a flat on Taymount Rise where their two daughters were born, Louise Sarah in 1958 and Johanna Elizabeth in 1963. In 1959 Younger left Carl Edwards to join the studio in Penshurst, Kent, of Lawrence Lee, professor of stained glass at the Royal College of Art. Lee had many commissions following the resounding success of his stained-glass windows in the nave of the recently completed Coventry Cathedral. Younger proved an ideal assistant while Lee encouraged him to adopt a looser, more spontaneous, approach to working on glass which undoubtedly extended his visual vocabulary. Meanwhile Younger's own work was taking shape. In 1961 he won the Worshipful Company of Glaziers' prize and in 1962 was awarded the Sir Arthur Evans travelling scholarship, which enabled him and his family to tour France and Germany studying the work of contemporary glass artists as well as the continental heritage of medieval stained glass. His first two commissions were east windows: Haselbech church in Northamptonshire (1966) and Boldre church in Hampshire (1967). His individual approach to design was immediately apparent in the deployment of varied textures on white and coloured glass, his concern for the orchestration of the lead line within the composition, and his passionate attention to detail. 
In 1969 the family bought a house, 44 Belvedere Road, near Crystal Palace, London. A studio was built in the garden with a north-facing window, workbench, and kiln. In this confined space Younger designed his windows, assembled the glass and cut out the shapes, and painted, stained, and fired the glass pieces. The only part of the process assigned to others was the glazing and fixing of the windows into the building. Demand for Younger's stained glass was now considerable as church clients responded to his charm, evident depth of knowledge, and the beauty of the finished windows. Significant commissions from this period include the Bede window in the Galilee chapel of Durham Cathedral (installed 1973); among his other church commissions were windows for Tamworth parish church, Glasgow university chapel, the Suzy Lamplugh memorial window at All Saints', East Sheen, London, two memorial windows for field marshals James Cassels and Mike Carver at the Royal Military Academy chapel, Sandhurst, and a lancet window at St Aldhelm's chapel, Worth Matravers, Dorset. Younger's competence as an architectural designer also brought him to the notice of organizations besides the church. During the 1980s the decorative glass makers Goddard and Gibbs sought artists who were able to offer contemporary interpretations of Arabic patterns for the decoration of mosques, palaces, and airports in the Middle East. With great sensitivity Younger designed windows for royal pavilions, private villas, and mosques in Saudi Arabia while the Queen Mother Marriage Hall, Kuwait, was an outstanding example of his work in this field. In Britain his secular commissions included windows for St John's College, Cambridge, and University College, Oxford, and two entrance panels for Putney shopping centre. 
In September 1987 Younger was invited to create new glass for the rose window at St Albans Cathedral to replace that installed during Lord Grimthorpe's late nineteenth-century rebuilding of the north transept. Completed in 1989 and dedicated by Diana, princess of Wales, the new window was a resounding success. Dramatic colour and a well worked out mathematical design made this one of the few modern rose windows to compare favourably with those of the middle ages. Other prestigious commissions followed. In 1993 Younger made three windows for Chester Cathedral, commissioned by the duke of Westminster, while in 1998 he won the competition to create new glass for the clerestory east window of Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey. Looking back over this demanding work -- which depicts the Virgin Mary and angels and took two years to complete -- Younger wrote: 'I was in complete agreement that the window should be figurative but did not want this element to dominate and be immediately apparent. A window that revealed its content slowly after a first impression of abstraction and rich jewel like colour, with an important ration of 'whites', in the manner of 15th century English glass would be preferable, endeavouring to convey a feeling that the glass had always been in that position and 'belonged' to the chapel, but at the same time was undoubtedly of 'today'. (Younger, 'Glazing the clerestory')' This window was installed in October 2000 and was his last major work. Another rose window, for St Katherine's Foundation in Rotherhithe, had been designed before Younger was diagnosed with cancer in early 2004; it was completed after his death by his friend the glass artist Caroline Benyon, daughter of Carl Edwards, and her husband, Tony Benyon. Besides his glasswork Younger was a lively and much loved teacher at Kingsdale School, the pioneering comprehensive in West Dulwich. From 1971 he also lectured in art history and life drawing at the American International University at Richmond. A member of the Art-Workers' Guild and liveryman of the Company of Glaziers, he was also an active fellow and vice-president of the British Society of Master Glass Painters and a much-valued trustee of the Stained Glass Museum, Ely. He died at his home in south London on 12 May 2004 and was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94090


Ziff, (Israel) Arnold (1927-2004), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 31 January 1927 at 28 Grange Avenue, Chapeltown, Leeds, the only son of Max Ziff ('d.' 1954), a boot manufacturer and retailer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Gilston. His family had moved to Leeds from Russia in the early years of the twentieth century. Arnold, as he was usually known, attended Roundhay grammar school in north Leeds before studying economics at the University of Leeds for one undistinguished year. He served in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps in the final months of the Second World War and as a staff sergeant assigned himself to an eight-month posting in Paris before he was demobilized in 1947. On 23 June 1952 he married Marjorie Esther Morrison, daughter of Jack Morrison, company director, at the New West End Synagogue in Paddington, London; the couple had one daughter, Ann, and two sons, Michael and Edward. 
As a businessman Ziff energetically pursued two strands of activity. The origin of the first of these -- the family shoe business, Stylo -- can be traced to the small shop, selling Leeds-made footwear, opened by his aunt Fanny soon after her arrival in the city at the turn of the century. After the First World War her four brothers, including Max Ziff, expanded the business, added production to the retailing component, and in 1935 formed the Stylo Boot Company. On leaving the army Arnold Ziff joined the family enterprise and took responsibility for maintaining and augmenting the portfolio of shops. Such was his success in this sphere that he was promoted to managing director on his father's death in 1954, and served as the company's chairman from 1967 until 2000, when his elder son, Michael, already chief executive, took over. Under Ziff's management, Stylo (which later became Stylo plc but remained firmly in family hands) developed as a multiple shoe retail group. In 1964 it acquired the Northampton firm W. Barratt which extended the company's profile to southern England, and followed this with the takeover of Priceless (discount footwear outlets) in 1995, Hush Puppy from Sear in 1996, and Shelly's footwear chain in 2003. Ziff's acquisitions consolidated the company's position at the lower price end of the market and by the time of his death Stylo was one of the country's largest independent footwear retailers, with 100 shops and 6000 employees. 
Ziff's knowledge of real estate, gained during his tours of northern England for Stylo, provided the foundation of the second element of his commercial enterprise. In 1959 he established Town Centre Securities (TCS), a retail property investment and development company, with capital of $1000. The company benefited considerably from a property boom which followed the period of post-war austerity: eighteen months after its creation it went public valued at $250,000. In 1964 TCS completed the innovative Merrion Centre in Leeds, then Britain's largest covered shopping centre and a major factor in the city's subsequent regeneration. The activity of TCS focused on the north of England and Scotland but also included the Maltings shopping and entertainment precinct in Salisbury. Early twenty-first century projects included the Eastgate and Harewood Quarter development in Leeds and the regeneration of Manchester's Piccadilly Basin, which was facilitated by Ziff's bold purchase of shares in the Rochdale Canal Company in the 1960s. 
Ziff sought to use his wealth and business acumen for the benefit of others. As a committed Jew he aimed to enhance the lives of his co-religionists in Leeds, but his philanthropic work was by no means confined to Jewish causes. It embraced a wide range of local welfare, medical, sporting, educational, historic, and artistic endeavours; and took a variety of forms which included straightforward and generous financial donation but more commonly involved fund-raising and motivating others. His early charitable work, however, was shaped by his father's commitment to the Leeds Jewish Board of Guardians (subsequently renamed the Leeds Jewish Welfare Board). Following Max's death Arnold Ziff acquired positions of responsibility on the board and strove particularly to combat loneliness and isolation among the community's most disadvantaged members. He was the board's president for twenty years from 1968 and at the same time worked tirelessly for the Leeds Jewish Housing Association. Among his many other contributions to the city Ziff was instrumental in the acquisition of a whole-body scanner for St James's Hospital (raising $1 million in six months) and served on the appeal committee of Leeds parish church, as patron of the Leeds Civic Trust, and as vice-president of the Leeds international piano competition. His passion for the arts was reflected in both individual and institutional support, and included the gift of a Steinway grand piano for the University of Leeds' concert hall. The business studies departments of both of the city's universities also benefited from Ziff's munificence, with an endowed Arnold Ziff chair in retailing at Leeds Metropolitan University and through his energetic fund-raising for the new business school at the University of Leeds. Ziff's commitment to charitable enterprise and artistic and educational pursuits was shared with his wife, Marjorie, and is recognized in the Marjorie and Arnold Ziff Community Centre, which opened in north Leeds in 2005, and the Marjorie and Arnold Ziff building at the University of Leeds. In recognition of his numerous contributions, Ziff was appointed a JP in 1967, OBE in 1981, and high sheriff of West Yorkshire in 1991. Although he did not graduate when a student, he later received honorary degrees from the University of Leeds (1993) and Leeds Metropolitan University (2003). He died of bronchopneumonia, congestive cardiac failure, and ischaemic heart disease on 14 July 2004 at St James's University Hospital, Leeds. He was survived by his wife and two sons, and succeeded as chairman of TCS by Edward Ziff. 


@@@@@


doc= 94093


Elis, Islwyn Ffowc (1924-2004), Welsh-language writer, was born Islwyn Foulkes Ellis on 17 November 1924 at 12 The Beeches, Acton Park, his aunt's home in Wrexham, Denbighshire, the elder son of Edward Ivor Ellis (1887-1964), a tenant farmer of Glynceiriog, Denbighshire, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Kenrick (1892-1963), who was the ninth of the eleven children of Samuel Kenrick, a tenant farmer of Ruabon in the same county. Named after the mystic poet Islwyn 
(William Thomas; 1832-1878)
, he was raised first in Glynceiriog and then, from the age of five, at the family farm, Aberwiel, just outside the village. Although his mother's first language was English, and notwithstanding the fact that the border with England was less than two miles to the east, the Ellis home was cultured and staunchly Welsh-speaking; like most country children at that time, Ellis spoke no English until the age of ten. He was to make much of the differences between his people and their English neighbours: 'We in our mountain valley spoke Welsh. They on the plain spoke English. We could sing spontaneously in harmony. They could not. We talked of preachers and poets, they of footballers and racehorses' ('Artists in Wales', 144). 
At grammar school in Llangollen, some twenty-six miles distant from his home, Ellis was taunted by teachers on account of his patriotism (he had begun to use the Welsh forms of his surname) but distinguished himself academically and went to the University College of North Wales, Bangor, in 1942. There he began writing verse, stories, and essays, won the crown at the University of Wales inter-college eisteddfod, and joined Plaid Cymru -- the start of his lifelong commitment to the cause of political nationalism. (He stood as the party's candidate in Montgomeryshire, a bastion of Liberalism, in 1962 and 1964, did a stint as editor of its newspaper, and played a key role as press and publications officer in the Carmarthen by-election of 1966 at which Gwynfor Evans won the party's first seat at Westminster.) After taking a degree in Welsh and philosophy at Bangor he spent two years at the theological college in Aberystwyth, followed by a year's pre-ordination training at Bala, before realizing his father's ambition for him to be a minister of the Presbyterian Church of Wales. During the Second World War he had been a conscientious objector on Christian pacifist grounds. 
In 1950 Elis (as he was now known) became a minister of the Calvinistic Methodists in Llanfair Caereinion, in northern Montgomeryshire. On 28 October the same year he married Eirlys Rees Owen (died 2007), the 23-year-old daughter of Lewis Rees Owen, farmer, of Tywyn, Merioneth. They had one daughter. Despite a friendship with the poet R. S. Thomas, who held the living of nearby Manafon and whom he helped to master Welsh, Elis was unhappy in Montgomeryshire, mainly because he did not feel himself suited to pastoral work but also because he was suffering a deep crisis of conscience that brought him close to complete breakdown. In three articles for 'Y Drysorfa', the denomination's magazine, in February, May, and August 1955, he questioned the contemporary relevance of the church, criticized its constitution, proposed the closure of all places of worship in favour of house meetings, and claimed that church allegiance was little more than 'the instinctive attachment of human nature to what is familiar and customary'. His already nervous disposition was exacerbated by what he considered his 'utter failure' as a man of the cloth, and he left the ministry in 1956 to return to Bangor, where for the next seven years he worked as a producer of radio programmes for the BBC and by writing. 
It is ironic that Montgomeryshire, the county where he had been so cast down by his own sense of inadequacy and inaptitude as a clergyman, was the setting of two of Elis's sunniest and most popular novels: 'Cysgod y cryman' (1953), and its sequel, 'Yn ol i Lleifior' (1956). They tell the story of the Vaughans of Lleifior, a prosperous farm in upland Montgomeryshire, and the pressures brought upon Edward Vaughan, the father, by the changing social conditions of the post-war years. His son Harri rebels against the old Liberal values of Edwardian Wales and, embracing communism, resolves to run the farm on co-operative lines. The Lleifior books were a milestone in the history of the Welsh novel by virtue of their contemporaneity and inventiveness, which, after decades of heavily didactic writing in stiff and often archaic language, delighted younger readers. Among a host of memorable characters are two nonconformist ministers, one doctrinally old-fashioned and socially inept, the other well-read, open-minded, and ready to meet the world in all its challenging complexity, even to treat Harri Vaughan's atheism seriously; the author left no doubt as to which kind he preferred and had tried to be. One of the bravest things the novels did was to present a sympathetic portrait of 'the good German', the saintly Karl Weissman, who, after working on the Lleifior land as a prisoner of war, chooses to stay on after 1945, learns Welsh, and eventually, after much tribulation and on the very last page of the latter novel, becomes engaged to Greta Vaughan, Harri's vivacious sister. The books sold in their thousands and remained in print throughout Elis's lifetime. Translated, abridged for Welsh learners, adapted for radio and television, and put on the syllabus of the Welsh Joint Education Committee, they became classics of modern Welsh literature. There was no dissent when, in 1999, 'Cysgod y cryman' was chosen as 'Welsh book of the century' alongside its English-language counterpart, the 'Collected Poems' of R. S. Thomas. 
In 1963 Elis joined the staff of Trinity College, Carmarthen, as a lecturer in Welsh and drama, but he remained in the post for only five years. He then worked as an editor and translator with the Welsh Books Council in Aberystwyth, where he used his French, Italian, and German, but found that having to deal with other writers' manuscripts had a baneful effect on his own work and temperament. After four more years as a freelance writer in Wrexham he took a lecturer's post at St David's University College, Lampeter, where he was appointed reader in 1984 and where he remained until his retirement in 1988. His students at Lampeter found him a conscientious and inspiring teacher, happiest when encouraging young people to write. 
Although he was never again to produce anything as good as the Lleifior novels, Elis published a number of books in which he continued to demonstrate a mastery of style and range of subjects which won him many more admirers. For his essays, 'Cyn oeri'r gwaed' ('Before the blood runs cold', 1952), he was awarded the prose medal at the national eisteddfod. His second novel, 'Ffenestri tua'r gwyll' ('Windows towards the twilight', 1953), was set in the world of the arts and is a study of a wealthy, sophisticated, neurotic, sexually frustrated, middle-aged woman who dominates and exploits the writers and painters who rely on her patronage. Other novels followed in quick succession. 'Wythnos yng Nghymru fydd' ('A week in the Wales of the future', 1957), published by Plaid Cymru, is a polemic in its depiction of, first, a utopian society enjoying full self-government and, secondly, a region known as 'West England' in which all traces of Welsh culture have been obliterated by a totalitarian regime. 'Blas y cynfyd' ('A taste of the old world', 1958) is a satire on the pettiness and hypocrisy that Elis found all about him in his own country. In 'Tabyrddau'r Babongo' ('Drums of the Babongo', 1961) he turned to the colonization of Africa and its implications for other oppressed cultures, and, always ready to bend the genres, in 'Y blaned dirion' ('The fair planet', 1968) he wrote the first science fiction in Welsh. He also persevered with his short stories, bringing out a selection under the title 'Marwydos' ('Embers', 1974), wrote a play about Howell Harris (leader of the Methodist revival in Wales), made a charming Welsh translation of 'Arabian Nights', and published a collection of his highly polished essays and radio talks under the title 'Naddion' ('Shavings', 1998). With Gwyn Jones he edited an anthology of Welsh short stories for Oxford University Press in 1971; this included a translation of his story 'Song of a Pole'. His Lleifior books were translated by Meic Stephens as 'Shadow of the Sickle' (1998) and 'Return to Lleifior' (1999). 
A diffident man, who could be prickly towards even his mildest critics, Islwyn Ffowc Elis was nevertheless unperturbed by the view that, in his attempt to create a younger and wider audience for the Welsh novel by making his work more accessible, he had set limits on the literary quality of his writing. He was fond of pointing to the English writer Graham Greene as a writer of 'entertainments' that beguiled the reader with their plots and characterization, as he had undoubtedly done in Welsh. For his services to the literature of his country he was awarded the degree of DLitt by the University of Wales in 1993. He died at the West Wales General Hospital, Carmarthen, on 22 January 2004, of bronchopneumonia and heart failure, and his remains were cremated six days later in Aberystwyth. He was survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 94095


Mikes, George (1912-1987), writer and humorist, was born Gyorgy Mikes on 15 February 1912 in Siklos, Hungary, the son of Alfred Mikes, lawyer, and his wife, Margit, 'nee' Gal. During the First World War the family moved to Pecs, where Alfred Mikes worked in a military court; they returned to Siklos when Alfred was invalided out of the army, and he died when his son was ten. The Mikes family were non-practising Jews; aged seventeen, George became a Roman Catholic. After attending the Cistercian school in Pecs and the Madach Gymnasium in Budapest, he studied law at the University of Budapest. There he dabbled in theatre criticism, and on graduation he worked for the Budapest newspaper 'A Reggel' ('The Morning'), covering all subjects except politics and sport. 
In 1938, following Hitler's invasion of Czechoslovakia, Mikes was sent to London to report on what he would later describe as the 'more and more deafening' portents of war. The assignment was expected to last two weeks, but Mikes stayed for good; in his autobiography he remarked that 'Some fortnights are longer than others' (Mikes, 97). He continued to work for 'A Reggel' until 1940, and from 1941 to 1951 was employed by the BBC's Hungarian-language service. At the BBC he met George Orwell, whom he introduced to Andre Deutsch, another Hungarian, who was then working for the publisher Nicholson and Watson; Orwell twice offered 'Animal Farm' to Deutsch, but no deal was forthcoming. 
Mikes's first book, 'The Epic of Lofoten', about the experiences of Norwegian islanders overrun by the Nazis, appeared in 1941. It was published under the name 'Dr H. George Mikes' -- an error resulting from his attempting to delete the title 'Dr' from the proof pages. On 17 December 1941, at Marylebone register office, he married Isobel Estelle Clemence Gerson (1916/17-1986), programme assistant at the BBC, and the daughter of Frank Gerson, shipping agent; one of the witnesses was the screenwriter Emeric Pressburger, a fellow Hungarian who had recently begun his collaboration with the film director Michael Powell. The marriage lasted exactly five years and the couple had a son, Martin ('b'. 1945). 
In September 1947 George Mikes became a British subject. The previous year saw his first real literary success, with 'How to be an Alien', subtitled 'A Handbook for Beginners and More Advanced Pupils'. The book was rejected by an editor at Nicholson and Watson, who is alleged to have said, 'A funny book about aliens, eh? I'm afraid you'd better try elsewhere' ('The Times', 20 Nov 1976). Mikes had more luck with Andre Deutsch, who now had his own publishing company; it was Deutsch's idea for Nicolas Bentley to provide illustrations. Mikes divided his study into two parts: a survey of specific English personality types -- including the 'Bloomsbury Intellectual' and the 'Mayfair Playboy' -- preceded by a survey of 'How to be a general alien' in which he considered subjects such as English understatement, mistrust of cleverness, and love of queuing, 'the natural passion of an otherwise dispassionate race' (p. 44). Mikes expected to inflame the reading public with his laconic assessment of British foibles. Among the book's more notable moments of pithiness was the observation that 'Continental people have a sex life; the English have hot-water bottles' (p. 36). But one-liners of this kind delighted an austerity-ridden Britain where laughs were in short supply, and Mikes's bank manager, who apparently threw the book in the fire, was a rare dissenting voice. The first printing of 5000 copies sold out in a week, and 'How to be an Alien' went on to be published in seventeen languages. 
Mikes would attempt to repeat the formula, with books about the French, Italians, Germans, Swiss, Israelis, Australians, and Japanese. None was as successful, though his capacity for epigram and for gentle but unsettling insight remained. On 2 January 1948, again at Marylebone register office, he married Lea Hanak (1921-1986), a colleague at the BBC and the daughter of Martin Hanak, merchant. Together they had a daughter, Judith ('b'. 1949). In the 1950s, while maintaining a prolific literary output, Mikes began working for the BBC's 'Panorama', for which he covered the 1956 Hungarian revolution. That led to more sober publications: his 'The Hungarian Revolution' (1957) was the first volume in English to document the event, and 'A Study of Infamy' (1959) examined the operations of the Hungarian secret police. His first novel, 'Mortal Passion' (1963), was less serious yet afforded a disturbing portrait of a man who could not stop eating. In 1970 Mikes returned to Hungary to make a documentary for the BBC. Incensed by the BBC team's filming the graves of people killed during the revolution, the Hungarian authorities demanded he leave the country. Nevertheless, he was able to return to Hungary in 1979. 
Many of Mikes's later books were in a flippant vein. They included a collaboration with Ian Russell, thirteenth duke of Bedford, 'How to Run a Stately Home' (1971), and the novel 'The Spy Who Died of Boredom' (1973). He published in 1982 an autobiography, 'How to be Seventy', and in the following year a memoir of his long friendship with Arthur Koestler. Other friends included J. B. Priestley and the cartoonist Victor Weisz (Vicky). His social life revolved around the Garrick Club and the Hurlingham Club -- the latter enabling him to indulge his 'one and only mania', for tennis (Mikes, 226) -- while his more public-spirited side was reflected in his being president of PEN in Exile from 1972 to 1980, as well as a governor of London Oratory School. 
Mikes lived latterly at 1b Dorncliffe Road, Fulham, London, where he put up his own blue plaque, removed after his death. He died of pneumonia, a complication of leukaemia, on 30 August 1987, at St Stephen's Hospital, Chelsea. He was survived by his two children, Lea Mikes having died in October 1986. 


@@@@@


doc= 94097


Paige, Edward George Sydney (1930-2004), physicist and engineer, was born on 18 July 1930 at Fernbank, Old London Road, Hastings, Sussex, the only child of Sydney Paige (1889-1958), a stationmaster, and his wife, Maude Agnes, 'nee' Robertson (1904-2002). Ted, as he was universally known, attended Rye grammar school, which for his first three years was based in Bedford, where he was billeted with a variety of families. As a boy he spent a lot of time roaming Romney marsh investigating wildlife and taking samples home to examine under a microscope. This interest in the natural world, and in birds in particular, remained throughout his life, developing into a passion for photography in his later years. In 1949 he was awarded a county scholarship and obtained a place at Reading University to read physics. When he was awarded a first-class degree he decided to stay in Reading to study for a PhD, becoming the first research student of Bill Mitchell. His research was on the optical effects of radiation damage in quartz for which received a doctorate in 1955. On 11 July 1953 he married Helen Gill ('b'. 1932), a clerk, and daughter of Alfred John and Kate Gill. The couple had two sons, Timothy and Niels, and two daughters, Sadie and Clare. 
Having found research to his liking, Paige applied to the civil service commission for, and was awarded, a junior research fellowship. He opted to hold it at the Radar Research Establishment at Malvern and took up his post in 1955, joining the recently formed transistor physics division under Alan Gibson. For the next thirteen years he was an integral part of the great forward push on semiconductors; his own contribution was on the electrical, optical, and acoustical properties of the important semiconductor materials germanium and silicon. 
Towards the end of this period Paige, together with a colleague, Dennis Maines, realized that the propagation of waves on the surface of a semiconductor might have considerable device potential. In 1968 they successfully applied for Ministry of Defence funding, which resulted in Paige being appointed leader of a new group that he built into a world-leading team in the research and development of surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices. Under his leadership the Malvern SAW group acquired a strong international reputation with many inventions, patents, and publications. In 1973 the Ministry of Defence presented its Wolfe award to the Malvern SAW team for its pioneering work. The team designed SAW filters, which were used to improve the performance of radar systems fitted into the Nimrod fleet of aircraft used by the RAF for reconnaissance. Paige's work on these filters resulted in a queen's award for technological achievement to the Royal Signals and Radar Establishment (as the Radar Research Establishment had become) in 1989. There were many other device successes, and for many years all colour televisions contained a SAW filter invented in the Malvern SAW group. 
In 1977 Paige was appointed professor of electrical engineering at the University of Oxford and a fellow of St John's College, making, as he himself commented, 'the simultaneous changes from physicist to engineer, from research to teaching, and from a government establishment to a collegiate university' (Raynes). He rose to the challenge and, using his long experience in pure and applied physics and industry, contributed strongly to the teaching and research life of the department of engineering science, playing a leading role in a number of new initiatives. In 1984 he was acting head of department for four months. 
Paige's achievements in science were recognized by many personal awards. In 1978 he received the Rayleigh medal of the Institute of Acoustics and the Duddel medal of the Institute of Physics. In 1979 he was awarded (with others) the Hewlett Packard prize for outstanding achievement in condensed matter physics awarded by the European Physical Society for 'The physical principles of surface acoustic wave devices'. He was a fellow of the Institute of Physics and of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. In 1983 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Paige's last area of scientific work, started after his retirement in 1997, was unknown to most of his former colleagues. Just before retirement he had been diagnosed with haemochromatosis, a genetic disorder causing the body to absorb an excessive amount of iron. He joined the Haemochromatosis Society, became a director, and spent much of his retirement helping the society by applying his scientific skills to help analyse data, to write reports on the geographical distribution of UK patients, and to investigate the extent of under-diagnosis of the disorder. Ted Paige was by nature a modest, quiet, even private, man. However, this deceptively mild exterior hid an inner firmness, and when he was roused by some perceived injustice he would prevail over the opposition with an impeccable logic few could match and an honesty and politeness that gained the respect of all. He died from cancer of the liver on 20 February 2004 at Sobell House, Oxford. He was survived by his wife, Helen, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94098


Nuttgens, Patrick John (1930-2004), architect, broadcaster, and educationist, was born on 2 March 1930 at The Studio, Whiteleaf, Monks Risborough, Buckinghamshire, the second son and third of four children of Joseph Edward Nuttgens (1892-1982), professionally known as J. E. Nuttgens, a stained-glass artist of German origin, and his first wife, Mary Catherine (Kathleen) (1890-1937), daughter of John Clarke, a magistrate, tax collector, and small farmer of Possextown, co. Meath, Ireland. His parents were both Roman Catholics and had met in Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, a centre of the arts and crafts movement, where Kathleen Clarke, a highly intelligent, strong minded, and volatile young woman, was tutoring the children of a local family. By the mid-1930s the Nuttgens family had settled at North Dean, in the Chilterns near High Wycombe. On a four-acre site on Pigotts Hill, Joseph Nuttgens built a house and stained-glass studio named Glasyers. As a child Patrick learned to cut, paint, and glaze glass. Across the fields at Pigotts lived another, more notorious Catholic craftsman, Eric Gill, along with his extended family, assistants, and apprentices. The lives of the Gill and Nuttgens families were intertwined to the extent of Patrick serving daily mass in the Gill chapel, too young to work out that the resident priest was often suffering the after-effects of the previous night's drinking in the local pub. 
When Nuttgens was seven his mother died suddenly of kidney failure. The news reached him when he was in his first miserable term at Grace Dieu Manor, a Catholic boys' preparatory school near Leicester. He attributed to the shock and trauma of the loss a nervous breakdown later in his life which brought him to consider suicide. Two years after his wife's death Patrick's father married Daphne Reid, whom Patrick described tartly as coming 'from a very respectable middle class family' (Nuttgens, 21). She and Nuttgens's father had eight more children -- four girls and four boys. A second cataclysmic event occurred when Patrick was twelve, and by then at the Catholic boarding school, Ratcliffe College. Captaining the junior rugby team, he stumbled off the pitch with extreme pain in his back and within hours was paralysed with poliomyelitis from the waist down. He endured the next two years in St Vincent's Orthopaedic College in Middlesex, and was discharged with a calliper on one leg and his torso in plaster. He wore a back brace or surgical belt all his life. A strong characteristic in Nuttgens was his aptitude in finding the uses of adversity. Unable to play games on returning to school in late 1944, he determined to excel in scholarship, winning every class prize for that year. He became a star performer in the school debating society, precociously developing his communication skills. Most importantly, inspired by travels with his father around Britain's country houses and cathedrals, he set his mind on becoming a great architect. 
In 1948 Nuttgens went north to Edinburgh, discovering the city he regarded as 'a work of art, a civilisation, an education in itself' (Nuttgens, 52). He studied art and architecture on a new joint course at Edinburgh College of Art and Edinburgh University. It was there that he met Bridget Ann (Biddy) Badenoch ('b'. 1931), second daughter of Alexander Badenoch, a remarkable local doctor, a former medical missionary and Catholic convert. Biddy was studying English Literature. Nuttgens enrolled in English classes so that he could sit beside her. Their marriage, on 21 August 1954, was the beginning of a close and fruitful partnership. They brought up six sons (one a foster child) and three daughters, and collaborated on several books on architecture. 
Nuttgens appreciated buildings conceived in the grand manner. The work of Sir Edwin Lutyens was a speciality of his, and the subject of an ebullient television programme which he wrote and presented. But he was intensely interested too in the living conditions of ordinary people, finding a productive subject for post-graduate research in the vernacular architecture of the north-east lowlands, in particular a group of fishing villages north of Aberdeen. He gained his PhD from Edinburgh in 1959. Meanwhile when the architect Robert Matthew was setting up the new department of architecture at Edinburgh University he appointed Nuttgens as his chief administrator, recognizing his talent as a course planner and teacher as much as an architectural practitioner. 
The ever-resilient Nuttgens recovered from the worst bout of depression he had yet endured to embark, in 1962, on what he later described as 'the most exciting and totally absorbing experience I have ever had' (Nuttgens, 83). This was his crucial involvement in the creation of the new university at York. First as director of the Institute of Advanced Architectural Studies and then, from 1968, as professor of architecture (a personal chair), Nuttgens was the link between the academics and the architects in developing the concept of what in that utopian period of university expansion appeared an ideal place of learning on the outskirts of the city: interdisciplinary buildings linked by covered walkways grouped around a central lake. He was also evolving radical methods of teaching. At the institute Nuttgens had devised short courses for architects, planners, builders, and engineers. These were professional, technical, and specific, reflecting his inherited belief in hands-on practice and professional collaboration. At York he opened out channels of communication between the university and the architectural masterpiece of York itself, teaching himself the detail of the city by walking round and round the walls. He came to love the city deeply, realizing that what made it 'the most beautiful, tantalising and coherent place' was 'its contempt for the set piece and the grand gesture' ('Daily Telegraph', 5 April 2004). From the mid-1960s he entered vociferously into long-running local planning controversies, defending the historic city centre from what he saw as ruination by crudely designed, characterless office blocks. 
Nuttgens was the product of two traditions: education for its own sake and, through his arts and crafts connections, education for a purpose, by means of practical experiment. The possibilities of merging these two approaches excited him when he was appointed the first director of Leeds Polytechnic in 1969. He liked the broad scope of an institution that combined technology, commerce, art, and teacher training, and was ambitious in his aims to make the former municipal college of technology into an institution of international reputation. Nuttgens was determined to put creativity back in the forefront of higher education. A characteristically imaginative gesture when he first arrived at Leeds was his relandscaping of the barren city centre site, forming grassy mounds which the students named Mount Nuttgens. But although his underlying ideas received attention nationally, and Leeds Polytechnic came to be accepted as one of the UK's leading educational institutions, these were problematic years in which Nuttgens's characteristic optimism was tested to the full. The polytechnic was harried by a local education authority unconvinced by Nuttgens's visionary outlook, and sabotaged from within by student protests of the period. He felt bitter about what he saw as the betrayal of the polytechnic principle by the Thatcher governments of the 1980s and he resigned in 1986, shortly before polytechnics were absorbed into a hugely expanded university system. 
Nuttgens's health had by now deteriorated with the onset of multiple sclerosis (or what may possibly have been post-polio syndrome) and from now on he always used a wheelchair or sped along the corridors on an electric bike. 'I may be a man of parts' he said, 'but some don't work as well as they once did' ('The Guardian', 17 March 2004). His good humour and energy were undiminished. The most widely influential of his architecture books were published at this period: 'Pocket Guide to Architecture' (1980), 'The Story of Architecture' (1983), and 'Understanding Modern Architecture' (1988). His quick brain, breadth of knowledge, fluency, and wit made him a popular pundit on such radio programmes as 'A Word in Edgeways' and 'Round Britain Quiz'. His career in television burgeoned, too. In 1989, for example, he wrote and presented -- from his wheelchair -- a television history of British housing, 'The Home Front'. He had the gift of disseminating information compellingly while never talking down. Late in life, as administrative burdens lessened, he returned to the sheer enjoyment of his watercolour drawings, vivid impressionistic architectural scenes. 
In 2000 Nuttgens's autobiography, 'The Art of Learning: a Personal Journey', was published. He was by now a considerable public figure: appointed a CBE in 1983, and holder of honorary degrees from five universities. But the story of his journey, related in endearingly personal terms, is a simple tale of fortitude, of difficulties triumphantly surmounted with the support of a large and loving family and strong, if critical, religious faith. After the onset of pneumonia, followed by multiple strokes, Nuttgens died on 15 March 2004 at York Hospital. He was survived by his wife and children. His funeral at the Roman Catholic church of St Leonard and St Mary, Malton, was followed by burial on 24 March in the village churchyard close to the Nuttgens's last home, Roselea Cottage, at Terrington, near York. A widely attended memorial service was held in September 2004 in York Minster, the city to which he felt most closely attached. 
It is not as the 'great architect' of his childhood ambitions that Nuttgens will be best remembered, but as a highly original philosopher of learning, one of the prime movers in the 'education through capability' movement of the 1990s, emphasizing the importance of the visual, creative, and vocational in forming a balanced personality. Nuttgens's popularization of art and architecture can be compared to that of John Ruskin in the nineteenth century. With his wonderful lucidity, largely through the medium of the television documentary, he opened people's eyes to the underlying meaning of the man-made world. 


@@@@@


doc= 94099


Bird, Walter Leonard Frederick (1903-1969), photographer, was born at 141 Southampton Street, Camberwell, London, on 21 June 1903, the elder child and only son of Walter John Bird, letter sorter, and his wife, Charlotte Helena, 'nee' Richards. While both his parents hoped their son would become an engineer, Walter chose to study fine art, first at Richmond Art School and then in Paris. He subsequently felt he did not possess a natural flair for painting and decided instead to pursue his interest in photography. 
In 1936 Bird joined the Royal Photographic Society, and became an associate the following year. His first studio was at 6 Denman Street, Piccadilly. In the early years of his career he worked primarily on advertising commissions and portraits of actors, including Robert Donat and Yvonne Arnaud, which were published in such society and stage magazines as 'Tatler' and 'Theatre World'. However, his 1930s colour figure compositions of artists' models (now housed at the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television in Bradford) best display his imaginative flair and individuality as a photographer. He employed the Vivex Carbro colour process, developed by D. A. Spencer and favoured by Madame Yevonde for its rich, saturated hues. His images of exotically clad and semi-nude women glow with jewel-like colours, blocks of vibrant reds and greens resonate against each other, and a combination of decorative patterned fabrics, feathers, jewels, and tropical flowers produce glamorous and luxurious effects. Red-lipped models are perfectly poised, appearing as otherworldly creatures of mysterious beauty, and group compositions like 'The Roman Bath' ('c'.1938) evoke the classical tableau paintings of artists such as Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema. When the Colour Photographs Ltd factory in Willesden, which processed Vivex photographs, closed in 1940 Bird turned to the new colour processes Kodacolor and Kodachrome. 
Bird published his early black and white nude studies in two solo books: 'Beauty's Daughters', with an introduction by the Italian artist Fortunio Matania (1938), and 'Beauty's Self: 48 Photographic Studies by Walter Bird' (1941). In addition he collaborated with the photographers John Everard and Roye on the book 'Eves without Leaves' (1940), which proved popular with British troops during the Second World War. 
During his career Bird exhibited in his studio and in London group exhibitions at the RBA Gallery in Pall Mall, the Royal Institute Galleries, and at the annual London Salon. In 1937 he was invited to exhibit at the Chicago Camera Club, showing a colour picture of the actress Stella Moya. As his reputation grew, he moved to a larger studio at 19 Savile Row, which was bombed during the war, destroying the majority of his negatives. He was devastated and left London for Bristol. Despite training as a fireman during the worst attacks on that city, in late 1940 and 1941, Bird still found time to give occasional talks on photography. He was eventually seconded from Bristol to the Crown Film Unit in London, a transfer organized by his friend the documentary film-maker Humphrey Jennings. 
After the war Bird shared a studio with the theatre photographer Houston Rogers and two others, at 85 Cromwell Road, Kensington, London. There he continued to work on images for advertising and portraiture, primarily in black and white. Bird preferred to use a whole-plate camera with a half-plate back, although later in his career he also used Rolleiflex and 35 mm cameras. On 11 July 1947 he married Margery Alice ('b'. 1913), daughter of Christian Hanckel, mining engineer. They had no children. Margery worked alongside her husband, as studio manager, for the following nineteen years, accompanied to work each day by a talkative parrot named Bobby. Bird was made a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society in 1948, and in the 1950s he took over the large studio of his close friend and fellow portrait photographer Mountstuart William Elphinstone (1871-1957) at 49 Queen's Gate. 
Throughout his career Bird encouraged and supported students of photography. He formed a teaching partnership with the photographer Dorothy Wilding in the 1950s and campaigned alongside other practitioners for the creation of a degree course in photography. For many years he was a member of the distinctions panel of the Royal Photographic Society and in 1959 was accorded a solo exhibition, which focused on his formal black and white portrait studies of well-known contemporary Britons, including the broadcaster Richard Dimbleby and the Nobel prizewinning scientist Sir Robert Robinson. The exhibition secured Bird's position as one of the most successful photographers of his generation. 
On the death of the photographer Walter Stoneman in 1958 Bird took over his position as chief photographer for the firm J. Russell & Sons, purchasing the entire business in December 1961. Bird also superseded Stoneman as the official photographer for the national photographic record of distinguished persons, which had been initiated by the National Portrait Gallery in 1917 to record important and influential citizens. These photographs were never intended for exhibition, but were rather a factual record of distinguished Britons in the archive of the National Portrait Gallery. His sitters ranged from peers, prime ministers, and such politicians as Harold Wilson and Edward Heath, to bishops, commanding officers of the armed forces, fellows of the Royal Society, Royal Academicians, and subjects from the arts like Barbara Hepworth, Sybil Thorndike, and Maggie Teyte. These formal, simple, black and white studio portraits are perhaps more imaginatively lit, and appear less bland, than those by Stoneman. Almost without exception they are three-quarter profile head and shoulder shots. They served a very different purpose from Bird's early lavish figure studies, and it is thus unsurprising that their style is equally contrasting. In total he photographed 1370 sitters for the national photographic record, and many of these images illustrate entries in the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography'. 
Walter Bird's appearance was dapper and conservative. In the studio he worked with rigour and enthusiasm: 'Everyone who sat for him was given the feeling that the sitting was a major event in Walter Bird's life. He gave his whole self to the business of interesting his sitter, posing him or her, and adjusting the lighting in his effort to make each photograph the best he had ever taken. ('The Times', 13 March 1969)' In 1967 the business was sold to Godfrey Argent, and Bird retired with his wife to a farmhouse at Trap, near Llandeilo Fawr, in Carmarthenshire. Two years later, while on holiday in Swaziland, he suffered a stroke, and he died there on 4 March 1969. 
In 1993 the Royal Photographic Society curator Pam Roberts and the photographer Vincent Stokes mounted an exhibition at the Long Gallery, Bath, of forty of Bird's Vivex Carbro prints and black and white nudes from the society's collection. The show revived the reputation of a photographer described by Charles Wheeler, president of the Royal Academy, as 'one of the most distinguished, if not 'the' most distinguished, photographers of important people living' ('Photographic Journal', January 1960, 12). 


@@@@@


doc= 94106


Pasley, Sir (John) Malcolm Sabine, fifth baronet (1926-2004), German scholar and literary critic, was born on 5 April 1926 at Rajkot, India, the younger child and only son of Sir Rodney Marshall Sabine Pasley, fourth baronet (1899-1982), who taught history and cricket at Rajkumar College, and his wife, Aldyth Werge, 'nee' Hamber (1898/9-1983). The baronetcy, which Sir Malcolm inherited in 1982, had first been granted to his ancestor the naval officer Thomas Pasley in 1794. He was educated at Sherborne School and from 1944 served for two years in the Royal Navy, in which he saw action in the final year of the Second World War. He spent the post-war months in Germany. His one item of booty, a typewriter, served all his subsequent writing. Between 1946 and 1949 he studied modern languages at Trinity College, Oxford, and after graduating with a first-class degree held a Laming travelling fellowship at Queen's College, which took him to Munich for a year. He began research on German social novelists of the nineteenth century. In 1950 he was appointed a lecturer at Magdalen and Brasenose colleges, Oxford. In 1958 he was elected a fellow of Magdalen, where he taught for the next twenty-eight years. On 25 February 1965 he married Virginia Killigrew Wait, daughter of Peter Killigrew Wait; the couple had two sons, Robert ('b'. 1965) and Humphrey ('b'. 1967). 
In 1960 a chance encounter gave Pasley's research a new and unexpected direction. The outcome turned work that would always have been intellectually distinguished into something unquestionably central, and directed his meticulous mind to the most basic literary issues. Through one of his pupils Pasley learned that the great-nephew of Franz Kafka, Michael Steiner, was studying at Oxford. Through Steiner he made contact with the writer's nieces, Marianne Steiner and Vera Saudkova, and discovered that it was they -- and not, as assumed, Kafka's close friend Max Brod -- who were the legal owners of the bulk of Kafka's literary estate. At Pasley's suggestion they agreed to have the manuscripts in their ownership, then in Zurich, placed in Oxford's Bodleian Library on permanent revocable loan. In 1961, in a journey later to become legendary, he collected the papers, insured them for $100,000, and transported them to Oxford on icy roads in his tiny Fiat car. 
The Bodleian Library now became the centre of textual scholarship on Kafka and hence of the critical edition that had been planned from the mid-1960s, and was begun in the following decade by the Frankfurt publisher S. Fischer Verlag, to supersede Brod's editions of the texts. Pasley became the leading figure of a small team of editors and took responsibility for the most important texts, 'The Castle' (published in 1982) and 'The Trial' (1990). Where diplomacy was necessary among the team or between editors and publisher, he supplied it. Such qualities were clearly evident during Pasley's work on his edition of 'The Trial', the manuscript of which was held and claimed by Brod's legatee. Pasley was permitted sight of a photocopy, which was wholly inadequate for the kind of minute genetic reconstruction he was practising; through careful negotiations with Brod's partner, who had inherited the papers after Brod's death in 1968, he was allowed in 1987 and 1988 to work from the original 'in the ill-lit bowels of a Zurich bank, under the eye of its owner' (Pasley, 'Kafka's 'Der Process': what the manuscript can tell us', 'Oxford German Studies', 18-19, 1989/90, 109). In 1986 he retired from his college teaching post to devote himself to editing. In addition to the two major novels, he edited a volume of writings and fragments from Kafka's 'Nachlass' (1993), as well as producing new translations for Penguin of 'The Great Wall of China and Other Stories' (1990) and 'The Transformation and Other Stories' (1992), a two-volume edition of the Brod-Kafka correspondence and travel diaries (1987-9), and a collection of his own essays on Kafka, 'Die Schrift ist unveranderlich' ('The writing is unchangeable', 1995). 
Pasley's edition became the basis for all later scholarly work on Kafka. At first sight, author and critic were strangely paired. It was paradoxical that 'this model English gentleman understood the mind of one of the most idiosyncratic and radical writers of the twentieth century better than anyone else in his time' ('Daily Telegraph', 25 March 2004). He even came to think of Kafka as a younger brother. Pasley's contribution was widely recognized with, among other awards, election to the German Academy of Language and Literature in 1983 and the British Academy in 1991. On his final visit to Prague, Kafka's birthplace, after the 'velvet revolution', he was feted by members of the Franz Kafka Society. In 1990 he was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis and while he continued to research, write, and publish, his illness led to a slow and painful decline. He died at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 4 March 2004 and was survived by his wife and two sons, the elder of whom, Robert, succeeded him as sixth baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 94124


Statham, Francis Reginald (1844-1908), journalist in South Africa, was born on 6 February 1844 at Everton, Liverpool, the fourth son of Henry Heathcote Statham, a solicitor, and his wife, Irene Elisa, 'nee' Horner. The architectural writer Henry Heathcote Statham was his eldest brother. On account of his health he received a large part of his education from private tutors, but he also attended both Liverpool Collegiate Institute and Windermere College. After leaving school he entered the cotton business in Liverpool, joining the firm of Rylands & Co. This was at a time of enormous speculation in cotton, owing to the American Civil War, and in November 1865 Statham, suffering from what he later described as an 'over-balanced mind', absconded with $2500 of the firm's money. Accompanied by a dancer from one of the local theatres, he fled to the continent under an assumed name. Pursued by a member of the Liverpool police rather improbably disguised as a Roman Catholic priest, the couple were finally caught at Lugano and agreed to return to England. There Statham was arrested, and, although he returned most of the money, he was sentenced to eighteen months with hard labour. His natural hypersensitivity was heightened by this experience, and later found expression in his novel 'The Fiery Furnace' (1895). After his release he married, on 31 October 1870, Margaretta Dalton ('b'. 1845), with whom he had at least five children. 
In gaol Statham underwent something of a religious conversion and in 1871 he became a lay preacher to an independent congregation in Edinburgh. He also began to write poetry; his 'Alice Rushton and Other Poems' appeared in 1868, and 'Glaphyra and Other Poems' two years later. However he soon turned to journalism and became assistant editor of the 'Liverpool Albion', before going to South Africa to become editor of the 'Natal Witness' in 1877. His premise was 'One man, with justice on his side, is a majority'; this made him both independent and fearless, but it also made him an awkward customer, and even some of those who should have been his natural allies found him difficult to deal with. As a severe critic of British imperial policy in South Africa, and an advocate of better relations with the Boers, it is not surprising that he offended officials in the Colonial Office, but even people as antipathetic to government policy as the Colensos found him a difficult ally. Frances Colenso accurately described him as 'a keen knife liable to shut upon the hand that used it, and therefore to be used with caution' (letter to F. W. Chesson, 23 July 1884, Anti-Slavery Society papers, Bodl. RH, file C130/40). 
In December 1879 Statham resigned from the 'Natal Witness' to become editor of the 'Cape Post'. When this closed down the following year he returned to England, where he wrote 'Blacks, Boers and British: a Three-Cornered Problem' (1881), in which he advocated reconciliation between the British and the Boers in South Africa. In 1881 he returned to South Africa to become editor of the 'Natal Witness' for the second time, but was forced to resign in 1887, following the revelation of his criminal past in Liverpool, and an unsuccessful defence against a libel action brought against the paper by John Wesley Shepstone over its coverage of his policies in Zululand. After a brief period in England -- where he attempted, unsuccessfully, to clear his name -- he became editor of the 'Natal Advertiser' in Durban. 
In 1891 Statham became editor of 'The Independent' in Kimberley and remained there until the paper closed in 1893. During this period he gathered the material needed to write his novel 'Mr Magnus' (1896), a devastating expose of Cecil Rhodes and the monopolistic policies of De Beers. In his factual writings he was hardly less vitriolic. In 'South Africa as It Is' (1897) he described the granting of the charter to Rhodes's British South Africa Company as 'the most extraordinary usurpation of power ever perpetrated since the Popes gave over the Peruvians into the hands of Pizarro'. 
Statham returned to England in 1895 where, funded by the Netherlands Railway Company, he acted as a propagandist for the Transvaal republic, writing a series of articles in the weekly 'South Africa' on 'Blacks, Boers and British'. These were followed by his books 'Paul Kruger and his Times' (1898) and 'The South African Crisis: the Truth about the Transvaal' (1899). During the South African War of 1899-1902 his pro-Boer sympathies once again got him into trouble with the authorities. The Colonial Office asked the Post Office to watch his mail, and the Metropolitan Police were asked to tail him on the grounds that he was possibly a Boer spy. No evidence of this was ever forthcoming. 
Towards the end of his life Statham attempted, without success, to become a music professor. A minor composer, he wrote a cantata, 'Prosperity and Praise', for the international exhibition at Kimberley in 1892, followed by another, 'Vasco da Gama', published in 1895. He also wrote anthems for all four South African territories. He died of kidney failure at his home, 2 Ruskin Avenue, Kew, Surrey, on 4 March 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 94126


Stern, Irma (1894-1966), artist in South Africa, was born in Schweizer-Reneke, Transvaal, on 2 October 1894, the first child of Samuel Stern (1863-1935), general dealer, and his wife, Henny, 'nee' Fels (1875-1944). Her parents were prosperous German Jews who retained strong ties with the cosmopolitan culture of Berlin, moving often between Germany and South Africa during her childhood. She spent several periods of schooling in Berlin and attended the ballet, theatre, and opera as well as art exhibitions as she grew older. At this time the conservative culture of Wilhelmine Berlin was being challenged by modernism and the excitement of a career in the fine arts clearly suited the passionate temperament that is evident in her journal and other early writings. 
Stern began her studies in art soon after her eighteenth birthday and quickly gravitated towards the expressionist idiom, a direction confirmed by her meeting in 1917 with the Brucke group artist, Max Pechstein. Works by Stern were included in the Frei Secession exhibitions of 1918 and 1920; and in May 1919 she showed thirty-three drawings at the Fritz Gurlitt gallery in what the 'Berliner Tageblatt' (in an undated cutting in her scrapbook) described as 'all kinds of modern styles'. By the time she settled in Cape Town in 1920 she was a successful young artist committed to modernism in the sense that she used her art to communicate the intensity of her feelings about life. 
Stern retained strong contacts with Germany until the rise of Hitler, at which time she broke off relations with childhood friends and even stopped writing in German. But she remained somewhat aloof from what she considered the provincial life of the Cape. She called her first exhibition in 1922 'An exhibition of modern art' expressly to signal her cosmopolitan status, and the poor critical reception of this and other early exhibitions appears only to have confirmed her sense of cultural superiority. This arrogance was complemented by an enduring insecurity and sense of loneliness. The expressionism of her early style disrupted conventional notions of beauty at the Cape, and the emotional and sexual nature of her subjects clearly made her conservative, Anglophile public uncomfortable. In particular her African subjects were viewed very differently in Cape Town and Germany. Colonial Cape Town saw itself as an outpost of civilization in Africa and was determined to keep all forms of primitivism at a distance. 
But Stern did not depend on the sale of her paintings to make a living as she was supported by her parents for much of her life. As for her personal life, after a succession of unhappy infatuations, she married her former tutor Johannes Prinz (1886-1942) on 1 April 1926 -- and divorced him on 6 March 1934. In 1927 she acquired The Firs, Rosebank, which soon became celebrated for its eclectic furnishings, colourful garden, and extravagant cuisine. 
The impression given in Max Osborn's monograph on Stern, published in Berlin in 1927, is that the artist's birth and domicile in Africa provided a rare authenticity for her images of the continent. In fact traditionalism was already confined to the native reserves demarcated by the 'Land Act' of 1913 to provide a constant supply of cheap labour for industrializing South Africa. Like A. M. Duggan-Cronin, whose photographic studies 'Bantu Tribes of South Africa' were launched in 1928, she effectively constructed her image of Africa by choosing to work in the reserves and then selecting her subjects and carefully removing any sign of western civilization from them. In the local context -- as distinct from Berlin -- her nostalgic representation of African life underscored the impossibility of assimilation. Her description of African people as 'lovely and happy children, laughing and singing and dancing through life with a peculiar animal-like beauty' ('Cape Argus', 12 June 1926) reflects her stereotypical view of African subjects. 
The dismay that Stern, and others of her generation, expressed at the increasing westernization of South Africa's black peoples led her not to develop closer relationships with them but rather to seek out people who had not yet been 'spoiled' as subjects for her art. Between 1937 and 1946 she made a series of remarkable expeditions to Dakar, Zanzibar, and the Congo, publishing idiosyncratic accounts of the last two. In these travels she continued to seek out the exotic, notably those she saw as quintessential Arabs in Zanzibar and aristocrat types among the Watussi in the Congo. But she also came to temper her expressionist search for the primitive with a more considered account of sheer physical presence, particularly in the form of portrait studies. In this development she gradually abandoned the angular, linear expression, with limited chromatic range, of her early years, in favour of more concentrated compositions of rich, sensual colour. 
Stern's travels contributed to the expression of a powerful decorative quality in her work through her constant discovery of exotic materials, particularly textiles. In her middle years, like Matisse, she came to present her art, whatever its subject and whatever its source, as an affirmation of the richness of life. In the same spirit she began a remarkable collection of objects from many different cultures, which she both displayed in her home and incorporated into her art: many still life paintings feature oriental ceramics or African sculptures from her collection; and she frequently used fragments of Zanzibar doors to frame her paintings. 
Significantly, Stern's developing interest in the form her art took, rather than her early concern with an expressionist purpose, led her increasingly to view her production within the context of European art history. From the 1940s she appears to have rekindled an interest in the art of the old masters, particularly in their treatment of religious and mythological subject-matter. And, after the Second World War, in a self-conscious effort to modernize her style, she looked closely at the work of Picasso and other artists of the French riviera. These formal experiments loosened the concentrated vigour of her style and introduced a somewhat anecdotal quality to her late work. Her late subjects of harbours, markets, flower sellers, and harvest scenes tend to use the same picturesque style whether for Mediterranean or South African examples. 
Stern died at the Volkshospitaal, Cape Town, on 23 August 1966, having achieved magisterial status in South Africa. She was cremated two days later at the Maitland crematorium. She left the greater part of her estate for the promotion of art. The Firs, with its contents, became the Irma Stern Museum, administered by the University of Cape Town. 


@@@@@


doc= 94127


Hamilton, James Stevenson- (1867-1957), wildlife conservationist in South Africa, was born at 7 Cumberland Place, Dublin, on 2 October 1867, the eldest son and first of three children of James Stevenson (1838-1926) of Braidwood, Lanarkshire, landowner and army officer, and his wife, Eliza Hamilton (1839-1875), who in June 1867 inherited from her uncle Fairholm, a property near Larkhall, Lanarkshire. On their marriage her husband adopted her surname in addition to his own (although he reverted to Stevenson in 1893). On Eliza Stevenson-Hamilton's death her son became sixteenth laird and heir to Fairholm, which was his lifelong home, although he never lived there permanently as an adult. His father twice remarried, in 1879 and 1885, and had further children. The complex family dynamics that resulted from his father's unhappy third marriage were unsettling, but throughout his life Stevenson-Hamilton remained intensely loyal to his father, to his siblings, and to the heritage of Fairholm. 
Intending to follow his father and paternal uncles in a military career, Stevenson-Hamilton was educated at Locker's Park, Hemel Hempstead (1879-1880), and at Rugby School (1881-3). Having completed his training at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in 1888, he was gazetted into the 6th Inniskilling dragoons and posted to the garrison in Pietermaritzburg, Natal. After his regiment returned to Britain in 1890 he became bored with the peacetime cavalry routine. In 1898 he took leave of absence to join Major A. St Hill Gibbons on an expedition to Barotseland to determine the navigability of the Zambezi River and to evaluate possibilities for white settlement in the region. In December 1899 he rejoined his regiment to fight in the South African War. Initially enthusiastic and in a position to display his qualities of leadership and military competence, he became increasingly critical of the conduct of the war. 
When war ended in 1902 Stevenson-Hamilton left the army and accepted employment in the Transvaal colony as warden of the Sabi game reserve that had been established in 1898 between the Sabi and Crocodile rivers. He found his life's work in enlarging and transforming this small game reserve into the Kruger National Park, an internationally renowned wildlife sanctuary. The aims of game reserves at that time were to prevent poaching, to eradicate a wide range of 'vermin' species (including lion, leopard, cheetah, and wild dog) and to nurture antelope and buffalo herds for the pleasure of sport-hunters. With his innovative leadership, Stevenson-Hamilton's accomplishment was to found an African national park that was both ecologically sound and receptive of visitors. He laid the foundations of South African nature conservation by initiating an effective paramilitary bureaucracy, careful formalized reporting, and a close personal knowledge of the people, landscape, and wildlife of the area. Initially he evicted all Africans from the game reserve. This earned him the name of Skukuza ('he who sweeps clean') but he later came to value the labour that black people could provide. He greatly expanded his area of control northwards by incorporating privately owned land up to the Olifants River and by taking over control of the Singwitsi, a game reserve established in 1903 between the Letaba and Levuvhu rivers. 
Stevenson-Hamilton publicized the value of wildlife protection by writing promotional and educational material in a number of books and journals. 'Animal Life in Africa', published in 1912, is a forerunner of modern animal behavioural ecology. Stevenson-Hamilton brought South African wildlife protection to international attention. An active member of the Society for the Preservation of the Wild Fauna of the Empire, he corresponded regularly with such eminent sportsman-preservationists as Frederick Selous, Abel Chapman, William Hornaday, and Theodore Roosevelt. 
Stevenson-Hamilton enlisted in the First World War and was stationed in Gallipoli and Egypt. Between January 1917 and December 1919 he was seconded to a civilian administrative post in the southern Sudan. For a short period in 1921-2 he was appointed superintendent of the game preservation department for the Sudan. 
From time to time political developments threatened the continuing existence of the game reserves in South Africa. Stevenson-Hamilton lobbied for the creation of a national park that would be secured by an act of parliament. He found allies in Jan Smuts, who later became prime minister of the Union of South Africa, and Deneys Reitz, the minister of lands, and he warded off the land hunger of the departments of mines, agriculture, and native affairs. In 1923 national park legislation was due to come before the South African parliament, but private landowners delayed expropriation, and a general election in 1924 brought a change of government. However, the incoming National Party government also supported the initiative, seeing in it the opportunity to promote Afrikaner culture. The national park became linked to a Dutch settler heritage and anti-British values, which at the time also found expression in a new national flag and anthem. Thus, when the 'National Parks Act' was passed in 1926, the park was named after Paul Kruger, former president of the old Transvaal republic. Stevenson-Hamilton considered retirement and accepted a temporary position in London as secretary of the Society for the Preservation of the Fauna of the Empire, but disliked the job. 
Stevenson-Hamilton returned to South Africa in 1926, becoming warden of the Kruger National Park, a position he held until his retirement in 1946. He managed the process of turning the game reserves into a national park that was attractive to tourists. Moreover, he transformed the conservation ethic by emphasizing the intrinsic value of the natural world and he ended 'vermin' killing. Increasingly, however, he resented interference by the expanding bureaucracy that managed the growing number of South African national parks. He also felt politically alienated, and disagreed with the preferential employment of Afrikaners and the philosophy of apartheid. Once he had retired his successors minimized his contribution to the Kruger National Park while extolling that of Afrikaners. Respected more by English-speaking South Africans, he was awarded honorary doctorates by the University of the Witwatersrand in 1935 and by the University of Cape Town in 1945. 
On 13 August 1930 Stevenson-Hamilton married Hilda Margaret Cholmondeley (1901-1979), an accomplished painter and photographer; they had three children, Margaret (1931-1935), James ('b'. 1933), and Ann ('b'. 1935). He died at Gibraltar, White River, Cape Province, South Africa, on 10 December 1957. His ashes were scattered in the Kruger National Park, where his legacy endures. 


@@@@@


doc= 94128


Walker, Eric Anderson (1886-1976), historian of South Africa, was born at Craigmore, Polworth Road, Streatham, London, on 6 September 1886, the eldest son of William Walker (1851-1927) of Leith, Scotland, mercantile clerk, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Goodman. From Mill Hill School he won a scholarship to Merton College, Oxford, where he missed a blue as an oarsman but was awarded a first in modern history in 1908. His first post was lecturer in history at the University College of Bristol, and while there he co-wrote a textbook for secondary schools on English history which went through many editions. 
In 1911 Walker decided to take up a lectureship at the South African College in Cape Town, in the newly established Union of South Africa. Two of his uncles were in South Africa, and his father worked for the Union Castle Line, which sailed between Britain and the Cape. Before he left England, Walker heard that the first professor of history at the South African College had resigned. He was appointed to the chair three months after arriving, not yet twenty-five, and was to remain in Cape Town for the next twenty-five years. In 1913 he married Lucy Stapleton (1883-1977), with whom he had two daughters. He would have served in France during the First World War had he not damaged his heart lifting heavy ammunition as a member of the Cape garrison artillery, which he joined in 1912. As a captain in that regiment he spent many months during the war watching for German ships off Cape Town. 
In 1918 the South African College became the University of Cape Town, and Walker made his one of the leading departments in the university. He was an outstanding teacher who made a great impression on his students, and the first-year survey course he introduced in 1923 survived for sixty years. In the early 1930s he served on the university's council and was dean of the arts faculty. Smuts was to suggest that had Walker been available, he would have been appointed principal in 1937. 
But it was above all as a pioneer in the writing and development of South African history that Walker made his name. Despite his heavy teaching load he was enormously prolific. He compiled the first historical atlas of South Africa (1922), wrote the first one-volume history of South Africa for the main examination taken in schools (1926), and produced the first scholarly synthesis of South African history (1928). He also published a biography of Lord Henry de Villiers, the former chief justice of the Cape (1925), and a centenary history of the University of Cape Town (1929). He penned many articles for the 'Round Table', and was the South African adviser of, and a contributor to, the eighth volume of the 'Cambridge History of the British Empire' (1936). 
From the mid-1920s, as Afrikaner nationalism was in its ascendancy, Walker became increasingly alienated from South African affairs, and he was shocked that the franchise enjoyed by Cape Africans could be under threat. He nevertheless went as a member of the South African delegation to the British Commonwealth relations conference held in Toronto in 1933, and the following year published a history of the great trek (1934) that presented it as a great romantic adventure. In later life he regarded this as his best and most readable book. He then began a sympathetic biography of another Cape liberal, W. P. Schreiner, published in 1937. 
In 1936, as he completed his Schreiner biography, Walker was offered the Vere Harmsworth chair of naval history at Cambridge. As he had never been on board a naval vessel, he hastened to Simonstown to rectify the omission; he was pleased that 'imperial' was now added to the title of his chair. In Cambridge, where he became a fellow of St John's College, he continued his interest in South African history, but he now also wrote on the empire more broadly; his 'The British Empire: its Structure and Spirit' (1943) was well regarded; his 'Colonies' (1944) was wide-ranging and considered the motives for colonization, the policies of the colonial powers, including the Soviet Union, and the future of the colonial empires. 
In the Second World War Walker acted as an air-raid warden in Cambridge, where by the end of 1942 he was the only history professor still teaching. In February 1944 Smuts asked him to return to South Africa to be editor-in-chief of the South African war histories. Uncertain whether to accept, he agreed to go, and then had a severe mental breakdown. After remaining in a mental hospital for over a year, he underwent a leucotomy in July 1946, in which part of his brain was removed. He then made a miraculous recovery, and was able to resume his university duties at Cambridge. 
In retirement from 1951, Walker brought out a third edition of his 'History of Southern Africa' (1957) and edited a second edition of the South African volume of the 'Cambridge History of the British Empire' (1963), which was much criticized for being out of date in its approach. His daughter, finding her parents living in poor circumstances in Cambridge, persuaded them to return to South Africa in 1968, the year in which he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Cape Town. He died in Durban on 23 February 1976. 
Along with W. M. Macmillan and C. W. de Kiewiet, Walker was one of the three most important historians of South Africa writing in the early twentieth century. If he had lesser analytical skills than they, he had greater flair for narrative and sweep, and he did more to establish history as a profession in South Africa. Though the argument he made about the importance of the frontier in an influential lecture, 'The frontier tradition in South Africa' (1930), is now much criticized, and most of his historical work is seen as Eurocentric, his biographies of de Villiers and Schreiner retain their importance. The seminar room of the department of historical studies at the University of Cape Town is named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 94129


Xuma, Alfred Bitini (1893-1962), politician and physician in South Africa, was born at Manzana, Engcobo district, Thembuland, in the Transkei, Cape Colony, on 8 March 1893. He was the seventh child of the Wesleyan converts Abraham Mangali Xuma, farmer and lay preacher, and Elizabeth Cupase Xuma, farmer, neither of whom received formal schooling. He had a bucolic early childhood herding cattle but excelled at school, first at Manzana's Anglican mission school then at the nearby Clarkebury Institute, where he qualified in 1911 as a primary teacher but not before organizing a student strike against the gross inequalities in African education. 
Xuma worked for two years as a teacher, saving much of the $14 a term he earned to enable him to sail to the United States in 1913 to further his education. He stayed in America for thirteen years, working at many jobs to pay for his studies. He tasted the life of a labourer in coal yards, building sites, and stables; in a furnace 'ramming the steel pipe moulds'; and as a domestic and cleaner. After studying initially at the Tuskegee Institute, Alabama (1914-16), he eventually took degrees in science and medicine from the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis (1920) and Northwestern University in Evanston (1926) respectively, having also spent a period (1921-3) at Marquette University and the Lewis Institute, Chicago. He gained experience in obstetrics and gynaecology and surgery with residencies at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, and at Pecs University and New St John's Hospital, Budapest, before travelling to Edinburgh in 1927, where he received the licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons, qualifying him to practise medicine in the British empire. 
After returning to South Africa in 1927 Xuma opened a medical practice that brought him a comfortable income. However, the depression and his practice and residence at Sophiatown in Johannesburg on the Witwatersrand, not far removed from thousands of toiling black workers, focused his attention on practical solutions to the problems of his fellow Africans who lacked socio-economic and political rights. Xuma opposed militant action but quickly embraced social reform. In detailed memoranda and evidence before government commissions he drew attention to the poor health, housing, and working conditions of Africans in places such as the crowded township of Alexandra, where he was part-time medical officer of health. In 1929 he urged the Miners' Phthisis Commission to rectify the lack of compensation for maimed African miners. Before the Native Economic Commission in 1931 he argued that pass laws limited Africans' bargaining power, and his 1932 address to the Bantu Social Club of the University of the Witwatersrand detailed high black infant mortality on the Rand. 
Before 1935 Xuma remained aloof from African politics. In 1929 and 1930 he declined positions of leadership in the African National Congress (ANC), despite being elected 'in absentia' to its executive. But after the government introduced the discriminatory Hertzog bills, he spoke out against the impending abolition of the Cape African franchise and in 1935 was elected vice-president of the All-African Convention. His staunch opposition to the purely advisory Natives' Representative Council further raised his profile. Xuma's political horizons widened during an extended visit to the United States and Britain in 1937-8, during which he became the first African to receive the diploma of public health from the London School of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. In London he interacted with African nationalist and pan-African leaders from many countries. Xuma returned to South Africa in 1938 as the ANC was starting to reorganize under its energetic secretary James Calata. Xuma now became more politically active and in December 1940 Congress delegates elected him ANC president-general by the narrowest of margins over the sitting president, Zaccheus Richard Mahabane. 
Xuma's time as ANC leader was a period of transformation and steady growth. He introduced administrative reforms, encouraged mass membership, and began to consider passive resistance. The organization became more centralized and financially viable. Membership grew from about 1000 in the 1930s to 5517 by 1947. Xuma's ANC reforms included abolition of the upper house and equality for women. In 1941 Congress voted for equal membership rights for women, confirmed in a new ANC constitution adopted in 1943. Xuma's second wife, the African-American Madie Beatrice Hall (1894-1982), whom he married on 18 May 1940 and who headed the revived ANC Women's League from 1943 to 1948, influenced these moves. (His first wife, the Liberian-born Amanda Priscilla Mason, whom he married on 29 October 1931, had died in 1934.) 
During the Second World War Xuma gave qualified support to the war effort but argued that solutions to problems of land, wages, and pass laws should not await the end of hostilities. Influenced by the spirit of the Atlantic charter, he established a committee of Africans who co-wrote 'Africans' Claims in South Africa' (1943), which called for peace, removal of colour bars, better African labour standards, the right of African self-determination, independence of all colonies, and no annexation by South Africa of British protectorates. In 1946 Xuma affirmed support at the United Nations for the anti-colonial struggle in South-West Africa (Namibia). In this period he also forged an alliance with the South African Indian Congress, agreeing a joint declaration of co-operation with Dr Yusuf Dadoo of the Transvaal Indian Congress and Dr G. M. Naicker of the Natal Indian Congress (the 'three doctors' pact'). He worked closely with both moderate and radical ANC members. Despite Xuma's disdain for strikes, he made submissions to the Smit and Lansdowne commissions arguing for legal recognition of African trade unions, and in 1946 denounced harsh state repression of a major African miners' strike. 
Often seen as lacking the common touch, Xuma shied away from mass action. Yet he articulated reformist values and prefigured black consciousness with a call to the 1944 ANC conference for Africans to develop race pride. In the same year he gave tacit support to such young radicals as Nelson Mandela and Oliver Tambo to form the Congress Youth League, whose radicalism eventually undermined his position after the victory in the 1948 elections of the National Party and its promotion of apartheid pushed the ANC to adopt a radical programme of action, including strikes and boycotts. Frustration at the apparent failure of his constitutional methods grew, and he was defeated in 1949 as ANC president by the Youth League's candidate, James Sebe Moroka. 
Xuma resigned from the ANC executive and henceforth played no major role in national politics. He criticized the ANC civil disobedience campaigns of the 1950s but he did organize his fellow Sophiatown residents against forced removals, and continued to make personal interventions for moderate change. Under the government's resettlement scheme he was forced to sell his house, 85 Toby Street, Sophiatown, to a white purchaser, and was obliged to move to 1401 Mtipa Street, Dube, Soweto, an area where black residents were permitted to live under the 'Group Areas Act'. He died there on 27 January 1962, and was buried in Brixton cemetery, Johannesburg, on 1 February. 
Xuma was a major figure in African politics in South Africa throughout the 1940s. His unswerving support for African rights and refusal to accept government tokenism gave him a reputation for steadfastness underscored by his hard work in building a stronger ANC. His years in America gave Xuma wide contacts among African-American and church circles that helped him consolidate his social position. British influences of liberalism, education, and culture were still dominant in South Africa and if Xuma's visits to Britain were less extensive, they nevertheless also provided contacts with South African liberals and African nationalists. He espoused a combination of African nationalist, Christian, liberal, and social democratic philosophies. While he failed to adjust to change after 1948, his legacy was a revived ANC; his hard work ironically placed it on the road to the militant resistance that materialized in the 1950s, even if he did not himself take this road. 


@@@@@


doc= 94130


Duncan, Patrick Baker (1918-1967), politician in South Africa, was born on 29 June 1918 at Moot House, Park Town, Johannesburg, the eldest of the four children of Sir Patrick Duncan (1870-1943), politician and governor-general of South Africa, and his wife, Alice Dora Amanda, 'nee' Dold (1893-1948). At the age of eleven he developed osteomyelitis from a cricketing injury, which stiffened his right knee, causing lifelong lameness. After a year convalescing in Lausanne he went to the Diocesan College, Rondebosch, Cape Town but, unhappy there, was sent to England, to Winchester College, where his political ideas began to develop. He became a strong supporter of the emperor Haile Selassie when Ethiopia was invaded by Mussolini's troops. In 1937 he followed his father to Balliol College, Oxford, taking second-class honours in modern languages in 1940. On a summer vacation in Germany with his mother's relations he spent three weeks in a 'Reichsarbeitsdienst' youth camp and 'smelt for the first time the evil stench of totalitarianism' (Borth. Inst., CSAS DU 9-1, ch. 2, fol. 54). 
After the outbreak of war, unfit for military service due to his lameness, Duncan entered the colonial service and was posted to the then crown colony of Basutoland in 1941. His career, first as a district officer, was orthodox enough, though he supported and found a pension for the pioneer African novelist, author of 'Chaka', Thomas Mofolo, who had lost his farm and livelihood under the 'South African Land Act' in 1913, and he challenged the Anglican church for paying its black and white clergy unequally. He also developed an intense concern for soil conservation ahead of his time. He spent 1945-7 as private secretary to the British high commissioner in southern Africa, Sir Evelyn Baring, returning to Basutoland in 1947 with his wife, whom he had married in Cape Town a few months before, on 25 April 1947. She was Cynthia, daughter of Sir Patrick Ashley Cooper, governor of the Hudson's Bay Company and a director of the Bank of England. Their marriage was a happy one and she was a great support to him. Two sons and two daughters were born between 1948 and 1959. 
In 1949 Duncan spent two terms on a 'refresher' at the London School of Economics, taught by Harold Laski. He emerged as irrevocably opposed to communism as he was to apartheid and all forms of racism, intensified by the advent to power of the Afrikaner Nationalists in South Africa the previous year. His last post in Basutoland (1950-52) was as judicial commissioner, with Chief Leabua Jonathan, later prime minister of independent Lesotho, as his principal assessor. Speaking excellent Sesotho, Duncan was able to set down and publish 'Sotho Law and Customs' (1960). It was a commitment to Gandhism that led Duncan, after resignation from the colonial service, to take part in the defiance campaign led by the young Nelson Mandela in 1952. With Manilal Gandhi, son of the Mahatma, he marched forty 'defiers' of all races into Germiston 'native location' near Johannesburg without a permit, and was briefly gaoled. The flagging campaign sprang into the world's headlines, and won a new recognition of the growing evils of white supremacist rule in South Africa. 
The years that followed took Duncan from national organizer of the non-racial Liberal Party of South Africa, where he clashed with its leader Alan Paton (though they remained friends), to the editorship of 'Contact', a fortnightly news magazine based in Cape Town, and published from 1958, which supported the Liberals and took on the strong communist element in the African National Congress and its allies. He came nearest to the centrality he had achieved in the defiance campaign after the Sharpeville massacre in 1960 and the subsequent state of emergency. After acting as intermediary between the police and the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) leaders of the march of 40,000 followers from Langa location into central Cape Town in March 1960, he defied the emergency regulations. 'Contact' was alone in the South African media in fully reporting the PAC campaign and its aftermath, a turning point in South Africa's long road to democracy. Duncan was heavily fined and later gaoled for refusing to name a source of information about underground political activity; his trial speech was published in 'The Law as Literature' (ed. L. Blom-Cooper, 1961). Though its wings were clipped financially, 'Contact' continued to have an influence far beyond South Africa, as it reported the rapid progress of neighbouring colonies to independence, or, as in Namibia, Zimbabwe, and the then Portuguese colonies, their liberation campaigns. 
In 1961 Duncan was reconciled with Nelson Mandela, who sought 'Contact''s support for the national strike he called. Duncan's activities against separate development plans in the Transkei probably led to his banning order in 1961 under, paradoxically, the 'Suppression of Communism Act'. He escaped to the Lesotho mountains, from where he joined the PAC, by then committed to the armed struggle. The PAC made him their north African representative, based in Algiers, but its new leaders opposed his views and expelled him. A post with a major relief organization, the Comite Chretien de Service en Algerie, sustained him in Algeria, but aplastic anaemia was diagnosed and after intermittent and lengthy treatment, he died in Westminster Hospital, London, on 4 June 1967. 
Duncan had immense charm and an informality and good humour which won him a host of friends of all races. Steadfast, yet sometimes impulsive, he 'dared to be a Daniel' and became a potent symbol of non-communist witness for non-racial democracy in South Africa. He maintained many interests outside his political life and spent the months of his illness writing his posthumously published 'Man and the Earth' (1975), full of ideas on saving the planet, which were, like so much of his thought, decades ahead of others. 


@@@@@


doc= 94131


Napier, Arthur Sampson (1853-1916), philologist, was born at The Hollies, Dean Row Lane, Bollin Fee, Wilmslow, Cheshire, on 30 August 1853, the eldest of the nine children of George Webster Napier (1825-1884), cotton spinner and manufacturer in the firm of Napier and Goodair of Preston and Manchester, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Bridgwood (1827-1904), of Longton, Staffordshire. The family also owned the Mossfield Colliery Company, and his parents managed the firm of Sampson, Bridgwood & Son, Anchor Works, Longton, china, earthenware, and granite manufacturers and millers; his mother was a partner in the firm, along with her sister Mary, until January 1879. The family home, Lightwood Lodge, to the south of Longton, was elegant, comfortable, and well stocked with books. Napier's siblings included Sir Walter John Napier (1857-1945), the attorney-general of the Straits Settlements, and Lieutenant-Colonel George Samuel Frederick Napier (1862-1942), who served with the British army in India and South Africa. 
In October 1867 Napier entered Rugby School, where he was a member of the school's natural history society and won prizes for chemistry. But he is later said to have regarded the public-school system at Rugby as 'cramping and uncongenial'; and he particularly disliked compulsory games (Farnell, 'An Oxonian', 51). From Rugby he gained an entrance exhibition to study chemistry at Owens College in Manchester, graduating with first-class honours in the London BSc examination in 1873. His choice of chemistry was connected to his family's expectation that he would join their china manufacturing firm after graduation. Between 1874 and 1877, with the benefit of an open scholarship, he undertook a further course of study in chemistry, this time at Exeter College, Oxford, where he took a first class in natural science in 1877. Having studied German at both Manchester and Oxford, he spent a term of the academic year 1876-7 at the University of Gottingen conducting chemical experiments, as well as consolidating his knowledge of German. At the same time he began the study of Norwegian. Critically for his future career, he also attended lectures on comparative philology and English philology at Oxford, given by Friedrich Max Muller and John Earle. 
These linguistic studies proved to be a turning point in Napier's life. By late 1877 he had decided that his future lay not in chemistry, with a guarantee of a managerial position in the family firm, but instead in philology. In February 1878 he was appointed to a two-year post of 'Lector' (which he translated as 'reader') in the department of English at the University of Berlin. The post involved giving classes for at least two hours a week, for example on written and spoken English, and lecturing in German on Shakespeare. The post was renewed for two further years in 1880. He had meanwhile married, on 11 September 1879, Mary Ferrier (1854-1936), second daughter of James Hervey JP (1812-1902) and Elizabeth, 'nee' Kibble, of Alderley Edge, Cheshire. Three of their six children (five sons and one daughter) were born in Germany. 
Napier pursued research in English philology under the supervision of Karl Mullenhoff (1818-1884), Wilhelm Scherer (1841-1886), and, especially, Julius Zupitza (1844-1895), to whose role as teacher and friend he paid affectionate tribute. In 1883 he obtained the degree of PhD 'summa cum laude' from the University of Gottingen for his thesis, supervised by Zupitza, on Archbishop Wulfstan, 'Uber die Werke des altenglischen Erzbischofs Wulfstan' (1882), with the accompanying study of Wulfstan's sermons (1883). In May 1882 he resigned from Berlin and, on Zupitza's recommendation, was appointed by Gottingen to the post of 'ausserordentlicher Professor' of English language and literature. He continued in this post until the summer of 1885, when he returned to Britain. 
Napier had been encouraged by Zupitza to apply for the newly created post of Merton professor of English language and literature at Oxford. His application, and subsequent appointment, generated a good deal of critical comment, both in public and in private. Some of it was instigated by Henry Sweet, a well-qualified potential candidate for the post, and a scholar who was out of sympathy with the views of Zupitza and his students. Sweet questioned Napier's academic credentials for such a major appointment; other critics queried the juxtaposition of language and literature in the title of the chair, much preferring that it should be literature alone. However, Napier, supported by testimonials from twenty-four colleagues in Britain and Europe, was the unanimous choice of the electors and, despite receiving comparable offers of a chair from the universities of Gottingen and Groningen, he accepted Oxford. He was elected a fellow of Merton College, and began work in Oxford in the autumn of 1885, aged thirty-two, and just seven years after formally renouncing chemistry in favour of philology. 
Napier's arrival brought a new style of English philological study to Oxford, different from that of, for example, his older colleague John Earle, the professor of Anglo-Saxon: it was strongly influenced by Napier's intimate knowledge of current philological scholarship in Germany. During the course of his career Napier lectured on Old and Middle English texts and dialects, the history of the English language, and, in later years, on English metrics and on Gothic. He concentrated only on the linguistic content of the texts he discussed, without reference, apparently, to any opinions, either of his own or anyone else's, about the aesthetic qualities of such works as 'Beowulf', 'Pearl', and 'Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight'. The reason was that he believed strongly that the academic boundaries between linguistic and literary studies had to be respected -- a typical German point of view at that time. Thus he interpreted the 'literature' element of his post as the linguistic study of literary texts. Whatever his students in general may have thought about his refusal to deal with matters of literary criticism, they generally applauded the quality of his lectures, which took account of the latest research, were sharply focused, and were delivered with clarity and scholarly detachment -- even if he was capable of spending three years discussing three pages of the text of 'Beowulf' in minute detail. Some students, however, found him 'dry as dust' and 'intolerably dull' (private information). The special weekly classes that he ran at his house on Headington Hill for senior undergraduate students were, apparently, models of dispassionate and thorough scholarly inquiry. Between 1896 and 1911 he supervised and examined a small number of postgraduate students studying for the BLitt, a newly created graduate research degree; almost all of them were working on Old or Middle English topics. 
Napier recognized that the key to encouraging the study of English in the university was to create an undergraduate honours course. An initial proposal, which had his strong backing, to establish a school of modern languages with a strongly philological emphasis was rejected by the university, on a tied vote, in November 1887. More than six years were to pass, to June 1894, before a final honour school of English was on the statute book, the first examination being held in 1896. Napier's resolutely linguistic, as opposed to literary, approach to the new discipline reassured critics who feared that an honour school in English would attract dilettantes: 'He was the right man for the time; for the English school was very open to capture by the indolent and the amateur' (Farnell, 'Napier', 313). In 1903 he was appointed to an additional chair, the Rawlinsonian professorship of Anglo-Saxon, which he held along with the Merton chair until his death. This released funds that enabled the creation, in 1904, of a separate chair in English literature (held by Walter Raleigh). 
Napier's published work consisted of various editions of texts, together with articles in journals and book reviews (over a third of them in German) on various aspects of English philology. They included notes (some brief, others in the form of extended commentaries) on, for example, AElfric, Boethius, the poetry of the Vercelli book, and place names. There were editions of Chrodegang, Theodulf, and Aniane (1916), 'Old English Glosses' (1900), the 'History of the Holy Rood-tree' (1894), and 'Iacob and Iosep' (1916). His edition of Wulfstan's homilies (1883) remained the standard treatment of the subject for more than seventy years. Like several other Oxford dons Napier contributed to the compiling of the 'Oxford English Dictionary'. Especially in the period 1889 to 1897 he was consulted regularly by the editor, James Murray, for his expert opinion on particular words. 
Two of Napier's long-gestating projects that remained unpublished were a historical English grammar, based largely on his lectures on the subject, and a major collation and study of Old English homilies, for which he carried out a good deal of preparatory work, sometimes with the aid of graduate students. The purpose was to extend the corpus of materials that his own thesis on Wulfstan had expounded. The materials finally appeared as 'Homilies of AElfric', under the editorship of John C. Pope, in 1967-8. 
President of the Philological Society for the years 1892 to 1894, Napier was an active member of numerous organizations connected with philology and literature, including the Chaucer Society, the Deutsche Shakespeare Gesellschaft, the Modern Language Association, the New Paleographical Society, the Oxford Drama Society, the Shelley Society, the Spenser Society, and the Yorkshire Dialect Society. 
Napier was elected a fellow of the British Academy on 29 June 1904, and a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences on 13 January 1915. He was also a corresponding member of the Gottingen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Oxford awarded him the degree of DLitt on 27 June 1901; his brother Walter was awarded the degree of DCL at the same ceremony. Victoria University (Manchester) made him an honorary DLitt on 13 March 1902 as part of the Owens College jubilee celebrations. The University of Groningen made him an honorary DLitt in Dutch language and literature on 1 July 1914. 
The most detailed description of Napier's interests and personality was by his long-time friend the Oxford classicist Lewis Farnell, who noted that he was 'strikingly handsome', or, as the Germans put it, 'ein bildschoner Mensch' (Farnell, 'An Oxonian', 51). He was keen on foreign travel, walking, horse-riding, and intellectual discussions. The strongest impression, however, was of a 'deeply sensitive and devoted friend' (ibid., 54). Students who studied under him expressed similar views. For relaxation he read detective novels. His health had never been particularly robust, and in his later years younger colleagues deputized for him and delivered his lectures. 
Napier died at his home on Headington Hill, Oxford, on 10 May 1916 of apoplexy, and was buried at Headington cemetery on 13 May 1916. Much of his personal library was acquired by the English faculty library at Oxford, thanks to the successful establishment shortly after his death of the Napier memorial library fund by Joseph Wright. 


@@@@@


doc= 94145


Dickinson, John (1782-1869), paper manufacturer and inventor, was born on 29 March 1782 probably in London, the eldest of nine children of Captain Thomas Dickinson RN (1754-1828) and his wife, Frances de Brissac (1760-1854). John Dickinson's father was superintendent of transports in the ordnance service, Woolwich, with quarters at the Tower of London, a post in which he was preceded by his father, Captain John Dickinson RN (1723-1783). The Dickinson family were from Northumberland and claimed a distant connection to the American politician John Dickinson (1732-1808), whose family had emigrated in the mid-seventeenth century. John's mother was of French Huguenot descent, the daughter of a silk weaver of Spitalfields, London, with publishing and printing connections. 
Dickinson was privately educated until 1797, when he was apprenticed to Thomas Harrison, a stationer of Leadenhall Street and Cornhill, London, on the recommendation of the king's printer Andrew Strahan. When he was admitted to the livery of the Stationers' Company in 1804 Dickinson was trading from an office at 2 Walbrook selling paper to such clients as the 'Gentleman's Magazine', the publishers Longmans, and booksellers Hatchards. With the financial backing of Strahan by 1805 he had moved to 39 Ludgate Street and had taken on an apprentice. 
Dickinson's first patent (no. 3030, 1807) was for a cannon cartridge paper that was 'non-smouldering and non-explosive' and this was successfully used by the Board of Ordnance during the Napoleonic wars. A second patent followed soon after (no. 3056, 1807) for the 'mechanical cutting of paper reels' to be used on a paper-making machine developed by Henry Fourdrinier and Bryan Donkin. Dickinson's most important patent for paper making (no. 3191, 1809) was for a cylinder-mould machine that 'comprised a hollow perforated brass cylinder covered with a fine wire mesh partly immersed in a vat of pulp in which it rotated, picking up fibres from a wet sheet which was taken off at the biggest point on a wet felt' to form a continuous sheet. There was better strength, smoothness and quality because the fibres were 'arranged in a horizontal and parallel direction'. 
In 1809 Dickinson purchased his first mill at Apsley near Hemel Hempstead in Hertfordshire, with financial backing from George Longman (1776-1822), a member of the publishing family and MP for Maidstone, with whom he formed the business partnership of Longman and Dickinson. Situated beside the River Gade, the Grand Junction Canal, the London-Aylesbury road (and from 1837 the London and North Western Railway) the mill was well placed for allowing rags -- the raw material needed for paper -- to be brought in and for products to be distributed easily. The partnership also took a lease on 63 Old Bailey as a London headquarters and showroom. In September 1810 Dickinson married Ann (1789-1874), daughter of Harry Grover, a banker, of The Bury, Hemel Hempstead, and his wife, Sibylla Ehret. With financial assistance from Grover, Dickinson purchased Nash Mill, south of Apsley, and settled at Nash House. 
Dickinson's innovations and improvements included the introduction of a vacuum into the paper-making cylinder and extra rollers to squeeze water from the paper, resulting in better drainage and greater speed. He also devised a means of removing lumps and iron out of the 'stuff' to produce a smooth, better quality sheet of paper, particularly suitable for book printing. Later he developed two-ply paper for copper-plate printing using two moulds on the same paper-making machine. 
The company was successful and continued to expand. In 1818 Dickinson bought Batchworth Mill, Rickmansworth, where rags were processed to produce half-stuff. By 1824 Nash and Apsley mills used steam power to produce paper, the first paper mills in the country to do so. Special punch cards for use with Jacquard looms were produced at Home Park Mill, built in 1826. In 1830 Croxley Mill, Rickmansworth, was built by Dickinson and by 1837 he had built another half-stuff mill in Manchester to process waste from the cotton mills. Other developments Dickinson worked on were a security paper containing silk threads, pre-paid envelopes for use in the new postal system, and gummed envelopes. He patented many improvements until 1855. 
Between 1825 and 1840 Dickinson took 22 Bedford Row as his London residence. Abbot's Hill, a house overlooking Nash Mills, was completed in 1836 to Dickinson's design and this became the family home. There he entertained scientific and literary friends, including leading publishers and distinguished authors. In March 1845 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He voiced his opinions loudly and campaigned against the excise duty imposed on paper and against the coal taxes levied in London. He was not a churchgoer but was philanthropic and charitable and he subscribed to build a church, school, and other buildings. 
The Dickinsons had seven children. Their eldest surviving son, John Dickinson (1815-1876), did not join the business but the husbands of their two daughters became partners in the company: Frederick William Pratt Barlow (1815-1883), who married Frances Elizabeth (Fanny) Dickinson (1814-1881) in 1840; and John Evans (1823-1908), who married Harriet Ann Dickinson (1823-1858), his cousin, in 1850. Evans, who was son of John Dickinson's sister Anne and her husband Arthur Benoni Evans, became the driving force for technical development after John Dickinson retired from the business in 1859, at the age of seventy-six. 
Dickinson went to live at 39 Upper Brook Street, London, where he continued to entertain literary and artistic friends. He died there on 11 January 1869 and was buried at Kensal Green on 18 January 1869. A very wealthy man, he had successfully taken paper making from a handcraft into an efficient manufacture. Described as energetic, hard-working, inventive, and practical, he could be severe. He left Abbot's Hill to his eldest surviving son, John, but a greater legacy was the firm of John Dickinson, which was incorporated as a limited company in 1886, and which in 2004 celebrated the bicentenary of Dickinson's establishment of the business. 


@@@@@


doc= 94147


Green, Nigel McGown (1924-1972), actor, was born in Onderstepoort, near Pretoria, South Africa, on 15 October 1924, the son of Henry Hamilton Green DSc, a pioneering biochemist in the field of animal health who was working in South Africa at the time of his son's birth. In 1927 his father was appointed director of the Scottish Dairy Research Institute, and went on to become a research officer at the Veterinary Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture at New Haw. The family moved to Weybridge in Surrey and Nigel Green was educated at King's College School, Wimbledon, and at London University, where he studied chemical engineering. Enlisting in the Fleet Air Arm after turning eighteen, he served on torpedo bombers as a sub-lieutenant observer during the Second World War. Following demobilization he attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art on a scholarship, and entered the theatre professionally. 
Among Green's earliest stage appearances were a small role as a gangster in Maxwell Anderson's 'Winterset' at the New Lindsey Theatre (1948), which won him a favourable personal notice from 'The Times'; opposite Edith Evans in Congreve's 'The Way of the World' at the Old Vic (1948) and John Gielgud in 'King Lear' at the Stratford Festival (1950); in 'The Foolish Gentlewoman' at the Duchess (1949), 'Come Live with Me' at the Vaudeville (1951), and 'Fires of Midsummer Eve' at the Embassy (1951). He married on 24 May 1952 Patricia Eileen Marmont ('b'. 1922), actress, daughter of Percy Marmont, actor. 
When John Burrell's London production of 'Mr Pickwick' transferred to Broadway in September 1952, Green was one of three original cast members to travel with the company to New York, where he again drew positive notices for his performance as Mr Jingle. While there he also made television appearances, including a leading role in a production of 'Death Takes a Holiday' (1953). On his return to Britain he extended his developing career into the cinema. 
Green's first screen credit was for the wartime drama 'The Sea Shall Not Have Them' (1954) and among other bit parts was one in 'Reach for the Sky' (1956). But in February 1956 he suffered a serious accident, fracturing his skull after slipping on ice. Hospitalized for weeks and suffering from paralysis and amnesia, he had a metal plate inserted in his head, which subsequently caused him severe headaches. After being discharged from hospital he took up golf as therapy. His first marriage ended in divorce, and he married, second, on 21 December 1956, Pamela Jacqueline Gordon-Tull (1937-2003), actress, daughter of Reginald Gordon-Tull, architect. They had a son and a daughter, but they later separated. 
Green returned to acting with a small but crucial role in another war film, Nicholas Ray's 'Bitter Victory' (1957). The genre was to prove his forte. He worked in the theatre less often following his accident, though he had parts in 'The Egg' at the Saville Theatre (1957) and in Agatha Christie's 'Go Back for Murder' at the Duchess (1960). According to the actor-director Peter Gill, 'there were rumours that he had offended Binkie Beaumont', the influential impresario (Hall, 156). Certainly Green found more jobs on television than on the stage. His height (6 feet 4 inches) and imposing physique led him to appear most often in historical action series such as 'The Adventures of Robin Hood' (1955-60), 'The Adventures of Sir Lancelot' (1956-7), 'Ivanhoe' (1958-9), and in a recurring role in 'William Tell' (1958-9). In similar vein on the big screen he was Little John to Richard Greene's Robin Hood in Hammer's 'Sword of Sherwood Forest' (1960). More notably, he played Hercules as a very human, fallible braggart in 'Jason and the Argonauts' (1963). His part in another Ray Harryhausen fantasy, 'Mysterious Island' (1961), was entirely deleted aside from one shot of the character's body lying face down in surf. Most of his other early film roles were routine, but he cut a striking figure as a Victorian police inspector in 'Corridors of Blood' (1958) and as a prosecuting attorney in 'The Durant Affair' (1962). 
Cy Endfield, who had directed 'Mysterious Island', gave Green his defining role. In 'Zulu' (1964), as Colour-Sergeant Frank Bourne -- though quite unlike the real-life last surviving veteran of the battle of Rorke's Drift -- Green created the archetypal British NCO: stolid and fastidious, but paternal and compassionate towards his men. Green was singled out for praise in virtually every review, and his film parts thereafter were more substantial, if never quite as memorable as Bourne. They included the double-dealing spymaster of 'The Ipcress File' (1965); a rare heroic lead as Inspector Nayland Smith in 'The Face of Fu Manchu' (1965); General Sir Garnet Wolseley in 'Khartoum' (1966) and other military officers in 'Tobruk' (1967) and 'Play Dirty' (1969); sub-Bondian villains in 'Deadlier than the Male' (1967) and 'The Wrecking Crew' (1968); and another spy, code name 'The Whore', in 'The Kremlin Letter' (1970). Regular television appearances included guest spots in several long-running series as well as a number of one-off dramas. The most intriguing of these found him once more playing a colour-sergeant opposite Michael Caine, in 'The Other Man' (1964) by Giles Cooper: the longest single play screened up to that time by ITV, which was shot on videotape and subsequently wiped. 
Green seems to have been a volatile personality. The 'Zulu' cast and crew members recalled him as alternately warm and gentle or aggressive and argumentative, especially after drinking, when his temper was short. Occasionally during the South African location shoot Green went out of control. One fellow actor believed him to have been a former alcoholic; others have thought him prone to depression and insomnia. On 15 May 1972 Green's body was discovered at his home, 30 Sussex Square, Brighton, which he had named Bourne House after his 'Zulu' character. He had died from a self-administered overdose of sleeping pills. Many of his friends and colleagues believed that he had committed suicide, but a verdict of misadventure was recorded. Green's final film, 'Gawain and the Green Knight' (1973), in which he played the Green Knight, was released posthumously. He was once again a powerful presence in an inferior film; but the best of his screen portrayals, especially his emblematic role in 'Zulu', remain a potent reminder of a promising career abruptly curtailed. 


@@@@@


doc= 94148


Fragson, Harry (1869-1913), singer and songwriter, was born at 4 Old Compton Street, London, on 2 July 1869, the son of Victor Pot ('c'.1832-1914), a French hotel-keeper, and his Belgian cook, Leontine Winand (died 1907). During the 1870s his father took up the business of yeast merchant, seemingly dividing his time between London and Antwerp, Belgium, while young Philippe was educated at a board school in England. Inspired by the visit of French music-hall singer Paulus to London in 1889, he sought to launch a career of his own, by singing to his piano accompaniment, at the Middlesex Music Hall in Drury Lane. The reception was inauspicious, and instead he sought better luck in Paris with an English persona and the name Harry Fragson -- the surname derived with thin disguise from 'Frog's son' 
With much use of Parisian slang and inimitable facial distortions, he gradually built up success. Soon known in France by the single name Fragson, he secured engagements at the Cabaret de la Butte (later the Cabaret des Quat'z'Arts), as well as other Montmartre night-spots such as the music hall La Cigale and the Chat-Noir. He toured France and in time gained engagements at all the major Paris music halls, as well as in many of the finest drawing rooms. From 1902 he was also engaged at the Folies Bergere in annual editions of the 'Revue des Folies Bergere', which required him to extend his performances to encompass character parts. Then, in 1904, he was seen by Arthur Collins, manager of London's Drury Lane Theatre, and invited to appear in the following year's Christmas pantomime. As a Frenchified servant Dandigny in 'Cinderella', and performing some of his own song compositions, he created a sensation. For the next few years he was able to divide his time between England and France, earning the description 'L'Entente cordiale comedian'. 
From 1902 to 1906 Fragson made recordings of many of his French songs for issue on cylinders and discs. Most were of his own composition, notably the waltzes 'Les blondes' and 'Les jaloux', simple melodies providing context for his comic patter. In 1909, 1912, and 1913 he added recordings of many of his English songs too, some little more than verbal patter to vamped accompaniment, and some of them English versions of French originals. The original English-language compositions include such titles as 'The Employment Agency' (1908), 'Billy Brown' (1908), 'The Other Department, Please!' (1910), and 'The Music Hall Shakespeare' (1912). Most significant of his later French creations was 'Reviens!' ('Come Back to Me!'; 1910), which has an intensity of passion quite missing elsewhere, and which has survived as a standard number for French entertainers. In 1912 he also appeared with Max Linder in a fourteen-minute comedy film, 'Max et l'entente cordiale'. 
Most important of Fragson's English compositions is, however, 'Hello! Hello! Who's Your Lady Friend?', a chorus song designed for audience participation. He recorded it around October 1913, also introducing it to audiences while on tour in Sheffield. After then performing it at the Finsbury Park Empire and London Coliseum in November 1913, he returned to Paris for what would prove the last time. 
Following Leontine Winand's death in 1907, Fragson and his father had lived together in an apartment at 56 rue Lafayette, Paris. Fragson himself never married but seemingly had many sexual liaisons, notably with singing actresses Eve Lavalliere and Alice Delysia (1889-1979), the latter of whom was presented to London in 1912 as Mrs Fragson. They were followed in 1913 by a Marseille girl, Paulette Franck, in a relationship that caused much friction between father and son, aggravated by suggestions that the aged father should enter a home while Fragson toured Britain. After dining on 30 December 1913, Fragson returned home around 8.30 p.m. prior to appearing at the Alhambra Music Hall. On arrival at his apartment he was shot in the head by his father. He was rushed to the Lariboisiere Hospital, but died there shortly before midnight. The funeral on 3 January 1914, before his burial in Montmartre cemetery, reduced much of Paris to a standstill. Victor Pot was arrested and detained but, suffering from diabetes, died on 17 February 1914 before he could be tried. 
Even if Fragson's public profile was heightened by the circumstances of his death, he was in his own right a top-ranked performer -- for only eight years in Britain, but for over twenty in France. Musically self-taught, he had an impeccable musical memory. His audiences appreciated his natural ability at the piano allied to a rich, mellow high-baritone voice, clear enunciation and a highly eccentric personality, with a great gift for mimicry and a strong sense of the ridiculous. He left enduring songs in the popular repertory of both countries in which he starred. 


@@@@@


doc= 94156


Maude, Dorothea Clara (1879-1959), physician and surgeon, was born in South Kensington, London, on 26 February 1879, the third of five daughters of Ashley Henry Maude (1850-1933) and his wife, Emma Constance, 'nee' Henry (1866-1889). Her paternal grandfather, Colonel Sir George Ashley Maude (1817-1894), a Crimea veteran, had been crown equerry to Queen Victoria. Her father, a barrister, lived on independent means, served for a year as mayor of Eastbourne, and pursued his amateur interest in botany (he was a member of the Linnean Society); under the influence of Lord Radstock he became a stern evangelical. He brought up his daughters with the help of governesses after their mother's death. Aged fourteen, Dorothea Maude was sent to Cheltenham Ladies' College, where she excelled. In 1898 she entered Somerville College, Oxford, and took first-class honours in physiology in 1902 but, Oxford degrees still being closed to women, graduated MA from Trinity College, Dublin, as one of the 'steamboat ladies'. After deciding to study medicine, she enrolled at the Royal Free Medical College for Women, graduating MB and BS in 1906, and MD from the University of London in 1909. After taking a hospital position in Liverpool and a locum position in the Shetland Isles, she set up a practice at 5 Holywell Street, Oxford. 
At the outbreak of war in 1914 many of the one thousand or so women physicians in Britain were keen to serve, both at home and abroad. The War Office rebuffed female medical volunteers in the field, on the ostensible ground that it was too dangerous, and that their skills were better applied at home, taking the place of male physicians and surgeons who were on war service. This led the Scottish-trained physician Elsie Maud Inglis to found the Scottish Women's Hospitals for Foreign Service, under whose auspices women medical volunteers went to assist the French and the Serb forces. Others joined the volunteer units organized by Mabel St Clair Stobart and Lady Paget. Maude went independently of these units, joining a British field hospital in Belgium in the autumn of 1914. In January 1915 she moved to a Royal Army Medical Corps unit, the Sophie Berthelot Hospital in Calais, France, where her arrival caused a stir, as 'a trouser-wearing Dr Maude' had been expected. She was next a staff physician at a hospital for battle casualties at Dunkirk established by her uncle Alwyne Edward Maude (1854-1945), after which she returned to her Oxford practice. 
Maude's third mission was to north Serbia, in July 1915, where she joined the Second British Farmers' Ambulance Unit in Pozarevac. She was one of four staff physicians, in a unit that also included a matron, sixteen nurses, seven male orderlies, and three female cooks. Much of her time was spent treating Serbian civilians in outpatient clinics -- typhus, dysentery, and cholera were rampant -- and relieving other physicians in units in northern Serbia, while also assisting in the nearby camp hospital, where she would ride out to administer anaesthetics. In October 1915, with the Serb forces in retreat, she was asked to accompany some ill nurses back to England. She set out again in March 1916 for Corfu, where her uncle had set up a hospital in the grounds of the Villa San Stefano, above Corfu town, to treat Serbs exiled by the Austrian advance. Visiting the hospital on 25 May 1916, the Serbian crown prince Alexander awarded her the order of St Sava. She moved to Salonika, where the hospital was transferred in September 1916, treating Russians, Italians, and Portuguese, as well as Serbs, in conditions where malaria and dysentery were rife. Her final move, in October 1916, was to Vodena, north of Salonika, where she witnessed the privations of the Serb exiles. In Corfu she had met (George Cecil) Hugh Nasmyth (1887-1942), a colliery manager in civilian life, who was then a lieutenant in the Army Service Corps. They married there on 19 April 1917, and she left Greece for Britain in May 1917. They had a son born in 1918 and a daughter in 1920. 
Dorothea Nasmyth returned to her practice in Oxford, and remained there, apart from a short period (1925-33) when she and her husband lived at Walmer in Kent. She finally gave up her practice in 1957, on the death of her last patient, the classical scholar Gilbert Murray. She died at her home, Badgers Holt, Boars Hill, Sunningwell, Berkshire, on 12 December 1959, and was cremated at Oxford crematorium. Her diaries document the wartime career of one of a number of British-trained women physicians who, undeterred by the opposition of the War Office, served independently in the field during the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 94158


Pearson, George William (1875-1973), schoolteacher and film director, was born at 1 Manor Street, Kennington, London, on 19 March 1875, the only child of George Pearson, a silk cutter, and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Voysey. He was educated at Archbishop Sumner School in Kennington, then trained as a teacher at Culham College, Oxfordshire. He took on his first headship at St Mark's School, Old Street, London, in 1896. On 2 August 1902 he married Edith Helen Stacey (1881-1961), daughter of William Stacey, a publican. In 1905 he became headmaster at Hornchurch, Essex, and in 1907 at Staples Road Boys' School, Loughton. A sense of restlessness and unfulfilled ambition then led the 36-year-old Pearson to take an extraordinary leap from headmaster to film director. 
It was an off-chance attendance at a local hall to see a travelling showman exhibit films that persuaded Pearson to make this dramatic change in life. He notes in his autobiography, 'I went, daringly, for it was not respectable for a schoolmaster to be seen at so vulgar an entertainment as the cinema!' (Pearson, 22). Indeed the cinema was widely seen as a low-class form of entertainment, with unhealthy venues and unseemly clientele. Yet something in the cinema spoke deeply to the idealist in Pearson, and he was able to communicate such feelings to the British branch of the French film company Pathe, which initially accepted some ideas from scripts by Pearson, then startled him by offering him a position as film director, leading him to resign his post at Loughton and join Pathe at the end of 1912. 
Pearson swiftly made his mark with features such as 'The Fool' (1913; based on Kipling's 'The Vampire') and 'Heroes of the Mine' (1913) before being poached in 1914 by the energetic producer G. B. Samuelson for his new studios at Worton Hall in Hounslow. Pearson had a notable success with the Sherlock Holmes adventure 'A Study in Scarlet' (1914), which imaginatively substituted Southport Sands for the Salt Lake desert, and with rapid responses to the onset war in 'The Cause of the Great European War' (1914) and 'The Life of Lord Roberts VC' (1914). But he found Samuelson's hyperactive enthusiasm exhausting, and moved to the Gaumont company in 1915. 
At Gaumont, Pearson enjoyed a commercial hit with 'Ultus, the Man from the Dead' (1915) and its successor titles, stylish imitations of the French mystery serials produced by Louis Feuillade, before establishing his own film company in 1918 with T. A. Welsh. With Welsh-Pearson Ltd he hit a creative peak. Following early success with 'The Better 'Ole' (1918; adapted from Bruce Bairnsfather) Pearson discovered the actress with whom he would make his most popular and characteristic films, Betty Balfour. 'Nothing Else Matters' (1920), 'Mord Em'ly' (1922), 'Love, Life and Laughter' (1923), the 'Squibs' series, and 'Reveille' (1924) and other films made with Balfour combined comedy, melodrama, and sentiment amid settings that were half-contemporary, half-Dickensian in a form that reflected Pearson's own mental make-up. 
Pearson's films had proved popular with British audiences and moderately successful overseas, but began to look old-fashioned in tone by the end of the 1920s. The arrival of sound to cinema ushered in a stylistic as well as a technical change that those such as Pearson were ill equipped to weather, but he nevertheless played a significant role in early sound film history, brought in to produce 'Journey's End' (1930; based on the R. C. Sherriff play) in Hollywood when the film looked to be in trouble, and producing a notable 'succes d'estime'. 
Pearson's film company was reorganized as Welsh-Pearson-Elder in 1928, but went into liquidation in 1930. He continued to be a figure of note in the industry, becoming president of the Association of British Film Directors in 1927. As a film director, however, he rapidly fell to being given cheap 'quota quickies' to make: twopenny titles such as 'Murder by Rope' (1936) and 'Midnight at Madame Tussaud's' (1936). Of these the poignant 'Open All Night' (1934), with Frank Vosper playing the wistful elderly manager of a hotel who sees that life belongs to the young, feels like a personal testimony. After a brief period with the GPO Film Unit, Pearson ended his film career working as director-in-chief for the Colonial Film Unit, which he joined in 1940 and with which he remained associated until 1955. Here he trained many young directors from the African nations in the basics of film-making, imparting not just technical knowledge but his abiding idealistic beliefs in the value of film. 
Pearson was honoured by the industry for his principles as much as his longevity. He was made an honorary fellow of the Royal Photographic Society and the British Kinematograph Society and a fellow of the British Film Academy. In 1951 he was appointed OBE for services to the British film industry. 
Pearson's autobiography, 'Flashback', published in 1957, reveals a man of great integrity and good sense, with a still burning passion for how film should appeal to the heart. Such passion was communicated on set through the homilies that Pearson habitually gave to cast and crew during a read-through of the scenario, reminding them of the purpose of their art. To those about to work on 'Reveille' on 23 January 1924 he said, 'I assert that the function of the Screen is to show the EYE a picture... through this picture to evoke Emotion, followed by Thought... Memory... Imagination... thus forcing the watcher to give of himself... the ultimate result being a complex thing, part received, part given... I want theme... not Plot... and Manner more subtle than Matter.' (Pearson papers, Item 7) 
Scholastic, a little fusty, principled but pragmatic, all in all a thoroughly decent man in a frequently disreputable business, there has never been anyone else quite like him in the history of British film. His surviving films may be marked by quaintness, but can still draw a tear from the hardest of hearts. 
Pearson died in the Mowbray nursing home, Victoria Road, Malvern, Worcestershire, on 8 February 1973, and was cremated at Worcester crematorium. His wife predeceased him. They had four children: Malcolm (a surgeon), Audrey, Winifred (who followed her father into film, becoming a production manager), and Owen (who followed his father's earlier vocation and became a teacher). 


@@@@@


doc= 94165


Ware, Richard of (d. 1283), abbot of Westminster, is of unknown origins. His life is unknown before 1257 when he appears as a Westminster monk acting as the proctor for Abbot Richard of Croxley. The career and connections that secured his elevation to the abbacy late in 1258 are thus obscure. Ware, however, was evidently a man of imagination and of business, although his promotion was somewhat fortuitous, his predecessor, Philip of Lewisham, having died in office only a few months after succeeding Croxley. Licence to elect a successor to Lewisham was granted on 1 December 1258, and Henry III gave his assent on the 15th. In the following year Ware travelled to Italy to secure confirmation from Pope Alexander IV (who made him a papal chaplain on 11 March), and saw at Anagni, in the crypt and nave of the cathedral, the superb pavements made by craftsmen (described later as Cosmati) who specialized in mosaics made from porphyry and other stones taken from the buildings of antiquity. On his return Ware may well have inspired Henry III, then pressing on with the rebuilding of Westminster Abbey in honour of Edward the Confessor, to scrap previous plans and commission a Cosmati shrine for the saint, a shrine that was probably under construction in 1262. This first commission led to another. On a later visit to the papal court, either in 1266 or 1267, Ware secured and brought back to England 'for the king's use' the stones and craftsmen to make the great pavement which still survives before the high altar of the abbey, a pavement dated by its contemporary inscription to 1268. Although the next year Ware received some recompense from the king for the cost of the pavement, he may well have shouldered the main burden himself, as the Westminster monk John Flete claimed in his history of the abbey written in the early fifteenth century. The pavement, a magnificent, multicoloured combination of zones and spheres, depicts the universe. A riddling inscription (now mostly lost) gave the date of the universe's end, and thus of the second coming of Christ and the last judgment. How necessary, therefore, was the intercession of the saint whose glittering shrine rose immediately to the west of the pavement beyond and above the high altar. 
Ware was a man of varied skills. In 1265 he was sent by Simon de Montfort on a mission to the French court, and he was employed again as a diplomat by Edward I, most notably in 1279 when he negotiated the marriage between the king's daughter, Margaret, and the eldest son of the duke of Brabant. A year earlier he had been named as chief justice for an eyre that was about to begin in the north of England, but in the end he took no part in it. The climax of his career as a public servant came on 18 June 1280, when he was made treasurer of the exchequer, the chief financial officer of the realm, a post that he held until his death. The king's favour enabled Ware to protect and extend the privileges of the abbey, and in 1280 he secured the confirmation of many of its royal charters. Three years later he vigorously resisted an attempt by Godfrey Giffard, bishop of Worcester, to exercise authority over the abbey's dependent priory at Great Malvern. Ware had long displayed his business acumen. He freed the monastery from a $400 debt to Italian merchants, purchased the manor of Great Amwell in Hertfordshire for $566, enclosed his park at Tiddesley near Pershore, and built a house in the abbey's cemetery so that its rents could support the lights at the high altar and the shrine of Saint Edward. 
Ware was also concerned with the health of the abbey's internal life, doubtless much disrupted by the building of the new church. He thus commissioned the writing of a customary, a book 'very necessary for the common utility of all, both for divine office and for the diverse customs of the monastery', as Flete put it ('History of Westminster Abbey', 114). Ware made use of earlier materials, but the work was unprecedented in its scale. The fourth section (all that survives) forms a separate book, running to 247 pages of modern print. It ranges from the office of the abbot to that of the gardener, and gives minute instructions for the care of sick and dying monks. In 1268, two years after the customary was begun (it took many years to complete), the papal legate Ottobuono held a visitation of the abbey, although delegating the actual work to Pierre de Tarentaise (later Pope Innocent V) and the dean of Bayeux. Their reforms included moving the prior's chamber into the heart of the monastic buildings, and closing a postern gate so that the infirmary could not be used as a thoroughfare between the abbey and the royal palace. Ware must have been pleased that henceforth the monks were not to engage in property transactions without the abbot's consent. He himself emerged unscathed, and that so little generally was found amiss is a considerable tribute to his rule. 
Ware died suddenly in London about the beginning of December 1283, reportedly while on the king's service. According to the Dunstable annalist his severity meant he was little mourned by the convent. The customary itself shows that he had tried to restrict contact between the monks and the abbey's resident almsmen or lay brothers. The endowment he provided for the celebration of his anniversary was reduced, the monks preferring to retain a portion of the income and assign it to their kitchen. Flete, however, described Ware as a wise and discreet man ('vir sapiens et discretus'), and his greatest achievements, the pavement and the customary, were certainly remembered and valued at Westminster. Ware was buried under the pavement before the high altar, and an inscription (now lost) explained how he had brought thither the stones to make it: 'Abbot Richard de Ware who rests here, now carries the stones he carried here from Rome' (Foster, 20-21). A graceful image of Ware survives on his abbatial seal, where he is not shown standing four-square in the usual way but turns a little to his right. Influenced by continental models, the design reflects the aesthetic sense and cosmopolitan outlook that were so important in Ware's career. 


@@@@@


doc= 94166


Heaton, John Deakin (1817-1880), physician and advocate of provincial civic pride, was born at 7 Briggate, Leeds, Yorkshire, on 23 November 1817, the younger of the two children of John Heaton (1769-1852), bookseller and stationer, and his second wife, Ann (1774-1841), daughter of William Deakin, a farmer. The art collector Ellen Heaton was his elder sister. Growing up surrounded by the literature and debate of his father's bookshop (regular visitors included Edward Baines, publisher of the 'Leeds Mercury'), Heaton was from an early age enveloped in a culture of rational knowledge which underpinned his public life. And while he later abjured his father's Independent faith, the inquiring nonconformity in which he grew up proved highly influential on his vision of civil society. 
After some ill-performing years at a local day school, Heaton was in 1830 admitted to Leeds grammar school. In 1834 his practical-minded father withdrew him from school to take up an apprenticeship with a Leeds surgeon, Mr Braithwaite. A year later Heaton combined his technical training with an academic course at the Leeds school of medicine. He excelled at the subject, gaining prizes in anatomy (1837), chemistry (1838), and forensic medicine (1839). After the conclusion of his apprenticeship in 1838 he spent an unhappy term at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, before entering University College, London, where he won the Fellowes gold medal for clinical medicine and the silver medal for botany awarded by the Apothecaries' Company. He graduated MB from London in November 1841 and MD in November 1843. 
Before returning to Leeds to begin his professional career Heaton followed the fashion of other wealthy middle-class young men and embarked on a grand tour. After summer school in Paris he travelled extensively through Italy and southern Europe. On his return to Southampton, customs officers confiscated his numerous fine art acquisitions. In October 1843 he was elected physician to the public dispensary in Leeds, and took up residence at 2 East Parade, purchased by his comfortably retired father. 
For Heaton the contrast between the architectural wonders of Renaissance Europe and the ugly, insanitary vista of industrializing Leeds was stark. His duties as physician led him to the overcrowded, fever-ridden courts and lanes surrounding Kirkgate, while his civic sensibilities were appalled by the filthy, narrow streets and utter absence of urban patriotism. It was a determination to transform the enfeebled cultural and physical fabric of Leeds that inspired his public life. 
Under the aegis of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society (of which he was a council member from 1845 and president from 1868 to 1872), the Leeds Conversation Club, and the Leeds Improvement Society, Heaton placed himself at the heart of a benevolent oligarchy of merchants, professionals, and industrialists. A commitment to science, progress, and reform -- the ethos of his father's bookshop -- provided the guiding ideal. Through public speeches, debates, and 'conversazione' this tightly knit, civic elite lobbied for public improvements from street widening to smoke inspectors. 
Heaton's most productive intervention in Leeds came during the debate over a new town hall. Like others in his circle he was convinced that 'a noble municipal palace... erected in the middle of their hitherto squalid and unbeautiful town... would become a practical admonition to the populace of beauty and art' (Reid, 142). Supported by Baines's 'Leeds Mercury', he attacked narrow-minded ratepayers and -- in a speech to the Philosophical and Literary Society -- urged his fellow citizens 'to show that in the ardour of mercantile pursuits the inhabitants of Leeds have not omitted to cultivate the perception of the beautiful'. The hall's new clock tower was, for instance, 'to serve as a lasting monument of their public spirit and generous pride in the possession of their municipal privileges' (Reid, 147). 
Heaton's campaign proved a success. He was rewarded with a significant position during Queen Victoria's opening of the town hall in September 1858: a ceremonial sanction for Heaton's belief in architectural ambition, civic pride, and provincial autonomy. Meanwhile, his public, if not private, medical career flourished. In addition to lecturing at the Leeds school of medicine from 1844 until 1878 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians (1868) as well as physician to Leeds General Infirmary (1850) and the house of recovery. On 3 April 1850 he married Fanny Heaton (1828-1893), daughter of the Leeds stuff merchant John Heaton, and in 1856 they moved into 23 Clarendon Road, known as Claremont. During the 1860s and 1870s this idiosyncratic Georgian mansion became the hub of Leeds civic society. Dinners for visiting dignitaries from the British Medical Association, meetings of the Conversation Club, and receptions for the British Association governed the Claremont calendar. 
Despite his alliance with the Baines family, Heaton remained a committed Anglican and in 1870 was elected to the Leeds school board on the establishment slate. Unhappy with the public profile of elected office, he demurred from standing for re-election in 1873 and instead used his position on the Yorkshire board of education to promote the creation of a college of science for Yorkshire. For Heaton, the college was to be another symbol of Leeds's urban identity, moral improvement, and intellectual capacity. Working closely with Lord Frederick Cavendish, Heaton proved an adept fund-raiser and institutional entrepreneur. He was the first chairman of the council of the Yorkshire College of Science, which opened in 1874. His wife was active in the movement for promoting the higher education of women in Leeds. 
Even with foreign travel and the company of his six children, Heaton's final years were marked by depression. The death of his favourite daughter, May Rucker, in August 1877 produced a further weakening of spirit. Heaton himself died from pneumonia at Claremont on 29 March 1880, and was buried in the vault of St George's Church, Leeds, on 2 April. Inspired by the history of continental city states, Heaton typified those progressive middle-class professionals who so determinedly nurtured the elusive civic pride of mid-Victorian Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 94168


Gavin, Hector (1815-1855), sanitary reformer, was born on 29 August 1815 in Edinburgh, the eldest of the eight children of Hector Gavin ('b'. 1784), engraver, and his wife, Marion, 'nee' Walker. Apprenticed at the age of sixteen to the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, Gavin turned his back on the family engraving trade to study medicine. In 1835 he won the prize for military surgery and in 1836 he was awarded the degree of MD by Edinburgh University. Two years later he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh on the strength of his prize essay, 'On feigned and factitious diseases'. Later expanded into a book, his essay proved an essential resource for military and naval medical staff in identifying malingerers. 
In December 1837 Gavin married Margaret, daughter of James Greenfield, and he and his new bride moved to London in 1838, Gavin having paid $1500 for a medical practice on the Hackney Road. Living close to the surgery, he was quickly initiated into the sanitary misery of early Victorian London. With human and animal waste lining the streets, industrial pollution, and extensive overcrowding, the registrar-general put the average age of death in 1839 in nearby Whitechapel at only twenty-six years. A keen advocate of preventive medicine, Gavin put himself forward as surgeon to the Bethnal Green workhouse. His altruistic commitment to sanitary improvement meant that he quickly added to his responsibilities the London Orphan Asylum and British Penitent Female Refuge. In addition, at Charing Cross Hospital, he lectured in forensic medicine, innovatively introducing public hygiene into the course. 
During the 1840s Gavin moved from medical philanthropy into public advocacy. He became a leading figure in the Health of Towns Association, deploying his local knowledge to expose London's sanitary horrors. Through deft use of the registrar-general's mortality statistics, the association hoped to shame central government into reform. As pamphleteer and co-editor of its journal, Gavin was among its most effective propagandists: 'There are parts of London where I have walked for hours with liquid putrefying filth in every kennel or hollow -- where the odour was that of one perpetual sewer or cesspool, and where squalor and wretchedness were visible without variety. (Gavin, 'Report of the Health of London Association', 26)' His most celebrated work, 'Sanitary Ramblings' (1848), comprised a street-by-street account of Bethnal Green's alleys and slums. The 1848 'Public Health Act' constituted marked progress for reformers, but it unconscionably excluded London from its remit. In response the Metropolitan Sanitary Association was formed, with Gavin as one of its honorary secretaries. He used his position to criticize the capital's sanitary state and urge the extension of the 1848 act to London. 
Gavin's industriousness and ability had by this time caught the eye of officialdom. Edwin Chadwick was greatly impressed by Gavin's approach and in 1848 he was appointed secretary and medical superintending inspector to the newly formed Board of Health. He joined a cadre of interventionist reformers who dramatically improved central and local approaches to sanitary management. The expertise he garnered at the Board of Health during the 1848 cholera outbreak later inspired Lord Palmerston to dispatch Gavin to the West Indies to manage the epidemic threatening the Caribbean. Between 1851 and 1853, Gavin travelled across the West Indies dealing with cholera, influenza, and smallpox. By this time a highly adept medical bureaucrat, he secured changes in colonial personnel, reforms to sanitation, and a system of dispensary relief. Despite catching yellow fever in Barbados, Gavin also found time to edit one of his lectures into 'The Habitations of the Industrial Classes' (1851). The work marked a shift from the Health of Towns Association strategy of energizing public opinion to a more stringent demand for state interference in housing and sanitation. 
On his return to England Gavin was dispatched by the Board of Health to assist in the cholera outbreak at Newcastle upon Tyne. Highly impatient with the deadly bumbledom of the council and the medical fraternity, Gavin administered a series of reforms -- closing unsuitable dwellings, safely disposing of bodies, and moving the sick -- which dramatically cut infection levels. While his high-handed manner infuriated local doctors, he claimed his strategy of house-to-house visitation reduced mortality from two hundred per thousand to three per thousand. He was later posted to Dundee and Edinburgh to manage similar cholera outbreaks. 
Back in London his medical skills were in demand for the employees of the postal service and in 1854 he was appointed government medical officer to the Post Office. The very next day Gavin was also made sanitary commissioner to the army in the Crimea. Appalled by the disease rife among the Crimea troops, Gavin had proposed a series of reforms to the earl of Shaftesbury. In turn Shaftesbury proposed that Gavin should join John Sutherland and Robert Rawlinson in assisting the troops. The commissioners arrived in Istanbul in March 1855 and immediately began improving the hospital management to ease the cholera epidemic. Florence Nightingale later remarked to Shaftesbury: 'That Commission saved the British Army' (Spriggs, 291). In April they travelled to Balaklava to sanitize the army's filthy systems for latrines, burial, food preparation, and refuse. But, sadly, there Gavin was to join the fallen. 
After dining with his brother William Gavin (a veterinarian attached to the Scots Greys), Hector Gavin sought to exchange a faulty pistol for one of his brother's. In the exchange, the pistol exploded and Gavin was shot through the abdomen. He died at Balaklava on the following morning, 21 April 1855. It was a needless end for a sanitary reformer who believed in both the value of preventive medicine and the necessity of state legislation to prevent huge numbers of equally unnecessary, avoidable deaths. He was buried at Balaklava and later commemorated in the Old Calton burial-ground, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 94171


Brown, (Elizabeth) Iona (1941-2004), violinist and conductor, was born on 7 January 1941 at the Cedars Nursing Home, Manor Road, Salisbury, Wiltshire, the first of four children of Antony Francis Brown, pianist and organist, and his wife, Fiona Mary, 'nee' Whitham, violinist. At the time of her birth her parents lived at 27A Canal, Salisbury. As she was born into a musical family it was almost inevitable that she should develop an interest in music at an early age. With the help of supportive parents who understood the pitfalls of the music profession -- her father was a respected keyboard player and her mother was a violinist in the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra -- her music education and performing career were nurtured carefully. All three of her siblings followed musical careers, Timothy as principal horn with the BBC Symphony Orchestra, Ian as a pianist and conductor with the Nash Ensemble, and Sally as a violist with the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra. 
Educated at the Cathedral School in Salisbury and Cranborne Chase School, Dorset, Brown began violin lessons at the age of five with Nora Atkinson. She progressed quickly, and in 1955 joined the National Youth Orchestra of Britain, with which she remained for five years. She never attended a conservatoire but instead studied with a string of leading performers and teachers, including Hugh Maguire in London, Remy Principe in Rome, Carlo Van Neste in Brussels, and Henryk Szeryng in Paris. On returning from her studies abroad she played in the pit for the Ballet Rambert and joined the Philharmonia Orchestra in 1963. She quickly came under the spell of the orchestra's conductor, Otto Klemperer, whose deep understanding of music she admired greatly. While still a member of the Philharmonia Orchestra she played with the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields and joined the Cremona Quartet, the other members of which were Hugh Maguire (first violin), Cecil Aronowitz (viola), and Terence Weil (cello). 
On leaving the Philharmonia Orchestra in 1966 Brown pursued a career as a solo violinist. One of her first important solo engagements was a performance of Mendelssohn's violin concerto with Sir Malcolm Sargent at the Promenade Concerts. That concert was of particular significance to her and she later recalled that 'the whole evening sticks in my mind... I nearly passed out from sheer excitement and fright' ('The Independent', 11 June 2004). In 1976 she gave the first performance of David Blake's violin concerto, which had been written for and dedicated to her, with Sir Charles Groves at the Proms. She continued to perform as a soloist at the Proms throughout her career and gave a memorable performance of Walton's violin concerto there with Sir John Pritchard and the BBC Symphony Orchestra in 1983. She was also a regular soloist with the Scottish National Orchestra, after making her debut with it in 1967 with Tchaikovsky's violin concerto. As a violinist she amassed a considerable discography and, along with the first recording of Blake's violin concerto with Norman del Mar, she recorded the complete Mozart violin concertos, Bartok's violin concerto no. 2 with Simon Rattle and the Philharmonia Orchestra, Vivaldi's 'Four Seasons', Vaughan Williams's 'The Lark Ascending', Beethoven's violin concerto, and many other works. 
In 1974 Neville Marriner invited Brown to replace him as director of the Academy of St-Martin-in-the-Fields, a post that she retained until 1980. By accepting this appointment she took her profile as a performing artist to new heights. Having entered the male-dominated world of conducting, she was soon compared with some of the leading maestri of the period. Although she later remarked in an interview for 'The Independent' that she occasionally wished she were a man because of the response of some players, she also argued that a conductor's ability was of greater importance than his or her gender. In contrast to contemporary trends, she continued to play baroque works on modern instruments with the Academy, and she was seen by many as a viable foil to period instrument performers. Under her direction the orchestra recorded with many international soloists, including Heinz Holliger, Sabine Meyer, and Hakan Hardenberger, and although she was later tenured with other chamber orchestras she continued to conduct the Academy until the end of 1999. 
In 1981 Brown was appointed music director of the Norwegian Chamber Orchestra. While the players often found her difficult personally they respected her drive and ambition. She broadened the orchestra's repertoire to include more romantic and twentieth-century works, and recorded a wide repertoire with the group that included Strauss's 'Metamorphosen', Tchaikovsky's 'Souvenir de Florence', Schoenberg's 'Verklarte Nacht', and Britten's 'Variations on a Theme of Frank Bridge'. She led the orchestra on a number of successful tours, including two visits to the USA in the late 1980s. In 1991 she and the orchestra appeared at the Proms and later returned to that series in 1997; she remained with the orchestra until 2001. Between 1985 and 1989 she was also guest director of the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, and she was music director of the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra between 1987 and 1992. She was reportedly 'deeply sad' when her contract with the latter was not renewed, on account of her commitments elsewhere ('San Francisco Chronicle', 11 June 2004); but she returned in 1995-7 as conductor and music adviser. Although she was associated primarily with chamber orchestras she also conducted many major symphony orchestras, including the London Philharmonic, Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, Halle, Bournemouth Symphony, Danish Philharmonic, San Francisco Symphony, and Tokyo Philharmonic orchestras. 
Towards the end of her career Brown suffered from rheumatoid arthritis in the wrists. This soon affected her playing and she appeared for the last time as a violinist in Tokyo in 1998. Her health continued to deteriorate and, after being diagnosed with cancer of the colon in May 2002, she also withdrew from the podium. Although she could be outspoken and difficult professionally, she had a good sense of humour. She took great pride in her appearance and was particular about her concert dress. Like the respected Australian pianist Eileen Joyce, she was renowned for reappearing after the interval in a different gown. During her professional career, she played on the 'Booth' Stradivarius, which she sold in 1999. In 1986 she was appointed OBE, and in 1991 she was made a knight of first class merit by King Harald of Norway. A first marriage ended in divorce, and on 7 February 2002 she married Bjorn Evan Arnils, a 39-year-old double bass player, and son of Evan Arnils, engineer. There was no child of either marriage. She died of cancer on 5 June 2004 at her home, Little Misselfore Cottage, Bowerchalke, Wiltshire, and was survived by her second husband, Bjorn. 


@@@@@


doc= 94173


Campbell, Judy Mary (1916-2004), actress, was born at 7 Welby Gardens, Grantham, Lincolnshire, on 31 May 1916. Originally named Mary Campbell, she was the daughter of John Arthur Campbell, formerly Gamble (1877-1947), playwright and theatre owner, and his wife, Mary Alice, 'nee' Worger (1879-1960), the actress Mary Fulton. After boarding-school education at St Michael's Convent, East Grinstead, Sussex, her first (albeit tiny) stage role was at the Theatre Royal, Grantham, in 1935, in 'The Last of Mrs Cheyney'. Like many of her generation she went on to acquire considerable experience in provincial repertory theatre, notably in Coventry, Brighton, Cambridge (where she played in Shaw and Shakespeare), and Liverpool, where she joined the Playhouse Company as leading lady between 1939 and 1940. She also appeared in brief runs at the People's Palace, east London, and at the Savoy in 1937. 
The turning point in the career of the tall, elegant, auburn-haired Campbell came in the revue 'New Faces' (1940), in which she was to have performed a Dorothy Parker monologue, which failed to arrive in time. Instead, standing in a white ball gown and feather boa, in the moonlit-park setting of the Comedy Theatre's stage, she sang Eric Maschwitz's 'A Nightingale Sang in Berkeley Square'. Apprehensive about singing in public, and having no formal training, she confided the song's romantic lyrics to the rapt audience in a husky half-whisper. The occasion passed into theatrical legend, abetted by Noel Coward's ambiguous compliment, 'It takes talent to put over a song when you haven't got a voice' ('The Times', 8 June 2004). Coward went on to reward her with starring roles in several of his plays. She was the stoically enduring Ethel Gibbons in the between-wars comedy-drama 'This Happy Breed', a stylish Joanna in 'Present Laughter' ('effective vamping', said the 'Daily Telegraph') and the mischievous ghost Elvira in 'Blithe Spirit'. She toured in all three with Coward in 1942 before reprising them in London the next year. On 9 November 1943 she married David Leslie Birkin (1914-1991), then a lieutenant and later a lieutenant-commander in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, and the son of Harry Lawrence Birkin, lace manufacturer. They had a son and two daughters. 
Judy Campbell continued her association with Coward's plays after the war. In 1951 she played a glamorous film star who suppresses her humble origins in Coward's 'Relative Values', and a couple of decades later she played his greatest female character, the monstrous charmer Judith Bliss in 'Hay Fever', for the Cambridge Theatre Company. But her range went well beyond Coward. She was especially effective in Shaw, playing a memorable Hesione Hushabye in 'Heartbreak House' (1961, at the Oxford Playhouse, then at Wyndham's, London) and Mrs Clandon in 'You Never Can Tell' (1966), at the Haymarket. More surprisingly still, she played dangerous Christine Mannon in Eugene O'Neill's 'Mourning Becomes Electra' in 1967 at the Arts, London ('dispensing malice with an offhand flourish', as the 'Daily Telegraph' reviewer said), and Linda in 'Death of a Salesman' (1983, Chichester). She was not averse to subduing her beauty for roles like those of the sorely tried, cardigan-wearing housewives Linda Loman and Ethel Gibbons ('an extraordinarily honest piece of acting', wrote the 'Daily Telegraph' reviewer of the latter role). 
Campbell played several 'grandes dames' in later years, including in the Chichester revival of 'The Sleeping Prince' (1983), in which her Grand Duchess was the highlight of a lacklustre production of a thin play. In 2001 she played Grand'mere in Harold Pinter's adaptation of 'Remembrance of Times Past' at the National Theatre, London, and in the year before she died she appeared at the Jermyn Street Theatre, accompanied by the pianist Stefan Bednarczyk, in a musical entertainment of her own devising, called 'Where Are the Songs We Sang?' She also wrote two plays, 'Sing Cuckoo' (1950) and 'The Bright One' (1958). The latter not altogether happily mixed Greek mythology and romantic comedy, but, as directed by Rex Harrison, it showcased luminous performances from Kay Kendall, just before her death, and Gladys Cooper. 
Films were undoubtedly secondary to Campbell's stage work but she appeared in nine features, including two for Ealing in 1940: an entertaining mystery, 'Saloon Bar', in which she played a tartly spoken barmaid, and a war film, 'Convoy', as the estranged wife of a naval commander (Clive Brook). She did not enjoy the latter, in which the director, Pen Tennyson, 'made her play her scenes in carpet slippers, in order to reduce her height relative to that of the male lead' (Sweet, 174). In the thriller 'East of Piccadilly' (1941) she showed spirit and charm as a crime reporter who enjoys a wise-cracking rapport with Sebastian Shaw, and her comedy flair served her well in 'Breach of Promise' (1941), again in a tricky relationship with Brook. David Farrar, her co-star in the amnesia drama 'The World Owes Me a Living' (1944), decades later recalled her as 'a grand actress and a lovable person' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema', 184). Her best film was Sidney Gilliat's witty hospital-set thriller 'Green for Danger' (1946), in which the murderer dispatches her too early, and her worst (through no fault of hers) was the lamentable mess 'Bonnie Prince Charlie' (1948), after which she did not film for over twenty years. In its profligate way with strikingly beautiful women, British cinema never made the most of Campbell. There was plenty of television, however, including appearances in 'Hadleigh' (1971), 'Anna Karenina' (1985, as Vronsky's mother), 'Inspector Morse' (1987), 'Bergerac' (1991), and finally as Aunt Ann in 'The Forsyte Saga' (2002). A true star, she made her presence intelligently felt even in small television roles. 
Campbell famously took a hot-air balloon ride over Paris for her eighty-fifth birthday and was by all accounts a woman of great charm and good humour. Her family life was very important to her and she became a graceful showbusiness matriarch. Her son, Andrew Birkin, was a director and screenwriter who cast his mother as the star of his Saki-derived short film 'Sredni Vashtar' (1981); her daughters were the singer and actress Jane Birkin and the artist Linda Jephson. Willowy and elegant to the end, Judy Campbell died at the Lister Hospital, Westminster, on 6 June 2004, of pneumonia, and was cremated on 18 June. She was survived by her three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94180


Ehrlich, Cyril (1925-2004), economic and social historian and writer on music, was born on 13 September 1925 at 5 Copley Street, Mile End, London, the elder child of Henry Ehrlich, tailor, and his wife, Dinah, 'nee' Jacobs, also a tailor. Both parents were descended from eastern European Jews. Although they were skilled tailors the uncertain economic climate of the late 1920s and early 1930s meant that they often had to seek work outside their trade. Consequently the family finances were precarious and (since his parents moved frequently in search of work) Ehrlich had to move from school to school. While he was keen to succeed academically, his strength was sport and he won prizes for sprinting. It was during his school years that he developed his interest in music by exploring his father's record collection, and by teaching himself the piano. Recordings and the piano became lifelong passions and his knowledge of both was encyclopaedic. 
Having joined the Royal Air Force in 1944, Ehrlich transferred to the army after being sent to India. There he was deployed to the education corps, for which he lectured on music appreciation. On demobilization in 1947 he enrolled at the London School of Economics, where he quickly came under the influence of the charismatic economic historian F. J. (Frederick Jack) Fisher. Although Ehrlich had enrolled initially to read economics the impact of Fisher's teaching was such that he decided to specialize in economic history. After accepting a post as a research assistant at the LSE in 1950 he began to consolidate his interest in the arts and could be found regularly at London's major concert and opera venues. During that period he heard most of the great musical figures of the age and was affected deeply by the work of the pianist Artur Schnabel, and the conductors Sir Thomas Beecham and Wilhelm Furtwangler. 
In 1952 Ehrlich moved to Uganda, where he taught at Makerere College. But music was never far away: before leaving for Africa he had acquired a good-quality gramophone system and later shipped out several uprights and a grand piano. It was in Africa that he wrote his PhD for the University of London on cotton marketing in Uganda, wrote his first book, 'The Uganda Company' (1953), and began to write chapters for the second and third volumes of the 'Oxford History of East Africa' (eventually published in 1965 and 1976). By placing the economics of cotton production in Uganda, and then of production and trade in east Africa more generally, within a cultural context he broke new ground. His writing style was clear and precise, and he blended sound historical practice with wit and humour. It was during his stay in Africa that he met Felicity Ruth Bell-Bonnett, whom he married in 1954. They had three children, a daughter and two sons. 
In 1961 Ehrlich was appointed a lecturer in economic history at Queen's University, Belfast. He was a passionate and committed teacher and was promoted to reader in 1969 and professor in 1974; he served as dean of the economics faculty from 1979 to 1981. By the time of his appointment at Belfast his interest in music dominated his activities and he soon began to specialize in the history of the piano. With an insatiable appetite to learn, he quickly balanced his knowledge of piano playing with a comprehensive technical understanding of the instrument. His deep interest in the piano culminated in the publication of his much-respected and much-read book, 'The Piano: a History', in 1976. That book was followed nine years later by his study 'The Music Profession in Britain since the Eighteenth Century'. After taking early retirement from Queen's University he wrote two further books: 'Harmonious Alliance: a History of the Performing Right Society' (1989), and 'First Philharmonic: a History of the Royal Philharmonic Society' (1995). Both were received with enthusiasm and soon became benchmarks against which all other books of their type were judged. Throughout much of his time at Queen's and after, Ehrlich also worked as a record, book, and concert critic for leading periodicals and newspapers. His reviews were always concise and balanced and were respected by performers, authors, and audiences alike. 
Although Ehrlich retired officially in 1986 his keen interest in academic life never left him, and at his home in Oxford, known affectionately as 'the University of St Andrew's Lane', he continued to work with scholars and musicians of all ages. In 1995 he was appointed visiting professor at Royal Holloway, University of London, and from 1998 he was visiting professor at Goldsmiths' College, University of London. With Simon McVeigh of Goldsmiths' College and David Wright of the Royal College of Music in 1999 he established a groundbreaking seminar series examining the social history of music in Britain at the Institute of Historical Research, University of London. In 2000 he was honoured with a Festschrift, 'Music and British Culture, 1785-1914', edited by Christina Bashford and Leanne Langley. His stature never diminished with age, and when the Wigmore Hall celebrated its centenary in 2001 he was invited to give a lecture about its history. 
A man of catholic taste, Ehrlich balanced a deep understanding of the music of Haydn, Schubert, and Wagner with a love of films and novels. He would regularly engage in lively discussions with all who would care to join in about the latest cinematic release, and could shift the discussion from popular culture to high art with the ease of a natural orator. Though he lived in Oxford he could be seen regularly at operas and concerts in London throughout his last years. Ever keen to keep his finger on the artistic pulse, he balanced an admiration of the great artists of the past with a willingness to acknowledge new talent. Although he had been ill for some time, his vitality and enthusiasm for life meant that his death from heart disease at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 29 May 2004 came as a shock to all who knew him. He was survived by his wife, Felicity, and their three children, all of whom became professional musicians. 


