@@@@@


doc= 94185


Gold, Thomas (1920-2004), astrophysicist, was born on 22 May 1920 in Vienna, Austria, the son of Max Gold, a wealthy industrialist and a director of Austria's largest mining company, and his wife, Josefine, 'nee' Martin, a former child actress. His early childhood was spent in a privileged environment, and it seemed natural that he would follow his father into business. However, the steep economic downturn in Europe at the end of the 1920s threatened the mining industry, so the family moved to Berlin, where his father took a more secure position as a metals trader. In 1933, after Hitler's rise to power, the family left Germany, Gold's father being Jewish, to spend four years travelling through Europe before settling in England in 1937. Gold was educated at the Lyceum Alpinum Zuoz in Switzerland, where he boarded. He then moved to England, where he spent one year learning Latin so that he could matriculate at the University of Cambridge. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1939 to read mechanical sciences, but received little teaching because within weeks the university was drained of its academic staff, who had been swiftly drafted into war work. 
Hitler's rapid advance in Belgium and France in May 1940 led on 12 May to the internment of all men of German or Austrian descent who were resident in eastern England. Thus it was that Tommy Gold and Hermann Bondi (who had also fled Vienna) met behind barbed wire on a concrete floor, and immediately became good friends. They were transferred to a camp in Canada for several months, then released to return to Cambridge in 1941, where Gold completed his engineering degree, gaining a miserable result, an ordinary degree, in June 1942. By this stage Bondi had joined Fred Hoyle on radar research for the Royal Navy. Bondi pressed Hoyle to hire Gold as a practically minded member of Hoyle's theory group. Thereafter Hoyle, Bondi, and Gold shared a rented house where they whiled away their evenings working speculatively in astrophysics. An unlikely chain of events that had commenced in 1933 led to Gold becoming an innovative scientist, rather than the entrepreneur his father had intended. 
Gold quickly became an indispensable member of Hoyle's group, working on how the state of the sea affected the radar visibility for aircraft-mounted radar. He then solved the problem of how a large number of landing craft could accurately navigate by radar to their correct landing spots on D-day. His greatest contribution to the naval intelligence service was his discovery in early 1944 that the German navy was fitting snorkels to many of its submarines, enabling them to recharge their batteries without surfacing. He worked in naval intelligence until 1947, when he returned to Cambridge as a junior research fellow at Trinity College. The same year he married Merle Eleanor Tuberg, an American astrophysicist; they had three daughters, Linda, Lucy, and Tanya. That marriage was dissolved, and in 1972 he married Carvel B. Beyer, with whom he had a fourth daughter, Lauren. 
In 1948 Gold, Bondi, and Hoyle proposed a new theory about the origin of the universe, which they named steady-state cosmology. Gold's contribution was in the setting of an intellectual puzzle: what properties would the universe need to have if its overall appearance were to remain approximately the same in all locations and at all epochs? Gold knew that such a model would require the continuous creation of matter in order to fill the voids left by the expansion of the universe. In the UK this steady-state cosmology seized the imagination of the general public, although it was never taken seriously in professional circles, despite the vociferous advocacy of its three proponents. With the discovery, in 1963, of cosmic microwave background radiation the rival big bang theory became the consensus cosmology, despite which Gold never lost his faith in steady-state cosmology. 
Gold's interests always ranged widely, encompassing physiology, astronomy, geophysics, and engineering. The department of physics at Cambridge found this broad spectrum attractive, and had appointed him a demonstrator in 1949. This brought him into direct contact with Martin Ryle, head of the radio group at Cambridge, with whom Hoyle was already conducting furious public arguments. Gold rather unwisely joined the fray on Hoyle's side, loudly criticizing Ryle for the latter's belief that cosmic radio sources are stars in the Milky Way, rather than extragalactic objects. Gold's undisciplined behaviour led to his modest appointment not being renewed, and his future did not look promising. Nevertheless his luck changed remarkably when the astronomer royal, Sir Harold Spencer Jones, offered him the prestigious post of chief assistant at the Royal Greenwich Observatory, which had moved out of London to Herstmonceux on the Sussex coast. There Gold was given a free hand, and he moved into the new field of space research. He took the first steps in subject areas that would hold his attention: the nature of the lunar surface, and solar-terrestrial relations. An opportunity to organize an expedition to watch an eclipse deepened his interest in the action of magnetic fields in space, and the ejection of high-energy particles in solar flares. In 1959 he coined the expression 'magnetosphere' for the region above the ionosphere in which the magnetic field of the earth has a dominant control over the motions of gas and fast charged particles. 
Gold resigned abruptly from the Royal Observatory in 1956, on finding that he could not work with the new astronomer royal, Richard Woolley. He had earlier taken the precaution of visiting several centres for astronomical research in the USA, which led to an invitation to spend a semester at Cornell. Consequently Gold and his wife left England for good in 1956. Harvard offered him a chair in radio astronomy in 1957. However, he and his family could not settle in Massachusetts, so when, in 1959, Cornell offered him the headship of its department of astronomy he accepted. This was his final move. At Cornell he founded, and directed for twenty-two years, the Center for Radio Physics and Space Research, the world's first institute dedicated to space research. He and his Cornell colleagues persuaded the US Defense Department to fund the construction of a giant radio telescope to observe the ionosphere. First operated in 1963, this instrument, located near Arecibo in Puerto Rico, was the world's largest single-dish radio telescope. 
During preparations in the late 1960s for a lunar landing Gold became embroiled in controversy by asserting that a thick layer of dust on the lunar surface could pose a threat to astronauts. He had made no detailed calculations, but incautiously remarked that the dust could be several metres thick. This caused panic at NASA: a robotic craft was dispatched to check that the risk was small in the designated landing zone. Relations between NASA and Gold subsequently improved, and he served with distinction on NASA's science advisory committee. He strenuously opposed manned space flight programmes, and the development of the shuttle, on the grounds that robotic instruments could deliver the science at much lower cost. 
The discovery of pulsars by the radio astronomy group at Cambridge in 1968 excited worldwide interest: what were these extraordinary objects? Ironically, when opposing Ryle seventeen years earlier, Gold had worked on the properties of small stars with very strong magnetic fields, and had suggested they would emit intense radiation. For him it was a small step to suggest that a pulsar is a rotating neutron star, an object the properties of which he had already predicted. His paper on this model was refused at the first international conference on pulsars, but the journal 'Nature' published it immediately. Gold predicted that radio astronomers should be able to detect pulsars with shorter periods than when first discovered, and he concluded that a pulsar would slow down over time as it loses its rotational energy. Both predictions were quickly confirmed by the Arecibo telescope, with the discovery of a pulsar with a period of 0.033 seconds in the Crab nebula. Gold's success encouraged theorists, most notably Stephen Hawking, to work on even more extreme objects, black holes. 
Gold became deeply fascinated by the origin of petroleum, a topic he had first pondered in the early 1950s, when he suggested a possible abiogenic cause. In 1980 he speculated that fossil fuels are not fossil at all, but rather that they are the result of the constant upwelling of hydrocarbons from deep below the earth's surface, where they have been trapped since our planet's formation 4.5 billion years ago. His conclusion was that the human race could meet its energy needs for thousands of years by the simple expedient of drilling ever more deeply. These speculations earned him the derision of geophysicists. Nevertheless he remained convinced, and in 1999 he elaborated further by suggesting that the biological markers present in petroleum have arisen from biological action on primordial methane, and that they are not evidence for a biological origin for petroleum. 
Gold's many honours included being made a fellow of the Royal Society (1964), a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1974), and a member of the National Academy of Sciences (1974), and he was a recipient of the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1985). He suffered a heart attack in 1985, and officially retired the following year. He died on 22 June 2004 at Cayuga Medical Center, Ithaca, New York, of heart disease, and was survived by his wife, Carvel, and his four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94193


Drew, Kathleen Mary (1901-1957), phycologist, was born at Cleeve House, Windermere Road, Leigh, Lancashire, on 6 November 1901, eldest daughter of Walter Drew (1873-1949), who was then a commercial traveller for an agricultural implement manufacturer (he later became chairman of a farm machinery company), and his wife, Augusta Caroline, 'nee' Millier ('b'. 1868), who had been a schoolmistress before her marriage. She had two sisters and a brother but only she followed a scientific career. Shortly after her birth her father was moved to Salisbury, where she attended Bishop Wordsworth's School, which was at that time co-educational. Botany was valued and well taught at the school and may have influenced her choice of career. She was an outstanding pupil, winning several prizes, was typically top of the class, and left school in 1918 with a county major scholarship. This gave her free university study and in 1919 she took up a place at Manchester University, where she also excelled; after two years she was excused the intermediate science examination on account of her outstanding work. At this time she started her study of algae, working first on the green alga 'Chara'. She graduated in 1922 with a first-class honours degree in botany, was awarded an Ashburne Hall research scholarship, in connection with Ashburne Hall, the hall of residence for women students at Manchester, and undertook study for the degree of MSc in the university department of cryptogamic botany. Her observations of red snow and red lakes during a summer school in Geneva may have inspired her to study red algae, which eventually led to the scientific discovery that made her famous and for which she is primarily remembered. On graduating MSc she became assistant lecturer on the staff, a position she held for two years. 
In 1925 Drew was one of the first women to be awarded a Commonwealth scholarship. This took her to the University of California at Berkeley, where two prominent American phycologists, William Setchell and Nathaniel Gardner, were based. She worked for two years on revising the taxonomy of a group of filamentous red algae from the Pacific coast of North America. In the USA she began collecting algae and this was the start of her herbarium of 2949 specimens now housed in the Natural History Museum, London. She collected algae every year throughout her career with the exception of the first three years of the Second World War. Before going to California she had met Henry Wright Baker (1893-1969), a lecturer in mechanical engineering at Manchester University, son of Harry Baker, analyst and works chemist. They had wanted to become engaged but her family did not approve, apparently on religious grounds, as they were high Anglicans and Wright Baker a Quaker. They made her wait to see if she still wanted to marry on her return to England. She did, and they married in a Quaker ceremony at Manchester, on 22 June 1928. 
Drew had returned to the University of Manchester after her time in California, but had been required to relinquish her university lectureship after her marriage, as a result of the university's policy against employing spouses. She continued her studies, working both at home and in time in the university, albeit with no salary. Both she and her husband were awarded the degree of DSc by Manchester University in 1939. In June 1939 Henry Wright Baker was appointed professor of mechanical engineering at Manchester Institute of Science and Technology. Their two children, John Rendle and K. Frances Biggs, were born in 1939 and 1940. 
During the war years Drew worked mainly on the life histories of red algae, her husband building her aquaria in both the cellar and garden. Her main work was an attempt to establish the life history of the red alga 'Porphyra', which had eluded many previous workers. Her scientific breakthrough came when she added shell to her algal cultures. Spores from the blade phase of the alga grew into minute threads that invaded the shell before coming to the surface to release spores. Previously such filaments in nature had been described as a separate species, 'Conchocelis rosea'. Her subsequent publication (''Conchocelis'-phase in the life history of 'Porphyra umbilicalis' (L.) Kutz', 'Nature', 164, 1949, 748-9) has been described as '100 lines that should change the world' (Michanek) and indeed they did. In Japan 'Porphyra' had been a food source for over 2000 years and probably the first seaweed in cultivation. Before her work nori cultivation depended on poles on which the seaweed was grown being naturally seeded. Poor harvests in the late 1940s and a massive typhoon in 1951 led to the collapse of the nori industry. However, Japanese scientists recognized the significance of her findings, and succeeded in cultivating nori artificially. Once the life cycle of 'Porphyra' was understood, large-scale cultivation and harvesting became possible, and the modern nori industry was effectively born. In gratitude the Japanese set up a memorial to the 'Mother of the Sea' near Uto City and every year there is a ceremony in honour of her. 
Drew's other major contribution was to the professional development of phycology. With the support of her friend and fellow phycologist Margaret T. Martin she founded the British Phycological Society in Edinburgh in January 1952. The first council was elected in January 1953 and, although she had to be persuaded, she was its first president. 
Kathleen Drew died in Manchester, from cancer, on 14 September 1957, having worked to the end. Before she died she burnt all her letters and documents, leaving little trace of her character. But an insight can be gained from a tribute from phycologists and friends in the 'British Phycological Bulletin' of June 1958. She was one of the most meticulous investigators of the morphology, cytology, and life history of the red algae, but also much more than that. She had a clear and acute mind, and was forthright, generous, sincere, and devoted to her friends. A colleague of integrity, she had high standards in everything she did. Harry Powell, the first secretary of the British Phycological Society, described her as 'dignified, very formal, as good as could be' (private information). Over her lifetime she published about fifty papers under her maiden surname; after her death she was generally known as Drew Baker. She remained a friend to Ashburne Hall throughout her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 94197


Hampshire, Sir Stuart Newton (1914-2004), philosopher and college head, was born on 1 October 1914 at Arden Court, Healing, Lincolnshire, the son of George Newton Hampshire, who ran a fish merchant's business in nearby Grimsby, and his wife, Marie, 'nee' West. He was educated at Repton School. In 1933 he gained a scholarship in modern history to Balliol College, Oxford. At Oxford, however, he switched to Greats (philosophy and ancient history), graduated with a first in 1936, and was elected to an All Souls fellowship that autumn. On arrival at All Souls he became a member of the philosophical group that Isaiah Berlin and J. L. Austin had just established. Of their meetings Berlin said that 'in retrospect they seem to me to be the most fruitful discussions of philosophy at which I was ever present' (Berlin, 108). Berlin later deplored their lack of interest in the wider philosophical world, but the habit of attending carefully to what was being said at the moment and by the particular persons in the room was a valuable one, and Hampshire's attentiveness to his students in later life was much admired by his colleagues. 
In 1937 Hampshire began a long relationship with (Grace Isabel) Renee Ayer, 'nee' Lees (1909-1980), the wife of A. J. (Freddie) Ayer. For a decade after 1937 the attachment threatened to destroy Hampshire's chances of an established career, whether in academic life or in the Foreign Office. The person apparently least put out by it was Ayer himself; he finally divorced Renee in 1941, citing Hampshire as co-respondent, but always acknowledged the child born to his friend and his wife in 1939 as his own. Julian Ayer was inevitably known as Julian Ayrshire. Julian's younger sister, Belinda, was acknowledged as Hampshire's child from the first. Hampshire and Renee Ayer eventually married in 1961. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War Hampshire joined the army and served briefly in the infantry in Sierra Leone. He was rapidly transferred into military intelligence, and worked with some distinguished colleagues including Hugh Trevor-Roper. He spent much of the war analysing the activities of the Reichssicherheitshauptamt, the central command of Himmler's SS. Like almost everyone else in military intelligence he came across colleagues whose loyalty lay with the Soviet Union rather than their own country. At the end of the war he was interviewed at length about his ties to Guy Burgess, during the first of several failed attempts by MI5 to uncover the full extent of the spy ring that Burgess had established. Many years later Goronwy Rees accused Hampshire of having been a member of the ring that included Burgess, Blunt, and Maclean; he was duly investigated, by Peter Wright, and cleared. The affair was awkward because Hampshire had been appointed in 1962-3 to review the intelligence-gathering activities of GCHQ at Cheltenham. 
By the end of the war Hampshire was fully acquainted with the atrocious history of the SS in occupied Europe and Russia. It persuaded him, as he later wrote, that 'unmitigated evil and nastiness' are as natural to human beings as kindness ('Innocence and Experience', 8); the feeling was sharpened when he had to interrogate Ernst Kaltenbrunner, the successor to Heydrich as head of the SS. Even his fellow SS officers regarded Kaltenbrunner as a ruthless sadist whose cruelty was disgusting. He was executed for a long list of war crimes in 1946. When the war was over Hampshire's future was uncertain. There were no philosophy posts open, and a permanent post in the Foreign Office was impossible in view of his marital status; for two years he occupied several slightly obscure positions in the Foreign Office that must sometimes have been a cover for work for MI5. They took him to San Francisco for the opening session of the United Nations and to Paris for some hard work on setting up the Marshall plan. 
Hampshire's return to academic life was brought about by Ayer. Ayer left Oxford when he became Grote professor at University College, London, in 1947; he immediately appointed Hampshire to a lecturership in his new department. In 1950 Hampshire left London and became fellow and tutor in philosophy at New College, Oxford; in 1955 he was elected to a senior research fellowship at All Souls; in 1960 Ayer left London when he became Wykeham professor of logic at Oxford, and Hampshire succeeded him as Grote professor. By this time Hampshire had published the two books for which he is best known, 'Spinoza' in 1951 and 'Thought and Action' in 1959. In 1960 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. But America beckoned. He stayed at University College, London, for only three years before moving to Princeton, where he was professor of philosophy from 1963 to 1970. 
At this time Princeton had one of the best philosophy departments in the world, and it remained so during Hampshire's years there. He became chairman of the department the year after he arrived, and was very successful in the position. His years at Princeton coincided with the increasing hostility to the Vietnam War, and by extension to modern capitalism and its political manifestations, that convulsed American campuses in the 1960s. He played an important role in defusing conflicts at Princeton that could all too easily have led to real bloodshed, as almost happened when students attempted to close the Institute for Defense Analysis and armed police confronted them. Hampshire played down the whole business, and self-deprecatingly referred to himself as having joined 'the stage army of the good' ('The Guardian', 16 June 2004), whose house journal was the 'New York Review of Books', or -- as George Will had it -- the 'English Review of Vietnam'. He enjoyed Princeton even though he found its pastiche Gothic painful; but he had no difficulty deciding to return to Oxford as warden of Wadham College when the chance came. 
In 1970 Maurice Bowra retired from the position as warden of Wadham that he had occupied since 1938. The college had flourished, and although Bowra was a markedly twenties-ish figure, Wadham was the most left-leaning, radical, and 'modern' of the traditional colleges. The college was not of one mind about how different it wished the next warden to be. Wardens had always been chosen from among fellows and former fellows; and Hampshire was not one. What clinched things for Hampshire was the fact that he was unequivocally in favour of Wadham admitting women undergraduates; in the eyes of young fellows it was a litmus test of one's attitude to all aspects of university and college life. 
Hampshire was a successful warden, although he did not set out to stamp his personality on the college and the university as Bowra had done. Colleagues and students felt pleased to have in their midst someone who was such a distinguished cultural figure in the wider world. In 1979 Hampshire was knighted for services to philosophy. The following year Renee died. Initially Hampshire withdrew into himself, but then turned more often to colleagues and the college for companionship; students from the early 1980s remembered him with particular affection. 
In 1984 Hampshire reached the age of seventy and had to retire from the wardenship. He was appointed to a chair in philosophy at Stanford University. In 1985 he married Nancy Lynn Delaney Cartwright ('b'. 1944), who was also a professor of philosophy at Stanford; they immediately adopted their first daughter, Emily, and the following year had a daughter of their own, Sophie. Hampshire and his wife remained at Stanford until 1991, when he retired and she became professor of philosophy and scientific method at the London School of Economics. They purchased a small house in Headington, Oxford, within a few yards of the Berlins, and Hampshire very happily -- though to the alarm of some old friends who disapproved of domesticity on principle -- settled into the role of house-husband, while continuing to write on Spinoza and much else until the very end of his life. 
At the time of the publication of 'Thought and Action' Mary Warnock described Hampshire as an 'Aristotelian existentialist' (personal knowledge), an evocative phrase that catches the flavour of his writing, if not the detail. In 1950 Hampshire had published, in the journal 'Mind', a devastating review of Gilbert Ryle's 'The Concept of Mind' that mocked Ryle's attempt to argue that our mental lives were 'obvious not occult', and insisted that the thoughts and desires of all of us were always open to interpretation and re-interpretation, especially by their 'owner'. Hampshire always insisted that Aristotle was right on one crucial issue -- what 'good' means. A great deal of time could have been saved if this had been better understood. This was a rebuke to those who had proffered emotivist and imperativist analyses of 'good'. While Hampshire sided with Aristotle's view that the task of ethics was -- in large part -- to explicate the nature of the virtues, he was far from endorsing Aristotle's substantive views, and over the years distanced himself still further. 
Hampshire's criticisms of Aristotle's vision of the good life emphasized the narrowness of Aristotle's view of what good lives there could be, and the inability of reason to choose between them. Characteristically he went beyond those observations to argue that what most undermined Aristotle's ethics was the nature of the modern world; a new sense of time and a new conception of freedom could not be accommodated within Aristotle's metaphysics and theory of action. He argued much the same case against Spinoza; on the one hand, he admired Spinoza's assaults on irrational guilt and anxiety, but on the other he thought Spinoza's defence of a paternalistic political order was wholly inapt for the modern world. 
The implausibility of building politics around the search for harmony became a prominent theme of Hampshire's later thoughts on ethics and politics. In both 'Innocence and Experience' (1989) and 'Justice is Conflict' (1999) he pursued ideas that if they had been explained less deftly might have seemed simply nihilistic. One was an emphasis on the difference between private and public virtue. It was intended as a restatement of Machiavelli's insistence on the unavoidability of dirty hands in public life, but Hampshire displayed a much stronger sense of the costs of effectiveness in the public realm, and had none of Machiavelli's relish for dirty tricks as an art form. Nor was Hampshire brusque in the way Machiavelli had been about the relative attractions of different kinds of life; the virtues of innocence were not 'monkish', or suited only to those without the nerve to risk their necks in the political realm. 
Hampshire was, among other things, a reviewer of near-genius. Everyone who read him in 'Encounter' or the 'New York Review' -- perhaps above all, everyone who read him in the 'New Statesman' -- was enchanted by his reviews; he had an uncanny ability to depict the inner workings of an author's mind and to hold in balance an attention to the deeply individual features of a writer and the culture in which they worked, and the universal features of human life that an author illuminated. He discounted these essays as contributions to criticism properly speaking; this was not affectation but the reflection of a sense of the different tasks proper to the critic and the philosopher. The critic ought, on this view, to tackle single works, one at a time, and evaluate them by the standards of the genre and the aspirations of those who worked in that genre. Hampshire, on the other hand, was showing philosophically minded readers how to nourish their imagination, and uncovering for the benefit of anyone interested the intellectual and theoretical allegiances that animated modern literature. But his sense of how much philosophy could learn from both science and literature had much to do with the engrossing quality of his work. He was a writer to whom readers turned in the expectation of enlightenment and inspiration; they might not always be sure where he would take them, but they were always happy to have shared the journey with him. 
Stuart Hampshire was one of the most interesting philosophers of the second half of the twentieth century. He made a less visible impact than several contemporaries: he was less of a public figure than Isaiah Berlin, less of a celebrity than A. J. Ayer, and less influential in setting the philosophical agenda of the day than John Austin, Peter Strawson, or Donald Davidson. But he had a strikingly wide range of close friends in the worlds of literature, art, and politics, and his philosophical writing reflected those interests. His work on Spinoza drew on his interest in psychoanalytic theory, as did his major work, 'Thought and Action'; while his later political writings, such as 'Justice is Conflict', reflected his deep conviction that the task of philosophy was to reflect the reality of irresolvable conflict over ultimate ends, not to try to tidy conflict out of sight. He died of cancer of the pancreas at his home, 7 Beaumont Road, Headington, Oxford, on 13 June 2004, after a mercifully short illness. He was survived by his second wife, Nancy, and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94200


Holland, Mary Philomena (1935-2004), journalist, was born on 19 June 1935 at 41 Maison Dieu Road, Dover, Kent, the daughter of Patrick Henry Holland, civil engineer and later civil servant, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Callanan. Her family had originated in Clonakilty, west Cork, but her father was then working in Malaya, where he designed bridges and where her two elder brothers had been born. When her parents returned to the Far East she was dispatched as a very young child to live in co. Cork with an aunt who was a nun. She was subsequently sent to Loreto Convent, Rathfarnham, co. Dublin, and then to a convent at Farnborough, Hampshire. In later years she spoke of having been at convent boarding school 'since the age of three' (personal knowledge). Although the nuns were not unkind to her, she came to feel that the early separation from her parents and siblings brought emotional problems: she spoke of her emotions having been 'cauterized' by the experience (personal knowledge). Throughout her life she was a person of stoical temperament, who never warmed to the 'touchy-feely' element in late twentieth-century culture. 
Mary Holland's brothers, John and Bill, both became doctors, and she studied briefly for a law degree at King's College, London, but dropped out to become a journalist after winning a competition for young writers with 'Vogue' magazine at the age of eighteen. She developed in 'Vogue' her interest in the theatre and the arts, and interviewed such celebrities as Sir Laurence Olivier and Vanessa Redgrave. She also wrote for 'Queen' magazine and 'Plays and Players'. Impressed by a profile that she had written of the poet Philip Larkin, David Astor of 'The Observer' hired her, and he became a mentor in her journalistic development. Initially she wrote about the arts; she stood in as theatre critic for Kenneth Tynan (whom she remembered as being infallibly kind to her) and struck up a warm friendship with Penelope Gilliatt, the film critic and wife of John Osborne. She became for a time fashion editor of 'The Observer', in which role she combined aspirational high couture with an eye for a bargain. 
On 2 April 1966 Holland married Ronald Trevor Higgins, a 36-year-old diplomat, and son of Robert Higgins, security officer. The wedding reception was held in the crypt of the House of Commons, and Ted Heath was a guest of honour. The couple were posted to Indonesia in 1966, just as the Vietnam War was reaching its height. She was instructed by the Foreign Office never to speak about politics, but to concentrate in her social conversation on 'flowers and holidays' (personal knowledge). She found the role of a diplomat's wife highly frustrating, and finally fled back to London. Ronald Higgins, who was devoted to her, quit his Foreign Office post in an effort to win her back, but by then the marriage had failed. 
In 1968, prompted by David Astor, Holland went to Northern Ireland, and found the cause that was to dominate the rest of her life. Her Irish roots were awakened -- her parents had been home rule nationalists -- and her sense of justice aroused by the situation she found. She became a superb reporter, and each week her by-line on 'The Observer' grew in authority. Harold Wilson later told her that she had concentrated his mind considerably on the issue. In 1970 she won the international journalist of the year award from the International Press Corporation for her Ulster reporting. She also fell in love with Eamonn McCann ('b'. 1943), a prominent civil rights activist from Derry, and this too was a true commitment of the heart. They lived together for some years and had a daughter and a son. However, she was ever more drawn to living in Ireland. She parted from McCann in the later 1970s and went to live in Dublin. 
Mary Holland covered Northern Ireland for 'The Observer' from 1968 to 1979, but was fired in the latter year by Conor Cruise O'Brien, the newly appointed editor-in-chief, who felt that her reportage was too coloured by Irish nationalism (a view shared by many Unionists and some English Conservatives) and thus indulgent of the Provisional IRA and their followers. After O'Brien's departure from 'The Observer' she returned as a columnist. Besides her work for that paper she became an influential columnist for the 'Irish Times'. She also fronted, with Peter Jay, the politics programme 'Weekend World' for London Weekend Television, from 1972 to 1988. In 1977 she co-founded, with Vincent Browne, 'Magill' magazine, published in Dublin. In 1980 her television documentary 'Creggan', an account of life on a working-class estate in Derry, won the Prix Italia and British Broadcasting Guild award. Among other awards she was voted, in 1990, 'Cork woman of the year', being called 'an illustrious daughter of west Cork' ('Irish Times', 12 June 2004): this hugely pleased her. 
Mary Holland was a liberal socialist rather than a nationalist -- though she was always committed to a united Ireland. She was involved with feminist issues and campaigned for abortion rights before the controversial abortion referendum in Ireland in 1983, and was also an active trade unionist. But the cause of Northern Ireland was always the priority for her, and she predicted, long before it occurred, that one day Ian Paisley would come to the conference table with Sinn Fein. 
The last years of Holland's life were blighted by a degenerative illness, scleroderma, which started with an apparent case of poor circulation. It was a painful illness that she accepted with a mixture of stoicism and acerbic wit. She had a cutting side to her temperament: she could freeze with an ice-cold remark. But she was warm of heart, kind, decent, and honourable. She was not a believing Catholic, though she had been married in church, and she retained a certain affection for the faith symbols of her childhood: she was strangely comforted by the presence of an image of the sacred heart in the hospice where she spent some time during her last months. She died in St Vincent's Hospital, Dublin, on 7 June 2004 and was survived by her daughter, Kitty, and son, Luke. After her death the 'Irish Times' published a collection of her articles, 'How Far We Have Travelled: the Voice of Mary Holland' (2004). Her humanist funeral service in Dublin was attended by two Nobel prizewinners, Seamus Heaney and John Hume, among many other dignitaries. Heaney said that, 'unusually for a journalist', she had had an influence on the events of her lifetime. 'In the Yeatsian sense, she was one of the 'hearers and heartners of the work', in both the cultural and the political worlds' ('Irish Times', 10 June 2004). 
Mary Holland was widely acknowledged as an influential political journalist, who was instrumental in bringing to worldwide attention the troubling events in Northern Ireland in the late 1960s. Her critics might have claimed that her initial sympathy for the nationalist underdog was partisan, but at the end of her writing life in the 1990s she was at pains to highlight the loyalist and unionist side of the story. As Seamus Heaney said, her efforts to be fair to all sides were exemplary. 'She had a probity that rubbed off on people' ('Irish Times', 10 June 2004). 


@@@@@


doc= 94203


Kieft, Cyril William (1911-2004), industrialist and motor engineer, was born at 8 Park Road, Gorseinon, Llandeilo Tal-y-bont, Swansea, on 27 September 1911, the son of Albert William Kieft, steel works manager, and his wife, Lilian Maud, 'nee' Evans. He was educated at Wellington School, Somerset, where he excelled at shooting, winning several cups in competitions at Bisley. Upon leaving school, he followed his father into the steel industry and trained at Richard Thomas and Baldwin, where his father was managing director. In 1933 he was appointed assistant plant manager at the Redbourne steel works, near Scunthorpe, in Lincolnshire. Four years later in 1937 he and his father restarted the Haybridge steel works at Wellington, Shropshire, with Cyril as assistant managing director. On 15 September that year he married Megan Thomas, 23-year-old daughter of David John Thomas, a south Wales colliery owner, at St James's Chapel of Ease in Swansea. They had two daughters. 
During the Second World War, Kieft served as a bomb disposal officer in the Home Guard while continuing as assistant managing director of the Haybridge steel works, which made steel sections for the war effort. However, in 1943 he moved to become managing director of the Wolverhampton steel works and also bought a drop forgings company and a steel pressing company which he ran on his own account. The drop forgings company was situated in Derry Street, Wolverhampton. In 1946, with the threat of nationalization of the steel industry by the then Labour government, Kieft expressed the view that he did not want to become a civil servant and set up a manufacturing engineering company in Bridgend in his native south Wales. 
Throughout his career in the steel industry, Kieft harboured an interest in racing cars. Prior to the outbreak of war in 1939 he attended race meetings at Donington and in 1948 he decided to enter the sport as a manufacturer. His chosen category was formula 3 where entry costs were low, as the car engines were based on 500 cc motorcycle engines. Kieft's initial sally into the sport was participation in the Tenby motor club's hill climb event at Lydstep House, Pembrokeshire. A year later in 1949 Kieft entered a Marwin, a modified rear-engined Austin 7, in the same event, but the vehicle was considered too heavy to be competitive. When Marwin went into liquidation later that year, Kieft bought key components from the receiver and proceeded to design and construct his own cars at his factory in Wolverhampton. The first Kieft prototype vehicle raced at Lydstep in spring 1950, but the experience was such that Kieft decided to end his driving career and subsequently always employed professional drivers. 
After competing in several events in 1950 Kieft took two of his cars to Montlhery where they broke fourteen different speed records. Kieft though was searching for a top-class driver and identified Stirling Moss, who at that time was working for Cooper's, a rival firm. Moss and a number of partners were also interested in designing and manufacturing their own cars, but lacked the necessary capital. Kieft recognized the potential of Moss's cars and offered the necessary manufacturing facilities. The ensuing car was launched in 1951 and won its first competition at Goodwood with Moss at the controls. Over the next two years Kieft cars won a number of victories with Don Parker, another 'privateer', including the formula 3 championship on three successive occasions. The Kieft car in which Parker won these titles was exhibited at the Earl's Court motor show in recognition of Parker's success. 
Regardless of his achievements in racing, Kieft continued to run his engineering business, but relocated his factory from south Wales to Wolverhampton. Additionally, he also formed the Welsh Motor Racing Club and built a race circuit on Swansea's outskirts at Fairwood Common. In 1953 and 1954 the production of Kieft cars continued with new designs and a variety of engine sizes, including one which competed at Le Mans in 1954 as well as a formula 1 car which remained hidden until nearly fifty years later, when it was unveiled for the first time. In addition to simply producing cars, Kieft was an innovator in car design, particularly in the use of glass fibres to reduce weight, the development of central seating positions for drivers, and the adoption of swing axles in his vehicles, so making a distinct contribution to racing car development in the early 1950s. 
Kieft was closely involved with the Conservative government in 1953 when it began to denationalize the steel industry, and worked with the merchant bankers Close Brothers to that effect. In 1955 he began to concentrate his energies on his steel and manufacturing interests and sold Kieft Cars, which continued to trade under various names until 1961. Kieft then proceeded to diversify his industrial interests with the setting up of Kieft Oil Products and Drop Forgings. He was also managing director of Raine Co., of Newcastle upon Tyne; Millom Askham and Hodbarrow, of Cumbria; and Darwyn and Mostyn, of north Wales. In the 1960s he became managing director of the Arusha group, and in the following decade both managing director and a major shareholder in the Wrexham Wire Company. 
Kieft pursued several hobbies, building up a collection of Swansea and Nantgarw porcelain, on which he was a recognized expert, as well as being an avid stamp collector, specializing in British Empire issues. Additionally, in 1961 he purchased a 51 foot yacht which he used to cruise around Britain and the Mediterranean, and also became a member of the Royal Yacht Club. His interest in motor racing was rekindled in the 1960s and he began watching racing again, but mainly on television. Nevertheless he was always happy to answer queries from enthusiasts about Kieft Cars, and on a number of occasions participated in the 500 Owners Association (for owners of 500 cc racing cars). His proudest moment came in September 2002 when the Kieft formula 1 car which had been built almost fifty years earlier was finally unveiled at Silverstone. The car was fitted with a 2.5 litre Coventry Climax FPE engine and competed in the Boulogne and Hawthorn trophies meeting. Following the race Kieft sat in the cockpit with a glass of champagne. After his wife's death he moved to Spain. He died on 10 May 2004, and was survived by his two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94204


Kydd, Frances Ruth Burke Shand (1936-2004), voluntary worker, was born on 20 January 1936 at Park House, Sandringham, Norfolk, the second of two daughters of (Edmund) Maurice Burke Roche, fourth Baron Fermoy (1885-1955), and his wife, Ruth Sylvia, 'nee' Gill (1908-1993), the youngest daughter of Colonel William Smith Gill of Bildside, Aderdeenshire. Her first encounter with royal life occurred before she was born, when Queen Mary deflected her own anxiety and impending grief by enquiring about 'Ruth Fermoy's baby'; her birth coincided exactly with the death of George V, in the 'big house' at Sandringham. The Fermoys enjoyed living in the King's Lynn area because of its proximity to the royal family. Many years later, in 1960, Ruth Fermoy became a lady-in-waiting to the queen mother. Frances had a brother, later fifth Baron Fermoy, who committed suicide in 1984, and an elder sister, Mary, who married three times, her first husband being Sir Anthony Berry, who was assassinated in the IRA's bombing of the Grand Hotel, Brighton, in 1984 (some years after their divorce). 
Frances Roche was educated at Downham School, Hertfordshire, and emerged as a confident seventeen-year-old, 'forcible, dynamic, energetic and very intelligent', as one friend put it (private information). The queen mother attended her coming-out ball in 1953, and soon Frances was engaged to (Edward) John Spencer, Viscount Althorp (1924-1992), heir to the seventh Earl Spencer. He served as acting master of the household on the queen's Commonwealth tour of 1953-4, during which Frances undertook finishing courses in Florence and Paris. On 1 June 1954, at Westminster Abbey, Frances and Althorp were married. The royal family attended in force, led by the queen and Prince Philip, the queen mother, and Princess Margaret. After the death of Frances's father in 1955 the Althorps settled at Park House, Sandringham, their lifestyle supported by Frances's American inheritance (her paternal grandmother was the New York heiress Frances Work). They had two daughters, Sarah ('b'. 1955) and Jane ('b'. 1957), a son (born and died the same day in 1960), a third daughter, Diana, in 1961, and then the eventual heir, Charles (later ninth Earl Spencer) in 1964. 
For some years the Althorps enjoyed a happy family life, Frances helping the local branch of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and the parochial church council. Connections with the royal family remained strong. Relations with Althorp's father were poor, but Cynthia, Countess Spencer, another lady-in-waiting to the queen mother, liked to visit her grandchildren when in waiting at Sandringham. The tragedy of these years was the loss of the hoped-for heir in 1960. He was buried in the churchyard at Sandringham. 
In 1966 Frances met Peter Shand Kydd (died 2006), a farmer, son of Norman Shand Kydd, and heir to a wallpaper fortune, at a dinner party. In the following year she eloped with him, taking Diana and Charles with her, until their father insisted on having custody of them. Shand Kydd's wife cited her in a divorce action in June 1968 and, in December, Frances lost a case for legal custody of her children, Althorp's side being supported by the children's headmistress and Frances's own mother, on account of Lady Fermoy's wish to dissociate herself in royal circles from the disgrace her daughter was bringing upon herself. Frances's own divorce case was heard in April 1969; she accused Althorp of cruelty and he cited her adultery. She was allowed access to her children, but they continued to live with their father, while Frances was branded a 'bolter'. On 2 May 1969 she married Shand Kydd and they moved to the Sussex coast, living as privately as possible. Then in 1972 they settled on a farm on the island of Seil in Argyll, breeding Shetland ponies and running a gift shop in Oban. The Shand Kydds also owned a 1000 acre sheep station in New South Wales, Australia. 
All this might have remained private but for the marriage between Frances's daughter Lady Diana Spencer and the prince of Wales in 1981. During the courtship she made a public plea that the press would not harass her daughter, in a letter to 'The Times', on 2 December 1980. She sought to put 'truth and reality' into the newspaper reports, she said, confirming that Diana had not had an assignation with Prince Charles on the royal train. With some prescience she wrote: 'May I ask the editors of Fleet Street whether, in the execution of their jobs, they consider it necessary or fair to harass my daughter daily, from dawn until well after dusk? Is it fair to ask any human being, regardless of circumstances, to be treated in this way?' No heed was taken of these words, however, and press interest grew after the engagement in February 1981 and the wedding at St Paul's Cathedral in July, after which Frances accompanied the duke of Edinburgh in the carriage procession back to Buckingham Palace. 
Any joy Frances Shand Kydd experienced at the birth of her two grandchildren, princes William and Harry, was paid for in full by the suffering imposed on her as their parents' marriage disintegrated. Media intrusion and strained relations with her daughter caused her considerable unhappiness, her strength of character being further tested when Peter Shand Kydd left her in 1988; the couple were subsequently divorced. In later life she was active in a number of local charities and causes including the Highlands and Islands Music and Dance Festival, and the Mission for Deep Sea Fishermen (Scotland). She was a counsellor for the bereavement counselling charity CRUSE from 1996. 
In 1994, two years after the Waleses separated, Frances sought solace in the Roman Catholic church. In 1997, in order to raise money for a prayer house on Iona, she gave an interview to 'Hello' magazine in which, inevitably, she expressed her opinions about Diana's marriage and her daughter's lack of wisdom in giving an interview to BBC television's 'Panorama' programme in 1995. As a result of this there was no further communication between her and Diana, and they remained estranged at the time of Diana's death in August 1997. The last occasions on which Frances impinged on the public conscience were her dignified attendance at Diana's funeral, and then, in the autumn of 2002, when she gave evidence in the trial of Paul Burrell (Diana's butler, accused of the theft of her belongings) in London. By this time her health had declined and she appeared a frail, elderly woman. She was generally respected for her kindness and ultimately the unfortunate role into which she had been propelled. She died of pneumonia at Callanish, Clachan Seil, near Oban on 3 June 2004. She was survived by her three remaining children. Her funeral took place at St Colomba's Cathedral, Oban, on 10 June and she was buried in the nearby Pennyfuir cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 94207


Macdonald, Murdo Ewen (1914-2004), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 28 August 1914 at Plocrapool on the Hebridean island of Harris, the son of Donald Alick Macdonald, a crofter and fisherman, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Campbell, a weaver. He was educated at Drinishadder, the local primary school in Harris, and then at Kingussie secondary school, Inverness-shire, before taking degrees in arts and in theology at the University of St Andrews. There he distinguished himself academically, as well as physically -- he was the Scottish universities middleweight boxing champion -- and as an extraordinarily vibrant personality with a very ready wit. On completing his studies in 1939 he was ordained as minister of Portree on the Isle of Skye, where he quickly developed a reputation as a compelling preacher, both in Gaelic and in English. 
In April 1940 Macdonald volunteered to join the armed forces as a chaplain, and he served first with the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders on the island of Aruba in the Caribbean, where he met his American-born wife, Elizabeth (Betty) Russell (died 1997), an English teacher, with whom he had two sons, Alasdair and Alan. In 1942 he volunteered to serve with the second battalion of the 1st Parachute brigade in north Africa. He was dropped with a detachment of troops behind the German lines, where he was wounded and taken prisoner. Following an adventurous journey, in the course of which he and a fellow prisoner were able to blow up the German plane that had taken them to Naples, he was imprisoned at Stalag Luft III in Silesia where he ministered to his fellow prisoners. While his new 'parishioners' were digging escape tunnels Murdo Ewen (as he was already universally known) sat apparently reading, but actually keeping an eye on the guards, and warning the tunnellers if any approached. In March 1944 seventy-six allied airmen escaped through the tunnels; all but three were recaptured and fifty were executed. During this time of fear, despair, and anger, Macdonald provided support, encouragement, and hope to all the prisoners in outstanding fashion. When the American prisoners of war were moved to a separate compound they asked for Murdo Ewen to go with them as their chaplain, which he did. He had, in the harsh and fearful conditions of a prisoner-of-war camp in the later stages of the war, a truly remarkable ministry, out of which came a network of lasting American friendships. In recognition of this ministry he was awarded the United States bronze star. 
After his repatriation Macdonald was called in 1947 to be minister of Partick Old Parish Church in Glasgow. He quickly established a reputation as a charismatic preacher, a caring pastor, and a passionate radical who lauded the coming of the welfare state, and frequently denounced private schools from the pulpit. After just two years he became minister of St George's West Church in Edinburgh, at that time without question the most distinguished pulpit in Scotland. He attracted large congregations, especially of students, and was undoubtedly one of the outstanding preachers of his day. One study reported that on an average Sunday some 400 students worshipped in St George's West, to say nothing of the large and influential regular congregation. Macdonald's warmth, enthusiasm, and wide reading -- skilfully deployed -- deeply influenced several generations of Edinburgh students. Many people in the professions, in teaching, and above all in the Christian ministry, felt that he had helped shape their vocations. Macdonald preached frequently overseas and was held in particular esteem in the United States. In his sermons he engaged seriously and intelligently with contemporary liberal theology, with existentialism, with a massive range of reading, and, of course, with the scriptures. But he was not usually an expository preacher like his contemporary James Stuart Stewart. He also used tales from his own experience of the prison camp and elsewhere to good effect in his sermons. Selections of these were published as 'The Vitality of Faith' (1955) and 'The Call to Obey' (1963). 
In 1963 Macdonald left St George's West to take up the chair of practical theology at Trinity College in the University of Glasgow. Despite his immense reading and his remarkable career as a preacher and pastor, he did not take easily to the academic life, or make the impression his sponsors expected. But if his teaching and his research were on the whole unremarkable, his warm and caring personality and his radical commitment, to say nothing of his extraordinary life story, had a deep influence on generations of young men -- and some women -- who were preparing for ministry in Scotland or elsewhere. He retired from university teaching in 1984 and later wrote an autobiographical essay, 'Padre Mac', which was printed by the 'Stornoway Gazette'. He declared his greatest achievement to be the climbing of every Munro in Scotland. 
Murdo Macdonald died on 6 June 2004 of arteriosclerosis at Eastwoodhill Home, 238 Fenwick Road, Giffnock, Renfrewshire. His wife having predeceased him, he was survived by their two sons. Among Macdonald's close friends -- whom he met at university -- was John Brown, minister at Kirkcaldy, Fife, and father of the Labour prime minister Gordon Brown. At the time of Macdonald's funeral Brown, himself a friend of the minister, described him as 'a truly great man -- principled, persuasive, humorous... When I last met him, though frail, he was engaging, interested and committed as ever to the great causes he believed in. His beliefs shone through everything that he did' ('The Herald', 12 June 2004). For the poet Iain Crichton Smith he was 'for want of a better term, the Happy Warrior of whom Wordsworth wrote: exuberant, life enhancing, hostile to injustice, a lover of the marvellous particulars of the world, yet aware of the darkness... By their fruits ye shall know them. And because we respect Murdo Ewen, we respect his God also. ('Padre Mac', 4, quoted in 'The Scotsman', 14 June 2004)' 



@@@@@


doc= 94211


Moraes, Dominic Francis (1938-2004), poet and writer, was born on 19 July 1938 in Bombay, India, the only child of Francis Robert (Frank) Moraes (1907-1974), an Oxford-educated lawyer, who edited the 'Times of India', the 'Indian Express', and the 'Times of Ceylon', and his wife, Beryl, 'nee' D'Monte (died 1989), a doctor. Both his parents were from English-speaking Roman Catholic backgrounds. When he was seven years old his mother became mentally ill and was institutionalized. He subsequently lived with his father in Ceylon, the south Pacific, and south-east Asia before returning to Bombay and continuing his education at Campion School and St Mary's High School. 
In 1954 Moraes met Stephen Spender, then on a visit to Bombay, and showed him his poems. Spender published some in 'Encounter' and helped him secure admission to Jesus College, Oxford. He left India in 1955, and in the year before he went to Oxford travelled widely in mainland Europe. At Jesus he read English from 1956 to 1959 and came to know other leading English and American poets and critics of the period, including W. H. Auden, Cyril Connolly, William Empson, Allen Ginsberg, and Allen Tate. His more immediate circle of friends included the poets John Heath-Stubbs, Julian Mitchell, and Peter Levi, and his first collection of poems, 'A Beginning', was published by the select Parton Press in 1957. When this volume was awarded the Hawthornden prize (1958) Moraes became its youngest and first non-British winner and his reputation seemed assured. In the year of the award he edited an issue of the Oxford literary review 'Gemini', in which he included poems by Stevie Smith, Ted Hughes, and Sylvia Plath. His autobiographical travel book 'Gone Away' (1960) and 'Poems' (1960) followed in quick succession; and a selection of his verse was published, along with the work of Kingsley Amis and Peter Porter, in the second volume of the influential 'Penguin Modern Poets' series, further confirming his place in the emerging canon of contemporary English poetry. His third collection, 'John Nobody', regarded by many as his finest, appeared in 1965. 
The acclaim Moraes received, particularly for the technical assurance of his poetry, was complemented by his adoption into the celebrity culture of the day: he became a television personality and a prominent figure in the Soho scene of the 'swinging sixties', which provided the setting for some of the poems in 'John Nobody'. Despite this he wrestled with personal problems, drank heavily at times, and was twice married and divorced in this period. On 5 December 1960 he married the socialite Henrietta Bowler, 'nee' Abbott (1931-1999), remembered as the model for Francis Bacon's 'Lying Figure with a Hypodermic Syringe'; and in 1963 to Judith St John, with whom he had a son, Francis. In 1970 he made a third marriage: to his childhood sweetheart, Leela Naidu, a celebrated film actress and former Miss India, but this marriage was also subsequently dissolved. Moraes's personal angst during this period can in part be traced to his early years. In his autobiographical volume 'Never at Home' (1992) he described how the spectre of his mother made him afraid of returning to India. He did so in 1974, when the United Nations agency for which he was then working lent him to the Indian government. His father died in that year and two years later Moraes followed in his footsteps in committing his mother to an asylum, amid feelings of guilt and self-hatred. In the years preceding his return to India, Moraes had been living in New York and Hong Kong, while travelling widely in south-east Asia and Australia and viewing himself as an 'international nomad' ('My Son's Father', ix). 
A widely held view of Moraes is that he failed to fulfil the promise of his early bohemian years in England. However, although his poetic output almost completely dried up during his middle period, he remained a prolific writer, columnist, editor, and film-maker. He worked as a war correspondent in Algeria, Israel, and Vietnam and made some two dozen documentaries for the BBC and ITV. He also published more than twenty prose works, including a biography of Indira Gandhi, a book about the cricketer Sunil Gavaskar, and two further volumes of memoirs, 'My Son's Father' (1968) and 'Never at Home' (1992), which were republished along with 'Gone Away' as 'A Variety of Absences' (2003). He returned to poetry with 'Absences' (1983), 'Serendip' (1990), and 'Cinnamon Shade: New and Selected Poems' (2001), works that represent his most mature achievement. In these volumes the often impressionistic romanticism of his early poetry gave way to a complex engagement with archetypal myths and the poetics of place. 
Along with Nissim Ezekiel and A. K. Ramanujan, Moraes was one of the triumvirate of poets who pioneered modern Indian verse in English, but for many years his reputation on the subcontinent was far from assured, because of his supposed Anglicization and the alleged obscurity of his sometimes very personal verse. Towards the end of his life his work received more acknowledgement at home, when, in the words of Ranjit Hoskote, his 'repugnance' towards some aspects of Indian culture was tempered by 'a certain compassionate equanimity towards its people' and 'the literary culture that had long rejected him... recognised him with awards, and more importantly, with a revival of serious interest in his writing' ('The Hindu', 3 June 2004). 
Moraes's partner during the last years of his life was the architect and author Sarayu Srivatsa, with whom he co-wrote one of his most interesting prose works, 'The Long Strider', the story of the early seventeenth-century explorer Thomas Coryate, who walked to India from Somerset. Moraes died of a heart attack, in the city of his birth, now Mumbai, on 2 June 2004. He had been suffering from cancer, for which he refused to take treatment, for several years. 


@@@@@


doc= 94212


Potter, Donald Steele (1902-2004), sculptor, was born at Parsonage House, Newington, Kent, on 21 April 1902, the eldest child of Henry Joseph Potter, a grocer's commercial traveller and later journalist, and his wife, Bessie, 'nee' Matthews. He had two sisters, Norah Mary ('b'. 1904) and Dorothy ('b'. 1906). His childhood outside school was idyllic. He roamed freely, carving lumps of chalk and wood, making clay models, and drawing. His first school was the Convent of the Nativity, Sittingbourne. He attended another school after his father's business failed and the family moved to Gillingham. He found Gillingham a dismal place, but two fortuitous events reinforced rich veins in his life. The fairground behind their house with its carved animals and rope-spinning in the wild west shows opened his eyes, and in 1914 he discovered an old cello in a junk shop, for which he paid $2 10's'. in 5's'. instalments. Around 1915 the family moved to Chingford, Essex. In 1917 he left school and went to work in a munitions factory in north London -- 'The nearest approach to prison I have ever known' ('Bryanston Saga', summer 1982, 17). Later work at an aero-engine factory taught him valuable metalwork techniques. 
Potter did not enjoy school, but he liked one English teacher, Josh Reynolds, who was also the leader of his wolf cub troop at Newington. After the family had moved to Chingford he joined the South Woodford Scout troop, which was often invited to spend weekends at Gilwell Park. In 1919 the Scout Association was presented with Gilwell Park as a gift and Potter attended the first wood badge (scoutmasters') course. The camp chief, Francis Gidney, invited Potter to become a permanent member of the Gilwell staff, and also gave him his first set of wood-carving tools. Lord Baden-Powell recognized Potter's talent and gave him numerous commissions, including carving wood badges and totem poles -- a 17 foot pole for the camp fire circle and one for each of the five dominions at the 1929 world jamboree. Later Scout commissions included the stone on Brownsea Island, Poole Harbour, commemorating the original Scout camp of 1907, and the 9 foot granite figure of Baden-Powell outside Baden-Powell House in Queen's Gate (1961). 
In 1930 Potter left Gilwell to learn more of stone-carving. He approached Jacob Epstein, but the two failed to get on, so he applied to Eric Gill. Gill took him on for six months and he stayed for six years in a cottage near Pigotts, Gill's home-cum-studio close to High Wycombe. Gill recognized Potter's skill in wood and passed a number of his commissions on to him. While with Gill, Potter learned the skill of letter-cutting from Laurie Cribb and played chamber music with Gill, Edmund Rubbra, and Antoinette Rubbra. From 1934 he did some teaching to supplement his income -- first at Hampden House School, Great Missenden, and later at Oldfield School, Swanage. In 1937 he left Pigotts to set up on his own, though Gill continued to pass on commissions. In 1939 he received the first of a number of commissions from the architect Richard Twentyman, a figure of St Martin for a church in Wolverhampton. 
Soon after the outbreak of the Second World War Oldfield School emigrated to Canada and the headmaster recommended Potter to T. F. Coade, the headmaster of Bryanston School in Dorset. He moved to Bryanston in September 1940 and remained there, teaching sculpture, pottery, and metalwork, until 1984. On 4 August 1945 he married (Victoria) Mary Broomfield ('b'. 1920), a hospital nurse and weaver. They had a daughter, Anne ('b'. 1947), and a son, Julian ('b'. 1952). 
At Bryanston Potter's activities were legion -- including his beloved cello and rope-spinning (around 1920 he had seen Tex McLeod rope-spinning in a London circus, invited him to Gilwell, and became proficient enough himself to give numerous shows in Britain and on the continent), but also potholing, photography, and running the school's fire-engine. After moving to the Old Forge in Bryanston in 1960 he made almost everything that could possibly be made by hand, including the floors, stairs, and much of the furniture. 
Throughout his time at Bryanston Potter was allowed to continue his own work, and he received many commissions. These included an inscribed oak panel for St Paul's School, London, commemorating Montgomery's planning of the invasion of Europe in the school's board room (1946); three carvings for Wolverhampton crematorium (1954); ceramic stations of the cross for St Matthew's Church, Bethnal Green (1959); a risen Christ for St Peter's School chapel, Wolverhampton (1965); three works for the English Martyrs' Church, Didcot (around 1967); and lettering to celebrate Pope John Paul II's visit to Coventry airport (1982). He worked in many materials -- wood first and foremost, but also stone, flint, marine ply, ivory, metal, fibreglass, and mosaic. Some of his work was clearly derived from Gill, perhaps particularly his figures and animals, but much work was completely his own. 
In his forty-four years of teaching at Bryanston Potter inspired many pupils to embark on careers in pottery (Richard Batterham, Mike Dodd, Kit Opie), sculpture (Bryant Fedden, Quinten Hollick, Ben Platts-Mills, John Richter, Brinsley Tyrrell), art (Richard Bawden, Tim Nicholson), design (Terence Conran), and architecture (Richard Burton, Quinlan Terry). He not only carried on working after retirement in 1984, but was still developing new techniques, most notably in the 22 foot 'Tree of Life' for Bryanston for which he had to gather and split all the flints (1988). Another local commission was to fill with carvings of St Nicholas and the Madonna and child two niches in the tower of the church of St Nicholas in Durweston (1992). In 1997 the Don Potter Art School was opened at Bryanston. In 2002 a centenary retrospective exhibition was held in Dorchester Museum, timed to coincide with the publication of Vivienne Light's book, 'Don Potter, an Inspiring Century'. An unworldly man, he never recorded the dates of his work, never kept cheque stubs, and never read newspapers; he therefore made the task of his biographer a demanding one. 
Known almost universally as Don, Potter was courteous, warm, and welcoming, with a great sense of fun and mischief. His and Mary's door was always open, as was his mind to new ideas. Despite his time with Eric Gill he was not conventionally religious, but he was deeply spiritual; he read widely and practised meditation throughout his adult life. Even in old age he was bright, alert, agile, and had a twinkling eye and a real zest for life. He died in Blandford Hospital, Blandford Forum, Dorset, in the very early hours of 7 June 2004, and was survived by his wife, Mary, and their two children. He was buried on 17 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 94217


Slay, Desmond (1927-2004), Old Icelandic scholar, was born on 30 December 1927 at the Victoria Nursing Home, Thame, Oxfordshire, the son of Wilfred Charles Slay (1907-1987), outfitter's assistant, and his wife, Doris Elizabeth, 'nee' Walker (1904-1979). At the time of his birth registration his parents lived at 3 St John Street, Oxford. He was educated at Lord William's Grammar School, Thame, and St Catherine's Society, Oxford, from which he graduated in 1948 with first-class honours in English. He was immediately offered a lectureship at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, by his external examiner, Gwyn Jones. He remained at Aberystwyth throughout his career, involving himself energetically in university affairs (including a stint as dean of the faculty of arts) and being appointed to the Rendell chair of English language and literature in 1978. He married Leontia Mary Cecilia McCartan, daughter of Bernard McCartan, schools inspector, at Aberystwyth on 10 April 1958. Two years his junior, and a graduate of Queen's University, Belfast, at the time of their marriage she was a university lecturer in zoology at Aberystwyth; she was later active in the playgroup and scouting movements. They had one daughter and four sons. 
Slay's research into Old Icelandic literature took the form of editions of major texts, in close association with the Arnamagnaean Institute in Copenhagen. In 1960 he published a monograph on the manuscripts of the legendary saga 'Hrolfs saga kraka', which anticipated by some thirty years the principles of the new philology in according weight to all elements in the text's transmission, rather than dismissing those copies considered to be secondary. For this he was awarded a doctorate of the University of Wales. In the same year he published an edition of the saga that acted as a model for many subsequent editions of Icelandic prose texts. In 1997, shortly after his retirement from Aberystwyth, his edition of the 'riddarasaga' ('chivalric saga') 'Mirmanns saga' appeared in the same 'Editiones Arnamagnaeanae' series. 
While still involved in research on 'Hrolfs saga' Slay achieved a coup that earned him the lasting respect of the Icelandic literary establishment by tracking down the important mid-fourteenth-century manuscript book 'Skardsbok (Codex Scardensis)'. It is the most complete medieval Icelandic collection of the 'Lives of the Apostles', and preserves the fullest versions of some of the lives. It was known to have gone missing from Iceland in the early nineteenth century, and to have been in the library of Sir Thomas Phillips of Thirlestaine House, Cheltenham, in the early 1890s, but had since disappeared. Alerted by Jon Helgason of the Arnamagnaean Institute to a record of its sale in 1945, Slay traced the codex with diligence and acumen, persuading the new owners to allow the copying of the manuscript for the production of a facsimile edition (published in 1960 as 'Early Icelandic Manuscripts in Facsimile', vol. 2, edited by Slay). Armed with the information he provided, Iceland was able to obtain the codex when it came up for sale again in 1965, with finance from a group of Icelandic banks, who presented the retrieved treasure to the nation. This and other services to Icelandic literary history were recognized by the award to Slay of the order of the Falcon in 1992. 
Slay produced other volumes of manuscripts in facsimile, collaborating with Jon Helgason on a facsimile of a manuscript of 'Alexanders saga' (1966) and producing a facsimile of a book of romance sagas preserved in the Royal Library, Stockholm (1972). Along with Peter Foote and Hermann Palsson, he edited the proceedings of the First International Saga Conference, held in Edinburgh in 1971. He was a significant figure in the Viking Society for Northern Research, serving as its president in 1970-72 and as an editor of 'Saga-Book' from 1978 to 2004. 
In private life Slay was a keen amateur sportsman, playing basketball well into old age, and a dedicated supporter of the scouting movement for over thirty years, earning the silver acorn, the association's second-highest award, in 2004. He died at Bronglais General Hospital, Aberystwyth, of cancer of the prostate on 20 May 2004, and was survived by his wife, Leontia, and their five children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94220


Squire, Raglan Hugh Anstruther (1912-2004), architect, was born on 30 January 1912 at 10 Warltersville Road, Islington, London, the eldest of the three sons and one daughter of Sir John Collings Squire (1884-1958), poet and literary editor, and his wife, Eileen Harriet Anstruther, 'nee' Wilkinson (1884-1970), elder daughter of Anthony Anstruther Wilkinson, rector of Hintlesham, Suffolk. He was educated at Blundell's School in Devon and St John's College, Cambridge, where he studied architecture. After gaining practical experience by working in a builder's yard, then in various architects' practices, he qualified as an architect in 1937, at the Regent Street Polytechnic. On 17 December 1938 he married Rachel Margaret Atkey (1914-1968), the daughter of James Frederick Haynes Atkey, solicitor, of Oxshott, Surrey; they had two sons. In 1938-9 he served as secretary of the Architecture Club (founded by his father) and in 1940 he became secretary of the Royal Institute of British Architects' reconstruction committee. During the Second World War, from 1942 to 1945, he served with the Royal Engineers. 
Together with Rodney Thomas and Edric Neel, Squire designed the prefabricated Arcon house, of which 39,000 were built in the immediate post-war period, as part of the temporary housing programme. Intended to have only a ten- to fifteen-year lifespan, the last of these dwellings was eventually pulled down in 2000. Between 1945 and 1956 he worked on the Eaton Square conversion scheme for the Grosvenor estate, converting all the houses around the square into flats. He was amused that the most expensive resulting properties, the glass-fronted penthouses on the top floors, had once been the servants' quarters. In 1948, with Brenda Rawnsley (the widow of Derek Rawnsley), he chartered an aeroplane and flew to France to persuade leading artists, including Picasso, Leger, Braque, Dufy, and Matisse, to design posters for the 'School Prints' series (which Derek Rawnsley had initiated, and of which Squire was now chairman). In the same year he founded Raglan Squire & Partners, architects. 
Over the next thirty-three years Squire worked prolifically on a diverse range of architectural commissions, in all parts of the world. His original designs were strikingly modernist in appearance, but he was equally adept at conversions or (when required) more classically influenced designs. In 1951 he was associate architect for the acclaimed Transport Pavilion at the Festival of Britain exhibition. In 1953-6 he designed the new Rangoon University engineering college, in independent Burma (which included an unusual umbrella-shaped roof laminated with local teak, to keep out the sun and the rain but ensure adequate ventilation). In 1955 he produced a town planning scheme for Mosul in Iraq, and also a report on the development of Baghdad airport. The practice designed factories in Weybridge and Huddersfield, and office buildings in London, Croydon, Eastbourne, Bournemouth, Bahrain, and Singapore (where he founded an offshoot of the practice, later hived off and renamed RSP). Squire also designed hotels in Tehran, Bahrain, Abu Dhabi, Jakarta, Tunis, and Nicosia (all for the Hilton chain), and in Malta, Singapore, Gibraltar, and Jamaica. A rare unbuilt design was his winning submission (with Robert Matthew) to the international competition in 1957 for a mausoleum in Karachi for Mohamed Ali Jinnah. The design, which consisted of six hyperbolic paraboloids in concrete, forming a vast star-shaped pavilion over the tomb, was highly regarded by his fellow architects, but eventually rejected by Jinnah's sister, who hoped 'for something a bit more like the Taj Mahal' ('The Times', 9 June 2004). 
Following the death of his first wife Squire married, on 27 December 1968, Delia Bridget Lawless (died 1997), a 54-year-old secretary, and daughter of John Lawless, police officer; and, on 23 October 1997, Mabel Elizabeth Stones, a 74-year-old retired hotelier, and daughter of Adam Smyth, police officer. He retired in 1981, but remained a consultant to Raglan Squire & Partners, which continued to produce a wide range of architectural and town planning designs. In 1985 he published his autobiography, 'Portrait of an Architect'; he also continued to write articles for the technical press on architecture, architectural education, and town planning. His recreations included gardening, chess, ocean racing, and designing small yachts (he was a member of the Royal Thames Yacht, Royal Ocean Racing, and Royal Southern Yacht clubs, and his firm designed the acclaimed Hamble Marina in Hampshire). He died on 18 May 2004 at Partridge House nursing home, Heath Hill Avenue, Brighton, Sussex, of a chest infection and myocardial degeneration; he was survived by his third wife, Mabel, and the two sons of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 94237


Conway, Richard Seymour-, fourth marquess of Hertford (1800-1870), art collector, was born in London on 22 February 1800, the eldest son of Francis Charles Seymour-Conway, earl of Yarmouth and later third marquess of Hertford (1777-1842), courtier ['see under 'Conway, Francis Ingram-Seymour, second marquess of Hertford], and his wife, Maria Emily Seymour-Conway, nee Fagnani (1770/71-1856) ['see under 'Conway, Francis Ingram-Seymour, second marquess of Hertford], illegitimate daughter of the Marchesa Fagnani and (probably) William Douglas, fourth duke of Queensberry. He was known until 1822 by the courtesy title Viscount Beauchamp, and spent his early life in Paris. Although his father brought him to England in 1816, where he was tutored by (among others) the superintendent of the royal observatory at Kew, Stephen Demainbray, he often returned to Paris to visit his mother -- for example, as attache to the British embassy in Paris in 1817 and 1819 -- and his relationship with her remained the most important in his life. 
Beauchamp matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 27 April 1818, but never graduated. In 1820 he bought a commission in the 10th hussars, transferring in 1823 as a captain to the 22nd light dragoons. Beauchamp's father succeeded to the marquessate in 1822, and Beauchamp advanced to the courtesy title of earl of Yarmouth. From 1822 to 1826 he was MP for co. Antrim. He travelled extensively in Europe during the 1820s, and it was as a young man that he was encouraged by his mother to buy gold snuff boxes, beginning his career as an art collector. In Paris in 1824 he entrusted his mother with his illegitimate son Richard Wallace (1818-1890), born following an affair with a Mrs Agnes Jackson, probably Eliza Agnes Wallace (1789-1864), daughter of Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie (formerly Thomas Dunlop) and estranged wife of Samuel Bickley. He was first recorded buying pictures in 1827. In 1829 he was attache to the British embassy in Constantinople, where he was greatly taken by the culture of the Ottoman empire. Also that year he acquired an apartment in Paris at 2 rue d'Artois, renamed in 1830 rue Laffitte, and in 1835 he bought the chateau of Bagatelle in the Bois de Boulogne, originally built in 1777 for the comte d'Artois, later Charles X. These purchases confirmed Paris as his principal residence; by the mid-1830s he was collecting art seriously. 
The year before the purchase of Bagatelle, Yarmouth had met Louise Suzanne Breart, daughter of a French professor and his English wife. Yarmouth appeared to have promised to marry Breart, and eloped with her to London, where they went through a marriage ceremony performed by Yarmouth's valet dressed as a Church of England clergyman. Breart did not discover that she was not really Yarmouth's wife for two months. She did not end the relationship at this point but instead remained faithful to her deceiver. She adopted the name Madame Oger, and one known child was born from the relationship, Seymourina Suzanne Vincent ('b'. 1846). Hertford had at least one more illegitimate child, Frederick, with a Miss Lucas. 
On succeeding to the marquessate in 1842 Hertford (as he became) inherited an estate reputedly worth $2,000,000 per annum. He had also by this time become one of the most active buyers and feared opponents in the art market. He was appointed KG in 1846, on the recommendation of Sir Robert Peel, but the honour was criticized in the London press because of Hertford's disengagement from public life and from his Irish estates around Lisburn, the source of much of his income, which he visited only once, in 1845. Contemporaries did however have the highest opinion of Hertford's abilities. Lady Blessington observed: 'He has great natural talent and knowledge of the world, but uses both to little purpose, save to laugh at its slaves. He might be any thing he chose, but he is too indolent for exertion' (Blessington, 1.118-119), while Peel commented that 'if he had lived in London, instead of frittering his time away in Paris, he would no doubt have become Prime Minister of England' ('Reminiscences and Recollections of Captain Gronow', 327-8). 
Hertford rented 13 Berkeley Square for use as a London home from 1846, but used it rarely except for extended visits between 1848 and 1850. His largest London residence, Manchester House, was let until 1850 as the French embassy, but from 1852 was used principally to house items from Hertford's art collection. He never finished the refurbishment of another London residence, 105 Piccadilly, inherited from his grandfather the duke of Queensberry and intended by Hertford for his principal London house. In France he became a friend of the emperor Napoleon III and the empress Eugenie, even agreeing to serve as chairman of one of the juries of the 1855 Universal Exhibition in Paris. Although not entirely free of the second empire's more lurid associations -- he was said to have paid the comtesse de Castiglione one million francs for one night of her favours, afterwards demanding a receipt (Viel-Castel, 4.173) -- Hertford was more generally noted for the extreme simplicity of his household and dress. 'Very un-English in appearance, having inherited the sallow complexion and bright dark eyes of his Italian mother' (Rothschild), Hertford as he grew older became increasingly reclusive, especially after the death in 1856 of his beloved mother: 'He lived apart, invisibly, never received any guests, only opened his door to a few intimate friends and, totally indifferent to all movement and life, would not have drawn back his window curtain to see a revolution go past in the street' (Yriarte, 'Souvenirs'). Hertford continued to add to his collections up until his death, increasingly relying on the advice of Richard Wallace, who often acted for him. He bought at many of the most spectacular sales of the period, including Stowe (1848), Pourtales-Gorgier (1865), and Demidoff (1863, 1868, and 1870). Hertford would pay immense prices when necessary, such as the 51,000 francs at the Pourtales-Gorgier sale for 'The Laughing Cavalier' by the then almost unknown Frans Hals. Although he sometimes appeared in person at sales, he generally dealt through agents, notably the London dealer Samuel Moses Mawson (1793-1862). Hertford lent generously to exhibitions, notably the 1857 Art Treasures exhibition in Manchester and the 1865 Musee Retrospectif in Paris. In 1857 Hertford declared that his 'collection is the result of my life' (Ingamells, 91) and in 1867 the art historian Theophile Thore described him as the greatest collector in Europe (Burger, 1.537). According to the diary of Sir Henry Cole he apparently intended to leave his collections to the British nation but took no steps to do so. 
Hertford demanded the highest standards in terms of quality, condition, and provenance. He favoured sensuous, attractive pictures judged by him to be 'pleasing', usually avoiding violent or overly serious subjects. He had little interest in the art of the Renaissance or the middle ages. Overall his old masters reflected traditional British aristocratic taste, with important groups of Dutch, Flemish, Italian, and Spanish seventeenth-century paintings. He was more innovative in his passion for French paintings of the 'ancien regime', the sensuality and sophistication of which he especially appreciated. Hertford was an important figure in the nineteenth-century revival of interest in this art, assembling an unparalleled group of paintings by Boucher, including his masterpieces 'The Setting of the Sun' and 'The Rising of the Sun', painted for Madame de Pompadour. He also acquired important pictures by Watteau, Lancret, Greuze, and Fragonard, whose celebrated 'The Swing' he bought in 1865. His taste for the 'pleasing' is also reflected in his collections of modern French and British painting, which include major works by Bonington, Delaroche, and Meissonier. He owned many orientalist pictures by such artists as Decamps and Horace Vernet and complemented these with an important collection of oriental arms and armour. Hertford also created extraordinary collections of French furniture, sculpture, and Sevres porcelain that, together with his French pictures, were to form the nucleus of the Wallace Collection, established in Manchester House after his death by Richard Wallace's widow. 
Hertford, who throughout his life was given to hypochondria, was diagnosed with cancer of the bladder in 1860. After enduring his disease with fortitude he died at Bagatelle on 24 August 1870, one week before the French defeat at Sedan led to the end of the second empire. He was buried on 27 August in the Hertford vault in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise, his funeral procession having much difficulty crossing Paris because of the preparation of defences against the city's imminent siege. He was succeeded in the marquessate by a second cousin, Francis Hugh George Seymour (1812-1884). He caused a bigger stir than he had ever done during his lifetime after his death, when he bequeathed the greater part of his unentailed property, including his art collections, to Richard Wallace, whom he never, even in his will, publicly acknowledged as his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 94244


Charles, (William) John (1931-2004), footballer, was born on 27 December 1931 at 19 Alice Street, Cwmbwrla, Swansea, the eldest of three sons and second of the five children of Edward (Ned) Charles, steel erector, and his wife, Lilian. He was educated at Cwmdu junior and Manselton senior schools and was also evacuated to Llandeilo, Carmarthenshire, for a year following the three-night blitz of Swansea in February 1941. 
Charles was part of an extraordinary generation of Swansea footballing brilliance that also included Trevor Ford, Ivor Allchurch, Jack Kelsey, Cliff Jones, and his own younger brother Melvyn (Mel) Charles ('b'. 1935). His own talent and enthusiasm, aided by his father who devised makeshift boots by fixing detachable steel bars to the soles of his shoes, were rapidly evident. He was chosen for the Manselton school team in his first year, and played for Swansea Schools at the age of twelve. Aged fourteen and playing at wing-half, he captained the team that reached the quarter-final of the English schools trophy and won the Welsh shield. On leaving school in the summer of 1946 he joined the groundstaff at Swansea Town Football Club, but moved to Leeds United in September 1948. Swansea folk-memory many years later still recalled his being 'stolen', and Football Association regulations were subsequently changed to close a loophole exploited by Leeds. Yet Swansea Town had shown little regard for his talents. He recalled that he did 'everything but play football', appearing in club colours only four times in two seasons ('King John', 32). The senior player Roy Paul remembered his appetite for food and footballing knowledge, but reckoned him 'too dainty' and reluctant to make full use of a physique being transformed by a teenage growth spurt that made a 5 foot 6 inch school leaver into a 6 foot 2 inch adult (Paul, 23). 
Spotted playing in a Swansea park by the Leeds scout Alf Pickard, Charles went as a trialist to the Yorkshire club before signing professional forms on his seventeenth birthday. The Leeds manager Frank Buckley demanded that his players be adept with both feet and capable of playing in more than one position. Signed as a wing-half, Charles played early matches at full-back before switching to centre-half. Within five months of signing he made his first-team debut in a friendly match against the Scottish club Queen of the South, whose centre-forward Billy Houliston, fresh from playing havoc with England's best defenders for Scotland at Wembley, called him 'the best centre-half I have ever met' (Edelston and Delaney, 30). He made his second division debut four days later against Blackburn Rovers. His impact was immediate. His team-mate Frank Dudley recalled that 'even when he was only 17 or 18, John was the best player in our team' (Risoli, 'John Charles', 33), although his debut for Wales against Northern Ireland in 1950 aged eighteen years and seventy-one days, a Welsh record which stood until 1991, was premature. 
Postings in northern England ensured that national service in the 12th royal lancers from 1950 to 1952 did not impede Charles's football career. While in the army he boxed -- a talent spotted in him as a child by Dai Curvis, the founder of a Swansea boxing dynasty -- and did so well enough to become northern command heavyweight champion, but he showed no interest in an approach from the promoter Jack Solomons. His return from national service was accompanied by professional and personal success. In October 1952 he was moved to centre-forward with immediate success, scoring twenty-six goals in the remaining twenty-eight league matches. This earned him a recall by Wales. Playing at inside-right in an all Swansea-born forward line against Northern Ireland in April 1953 he scored twice in a 3-2 win, beginning a run of twenty-one consecutive internationals over the next four years. On 16 March 1953 he had married Margaret Elsie (Peggy) White, a 21-year-old Leeds bank clerk, and daughter of Frank White, engine driver. They had four sons -- Terry, Melvyn, Peter, and David. 
In the 1953-4 season Charles was the second division's leading scorer with forty-two goals, still at the time of his death a Leeds record. Three seasons later, having helped Leeds regain first division status after nine years, he was equally effective against top-level defenders. His thirty-eight goals in his only first division season was a record beaten only once in the next fifty years, by Jimmy Greaves in 1960-61. 
Charles would have been an exceptional player as either centre-half or centre-forward. What set him apart was the ability to play brilliantly in both positions, sometimes in the course of the same match, at the highest level. At 6 foot 2 inches and 14 stone he was physically imposing. In 1957 the Juventus club doctor said 'I have never seen a better human machine in a lifetime in medicine' (Risoli, 'John Charles', 69). Charles had 'a huge torso rising from slender hips to broad shoulders; with exceptional balance and the spring of a high-jumper' ('The Independent', 23 Feb 2004). Geoffrey Green recalled him as 'Deep-chested, powerfully-muscled, upright as a guardsman' (Green, 264). His size and athleticism made him all but unbeatable in the air: 'he seemed to hover over opponents looking like an eagle among sparrows', according to Michael Parkinson ('Daily Telegraph', 23 Feb 2004). Bobby Robson recalled: 'His timing was spot-on and he could jump higher than anyone else. It was as if he was able to hang in the air' ('King John', viii). Physical attributes were complemented by innate football gifts defying the assumption of football physics that skill will be in roughly inverse proportion to size. Tony Pawson noted that he 'has the frame of a rugby forward and yet he achieved the delicacy of touch, the certainty of balance and the quickness of turning that could match any small, elusive player' (Pawson, 111). Danny Blanchflower, a gifted and perceptive contemporary, wrote that: 'Everything John does is automatic. When he moves into position for a goal chance it is instinctive. Watch me and you will see I am seconds later... my feet do not do my thinking for me as they do for a player like John Charles. ('King John', 386)' Tommy Lawton reckoned him the best centre-forward in the world while Jack Charlton rated him alongside his world cup-winning colleague Bobby Moore as a centre-half. His famously pacific temperament was expressed in a philosophy: 'If I have to knock them down to play well, I don't want to play the game', echoing a Welsh sporting contemporary, the rugby league player Billy Boston (Hughes, 102). Never sent off or booked in a quarter of a century, he was only seen to lose his temper once, when his younger brother Mel was badly fouled playing for Wales against Austria in 1955. 
Italian clubs started watching Charles in 1955, and in April 1957 he was transferred to Juventus. Leeds were reluctant to sell, but needed to rebuild their west stand after a fire and Juventus paid $65,000, nearly double the previous record for a British player. While many reports of the terms agreed with Juventus were exaggerated, Charles's personal circumstances were transformed. He exchanged the British maximum wage of $20 per week for a basic pay of $18 per week supplemented by bonuses of $40 for a win, much more for the most important matches, a signing-on fee of $10,000 paid in twenty-four monthly instalments, and perks such as a car and an apartment, which Charles reckoned were worth another $240 per month. In return he had to enter the almost unknown -- few British players, none of comparable stature, had played in Italy -- and restore the fortunes of Juventus after one of the poorest seasons in their history. He was instantly and astonishingly successful, forming a lethal partnership of contrasts with the mercurially explosive Argentinian Omar Sivori. His twenty-nine goals against the most sophisticated defenders in Europe made him the leading scorer in the league, Juventus won the championship, and he was voted Italian player of the year. 
Charles spent a total of five years with Juventus, scoring 93 goals in 155 games. The team won further league championships in 1960 and 1961, and the Italian cup in 1959 and 1960. A diving header against AC Milan was still being shown weekly on Italian television at the end of a Saturday night football show in the early 1980s. In 1997 Juventus fans voted him their greatest foreign player and he was the first overseas player elected to the Italian football hall of fame. Charles was popularly known as 'il Buon Gigante' -- literally 'the good giant', more frequently translated as 'the gentle giant' -- after a derby match against Torino, when he kicked the ball into touch after an opponent was injured rather than taking a scoring chance. His success contrasted with other British imports like Denis Law and Jimmy Greaves, who failed to adjust culturally and returned home rapidly. He appeared in a film with Sivori, made two records, sang on television with Nat King Cole, and opened a restaurant in Turin in partnership with his team-mate Umberto Colombo. The sole drawback was Juventus's reluctance to release him for international matches. He was released for the 1958 world cup finals in Sweden, the only time Wales qualified, at the last moment. They reached the quarter-final, but Charles had only a moderately successful tournament, outshone by the performances of his brother Mel, reckoned by some the best centre-half in the tournament. Kicked unmercifully by Hungary in the group stage playoff, he was unable to play in the quarter-final against Brazil. He remembered this as 'the biggest disappointment of my football life' ('King John', 217). The Wales manager Jimmy Murphy and several team-mates believed that had he played they might have won rather than losing 1-0 to the eventual champions. 
Charles's return to Leeds in 1962 was anticlimactic and signalled the beginning of a long decline. His marriage was under pressure, while his team-mate Jim Storrie recalled that he had 'spent so long in Italy that he found it difficult to adjust himself to our training methods' (Thomas, 18). After only three months he returned to Italy with Roma, but could not recapture his Juventus form. He was dropped from the team and at the end of the 1962-3 season joined Cardiff City. He played three second division seasons in a team loaded with veterans, and his last match for Wales in 1965 -- ending with thirty-eight caps and fifteen goals -- before moving into non-league football with Hereford United then Merthyr Tydfil. He remained an effective player into his forties and was manager at both Hereford and Merthyr, but the amiable guilelessness that had helped make him a popular team-mate ill fitted him for management. He was youth team manager at Swansea City from 1974 to 1976, where players in his charge included his nephew Jeremy Charles, later a Welsh international. 
Charles returned briefly to football as technical director of the Canadian team Hamilton Steelers in 1987. Going to Canada was an attempt to break with a pattern of business failures that had dissipated the fortune made in Italy. He lost $35,000 on the Turin restaurant and another $9000 on a short-lived Cardiff sports shop, his partner remembering that 'He could not see that it was a business. He was very generous and a lot of people took advantage of him' ('Gentle Giant', 210). His divorce in 1982 also proved expensive. He was no more successful as a publican, his three years as landlord of the Gomersal Park Hotel, near Batley, leaving a rates bill of $943 non-payment of which led in March 1988 to five and a half hours in police cells, with a sixty-day prison sentence in prospect, before he was bailed out by the Leeds United chairman Leslie Silver. He married secondly, on 23 April 1988, Glenda Vero, the 42-year-old daughter of Henry Hall, engineer, but his later years were clouded by poverty, misfortune -- he lost his football mementoes in a house fire in 1989 -- and ill health. He had a heart attack in 1993, was diagnosed with cancer in 1997, and suffered from Alzheimer's disease. Yet he remained remarkably unbitter, a genial raconteur of anecdotes about his time in Italy and, unlike many former sportsmen, appreciative of modern performers. That spirit was evident in 'King John' (2003), his third autobiography, following 'King of Soccer' (1957) and 'The Gentle Giant' (1960). The awards he received -- appointment as CBE in 2001, the freedom of Swansea in 2002, and honorary degrees from Leeds Metropolitan University and the University of Wales -- were limited and belated in relation to his achievements, but warmly appreciated by the recipient. 
Charles remained a hero in Italy. He was waiting to appear on television in Milan in January 2004 when he collapsed. He was flown home in the Juventus club plane and died of multi-organ failure in Pinderfields Hospital, Wakefield, on 21 February 2004. He was survived by his wife, Glenda, and the four sons of his first marriage. His funeral at Leeds parish church on St David's day, 1 March 2004, was followed by a memorial service at Leeds's Elland Road stadium that day and another at Swansea's Brangwyn Hall on 19 April. He was cremated and his ashes interred at Swansea City's Whiterock stadium. 


@@@@@


doc= 94250


Violante, Signor (fl. 1727-1728), ropeslider, was probably from northern Italy. He was the husband of the famous rope-dancer Signora (or Madame) Violante (1682-1741). The Violantes (who also used the name Larini) had a daughter, Rosina, who married George Richard Estcourt Lupino (1710-1787), dancer, and was the ancestress of the Lupino theatrical dynasty, including Ida Lupino and Lupino Lane. 
Violante's first recorded appearance was at 8 o'clock on the evening of 31 May 1727, when he descended head first from the steeple of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster. The event may have been scheduled to celebrate the birthday of George I. Violante travelled over the rooftops of St Martin's Lane to the west side of the royal mews -- a distance of 300 yards in 30 seconds -- leaping off the rope only yards from the feather bed laid to receive him. The large audience included the royal princesses; pickpockets 'made good Earnings of it' ('Daily Post', 1 June 1727). He was foiled in repeating the feat by the vicar, Zachary Pearce, perhaps because of the death of George I on 11 June, and thwarted in his plan to fly from St Paul's Cathedral over the Thames into Southwark, thereby disappointing 'a World of good Company' ('London Journal', 1 July 1727). Violante was then promoted by a Welshman, Mr Powell, as the star attraction at the pleasure gardens at Belsize House in Hampstead, north of London. There from 12 June to 24 July he performed three times and later twice a week 'several surprising things' on the rope, including 'the greatest Performance that ever was done in the World; he caused a live Ass to fly upon the same Rope as he did, and challenges all Men in England or out of England to do the like' ('Daily Post', 28 June 1727). The public's enthusiasm for Violante was turned to devilish satire on the English love of novelty in two pamphlets attributed to John Arbuthnot: 'The Devil to Pay at St. James's' (1 July 1727), and its sequel 'A Little More of That Same... Particularly... a Most Surprising Account of the Miracles Perform'd by the Flying Ass at Belsize', abounding in allusion to 'Gulliver's Travels' -- 'Dr. Swift avers it to be a young Houyhnhnm' (p. 11) -- which elaborated an earlier full-page letter to the 'Weekly Journal' (24 June 1727) possibly by the same author. 
After 24 July 1727 Violante no longer appeared in advertisements for Belsize House. The next year, on 6 July and again a week later, Violante flew from St Vincent's Rocks at Clifton across the River Severn, a distance of 550 yards in half a minute, firing a pistol in each hand, and was 'to do something more curious' ('London Evening-Post', 6-9 July 1728). No further report of Violante appears to have survived, but he had launched a flying craze that crested with the 'flights' of Robert Cadman. Numerous unknown -- and less talented -- itinerant 'High-flyers' ('The touch-stone', 109) were recorded during the 1730s. One flyer, presumably not Violante and possibly a Frenchman called Gillinoe, featured a 'flying' jackass at Newcastle in 1733, but weights strapped to the animal's legs fell off, killing a small girl and injuring many, and at Derby in 1734 a similar accident occurred. 
Horace Walpole reminisced that 'very early in my life I remember this town at gaze on a man who 'flew down' a rope from the top of St Martin's steeple... [this] Icarus broke his neck at a subsequent flight' (Walpole, 9.450-51), possibly confusing Violante with Cadman, who died a similar death at Shrewsbury in 1740. Both Violante and Cadman have been identified as funambulists depicted in Hogarth's 'Southwark Fair' (1733). According to the 'Bristol Mercury' (27 May 1826), at some unspecified time Signor Violante accidentally hanged himself while performing, perhaps suggesting that he died at or near Bristol: 'This Violante was no doubt a wonderfully clever fellow; but in risking his life a hundred times in 'descending' by rope, he ultimately lost it, by being accidentally compelled to perform the experiment in a contrary direction!' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 


@@@@@


doc= 94251


Dyer, John (1653/4-1713), newsletter writer, is of unknown origins. By 1688 he was known as a coffee-house keeper in Whitefriars, London, and as the publisher of a manuscript newsletter, the circulation of which was estimated by Sir Roger L'Estrange to be about 'five hundred copies... spread over the kingdom' (BL, Add. MS 41805, fol. 93). 
Dyer's newswriting operation was a substantial one: he may well have employed as many as fifty scribes to work for his news scriptorium and he was producing perhaps 500 copies thrice weekly. His news circulated throughout the British Isles and on the European continent as well. Dyer often managed to take advantage of the franking privileges of members of parliament in order to have his newsletters circulate postage-free throughout the kingdom. Dyer's news may also have been read aloud in groups in the countryside, if Joseph Addison's satire on the practice in 'The Spectator' is to be believed. 
Dyer's news was also highly controversial. Manuscript news, unlike printed newspapers, was unlicensed in later Stuart England and thus offered a more convenient medium for more politically partisan or critical commentary than that which was normally found in printed newspapers like the official 'London Gazette'. 
Dyer's decidedly partisan support for tory politics and his willingness to offer critical reflections upon government office-holders often incurred the wrath of state officials, especially whigs. He quickly gained a reputation for being a Jacobite, or at least a crypto-Jacobite sympathizer, but no concrete positive evidence of Dyer's Jacobitism has been uncovered and it is likely that the accusations of disloyalty levied against him were attempts by whiggishly inclined writers to further smear his reputation. 
Many of Dyer's customers clearly cherished his news and thought it well worth preserving. Many of the news items from Dyer's letters made their way into the notes of contemporary events made by Narcissus Luttrell, published in 1857 as his 'Brief Historical Relation of State Affairs'. The papers of the Oxford antiquary Thomas Hearne also contain many items derived from Dyer. 
Dyer seemed to take great pleasure in evading the numerous attempts by royal messengers of the press to apprehend him. Even after depositing four sureties to guarantee his appearance for prosecution at the sessions in autumn of 1693, Dyer continued to write and publish newsletters that denigrated the war efforts of William III. By the time he made an appearance before the magistrates at the Old Bailey, Dyer had racked up three indictments against himself for his newswriting, and although he briefly tried to escape his punishment by making an escape and living undercover, he was ultimately convicted and fined 80 marks. By September 1694, while he was still bound under his recognizance for further good behaviour, Dyer was again facing prosecution for his satiric jibes against the government in his newsletters. He was tried again for publishing false news, this time while kept under armed guard to prevent further escape attempts. The prosecutors wanted to obtain a judgment ordering Dyer to refrain from writing news ever again, but they ultimately failed to obtain a conviction due to lack of evidence. In December 1694 Dyer was also called before the House of Commons to be prosecuted for breach of parliamentary privilege by presuming to report upon their proceedings in his newsletters. He was fined for his transgression, but he was hardly chastened by the experience. 
As silencing Dyer through direct prosecution failed to stop his pen, alternative means of shutting him up were tried. Several coffee-house keepers who subscribed to Dyer's newsletter service were prosecuted at the London Old Bailey sessions in September and again in October 1695. The prosecution in both cases was successful and on each occasion two of the coffee men were fined. Later in the year Dyer himself was again apprehended, but he seems to have escaped once more and he remained at large until April 1697, when he was taken once more into custody by the serjeant-at-arms for the House of Commons. Seemingly unperturbed by his travails, Dyer was yet again taken into custody in September 1699. 
Dyer remained unruffled by this harassment and he continued to supply the coffee houses with his newsletters in Queen Anne's reign, despite continued attempts to suppress his newswriting generally and to prosecute him specifically. When the earl of Godolphin, lord treasurer, received a complaint from the duchess of Marlborough about Dyer's report that the second earl of Sunderland had died a Roman Catholic in October 1702, Godolphin replied to her wearily that many previous attempts to suppress Dyer's writings had been failures 'and still the consequence of it has been that his letters have been more sought after than they were before' ('The Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', ed. H. L. Snyder, 3 vols., 1975, 1.125). A warrant for Dyer's arrest was issued in March 1703. Charles, Lord Mohun, took a more direct approach in December 1694 when he encountered Dyer in person at his coffee house and presented Dyer with a copy of a newsletter in which he had been named. Mohun then 'immediately laid him on with a cudgel he had provided for that purpose, and made him swear to have no more say of the Lord Mohun' (Oldmixon, 95). Dyer met much the same treatment at the hands of an angry sea captain in January 1705 when he was discovered by the seaman at Man's Coffee House. 
A few furtive attempts were made by local magistrates and press messengers to silence Dyer's newsletters in Queen Anne's reign but not on the scale seen in the preceding decades and to no avail. Dyer died on 6 September 1713 in the parish of St Bride, Fleet Street, London. He was probably married, as he had two sons, Thomas Dyer and John Dyer. 
As late as 1716 -- nearly twenty-eight years after Dyer began writing his newsletters and indeed almost three years after the death of Dyer himself -- Addison, a whig, still complained that Dyer's newsletters misled the public, especially those in the countryside. Dyer's readers, Addison thought, remained obstinately ignorant of the official news found in the printed newspapers since they still preferred to rely upon Dyer's handwritten, and decidedly high tory version of the news. The tory newsletter genre that Dyer made his own persisted well after his death and was imitated by other scribal journalists like George Dormer. 


@@@@@


doc= 94252


Howard, Aletheia, countess of Arundel, of Surrey, and of Norfolk, and 'suo jure' Baroness Furnivall, Baroness Talbot, and Baroness Strange of Blackmere (d. 1654), patron and collector of art, was born after 1582, the youngest of five children of Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury (1552-1616), and his wife, Mary Cavendish (1557-1632). Her maternal grandparents were Sir William Cavendish (1508-1557) and Elizabeth Talbot 
(Bess of Hardwick; 1527?-1608)
. Queen Elizabeth, her godmother, named her Aletheia to signify 'veritie' or 'truth'. The deaths in infancy of her two brothers made Aletheia and her two sisters, Mary Herbert, countess of Pembroke (died 1650), and Elizabeth Grey, countess of Kent (1582-1651), the joint heirs to three of their father's titles and much of the great family estate. 
A devout Roman Catholic throughout her life -- an allegiance that she nurtured in her children and grandchildren -- in September 1606 Aletheia married a member of England's premier Catholic family, Thomas Howard, fourteenth earl of Arundel and fourth earl of Surrey (1585-1646), son of Philip Howard, thirteenth earl of Arundel (1557-1595) and Anne Howard, countess of Arundel (1557-1630). Through the influence of her cultured parents and grandmother Lady Arundel came to her marriage with knowledge of architecture, patronage, and collecting. In 1608 the couple moved to Arundel House in London and were prominent at the court of King James and Queen Anne. Lady Arundel acted in many court masques, including Ben Jonson's 'Masque of Beauty' (1608) and 'Masque of Queens' (1609) and as the River Arun in Samuel Daniel's 'Tethys' Festival, or, The Queen's Wake' (1610). The couple had six sons, two of whom died in infancy. 
Lady Arundel enjoyed her first adventure abroad in June 1613, when she and her husband escorted the newly wed couple Princess Elizabeth and Frederick, the elector palatine, to Heidelberg. Rather than return directly to England, the Arundels moved on to Italy, and that winter spent six weeks studying Italian in a monastery near Siena. Their party included Inigo Jones, whose ability to speak Italian made him a significant asset, and their travels together marked the beginning of a lifelong friendship. After a year and seven months of absence the Arundels returned to England in November 1614. In the years following, while Lord Arundel was occupied with political obligations, Lady Arundel maintained a high profile in court. She supervised Inigo Jones's architectural renovations on Arundel House and hosted elaborate social gatherings, such as a dinner for the Florentine ambassador, which displayed her immersion in Italian culture. Her souvenir gondola, Venetian maid servants, and Italianate banquets with their multi-layered tablecloths all caused much excitement among her guests. A contemporary account of the queen's banquet for Pietro Contarini, the Venetian ambassador in England, held in August 1618, noted that she was 'the chief lady of the court and kingdom, no other taking precedence of her either for descent, or in the Queen's favour' and added that she retained a partiality for 'the city and aristocracy of Venice where she received much favour and courtesy a few years ago' (Hervey, 141). Her pre-eminent position at court was confirmed at Queen Anne's funeral in May 1619, when she acted as chief mourner. 
In June 1620 Lady Arundel set off without her husband for Padua, where her two elder sons had gone the previous year to study. Her self-sufficiency in foreign travel was one of the most remarkable aspects of her independent character and she occupied herself for two years in Padua and Venice corresponding with artists and acting autonomously as an art patron and collector. Soprani's description of her as a 'Dama molto amante di Pittura' (Hervey, 200) pays testament to her engagement with Italian art. She had already stopped in Antwerp on her way to Italy, and sat for Peter Paul Rubens to paint her portrait. Tizianello, a relative of the artist Titian, dedicated his 'Breve compendio della vita del famoso Titiano Vecellio de Cadore' (1622) to Lady Arundel. Intending to commission more paintings, Lady Arundel tried to arrange for Tizianello to return to England with her, but this agreement did not materialize. Anthony Van Dyck was probably part of her circle in Venice and even part of her entourage during her travels. 
Lady Arundel's audacious spirit is best captured in April 1622 when she was falsely implicated in allegations of treason. The previous Venetian ambassador to England, Antonio Foscarini, was accused of privately meeting with foreigners and conferring state secrets. He was strangled in prison and his body was hung in the piazza San Marco. Sir Henry Wotton, English ambassador at Venice, warned Lady Arundel that the senate suspected Foscarini had held some of his clandestine meetings at her house on the Grand Canal and that they intended to expel her within three days. Wotton encouraged her to leave immediately, but the accusations deeply angered Lady Arundel and she insisted on reporting before the Venetian cabinet. An audience was called for her the following morning and she delivered her case before the doge. He declared the accusations untrue, and vowed to punish anyone involved in spreading these slanderous remarks. Shortly afterwards, Lady Arundel's innocence was publicly displayed when she was given a gallery at the national festival for accession day and was escorted to the event by two government officials. Public banquets were also held in her honour at Murano and on the Lido. 
In late September 1622 Lady Arundel left Venice with her two sons to begin her return to England. Her eccentric response to the accusations of treason and her extensive travels abroad without her husband supplied substance for rumours that began circulating in London. Yet instead of heading directly back to England to dispel the attacks on her reputation, Lady Arundel spent many months in Turin and Genoa. She probably stalled in the hope of being conveniently placed to escort the Spanish infanta to England for her proposed marriage to Prince Charles. In April 1623, after the anticipated marriage was vetoed, Lady Arundel set out for The Hague to visit Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, stopping in Mantua to negotiate an art purchase with Duke Ferdinando Gonzaga of Mantua on behalf of Prince Charles. The group had not yet reached The Hague when in July Lady Arundel's eldest son, James, died suddenly of smallpox. The tragic news caused Lord Arundel to join her abroad and in September 1623 the couple finally returned to England together, concluding Lady Arundel's three years of travel. 
From almost immediately after Charles I's coronation in February 1626, the intense relationship between the king and George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham, caused hardships for the Arundels. The first instance of their troubles occurred when their son Henry Frederick Howard, Lord Maltravers, secretly married Lady Elizabeth Stuart, whom the king had intended for Lord Lorne. Hoping to explain his innocence, Lord Arundel went immediately to Charles but the king still punished the family, sending Lord Arundel to the Tower and confining Lady Arundel to her mother-in-law's house at Horsley, Surrey. The birth of their grandson in March 1627 allowed them the freedom to return to London but they had to stay confined to Arundel House. It was not until a meeting of parliament in March 1628 that their punishment was fully lifted. After Buckingham's assassination the Arundels slowly regained their favour at court. Lady Arundel cultivated a friendship with Queen Henrietta Maria and the royal couple visited Arundel House in December 1628, touring every room to view their collections. 
In 1633 the Arundels purchased Tart Hall, a villa on the west edge of St James's Park, and for the rest of the decade Lady Arundel supervised its architectural renovation. Inspired by the architecture she had seen in Venice and Padua, she paid Nicholas Stone to produce a building embodying a hybrid of English and Italian design. For the remainder of her time in England the house became Lady Arundel's favourite and was where she displayed her personal art collections, entertained her Catholic circle, and invited priests to dine with her. It was at Tart Hall that in March 1637 Lady Arundel received George Conn, the Italian papal agent in England. The two played chess and engaged in a four-hour discussion of possible Catholic modifications to the oath of allegiance, a highly contentious contemporary debate. Conn later wrote of his obligation to act as Lady Arundel's confessor, noting that she was 'most charming' and 'Catholic in all but outward profession' (Hervey, 398, 399). Her social skills had also been deployed the previous year when she tried acting as mediator in a dispute between her husband and the lord deputy of Ireland, Sir Thomas Wentworth, over Lord Arundel's attempt to recover Irish possessions once owned by his grandfather. 
It is likely that it was Lady Arundel who initiated the revival of the scheme to colonize Madagascar, which originally involved the conversion to Catholicism of its proposed leader, Prince Rupert. In 1639 the Arundels revived what proved a popular scheme, and the last months of the year were spent preparing ships and enlisting volunteers. Van Dyck's impressive portrait of the couple known as the 'Madagascar portrait' was probably painted in 1639 or 1640. It shows Lord Arundel pointing to Madagascar on a globe with Lady Arundel sitting at his side holding navigation instruments. It is unclear why the two did not embark on this journey, although Lord Arundel's ill health provides a plausible explanation. 
Lady Arundel helped to promote and finance the commercial development of Lincoln's Inn Fields at the beginning of the 1640s, although the outbreak of the civil war put a premature stop to this endeavour. In 1641 Charles appointed the Arundels to escort the queen's mother, Maria de' Medici, abroad. Frustrated when the latter delayed, Lady Arundel left early for the Netherlands in the company of her son William Howard, Viscount Stafford, and his wife, and of three of the children of her eldest son. She continued to live in Amsterdam after Lord Arundel left England with the queen and settled in Italy. The reason for their living apart in exile remains unclear, as no letter between the two is extant from this period. In June 1644 Lord Arundel was created earl of Norfolk, making Lady Arundel countess of Arundel, of Surrey, and of Norfolk. Lady Arundel was not with her husband when he died in Padua on 4 October 1646 NS and a bitter family argument erupted when her son, Henry Frederick, then fifteenth earl of Arundel, appears to have personally executed his father's will and usurped properties that should have passed to his mother. 
Throughout her fourteen years of exile Lady Arundel maintained an art collection in her Amsterdam house and retained a circle of intellectuals and artists including Sir Edward Walker and Hendrick van der Borcht the younger. Francis Junius, the Arundels' librarian, frequented Lady Arundel's Amsterdam home and recorded that she 'carried over a vast treasure of rarities' and that 'Shee caused mee to sett her librarie in some order, and to make a catalogue of all the books that were in it' (Levy Peck, 7). She continued to finance Tart Hall and in 1652 even planned a return there. Following the deaths of her childless sisters, Mary in 1650 and Elizabeth on 7 December 1651, Lady Arundel inherited the baronies of Furnivall, Talbot, and Strange of Blackmere. She died in Amsterdam on 3 June 1654 NS but was buried in Rotherham, Yorkshire. The issue of who would inherit her properties and collections was disputed between her only surviving son, Viscount Stafford, and her grandson, Henry Howard, later sixth duke of Norfolk, a dispute that required an admonition as late as 1714. An inventory of her remaining collections was therefore taken in 1655, but it lists only a fraction of the items known to have been in them. The same year a sophisticated book of domestic science entitled 'Natura exenterata' was published bearing a copy of Lady Arundel's portrait on the flyleaf. There is little information to confirm Lady Arundel's actual participation in the compilation of this recipe book, but some of her contemporaries, including Samuel Hartlib, attributed it to her. 


@@@@@


doc= 94258


Loiseleur, Pierre (1530-1590), Reformed minister, was born at Lille; nothing is known about his family background, although he inherited the title of sieur de Villiers. He studied law at the University of Orleans in 1552 and went on to become an 'avocat' at the 'parlement' of Paris. Having become a protestant in a time of increasing religious persecution, Loiseleur left about 1557 for Geneva, where he became friends with Theodore de Beze. He also married; his wife, Jeanne, was the daughter of Charles de Brichanteau, seigneur de St Martin and seigneur de Nigerets. 
Loiseleur had returned to France by 1558 and travelled in the entourage of Jean d'Andelot to Brittany, where with Jean Fleury he was regarded as the evangelizer of the duchy and responsible for establishing its Reformed congregations, in particular at Croisic. His career during the 1560s remains shadowy; there are suggestions that he entered the service of William, prince of Orange, and went to the Netherlands, although in April 1568 he was recorded as being at Bayeux. In 1572 he took up the ministry of the church of Rouen, where he probably became a friend of the English presbyterian Thomas Cartwright, until his residence was abruptly terminated by the massacre of St Bartholomew's day. According to Crespin, Loiseleur sheltered with his wife and seven young children at the chateau of 'la Riuiere', 2 leagues from the city, before fleeing to England. 
In December 1572 Loiseleur was appointed by the French church in London to give thrice-weekly lectures in theology and doctrine. During his time in England he completed the translation into French of the annotations to Beze's 'New Testament'; the book was published in London in 1574 by Thomas Vautrollier as 'Jesu Christi D. N. Novum Testamentum interprete' and was dedicated to Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon. It went through five editions as well as Latin and English translations, the latter being completed by Laurence Tomson in 1576. In 1575 Loiseleur delivered a series of theology lectures at the inns of court and in the same year was offered the post of professor of theology at Leiden. He remained in England, however, received a doctorate of theology from the University of Oxford in July 1576, and was for a while resident at Christ Church, Oxford. 
Loiseleur was active in the affairs of the French exile community in London, and following the death of Jean Cousin he was elected in October 1574, with Robert le Macon de la Fontaine, to be one of the church's ministers. His name appears in the consistory minutes in connection with matters of discipline until September 1577. Loiseleur played an active role in the controversy arising from the charges of heresy brought against the Spanish-born theologian Antonio del Corro, which alienated the latter from the exile churches. Corro had been in part discredited through his association with another native Spaniard of uncertain orthodoxy, Casiodoro de Reina, and Loiseleur was later to lead the opposition to Reina's appointment as minister of the Lutheran congregation in Antwerp in 1579. 
Loiseleur's political connections with France meant that he played an important role in representing Huguenot interests at the English court. His activities were reported on by the French ambassador, who noted with some relish the rebuke the minister received from Queen Elizabeth for his celebration of a Huguenot victory over the French crown in March 1575. Loiseleur's links with members of the privy council meant that envoys of William of Orange gained access to court, and in 1576 the minister mediated in a disagreement between the prince and the queen. 
In 1577 Loiseleur moved to the Netherlands to become court preacher to William of Orange, but his political abilities also became increasingly in demand, as he assumed the responsibilities of William's secretary, Marnix van St Aldegonde, when the latter was absent on diplomatic missions. A pamphlet in 1583 even suggested that peace could only come to the Netherlands if Orange and his evil genius, Loiseleur, were locked up in a room together. The minister had arrived in London impoverished, but he prospered in the service of Orange, purchasing the castle of Westhoven on the island of Walcheren in 1583. Loiseleur's enemies attacked him for maintaining a coach, and for the expensive clothes and jewels worn by his wife and daughters. None the less Orange relied heavily upon the minister for advice, although this also prompted criticism. Probably Loiseleur's most important contribution in the service of Orange was as the ghost writer of the political tract 'Apologie ou defense de... Guillaume... prince d'Orange contre le ban & edict publie par le roy d'Espagne' (1581). Virulently hostile to Philip II, it made a substantial contribution to the 'black legend' of Spanish atrocities, not least through a number of fabrications maligning Philip's character, while presenting detailed justifications for the actions of William of Orange. An English translation was published at Delft in 1581 and in London in 1584. Loiseleur's engagement in religious affairs continued after the prince's death, and he was involved in the attempts to restore religious unity in Utrecht (1585) and in the dispute over the political activities of the theologian Adrian Saravia (1587). 
Loiseleur was intermittently active in connection with English emigres to the Netherlands. He took part in the presbyterian ordination of Walter Travers at Antwerp in 1578, a service he also extended to the nonconformist Robert Wright in 1581, and was concerned with the activities of the separatist Robert Browne and his followers in 1582. But although he had remained in contact with the English court, his decision to counsel William of Orange to pursue a closer relationship with the French rather than uphold the English cause in the Netherlands alienated his English allies. Orange's continued support for the duc d'Anjou as ruler of the Netherlands, even after his abortive attempt to seize power in 1583, was encouraged by Loiseleur and overshadowed the final months of the prince's life. The unpopularity of this policy even led some contemporaries to suggest that Loiseleur had been partly responsible for the assassination of Orange in 1584. 
Henri of Navarre (the future Henri IV) invited Loiseleur to enter his service after the death of Orange, but he remained in the service of William's son, Maurice of Nassau, for whom he conducted diplomatic missions. It was following one such mission that he was taken ill on 25 November 1590; he died the following day. He was buried in St Pieterskerk at Middelburg on 28 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 94260


Buckley, Wilfred (1873-1933), promoter of clean milk and collector of antique glass, was born at 27 Wheeleys Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 13 June 1873, the second son and second of the four children of Henry Buckley (1838-1903), general merchant, and his wife, Caroline Therese (1847-1891), daughter of Martin Parry Kennard of Boston, Massachusetts, and his wife, Caroline Augusta. 
Buckley was educated at Giggleswick School in Yorkshire from 1885 to 1889, and then worked in the family business handling the export of Birmingham manufactures. About 1895 he was sent to America to manage the firm's New York office. There he met a Fifth Avenue heiress, Bertha (1873-1937), daughter of Herbert Leslie Terrell. They were married on 31 December 1898 at the Protestant Episcopal church of All Souls on Madison Avenue, New York city. They had one daughter, Janet, born on 3 June 1901. 
Buckley subsequently returned to England and in 1906 he bought the Moundsmere estate at Preston Candover in Hampshire, where he had a Palladian-style mansion built. Though initially ignorant of farming matters, he soon began taking a keen interest in the management of his estate. He instituted proper record keeping and introduced several innovations, including poultry, a prizewinning herd of pedigree Berkshire pigs, and a dairy that produced milk of exceptional hygienic quality. In 1917 he published an account of this work in a book called 'Farm Records and the Production of Clean Milk at Moundsmere'. 
The dairy came about because, shortly after the Buckleys' arrival in England, Janet contracted tubercular glands. Although she recovered successfully, her parents were advised that in future she should only have milk guaranteed free of bovine tubercle. The Buckleys knew that in the United States such 'certified' milk was widely available but in England it was quite unknown. Buckley therefore set up his own dairy so that Janet should have milk of this standard. The venture soon developed into a commercial undertaking. The milk was bottled and taken by train each day to London, where it was distributed among the West End stores. 
By the early 1900s the production and distribution of milk had developed into a major industry, yet its hygienic quality was very poor. Most farmers carried out the milking by hand in the cow barn amid bedding straw and manure, and with the cattle so caked in dirt that loose hair, dust, and manure would fall liberally into the open pail. The milk was then poured into churns and taken to the railway station, where it would be loaded into warm railway vans with other goods and livestock. The actual delivery to the consumer usually entailed ladling the milk from the roundsman's dray into a jug, and this operation invariably took place over the gutter. 
All these hazards left the milk heavily contaminated with bacteria. Many practitioners in the fields of medicine, public health, and social welfare claimed that this not only undermined the nutritive value of milk but helped to propagate diseases such as typhoid, scarlet fever, and tuberculosis. By the 1900s a possible solution to the problem had come into being with the development of pasteurization, but the efficacy of such heat treatment was widely disputed. There was also a multiplicity of public health authorities and a lack of powers to enforce hygienic standards in milk production and distribution. Successive governments were deterred from pursuing reform because of the difficulties in reconciling the conflicting interests and by the lack of any strong public agitation. 
In these circumstances initiatives such as Buckley's model dairy at Moundsmere aroused considerable interest among the clean milk advocates. In 1910-11 it formed the subject of a study by a certified milk committee chaired by the physician Sir Thomas Barlow. Buckley himself was soon drawn into playing an active role -- penning letters to the press, drafting leaflets, giving lectures, and lobbying government over milk legislation. Although he always remained an enthusiastic amateur, he was able to engage the support of a wide range of professionals and government officials, and in 1915 he founded a pressure group called the National Clean Milk Society (NCMS), of which he served as chairman. Through these activities Buckley became the effective leader of the movement. 
In 1917 Buckley was invited to become director of milk supplies at the Ministry of Food and served in this capacity until April 1920. His prime task was to set fair prices, but he also used his position to promote the clean milk cause. In 1918 he introduced the first milk grading scheme, which was to be further extended over the following years. In 1920 he was appointed CBE. 
During the 1920s Buckley, as chairman of the NCMS, worked tirelessly at giving lectures, organizing conferences, and mounting practical demonstrations of clean milk production at agricultural shows. He was a leading figure in the National Milk Publicity Council and the Certified Milk Producers' Association, and was a keen supporter of the National Institute for Research in Dairying at Reading. He served on a milk advisory committee to the ministries of Health and Agriculture, and during the general strike he was appointed emergency milk commissioner. 
The dairy industry generally derided Buckley's views on the need for improved methods in the production and distribution of milk. Such criticisms never deflected him from the cause, though he became increasingly dispirited at the apathy of both government and public. In 1928 he decided to wind up the NCMS, but continued to play an active role in the movement. 
Buckley always had a keen interest in literature and art and especially in antique glass. Over the years he built up a sizeable collection that became widely known among his fellow collectors. As the milk campaign faltered, so he devoted more time to his fine art interests. He wrote a series of books for collectors, notably 'European Glass' (1926) and 'Diamond Engraved Glasses of the Sixteenth Century' (1929), and took part in organizing several major exhibitions, in particular an exhibition of Italian art in 1930 for which he was made a grand officer of the order of the Crown of Italy. All this brought a number of eminent visitors to Moundsmere, including Queen Mary, who made a private visit in 1931. 
Buckley died in a nursing home at 16 Fitzroy Square, London, on 26 October 1933, following an operation for cancer. After cremation at Woking on 30 October his ashes were buried later that day at Preston Candover. 
Tall and athletic in bearing, Buckley possessed wide-ranging abilities and pursued a variety of interests: he was a highly competent mathematician with a particular bent for statistics, a keen sportsman, and a student of the classics, literature, and art. His manner was kindly and considerate but he was capable of a blunt honesty which could sometimes border on tactlessness. His tragedy was that he died with the clean milk crusade only half won. In the years following his death the Milk Marketing Board introduced various schemes for improving milk quality, while the Second World War wrought profound changes to the supply and consumption of milk that endured in the post-war period. As a result of his relatively early death, however, Buckley's contribution to these improvements was generally overlooked and this robbed him of the recognition he deserved as a pioneer in the clean milk campaign. 


@@@@@


doc= 94265


Roberts, Sir James, first baronet (1848-1935), mill owner and benefactor, was born on 30 September 1848 at Lane Ends, Oakworth, near Haworth, Yorkshire, the ninth of the eleven children (five sons and six daughters) of James Roberts (1807-1888), wool weaver and later farmer, from Harden, near Bingley, Yorkshire, and his wife, Jane 'nee' Hartley ('bap'. 1811, died 1878). Both parents signed their names to legal documents with a cross. In 1851 the family moved to Haworth, where the writer and painter Branwell Bronte had died at the parsonage in the week of James's birth. As Baptists, they did not attend Haworth's parish church, though according to family legend James spoke with Branwell's sister Charlotte, who died when the boy was six years old. In retirement Roberts was to play a prominent role in the conversion of the Brontes' former home into a museum of international standing. After his mother's death in June 1878, James's father remarried. His second wife was Mary Hartley, 'nee' Windle (1808-1890). 
At eleven Roberts had begun work as a worsted spinner at Oxenhope Mill where, by twenty-four, he had risen to become the 'mill manager' (m. cert.). On 14 May 1873 at All Saints' Church, Bingley, he married Elizabeth Foster (1852-1935), of Harden, daughter of William Foster, a farmer, plumber, and grocer, who was resident at Brass Castle, Harden, in the early 1880s. Her maternal uncle was the writer John Nicholson, known as the Airedale Poet, who drowned in 1843 while crossing the River Aire. Between 1874 and 1893 the couple had four sons and three daughters, two of whom died in childhood. At about the time of his marriage Roberts was employed as a manager for the Bradford firm of worsted spinners J. and W. Hodgson & Co. Soon after he set up in partnership with his cousin, Joe Feather, as James Roberts, wool and top merchants. It was in this period that Roberts learned of the merino sheep bred in Russia and travelled there and elsewhere in the world to obtain wool at the best prices. Roberts's interest in Russian merino wool had parallels with that of the textile manufacturer Sir Titus Salt who, in the 1830s, had discovered the superiority of Peruvian alpaca wool. In the 1850s Salt had built a mill and model village on the River Aire (now a UNESCO world heritage site), which he named Saltaire, and it was to nearby Baildon that Roberts and his family moved in 1883. 
When Salt's Mill went into liquidation in 1892, Roberts -- along with the spinner Isaac Smith, weaver John Maddocks, and the colliery owner John Rhodes -- bought the premises and the village. The initial concerns of Saltaire's 4000 workers were allayed as Roberts's consortium retained their employment and modernized the mill, returning it to profitability and doubling the premises in size. Within a few years Roberts bought out his other partners. In 1903 he acquired Milner Field, Eldwick, the mansion and 150 acre estate that had originally been built for Salt's son. In the same year he erected a bronze statue of Sir Titus Salt -- with plinth decorations of an alpaca and an angora goat -- which is now situated in Roberts Park, Saltaire. The park was also gifted to the local council by James Roberts in 1920 and was named not for him but to commemorate his second son, Bertram (1876-1912). 
In November 1909 Roberts's commercial and philanthropic achievements at Saltaire were recognized with a baronetcy. To mark the occasion, workers at Salt's Mill presented him with a gilded silver casket with enamelled panels depicting, among other scenes, Oxenhope, Milner Field, and Saltaire, and decorated on the lid with an angora goat. In return Roberts established a pension scheme of 5's'. a week for retired workers over the age of sixty-five. A year later he purchased and moved to Strathallan Castle, Auchterarder, where he lived until 1925. 
Though a staunch liberal with a firm commitment to free trade, Roberts declined an invitation to stand as the Liberal Party candidate for Keighley at the election of 1911. He was for a time joint owner of the 'Yorkshire Observer' and also president of the Saltaire Cricket Club to whose members he presented a pavilion and a competition cup for which teams continue to compete in the early twenty-first century. Other philanthropic acts included the construction, in 1910, of the Roberts Home for Dr Barnardo's Invalid Children, Harrogate, and extensive rebuilding at the Bingley Cottage Hospital in 1918 and 1924. In June 1916 Roberts spoke of his knowledge of the Russian language and his affection for the Russian people (interview, 'Yorkshire Observer', 2 June 1916). Later that month he donated $10,000 for the creation of a chair in Russian language and literature at the University of Leeds. The professorship was the country's second endowed chair in the subject, after Liverpool, and was prompted by Roberts's conviction of 'our national need' to study Russian to promote trade and British manufacturing (Roberts to Michael Sadler, vice-chancellor, 15 June 1916, quoted in Cross, 19). 
With the outbreak of war in 1914, Roberts initially sought the help of his third son, Joseph Henry (Harry) Nicholson (1887-1946), in the running of the Salt's Mill -- his two elder sons having died in 1898 and 1912 aged twenty-four and thirty-six respectively. However, Harry was called up and, having been gravely wounded, was no longer able to work at Saltaire. In the war years Roberts ensured that the families of workers serving in the forces continued to receive their pay; he also refused to raise rents for the mill's workers and helped them purchase war bonds. Having invested heavily in Russia, Roberts suffered serious financial repercussions in the wake of the Bolshevik revolution of October 1917. Afterwards, he paid regular visits to the reparations department of Lloyds Bank in the City of London where he met T. S. Eliot, who was employed in the bank's foreign section between 1917 and 1925; Sir James is most probably the 'Bradford millionaire' in Eliot's 'The Waste Land' ('III. The Fire Sermon'). Roberts's financial difficulties were compounded by his worsening health caused by the strain of maintaining his business. Negotiations to sell Saltaire began in 1917 and were concluded in January 1918 when the mill, village, and Roberts's company were sold for a little under $2 million to a Bradford firm of wool traders who also acquired Milner Field in the following year. After spells resident in Hyde Park Gardens, London, and Newland Park, Chalfont St Giles, Buckinghamshire, Sir James and Lady Roberts moved to Fairlight Hall, near Hastings, Sussex, in 1925. 
It was here that Lady Roberts read of the decision by the Haworth church land trustees to sell the parsonage, the former home of the Bronte family. She persuaded Sir James to give $3000 to purchase the house for the Bronte Society, of which he was a long-standing member. At the opening ceremony for the Bronte Parsonage Museum, on 4 August 1928, Roberts described himself as one of a 'fast narrowing circle of Haworth veterans who remember the Parsonage family' (Whitehead, 45). A further donation of $1500 was made to adapt parts of the house for the requirements of a museum and archive. Other bequests from this period include a further $5000 to Leeds University, which came four years after his receipt of an honorary doctorate from this institution. Sir James Roberts died, of cardiac syncope, on the night of 31 December 1935 at Fairlight Hall, near Hastings, and was buried at St Andrew's Church, Fairlight. He was survived by his two remaining daughters and his third son, Harry, his wife having died on 27 July 1935. The baronetcy passed to James Denby Roberts (1904-1973), the son of Sir James's second son, Bertram Foster (1876-1912). Serendipitously, alpaca goats roam the lawns of Fairlight Hall in the early twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 94278


Simpson, Sir Joseph (1909-1968), police officer, was born at Doseley, Dawley, Shropshire, on 26 June 1909, the second of four children and the elder of two sons of Joseph Simpson (1875-1952), mechanical engineer, and his wife, (Ann Mary) Dorothea (Dora), 'nee' Maw (1874-1950). He was educated at Oundle School and at Manchester College of Technology, where he studied textile engineering with the intention of entering the cotton industry. He excelled at athletics, specializing in the long jump and hurdling, and just missed selection for the British team at the 1928 Olympic games in Amsterdam. At the world university games in Darmstadt in 1930 he won the 400 metres hurdles, setting a new German record. 
In 1930 Simpson joined the Metropolitan Police, entering the training establishment at Peel House in November 1930, and starting as a constable in Wembley in February 1931 before moving to E division (Bow Street). His choice of career may have been influenced by the opportunity to continue his sport, while the economic crash of 1929 accelerated the shrinking of the textile industry for which his degree qualified him. The Metropolitan Police was seeking to take advantage of the difficult job market by appealing to public-school men and university graduates in the hope of raising the educational calibre of the force, and Simpson's appointment was cited in the press as an example of this new type of recruit. He was additionally notable on account of his athleticism: 'If you see Constable Simpson in the street near Bow Street, and you feel like running, it would be just as well to think twice' ('Evening Standard', 4 Aug 1931). The Met offered such 'gentstables' job security and excellent promotion prospects at a difficult time; what social status it conferred was less clear. As one wrote to a newspaper, 'The young man often finds himself shunned and despised by his former friends and demoralised by the crudeness of section house life, where privacy does not exist and manners are unappreciated and unknown' ('Daily Express', 7 Oct 1933). Simpson may have written the letter; he certainly thought enough of the article to paste it into a personal scrapbook. 
Such grievances were partially assuaged when, in 1934, the Metropolitan Police commissioner Hugh Trenchard established Hendon College, where promising members of the Met and highly qualified new recruits enjoyed levels of comfort unusual in a training college. Simpson was one of the first Hendon intake, passing out second in the year in July 1935 after gaining second prize in the king's police (British empire) gold medal essay competition. Hendon graduates were promoted to the rank of junior station inspector, which Simpson assumed on returning to the Met in A division (Westminster) in 1935. While still a constable he had begun to study law, was admitted to Gray's Inn, and returned to Hendon in May 1936 as an assistant law instructor. He was called to the bar in January 1937. On 20 December 1936 he married Elizabeth May Bowler (1910-1970), daughter of Percy Bowler of Chorlton upon Medlock. The couple had two sons, Joseph Mark ('b'. 1939) and Benjamin David ('b'. 1942); a daughter died at birth in 1946. 
Clearly marked as a high flyer, Simpson was supported by G. H. R. Halland, commandant at Hendon, in his successful application in 1937 for the post of assistant chief constable of Lincolnshire, the force that Halland had left to come to Hendon. He was twenty-seven years old. Some criticized Trenchard's Hendon experiment as an attempt to create an officer class in the police service, and Simpson, who considered the college 'a very brave experiment that was not unsuccessful' ('The Times', 7 May 1959), rose as quickly as any Hendon alumnus. On the outbreak of war he was seconded to the office of the regional commissioner appointed under the 'ad hoc' wartime system of local administration, another institution that enabled rapid promotion. He served first as regional police staff officer, then as acting inspector of constabulary, in the Nottinghamshire and the Cambridgeshire civil defence regions. In March 1943, aged thirty-three, he became the youngest chief constable in the country when he was appointed to head the Northumberland force. In December 1946 he took up the position of chief constable of Surrey, serving for almost ten years before returning to the Met as assistant commissioner in February 1956. 
Simpson succeeded Sir John Nott-Bower as commissioner of the Metropolitan Police in September 1958, and received a knighthood in 1959. During his ten years in command of the Met Simpson had to address the problem of policing an affluent society. He had cut his teeth in the police service during the depression years, and in a contemplative introduction to his first annual report as commissioner regretted that 'neither the absence of real poverty nor the more progressive methods employed in dealing with delinquents appear to have done anything to reduce the volume of crime'; in fact indictable crime had risen by nearly 60 per cent since 1937 ('Report of the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis for the Year 1958', 7). Traffic crime and crimes involving cars increased with the spread of car ownership: Simpson reported a massive 34 per cent increase in thefts from unattended vehicles in his annual report for 1961. Prosperity also encouraged burglary: Simpson noted a 14 per cent rise in housebreaking and burglary in 1964, 'the worst year of the century for crime' ('Report, 1964', 7). 
Despite rising crime the Met's authorized establishment had not been increased since the war. A less obvious effect of affluence was to make it impossible to recruit and retain enough men even to meet the existing figure. Full employment eroded the advantage of job security and police pay was inadequate to offset London's high cost of living: 'they are not very impressed, I think, by what are known as invisible emoluments', Simpson told the select committee on estimates shortly after his return to the Met, 'it's what they get in their pay packets that counts' ('Select committee on estimates', 'Parl. Papers', 1957, question 341, 21 Feb 1957). He was unusually forthright about policemen's pay, gaining an eye-catching headline with his evidence to the royal commission on the police in 1960 that 'They are humiliated by the fact that their wives earn as much as they do, under much more agreeable conditions' ('The Times', 13 May 1960). The wastage rate among young recruits was compounded by the belated discovery of the drawbacks inherent in a policeman's lot: the discipline, long hours, and often poor conditions of work and accommodation. 
Many of the initiatives associated with Simpson's time as commissioner were driven in part by the need to make manpower go further: the expansion of the use of motorcycle patrols, particularly in suburban areas, to replace beat constables; the introduction of traffic wardens in 1960; and the plan, implemented after Simpson's death, to train civilian scene-of-crime officers to relieve CID men of the burden of evidence-gathering, for petty crimes. These measures helped secure Simpson's reputation as a modernizing commissioner, but he continued to worry about the distancing of police from public, particularly as a result of expanding motorized patrols. 
At heart Simpson remained an advocate of the beat policeman. He accepted that it was impossible in London to expect the degree of co-operation between police and public that he had experienced in shire forces -- unlike in rural areas, 'nobody will tell a constable who has pinched a transistor radio from Savoy Street' ('Select committee on estimates', 'Parl. papers', 1966, question 383, 14 Feb 1966) -- but he never strayed from the belief that 'The policeman who counts from a public standpoint is the policeman who stands on his feet and who can talk to the public' ('Royal commission on the police', 'Parl. papers', 1962, para 38, p. 1158, memorandum of evidence by the commissioner of police of the metropolis). The result was that, by the mid-1960s, every policeman in the Met was working twelve hours per fortnight longer than the maximum time prescribed in the force's regulations, which Simpson believed overstretched the force and lowered morale within it. 
For much of Simpson's term as commissioner the public image of the Met was problematic. Car ownership brought much of the 'respectable' public into unfamiliar and unanticipated conflict with the police. The royal commission on the police found that car, bus, and taxi-drivers (who fought a particularly bitter guerrilla war with the Met after the introduction of minicabs to London's streets in 1961) formed the largest group of complainers. The National Council for Civil Liberties and other liberal pressure groups were also prominent among the critics. Simpson's commissionership was marked by a wave of political demonstrations unprecedented since the 1930s, from the anti-nuclear rallies of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the more radical Committee of 100 in the early 1960s, through the protests against apartheid in South Africa and UDI (unilateral declaration of independence) in Rhodesia, to the demonstrations against the war in Vietnam from the middle of the decade: the first and more violent of the demonstrations outside the American embassy in Grosvenor Square, in March 1968, occurred days before Simpson's death. When protest turned to violence, as at Grosvenor Square, it was possible to treat the episode primarily as a public order question, but in the case of the largely peaceful anti-nuclear protests delicate issues of civil liberty arose, which the officers on duty -- generally unsympathetic to the protesters -- did not always handle well. 
Civil disobedience was one area in which the business of policing took on a political aspect in the 1960s. Another was race relations. Simpson's last annual report, for 1967, contained an outspoken defence of police relations with ethnic minorities: 'never had the immigrant groups less cause for complaint than now' ('Report, 1967', 16). It is unlikely that Simpson really believed this contentious issue to have been settled by that point. Simpson's term as commissioner had begun only days after the eruption of racial unrest in Notting Hill in 1958. The threat of heightened racial tension in London after the murder of the Antiguan Kelso Cochrane in Notting Hill in May 1959 led Simpson to confer with the commissioner of the West Indies Federation, Garnett Gordon, in July, in order to 'establish a channel of liaison' between the Met and the Federation (Whitfield, 65-6). Simpson's candid account of the meeting, referring at one point to the 'sort of weaknesses and defects which we experience in coloured people', indicates inadvertently the ground still to be covered by the Met in its approach to race relations. Although the Met was hardly alone among British police forces in its failure to attract black recruits, the poor progress made in this direction was arguably more damaging in London than elsewhere. At the same time Simpson did become increasingly anxious to impress upon white officers their duty to show tact towards London's blacks, accepting in 1963 the desirability of stressing 'the need for greater care in dealing with coloured people' in probationers' courses (ibid., 128). Riots in the USA in the mid-1960s showed the potential of racial hatred to generate serious public disorder; Simpson's understanding of this risk was evident in one of his last published pieces, warning the rank-and-file readership of 'The Job', the Met's new in-house newspaper, of the danger of a 'disastrous' breakdown of communications with black people, and stressing the responsibility of every policeman 'to avoid having a situation develop which resembles that already existing in large American cities' ('The Job', 8 Dec 1967). 
In different ways the issues of civil rights and race relations underlined the need for more sensitive and intelligent policing in London. Simpson understood that an educated and enlightened public, conscious of its civil rights and politically aware, would no longer accept the direction of a policeman without question, and that this new public was dealing with sometimes unenlightened and under-educated police officers. The memory of his own early career shaped his views, and he expressed concern that the police service was losing out in the competition for 'the man who has a high intelligence quotient and a potentially good chance of succeeding academically' ('Select committee on estimates', 'Parl. papers', 1966, questions 355, 383, 14 Feb 1966). Since the war only twenty-five graduates had joined the police forces of England, Wales, and Scotland. Simpson expanded and promoted the police cadet scheme introduced by his predecessor, and the cadet ranks were said to include a high percentage of grammar school boys, but this was an uphill struggle. The creation of specialist squads within the force -- most notably the obscene publications squad and the drugs squad in 1963 -- though meeting an obvious operational need, was partly designed to provide some officers with a focus and an opportunity to specialize lacking in the often mechanical police routine. He was concerned that the remarkable generation of Hendon men were reaching the end of their careers, and that there should be men competent to take their places, but he expected a showdown with the Police Federation over any proposals that favoured graduate recruits (evidence to royal commission on the police, 22 March 1961, TNA: PRO, MEPO 2/10114, p. 36). In a plaintive article in 'The Job' he asked 'why should university be any more of a dirty word than secondary modern?', suggesting that many hearts and minds in the ranks remained to be captured ('The Job', 24 Nov 1967). 
Public criticism of the Met's accountability, transparency, and even probity was meanwhile deeply irksome to rank-and-file policemen who were already overworked, exacerbating problems of morale. In November 1963 Simpson convened a meeting of representatives -- an inspector, a sergeant, and a constable -- from each of the Met's twenty-three divisions, at which the top brass was told that 'if the [public] habit of complaining about the way they do their duties is growing, they want to be sure that their superiors are backing them up' ('The Guardian', 30 Nov 1963). He reacted with appropriate vigour to criticism of the force that he considered unjust, following the miscarriages of justice brought about by Sergeant Harold Challenor in Soho in 1964, and to an ATV 'Law in Action' investigation into the Met's treatment of suspects in 1966. 
Simpson found the disciplining of corrupt policemen the most unpleasant part of his job, but, mindful of the force's fragile morale, he was a determined opponent of any external complaints tribunal. In his private testimony to the royal commission on the police he argued that chief constables should be trusted to deal with their own men. His view that the Met's complaints procedure was 'essentially a domestic matter' (evidence to royal commission on the police, 22 March 1961, TNA: PRO, MEPO 2/10114, 23) was consistent with this, but the rejection of external scrutiny was proving increasingly unacceptable to the Home Office. The liberal-minded Roy Jenkins, who became home secretary in December 1965, attributed the Met's institutional failings to its introversion, and especially its unwillingness to employ police from other forces. Jenkins used his power as home secretary to secure the appointment of Robert Mark, former chief constable of Leicester, as assistant commissioner at Scotland Yard in 1966. The appointment was intended to make waves and did so: if Simpson did not ostracize Mark in the manner of the established assistant commissioners, he apparently saw him as something of a Trojan horse, and although he eventually reconciled himself to Mark's appointment, 'he could not bring himself to say so' (Mark, 92). Mark's appointment was interpreted as a move to bring the Met under closer Home Office control, as was Jenkins's initiative early in 1967 to appoint a team of management consultants to overhaul the force's organization. 
Simpson had already presided over reorganizations during his early years at Surrey and when London government was restructured in 1963-5. A fresh bout of reconstruction was unwelcome, and it was generally felt that it contributed to the stress that killed him. He had spent a month as an in-patient at St Thomas's Hospital in May-June 1965 after a myocardial infarction, after which he had apparently been warned to curb a working day that routinely lasted fifteen hours ('Evening Standard', 20 March 1968). However responsive or otherwise he was to that advice, it is unlikely that the demands of the job at that point could have allowed much respite. A further heart attack on 20 March 1968 led to his death, at his home, 7 Roedean Crescent, Roehampton, London. He received something close to a state funeral at Westminster Abbey on 29 March, reflecting the acknowledgement that he had been the greatest Metropolitan Police commissioner since Trenchard. 
Simpson's work was, of course, unfinished, and we cannot know how he would have handled the major scandals that afflicted the Met in the 1970s. It is clear, though, that some of the reflexes developed in response to relatively limited criticism in the 1960s -- the assumption that public and media attacks were ill informed or even malicious and that wrong-doing could be handled internally -- damaged the Met severely when far more substantial charges were laid against the drug squad and the obscene publications squad in the 1970s. As commissioner, Simpson had undertaken a very difficult balancing act, as he sought to raise the calibre of the Met without in the process damaging further the bruised morale of the force he had inherited. He had achieved considerable success in this operation by listening to the views and the grievances of his men and by coming almost instinctively to the force's defence at a time when it was believed throughout the Met that 'the Police Council, Home Office, MPs, church magazines, courts of criminal appeal, magistrates and the press all appeared to be against the police' (Whitfield, 57, account of meeting with chief superintendents in January 1966). The vice squad superintendent and future assistant commissioner Gilbert Kelland noted that where the retirement of Simpson's predecessor, Sir John Nott-Bower, 'had hardly been noticed by the force' (Kelland, 99), Simpson's death in office evinced deep and genuine sadness from men of all ranks who saw him -- the first commissioner to rise from the Met's own ranks -- as 'one of us'. The Met's renewed self-esteem reflected a necessary recovery of morale from the low point of the late 1950s, but a more bullish resistance to outside criticism threatened to become a liability when the force faced a reforming Home Office and a crusading press, pursuing genuinely damaging allegations. Had Simpson lived to retiring age it is likely that he would not have enjoyed his last few years in post, as the case for greater accountability and for external scrutiny became ever harder to resist, and his own reputation might well have suffered in the process. At the time of his death, though, what Kelland called Simpson's 'moderately iconoclastic' approach to the reform of a notoriously intractable organization (ibid., 133) had achieved tangible results, during what his erstwhile Hendon colleague Ranulph Bacon described as 'ten of the most progressive years our Service has ever known' ('Police Review', 29 March 1968). 


@@@@@


doc= 94283


Barber, John Norman Romney (1919-2004), motor industry executive, was born on 22 April 1919 at 24 Cranleigh Drive, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, the son of George Ernest Barber, master builder, and Gladys Eleanor, 'nee' Tassie. He was educated at Westcliff high school, Westcliff-on-Sea, and read economics at London University until he left to join the army at the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939. He became an officers' training instructor stationed in Wales and Dorset and rose to the rank of captain. On 15 March 1941 he married Babette Chalu (1917/18-2003), who had been born in France and who was the daughter of Louis Chalu, a works manager; the couple had one son. 
For nine years after the war Barber worked for the Ministry of Supply. In 1956 he joined the finance department of the Ford Motor Company as an assistant controller with a brief to modernize. Barber described what he found as 'an almost green eye-shade operation' (private information) that had hardly changed since the 1930s. He began by spending six weeks in the United States identifying and observing modern financial systems that would later make Ford UK hugely successful. On his return to England he began the Ford graduate scheme, which recruited 100 university leavers in a year and became a well-known and respected nursery for management talent for Ford and other companies. In 1962 Barber became finance director but left the company three years later, uncomfortable at what he saw as the creeping Americanization of British operations. He now moved, again as finance director, to Associated Electrical Industries (AEI), and was once more charged with reorganizing the company. In 1967 AEI was the subject of a successful takeover bid by Arnold Weinstock's General Electric Company (GEC), despite an energetic defence of AEI in which Barber played a key role. 'You cost me', complained Weinstock (private information). 
GEC's takeover of AEI was one of two big restructurings encouraged by Harold Wilson's Labour government as part of its bid to modernize and rationalize Britain's industrial economy. Barber was soon in the thick of the second restructuring, the proposed merger of Leyland Motors with British Motor Holdings (BMH), the floundering agglomeration of Austin, Morris, and more recently Jaguar. Having declined Arnold Weinstock's offer of a job with GEC, Barber was invited to return to the car industry by Leyland's chairman, Sir Donald Stokes, an industrialist favoured by the Labour government for his success with the export of buses and trucks. Barber recalled how Stokes -- the consummate salesman -- had told Harold Wilson of his plan, only to be asked for details by the prime minister. 'Stokes came back at eleven o'clock and said, 'John, I have to have a plan for taking over and rationalizing BMH for four o'clock'' (private information). Barber duly obliged and in 1968 he became director of finance and planning at the newly created British Leyland Motor Corporation. 
In the late 1960s the new motor company ranked tenth in the world. However, Barber -- his cerebral manner offset by a boyish enthusiasm for cars and a delight in the latest engineering -- was alert to British Leyland's flaws. As numerous working parties set out to establish consensus about anything from pensions to products, he was horrified to find 'a mass of unrationalised production plants and products, umpteen engines, umpteen gearboxes, umpteen axles' (Adeney, 257). Barber blamed the company's midland management for allowing the workforce to get out of control. While at Ford, it had been customary for Barber and other executives to compare their own lines with rival models across Europe; this practice was absent at British Leyland and from this Barber identified a basic lack of interest in cars from a management obsessed with production difficulties. As one of British Leyland's two deputy managing directors from 1971, Barber worked and competed with the other, George Turnbull, who was responsible for the company's largest division, Austin-Morris, at Longbridge in Birmingham. Turnbull's overriding concern was to start earning revenue from the plant's new models, and feared that imminent business rationalization or redundancies would prevent this. Other powerful barons at this time included Sir George Farmer of Rover and Sir Bill Lyons of Jaguar, who both sought to maintain their independence within the company. Barber saw himself as a champion of coherent planning. His midland colleagues, by contrast, criticized him for trying to impose Fordist constraints within Leyland and so restrict autonomy in a company characterized by diversity. In this climate Barber struggled to rationalize and to make the company more outward-looking, and sought to make his point on competition by, on one occasion, lining up a selection of rival continental marques outside a top management meeting. Progress was made and new mass-market cars did emerge, although only after strikes had cost $15 million in six weeks. Even then, the new Marina and Allegro models proved unpopular and sold less well than the cars they replaced. 
Barber saw British Leyland's long-term salvation as being the upmarket Rover and Jaguar lines. He battled to prevent George Turnbull forming a cars division which would include specialist as well as mass-market marques -- a mistake made under the company's later managers. Turnbull saw Barber's resistance as a threat to the autonomy of his division and, while praising the financial control systems introduced by Barber and his former Ford colleagues, also criticized his rival for an excessive zeal to merge the business. It was Turnbull's opinion that putting tractors and buses under the same management as cars would not work. In 1973 Barber was appointed deputy chairman and managing director, and so became the heir presumptive to Stokes (now Baron Stokes). Turnbull resigned in September 1973. But time was also running out for British Leyland's senior management. Stokes's consensual style had failed to grip the enlarged company in the way that Arnold Weinstock had welded GEC. The 1973 oil crisis devastated the market for cars; managers were wearied by serial industrial unrest (which led to a production loss of more than 150,000 cars in 1974), and the group started to run out of working capital. 
Barber's view always remained that a relatively small injection of cash -- perhaps $100 million -- would have enabled British Leyland to pull through. With the company almost bankrupt in the summer of 1974, Harold Wilson's new Labour government initially provided emergency funding but then lost confidence. In June 1975 the government nationalized British Leyland after receiving from Lord Ryder of Eaton Hastings, chairman of the National Enterprise Board, a report on the company's current situation and proposals for its future. Stokes and Barber were ignored during the investigation, and Ryder's plans -- which Barber considered hopelessly optimistic -- were prepared without their involvement. Under its terms, $1400 million was poured in with much of the spending, in Barber's opinion, being directed to the wrong sectors. In his report Ryder criticized Barber for having undermined 'the authority and responsibility of line management by having too many people reporting to him' ('British Leyland: the Next Decade', 1975). Despite receiving the support of the House of Commons' public expenditure committee, which declared that the British motor industry could not 'afford to lose the able managers it possesses', there was to be no place for Barber in a newly nationalized British Leyland. He refused to resign, maintaining that it was his job to get the best possible deal for the company's shareholders. As a result on 14 August 1975 Barber was dismissed. He took his sacking badly: his wife complained to the press while he wrote to 'The Times' to justify his record, claiming that his large team was only temporary and that he had not been given sufficient time to make an impact. 
John Barber spent the rest of his career in a series of lesser non-executive positions, firmly of the belief that once he had been black-balled by the government, big companies would not take a chance on him. None the less he made a series of profitable investments in smaller companies which manufactured car seats, exhibition stands, and other products, and enjoyed his role as a hands-on manager. To his admirers, the loss of Barber's undoubted talent for analysis and management was a tragedy for the domestic motor industry. It is equally the case that the problems faced by British Leyland in the early to mid-1970s were too complex and politically charged for a purely business solution to be effective. The company was perhaps beyond salvation by the time he became managing director. Certainly Barber lacked the subtlety and the human and political touch required to attempt a rescue. Despite his departure from British Leyland, Barber retained his fascination with motor cars and motor racing. In his sixties he was happy to bend people's ears on the engineering merits of his own Honda car and took as a badge of honour Lord Stokes's claim that he had been the one car nut on the Leyland board. John Barber died on 21 October 2004 at Southampton General Hospital from pneumonia; his wife, Babette, predeceased him in 2003 and he was survived by their son. 


@@@@@


doc= 94289


Booth, Sir David Alwyn Gore- (1943-2004), diplomatist, was born on 15 May 1943 in Washington, DC, USA, the older of the twin sons of Paul Henry Gore-Booth (1909-1984), diplomatist, and his wife, Patricia Mary, 'nee' Ellerton (1921-2012), daughter of Montague Ellerton, originally from Adelaide in South Australia. At the time of his birth his father was a first secretary in the British embassy, later rising to be permanent under-secretary at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office; he was knighted in 1957 and made a life peer as Baron Gore-Booth of Maltby in 1969. The Gore-Booth family were of Anglo-Irish origin and it is curious that this father and son, both prominent in the British establishment, should have had a relative, Countess Markievicz (Paul's aunt), who was active in the Dublin rising of 1916. The Irish connection faded but for a time Gore-Booth 'fils' thought he was in danger of inheriting a run-down house in Yeats's Lissadell. 
Gore-Booth was educated at Eton College and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he read history and graduated with a second-class degree in 1964. On 27 June the same year he married Jillian Sarah Valpy, a 21-year-old interior decorator, and daughter of James Wyatt Valpy, a farmer in South Africa. They had a son, Julian, in 1968. They divorced in 1970 and on 7 October 1977 he married Mary Elisabeth Janet Gambetta ('b'. 1949), an interpreter, the daughter of Sir David Muirhead, ambassador successively to Peru, Portugal, and Belgium, and the former wife of Enrico Gambetta de Patrantonio, of Lima, Peru. This was an ideally happy union. 
Gore-Booth had himself joined the diplomatic service in 1964, and was sent almost immediately to learn Arabic at the Middle East Centre for Arab Studies in the Lebanon. Two years later he was posted to Baghdad but his stay there was cut short by the breach of diplomatic relations over the Arab-Israeli war of June 1967. After brief spells in Zambia and Libya he took over the Arab-Israeli desk at the Foreign Office in 1971, where during the Arab-Israeli war of October 1973 his performance was outstanding. He was rewarded with a posting as first secretary to the busy UK mission to the European Economic Community in Brussels. Next he was assistant head of the financial relations department in London and then, with early promotion to counsellor, head of the commercial section in the embassy at Jiddah. By now he had been fully recognized as a quick and efficient worker, unflustered in a crisis, and he was sent to a 'flier's' job: head of chancery at the mission to the United Nations in New York. From there his rise was swift -- head of the policy planning department from 1987 to 1989, assistant under-secretary for the Middle East and the United Nations from 1989 to 1993, ambassador to Saudi Arabia from 1993 to 1996, and high commissioner to India from 1996 to 1998. He was appointed CMG in 1990, promoted to KCMG in the 1997 new year's honours, and made KCVO during the royal visit later that year. 
Gore-Booth was frequently in the limelight. As assistant under-secretary he was the focus of a BBC television series which followed him in his various activities and carried on into his first weeks as ambassador in Riyadh. There his earlier experience of commercial work gave him an understanding of business and industry which made him popular with the British expatriates, and his lively personality won over the Saudis, who recognized both his competence and his credibility back home. Along the way, however, there were a number of scrapes. He was always conspicuous, always accessible to journalists, and his outspokenness provided the media with frequent stories. His indiscretions arose usually from his conviction that the Palestinians had been unjustly treated, that Israeli policies were not helpful to the 'peace process', and that the British failure to criticize those policies was damaging to the national interest. The gradual swing in public and governmental opinion towards an understanding of the Palestinians' plight made his views more acceptable but he had already been classified as a member of the so-called Arabist mafia in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. There was, too, another incident that put him in the spotlight: he was harshly interrogated and criticized by the Scott tribunal inquiring into the sale of arms to Iraq. He felt he was unjustly treated, and his sense of grievance was shared by Lord Howe, the former foreign secretary, who had received similar treatment. Moreover his self-confidence and his background of Eton and Oxford made him vulnerable to charges of arrogance and privilege from critics who disliked his views. In fact he was always kind and considerate, especially to his juniors. But the charges followed him and he was hurt. 
Gore-Booth's transfer to New Delhi offered an escape from obloquy. His father had held the same post forty years before and was remembered with respect. There he might get away from association with what the press called the 'camel corps'; and a trouble-free tour would leave him ready for the job on which he had set his sights and for which he was admirably fitted, that of permanent representative at the United Nations in New York, almost the top of the diplomatic tree. Alas for theory. After a good start the Indian press took against him. He was 'regularly described', he noted, 'as a hunting, shooting, fishing aristocrat', though he had never 'held a rein, a rod or a gun' in his life (private information). Worse, during the queen's visit in 1997 there was public friction between him and the new foreign secretary, Robin Cook, who rejected his advice on how to handle the sensitive question of Kashmir. Moreover, the prospect of New York was blocked by the appointment of a contemporary. Disenchanted, in 1998 he decided to take early retirement and recorded his feelings in a characteristically frank valedictory dispatch. 
During his time in Saudi Arabia, Gore-Booth's talent had been spotted by the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation and in 1999 he was made a special adviser to the group chairman. He quickly mastered balance sheets and interest rates and was deployed on the boards of various affiliates, including HSBC Bank Middle East and the British Arab Commercial Bank. In one bank he even became chairman of the audit committee, a remarkable appointment for a layman. Based in London, he was prominent as a committee man, lecturer, and consultant in many organizations that valued his regional experience, among them the Middle East Association, 'Middle East International' magazine, the Windsor Energy Group, and the British Syrian Society. All was now going well; but in 2003 cancer of the oesophagus was diagnosed and after a year of exhausting treatment he died at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital on 31 October 2004. Thus a career which had always sparkled, had suffered a few hiccups and one serious setback, and had finally blossomed, came to a premature end. His memorial service at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 16 March 2005 attracted a host of mourners. He was survived by his wife, Mary, his son from his first marriage, and a stepson. 


@@@@@


doc= 94293


Bridgeman, Sir John (1568/9-1638), judge, was the only son of John Bridgeman of Mitcheldean and Sudeley in Gloucestershire and Anne, daughter of William Gernon of Herefordshire. His father was a younger son in an aspiring gentry family settled on the eastern edge of the Forest of Dean; Sir John, helped by his education and an astute marriage, was its first member to achieve prominence, as both a substantial landowner and a provincial lawyer with a wide sphere of influence. 
After matriculating from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in June 1582, aged thirteen, Bridgeman spent some years at Clifford's Inn, an inn of chancery, to which he formed such an attachment that he later presented it with a window displaying the Bridgeman coat of arms. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in June 1591, called to the bar in 1600, and made a bencher in 1615. Having gained early commendation from the auditor of the duchy of Lancaster in northern parts, he seems to have practised most often in the court of common pleas, and compiled a report of its proceedings between 1613 and 1621 (not published until 1659). In 1614 he was appointed counsel for the city of Gloucester, but the city of Exeter did more to advance his reputation, employing him in July 1622 in its successful struggle to prevent the unprecedented intrusion of Bishop Valentine Carey into the civic peace commission. At much the same time Edward la Zouche, eleventh Baron Zouche, a former president of the council in the marches, began to engage Bridgeman as legal counsel. On 30 June 1623 Bridgeman became one of thirteen new councillors in the marches; three months later he was made a serjeant-at-law, and on 7 December he was knighted at Whitehall. 
In February 1626 Sir Thomas Coventry, who was not only attorney-general but also a former fellow student of Bridgeman's at the Inner Temple and his near-neighbour in Worcestershire, did much to advance Sir John to the chief justiceship of Chester, vacant since April 1625. The duke of Buckingham's earlier attempts to secure the place for the notorious Shropshire baronet Sir Thomas Harris came to nothing. In his new office Bridgeman presided at assizes for the county of Cheshire, and over great sessions on the north-eastern Welsh circuit of Denbighshire, Flintshire, and Anglesey. He also occupied a prominent place in the council in the marches of Wales, where he regularly deputized for an absentee president, and was named in peace commissions for Herefordshire, Monmouthshire, Shropshire and Worcestershire, in addition to those of Chester, Gloucestershire (where he was also 'custos rotulorum' for a time), and the twelve counties of Wales. Recorderships for Gloucester, Shrewsbury, Ludlow, and Wenlock soon followed. For the rest of his life Bridgeman devoted himself to the region in which he had his roots, and unlike his immediate predecessors Sir James Whitelocke and Sir Thomas Chamberlain seems never to have hankered after a place on the Westminster bench. 
In his administrative round Bridgeman was notably conscientious, for example never missing a Cheshire assize session between 1626 and his death. He also appears to have been merciful, both in his judgments and his sentencing. But despite his adding of his kinsman John Greene to Chester's council, his part in settling the city's internal wrangling provoked by rivalry between the Whitby and Mainwaring factions was never entirely happy. As common-law judges neither he nor his colleague Sir Marmaduke Lloyd fitted comfortably into the processes of conciliation favoured both by the privy council and by Chester's accustomed broker, Thomas Savage, Viscount Savage. Savage and the privy council were looking for sensible compromise, not necessarily based on strict law, but intended rather to produce a lasting settlement acceptable to all parties. 
The relations of Bridgeman and his fellow marchers with the central government suffered from a lack of satisfactory definition, despite the election 'ex officio' of its president to the privy council in November 1629, and they did so even after Charles I reasserted his commitment to the full exercise of local justice in 1631. Too often the privy council devolved the drudgery of establishing the detailed facts of a complex and tedious case upon Bridgeman and his colleagues, while reserving to itself the final power of decision. It thus appeared to deny the council in the marches its intended authority, slighted its regional standing, and encouraged the senior gentry to regard Westminster as their place of first resort. Yet there were occasions of co-operation. It seems likely that an undated set of twenty-six questions from lords of Welsh manors, with resolutions supplied by Bridgeman, was prompted by the privy council's launch in January 1631 of the earl of Manchester's 'Book of Orders', which gave Sir John sole responsibility for the book's reception in Wales while the presidency of the council in the marches was vacant. Both questions and resolutions relate closely to the book's 'directions' concerning the responsibilities of landlords and stewards, and their exhaustive coverage suggests that it was regarded as a necessary exercise. Bridgeman felt justified in asking for the unusually large fee of $40 for his labour. 
By the mid-1630s, already suffering from a lack of profitable business, the council in the marches was further threatened by the determination of Sir John Lambe, the dean of arches in the province of Canterbury, to win back testamentary business and jurisdiction over sexual immorality for the church courts. Bridgeman and his new president, John Egerton, first earl of Bridgewater, began to hunt out suitable precedents and to fear for the future of their own court. They were not well placed, in Bridgeman's case because he was regarded with suspicion by Archbishop William Laud, who seems to have distrusted the growing warmth between the judge, now settled at Prinknash, and his new neighbour Godfrey Goodman, the wayward bishop of Gloucester. By February 1637 Laud was reporting to Charles I that much good might be done 'in a church way' if officials were 'not overborne' by the court in the marches ('Works', 5.345), and his efforts to constrain the council by depriving it of revenue from incontinence and testamentary cases, and by challenging its authority to deal more generally in church matters concerning the laity, came to have royal support. By 1638 very few of the disputed cases were reaching Ludlow. 
Long before then Bridgeman had come to appreciate that there were other ways in which government policies might impinge upon local susceptibilities. In 1626-7 he was active in securing a reluctant acceptance of the forced loan in most of the marcher counties. When Gloucester was threatened with forced billeting Bridgeman, as the city's recorder, wrote privately to Coventry on 26 February 1628, preparing the ground for an appeal by the mayor and aldermen that may have shortened the troops' stay. He was involved from the first in the king's efforts to increase his revenues from the royal forests, and played his part in dealing with the widespread unrest arising from the policy. He took part in three surveys of Braydon Forest in Wiltshire between 1626 and 1629, before applying himself in 1631-2 to the Forest of Dean, a larger forest with important connections with the navy. Difficulties in the terrain, which made evasion easy, and intimidation of witnesses, meant that indictments far outnumbered arrests, but Bridgeman still came to be regarded as 'the one official the privy council could trust' (Sharp, 123). He remained in good standing at further forest courts ('justice seats') for Dean in July 1634, and for New and Chute forests in Hampshire and Rockingham Forest in Northamptonshire in June 1635. By contrast his role in the collection of ship money, when the tax was extended from coastal to inland counties, remains unclear. His main duty was to settle disputed assessments in Wales and the marches, which often meant upsetting ratings already made, and his last days were accordingly disturbed by the protests of aggrieved high sheriffs, mingling discordantly with the admonitions of Archbishop Laud. 
By 1606 Bridgeman married Frances, daughter and sole heir of Henry Daunt of Owlpen, near Dursley, in Gloucestershire east of the Severn. The early deaths of her father and only brother had allowed the family home to pass into the hands of her uncle, so she and Bridgeman settled instead in Nympsfield, a few miles north. They had four sons (George, William, Thomas, and John), and three daughters (Elizabeth, Ann, and Mary). After becoming chief justice of Chester Bridgeman also acquired the last abbot of Gloucester's country retreat at Prinknash, a few miles south-east of the city. He added a battlemented two-storey porch to the front of the house and rebuilt its crumbling chapel, for which Bishop Goodman conducted an elaborate consecration service in May 1629. He continued almost to the end of his life to buy small parcels of land and to acquire leases and tithes, some of them from the cathedral chapter. The principal beneficiary of Bridgeman's activity in the property market was his eldest son, George, who married Heveningham Potts, the daughter of a south Worcestershire JP, and with his father's assistance entered public life. In 1628, aged twenty-one, George was returned to parliament as second burgess for Wenlock, where Sir John was recorder; at twenty-seven he was sworn in as a marches councillor; and two years later Bishop Goodman allowed him to make the presentation to his own Gloucestershire living of Kemerton. 
When Sir John Bridgeman began to make his will, at Ludlow on 28 November 1637, the disposition of most of his property had evidently been decided. He was then 'somewhat ill in bodie' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/176/30). His will resumed on 5 February 1638, the day he died. Probably in response to questions, he made a short series of succinct bequests which included $1500 for his unmarried daughter Mary and $100 each for his sons George and John. Much else was left to the discretion of his wife, including provision for his servants and for the local poor. She also had to arrange for his burial. She settled on St Lawrence's Church in Ludlow, where a black and white marble monument was erected in its north chapel, possibly the work of Francesco Fanelli. 
Bridgeman's surviving papers show his public face, as a talented lawyer and a capable administrator. Always concerned for his reputation but not unduly ambitious, he was apparently content to devote his energies to his western jurisdiction, and to enjoy amicable relations with its successive presidents. At the same time he was astute enough to keep in regular contact with his friends at court, especially Coventry, and was thereby largely able to maintain his position. Overall he showed himself a man who was more concerned with the particular details of policy than with its general tenor. His service on three forest 'justice seats' attracted little attention and no censure. His attitude to the church was opaque even to Laud. Even so, he could not avert the attentions of the archbishop as he threatened to undermine a conciliar court on whose integrity Charles I had always insisted, and for all Bridgeman's circumspection, its future at the time of his death looked far from settled. 


@@@@@


doc= 94296


Pyne, Hugh (1569/70-1628), lawyer and alleged traitor, was a younger son of John Pyne (died 1609), barrister, of Curry Mallet, Somerset, and Juliana, 'nee' Towse. He followed his father to Lincoln's Inn, London, in 1588 at the age of eighteen, was called to the bar in 1596, and in 1597 married Mabel, daughter of Henry Staverton of Durley, Hampshire. In his will, dated 1 October 1624, Pyne refers to his 'most virtuous, loving, dutiful, dear, wise, and understandingly religious wife', who died in 1618 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/155). The couple had one son, Arthur, born at Micheldever, Hampshire, and a daughter, Christabella, born at Monckton, Dorset. Pyne possessed lands and leases in Dorset and Somerset, but his principal residence, where he paid his $20 subsidy, was at Cathanger in the parish of Fivehead, Somerset. Observers in 1627 described him as 'a man of great estate, $2000 per annum at the least' (Birch and Williams, 1.295). Pyne's will, with its 'assurance by faith' and expectation of 'blessed immortality', suggests a mainstream moderate puritanism. 
Pyne rose under James I to become counsel to Queen Anne and a practitioner in Star Chamber. He contributed to the refurbishment of Lincoln's Inn in 1610, was a bencher by 1613, a reader by 1616, and treasurer from 1624 to 1626, displaying his arms in the inn's west window. He served as a justice of peace for Dorset (1614-26), recorder for Weymouth (1615-28), JP for Somerset (1616-26), and deputy 'custos rotulorum' of Somerset (1622-6). He was active against Charles I's forced loan, and outspoken against the raising and billeting of troops. Historians have subsequently judged him 'pompous', 'waspish', and 'rambunctious' (Barnes, 70, 262), and 'short-tempered and tactless' (Cust, 192). 
Charles I's visit to Somerset in the autumn of 1625 occasioned the words that made Hugh Pyne notorious. When a neighbour reported seeing King Charles at Hinton St George, Pyne responded: 'then hast thou seen as unwise a king as ever was, and so governed as never king was; for he is carried as a man would carry a child with an apple. Therefore I and divers more did refuse to do our duties unto him. ('Reports of Sir George Croke', 83)' Pyne then reportedly added that Charles I 'is to be carried any whither... he is no more fit to be king than Hickwright', referring to 'an old simple fellow who was then Mr. Pyne's shepherd' (ibid.). Pyne's enemies secured 'an accusation of treason for words spoken in contempt of the king', which cost him his liberty and his career. Other reports had him saying that the king was 'stripped and governed by a company of upstarts' ('Diary of Walter Yonge', 110). Pyne's principal accuser was John Poulet (made a baron in 1627), a client of the duke of Buckingham, and the king's host on his visit to Hinton. 
Arrested in June 1627, Pyne was first committed to his chamber in Lincoln's Inn, then confined to the gatehouse, and by November he was in the king's bench prison awaiting trial for treason. If guilty he faced a gruesome execution and forfeiture of his estates. But Pyne commanded formidable legal resources. His application for habeas corpus was supported by William Noy, John Bramston, John Selden, and Henry Calthorpe, and their pleading at Westminster on 22 November produced 'wonderful applause, even of shouting and clapping of hands, which is unusual in that place' (Birch and Williams, 1.292). A panel of senior judges, including Sir Nicholas Hyde, Sir Thomas Richardson, Sir John Walter, and Sir Henry Yelverton, debated the case before the attorney-general, Sir Robert Heath, and reviewed the law of treason. Their conclusion, repeated in 'State Trials', was that: 'the speaking of the words before mentioned, though they were as wicked as might be, was not treason... the words spoken here can be but evidence to discover the corrupt heart of him that spake them; but of themselves they are not treason, neither can any indictment be framed upon them.('Reports of Sir George Croke', 89; 'State Trials', 3.367)' Pyne's case established the judgment that words by themselves could not constitute treason. A statute of 1352 had made it treason to 'compass or imagine the death of our lord the king' and to give 'aid and comfort' to the king's enemies, but conviction required an overt act (25 Edw. III s. 5 c. 2). 
Freed on 16 February 1628, Pyne was almost immediately elected member of parliament for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis. He was active in debate from April to June 1628, especially in support of the petition of right. In his final speech, on 5 June, on grievances against the duke of Buckingham, Pyne remarked, 'I think we can hardly tax the man in question without blaming a greater power' (Johnson and others, 4.131). By the autumn of 1628 Pyne was ailing. On 16 October he paid a fine to be discharged from his reading duties at Lincoln's Inn. On 19 November he made a codicil to his will in favour of his son-in-law Edmund Windham and his granddaughter Mabel Windham. He died at Cathanger, Somerset, on 21 November 1628. His son Arthur inherited Pyne's Somerset and Dorset leaseholds. His nephew John Pyne, son of Thomas Pyne (died in or before 1609), had a parliamentary career that continued to 1653. 


@@@@@


doc= 94300


Calle, Richard (d. in or after 1503), administrator and land agent, was the son of a shopkeeper from Framlingham in Suffolk. Nothing more is known about his family except that he had at least one brother. Framlingham was the seat of the Mowbray dukes of Norfolk, and it was thanks to a personal recommendation from the third duke that Calle was taken into the service of the Paston family, gentry from north Norfolk. No details of his experiences before he entered Paston employment, nor the precise date at which he joined their household, can now be recovered. However, the survival of the Paston letters (twenty-six of which were composed by Calle, and eight others written by him at the dictation of members of the family) means that much more is known about his life and career than is the case for most contemporaries of his modest status. 
Calle first appears in the Paston correspondence in the mid-1450s. It is clear from the letters that he was an intelligent man who had been educated to a high standard of literacy and numeracy, and he turned his hand to an impressively broad range of duties. He shouldered the principal responsibility for the management of the Paston estates -- arranging leases, collecting rents, organizing the sale of agricultural produce, and drawing up detailed financial accounts -- and advised his employers on commercial, agricultural, and political matters. When the Pastons became embroiled in a complex battle to inherit the valuable estates of Sir John Fastolf after the latter's death in 1459 -- a campaign in which their difficulties were compounded by the civil war which resulted in the deposition of Henry VI and the accession of Edward IV in 1461 -- Calle was entrusted with sensitive legal and political errands, and was sometimes required to put his own safety at risk to protect Paston interests. In the autumn of 1462, for example, he worked closely with John (III), the second son of the family, to fend off the incursions of a rival claimant at the Fastolf manor of Cotton in Suffolk, and was arrested and briefly imprisoned as a result. It is clear that by this stage Calle was one of the most trusted retainers within the Paston household, and that the family depended heavily on his competence and counsel. 
However, that trust was shattered, and his expertise lost to the Pastons, in 1469. Just when the fourth duke of Norfolk's challenge for a share in the Fastolf estates was precipitating a terrifying political crisis for the family, they suffered a blow nearer home when it emerged, to their horror, that Calle and Margery Paston ('b'. 'c'.1450) ['see 'Calle, Margery, 'under' Paston family], elder daughter of John (I) Paston, had fallen deeply in love. The relationship seems to have begun in secret two years earlier, but was discovered in April 1469 by Margery's widowed mother, Margaret. The Pastons' objection to the match was not the difference in the couple's ages -- Calle was probably in his mid-thirties, and Margery about twenty -- but the disparity in their status: 'he should never have my good will for to make my sister to sell candle and mustard in Framlingham', her brother John (III) wrote angrily ('Paston letters and papers', 1.541). Despite this vehement opposition, in the late summer of 1469 Calle and Margery became formally betrothed, albeit in secret. When the family discovered what had happened, Calle was banished to London and Margery kept under watch in her mother's home. One of Calle's letters -- gracefully composed and intensely moving -- has survived from this period of separation: 'we that ought of very right to be most together are most asunder; me seemeth it is a thousand years ago since that I spoke with you' (ibid., 2.498). 
Margery was no less determined, refusing to renounce her vows even when interrogated by Walter Lyhert, bishop of Norwich, on 8 September. As a result, the union could not be annulled, and a few weeks later the couple were reunited at Blackborough nunnery near King's Lynn, where Calle took employment as the convent's receiver. A public ceremony of marriage seems to have followed. It seems that Margery was never fully reconciled with her mother and brothers, but, for the pragmatic Pastons, Calle's experience and loyalty -- which never wavered, despite their rejection of him as a prospective son- and brother-in-law -- were too valuable to lose permanently. By 1472 he was back in their service, although he did not regain the position of trust he had previously enjoyed. 
Calle was eventually able to buy an estate at Bacton in north-east Norfolk and establish his own household there. With Margery he had three sons, William (who probably became a friar), Richard, and John, the eldest, to whom Margery's mother Margaret left $20 in her will in 1482. It is possible that Margery herself had died by then. Certainly Calle outlived her, for at an unknown date he married Margaret, daughter of Sir Andrew Trollope and of Elizabeth Mundeford, whose brother Osbert was an old friend and relation by marriage of the Pastons. Calle and his second wife had at least two sons, Anthony and Andrew. It is not known when Calle died, but he was still alive in the spring of 1503. 


@@@@@


doc= 94301


Ngakane, Lionel (1928-2003), actor and film director, was born in Pretoria, South Africa, on 17 July 1928. His parents worked as teachers and, after moving to Johannesburg in 1936, his father set up a hostel for young delinquents with Alan Paton. Politically active from an early age, Ngakane joined the ANC youth league with Oliver Tambo and Nelson Mandela. It was around this time that his passion for cinema began. One day his father came home with a 35 mm projector as a present for his son. Ngakane then collected small strips of film and projected them onto a wall at home, upsetting his family when the film burned in the projector. At Fort Hare University College and the University of the Witwatersrand he studied political philosophy, geography, and 'native administration', but these hardly prepared him for his job as head of wheels (maintenance) on the Johannesburg buses. From 1948 to 1950, as a freelance journalist, he contributed to 'Zonk' and 'Drum', two of South Africa's most successful black journals, and it was as a journalist that he came to Britain, to interview the film director Zoltan Korda (brother of Sir Alexander Korda). It was Korda who offered Ngakane his first acting role, as Absalom Kumalo, the 'lost' son of the village priest, in his film version of Alan Paton's novel 'Cry, the Beloved Country' (1951). 
Settling in Britain, and encouraged by Korda, Ngakane planned to become a film-maker; but he faced difficulties. The South African government refused to sponsor him. To earn a living he continued acting, but work was not regular. In the mid-1950s he acted in a few British films made on location in Africa with titles such as 'Duel in the Jungle' (1954), 'Safari' (1956), and 'Odongo' (1956), but he felt that these exploited Africa and provided nothing more than exotic backdrops for visiting Hollywood stars. However, working on these films enabled him to learn something about the technical side of film-making. In 1962 Ngakane released his first film: 'The result of experimenting with my 16mm camera was a short film called 'Sunday in London', and this gave me the confidence to make a film by myself. I visited my home in South Africa and made a seventeen-minute documentary called 'Vukani/Awake' [1962], the first film about the political situation in South Africa made from an African's point of view. Subsequently, it was shown all over the world during the anti-apartheid campaigns. (Bourne, 129-30)' For his second film Ngakane turned his attention to the situation of Britain's post-war African-Caribbean settlers. The result was 'Jemima and Johnny' (1966), filmed in 35 mm in black and white, with no dialogue. Ngakane said that this short drama about the friendship between a black girl and a white boy was inspired by the French film classic 'The Red Balloon' (1955): 'It was the official entry for Britain in the Venice Film Festival, and won first prize for Best Short Feature. I was thrilled that we had won first prize for Britain, and confident that I would make more films. I had high hopes, but I never had one offer, or enquiry. (Bourne, 130)' By the 1970s 'Jemima and Johnny' had disappeared from view but in the late 1980s it was given a new lease of life by June Givanni of the British Film Institute's African-Caribbean unit. Shown on Channel 4 television, and distributed on video, the film enjoyed new-found popularity and gave recognition to Ngakane as one of Britain's pioneer black film-makers. 
After the 1960s Ngakane became a founder member of two important institutions in African cinema: the Pan-African Filmmakers Federation (FEPACI) and the Pan-African Film and Television Festival of Ouagadougou (FESPACO), both of which encouraged links between Africa and Europe. In 1986 his film biography of Nelson Mandela, 'Mandela', was screened by Channel 4 and in 1989 he worked as the technical adviser to the director Euzhan Palcy on her film 'A Dry White Season'. He returned to South Africa in 1994 and continued to work hard to raise the international profile of African film-making in general and South African film-makers in particular; he was widely acclaimed as 'the father of South African film', and as June Givanni later said, 'his inspiration and support were always forthcoming and of immeasurable value' ('Black Filmmaker'). Until he died in Rustenburg, South Africa, on 26 November 2003, he divided his time between attending film festivals in an advisory role and serving on the board of directors of the Film Resource Unit in the University of Natal. 


@@@@@


doc= 94305


Nancy Mona Carline (1909-2004), painter, was born on 30 November 1909 at 18 Chantrey House, Eccleston Street, Belgravia, London. She was the daughter of Douglas Stanley Higgins (1880-1917), a director of the Peckham store Jones and Higgins, who was killed in the First World War, and his Australian wife, Mona Mary, 'nee' Richards. She was educated at Wycombe Abbey School and, from 1929, at the Slade School of Art, London, where she was particularly influenced by the teaching of Henry Tonks, Philip Wilson Steer, and Allan Gwynne-Jones, from whom she learned technical discipline and the value of keen observation. While working unpaid at Sadler's Wells ballet she met Vladimir Polunin, who persuaded her to return to the Slade to take his course on stage design. Polunin's teaching and work, strongly influenced by modernism, helped Nancy Higgins to move away from the subdued and highly figurative style encouraged during her first period at the Slade. In Polunin's class she also encountered a group of friends, including Rosemary Allan (who later married her former teacher Allan Gwynne-Jones) and the decorative artist Aelred Bartlett, with whom she formed a close and enduring circle. In 1934 she met Richard Carline, and became a prominent member of his Hampstead Artists' Council. One of her best-known works, 'Supper on the Terrace' (1946, Tate collection), depicts Richard and other members of the Carline family (including Richard's recently deceased mother, Annie, and Nancy herself) at the family's London home, 17 Pond Street. Land and townscapes became dominant subjects of her work. Both allowed her to study important themes of light, water, architecture, and the observation of daily life. Her work was exhibited at the New English Art Club, the Royal Academy, and the Camden Arts Centre (a retrospective in 1985), and formed part of the National Theatre's exhibition of the Carlines' circle in 1997. She travelled regularly with her husband, often to Venice, and was responsible for encouraging his return to a more painterly style. She was a teacher of art during the Second World War; she and her husband worked as examiners for more than twenty-five years. After her husband's death she moved to Wallingford in Oxfordshire. Suffering from Parkinson's disease, she died at Rush Court nursing home, Wallingford Road, Shillingford, Oxfordshire, on 18 October 2004, of pneumonia. She was survived by her son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 94307


Chapple, Francis Joseph, Baron Chapple (1921-2004), trade unionist, was born at 90 St Johns Road, Shoreditch, London, on 8 August 1921, the only son of Francis (Frank) Chapple, boot and shoe repairer, and his wife, Emma Gertrude, daughter of Joseph Rook, of Hoxton. His birthplace was a flat above his father's shop; the family later moved to Pitfield Street, Hoxton, where again they lived above the father's shop. Chapple senior was illiterate, and in his own son's graphic and unashamed description 'a bit of a villain' (personal knowledge). Indeed the relationship between Frank senior and Frank junior was at best tentative and often non-existent. It was his mother, Emma, who was, and remained, his guiding influence. She was a self-educated, highly intelligent woman, ambitious for her son -- there was also a daughter, Emily -- and came from a family of moderately successful greengrocers in Hoxton, where she also worked. Indeed it was Chapple's mother and her family of hardworking greengrocers who did much to support the precarious household, financially as well as emotionally, and to nurture the young Frank and his sister. Emma Chapple was a Conservative voter who ridiculed her husband's professed socialism. Perhaps in later years Frank Chapple's political swing from the communist left to the far right of Labour was, in part, a reflection of that early domestic conflict and, especially, maternal influence. The family conflicts of his childhood probably had a significant psychological bearing on Chapple's later development. 
The family's living conditions were almost Dickensian. In the rooms above his father's shoe repair shop there was no bath or hot running water. In common with other working-class families in that area of London, bordering on the City and the East End, the Chapples used public baths to maintain personal hygiene and in later years Chapple claimed that he did not have a properly plumbed bath at home until after the Second World War. It was a very tough start for the lad who was first to become an active and dedicated communist and later to turn against his former comrades and become, if not a defender of the establishment, then certainly a crusader against communism. 
Chapple left school at fourteen and his first, short-lived, job was as an errand boy with a local electrical firm. It was by pure chance that he was then taken on as an unindentured apprentice electrician with a firm that was working on wiring up his family's greengrocer's shop, where his mother still worked. Chapple's political senses were sharpened by his involvement in the anti-fascist battles against Sir Oswald Mosley's blackshirts as they rampaged against the East End Jewish community. Chapple was not Jewish, but his dark, swarthy stockiness sometimes gave that impression, and at his local elementary school he was frequently mistaken for a Jew and suffered antisemitic racial gibes. This certainly influenced his intense loathing of racial prejudice. At the age of sixteen, and steered by peer pressure in his electrician's job, he joined a trade union -- which in the 1930s was no simple task because high unemployment meant that most skilled unions placed restrictive limits on their membership. After several attempts he was finally accepted by the Electrical Trades Union (ETU) and recruited into its Islington branch, then run by active Communist Party members. The young Chapple had already joined the Labour League of Youth in Shoreditch, where he was befriended by a young socialist writer, Ted Willis, who was the national chairman of the Labour League of Youth and who came to play an important and influential role in Chapple's political life. It was Willis, having broken with the Labour Party's youth section over Labour's failure robustly to oppose Mosley's fascists, who then switched to the Young Communists and took Chapple and an entire section of the Labour League of Youth with him. Chapple remained an active member of the Communist Party for the next twenty years. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Chapple, as a skilled electrician, was recruited for work in the Royal Ordnance factories -- where he encountered his first strike. He desperately wanted to join the army and move out of a protected occupation, but it was not until 1943 that he succeeded in enlisting, joining the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers. Very soon he was in training for the Normandy landings of June 1944. Shortly before, on 31 May 1944, he married Joan Jeannette Nicholls, the 21-year-old daughter of James Nicholls, builder, of Hoxton; they were to have two sons, Roger ('b'. 1947) and Barry ('b'. 1951). On D-day plus twenty Chapple landed in France, where he was involved in tank maintenance. His war record carried a characteristic humorous touch -- he was mentioned in dispatches, as he would for ever confess with a modest wave of the arm, because he was on hand to repair his brigadier's car, which kept breaking down when under fire. 'Keeping my commanding officer mobile as we advanced toward the Rhine', Chapple would modestly explain with a grin, 'made me a hero!' (personal knowledge). Yet Chapple's war service did not weaken his resolve as a communist. Once in Germany as part of the occupying army he immediately established contact with the emerging West German Communist Party, helping to run a secret party cell from the army's education unit at Lubeck. Demobilized in 1947 but without work for some time, he resumed activities with the ETU and was rewarded by the union's communist hierarchy with a trip to Prague as one of the union's representatives at the conference of the World Federation of Communist Youth. 
It was in Prague that Chapple met the man who, eventually, would help transform his life, and his politics -- another young communist electrical worker named Leslie Cannon. Neither of them realized it at the time, but their Prague meeting was to form the basis of experiences which not only changed both their lives but also, without overstating the case, arguably helped to influence the future shape of British trade unionism. In their separate ways Chapple and Cannon, both having become full-time officials of the ETU, grew increasingly disillusioned with the communist leadership of this important and influential union. Both began to suspect ballot rigging at the highest level, and both found that even their questioning, let alone criticism, was deeply resented by the ETU hierarchy. Their dramatic break with that hierarchy, in 1958, made national newspaper headlines. The first move was the result of Cannon's bid for a senior job in the union as head of the ETU education college. He was appointed to that job -- then quickly sacked by the union's leaders for his critical stand against the communist leadership. This was followed by Chapple's resignation from the Communist Party, his immediate switch to the Labour Party, and his winning a seat on the union's executive council. The two rebels were acting quite separately, but the ETU's communist leaders saw them as a combined threat. Even so it should be emphasized that the two men were quite different characters. Cannon was the more strategic thinker, autocratic, and a touch humourless; Chapple far more impulsive, quarrelsome, and by his own admission 'an awkward bugger' (personal knowledge). Both had critics even among their political allies. Chapple's 'cheekie chappie' persona often infuriated his friends. Cannon's superior style invited similar displeasure. Yet their courage was undeniable. Together they led a reform group inside the union, aiming to remove the communist leadership, and in 1959 supported a well-known Catholic anti-communist, the Scottish area official Jock Byrne, in a challenge to the sitting general secretary, the communist Frank Haxell. It was a furious, bitter contest that Haxell claimed to have won. The result was then the subject of a High Court case, promoted by Cannon and Chapple, and presided over by Sir Rodger Winn, who, in a historic judgment of June 1961, found conspiracy to defraud by five communist leaders of the ETU -- arguably the most damaging indictment of trade union behaviour handed down by an English court. 
After that momentous ruling Byrne became ETU general secretary and in 1963 Cannon was elected union president with Chapple as Byrne's deputy until 1966, when he succeeded Byrne as general secretary. Cannon and Chapple then ran the ETU for several years, in harness, until Cannon died of cancer in 1970. Chapple was then elected to succeed him as president and for a time occupied both that role and that of general secretary until he persuaded the union's executive to merge the two positions. From 1966 until 1970 he was also the ETU's representative on the Labour Party executive -- and a constant critic of Harold Wilson's government, notably opposing the government's incomes policy. In 1971 he moved across from the party executive to join the TUC general council, where he cemented his reputation as an irritant and critic of most other union leaders. He even quarrelled publicly with two TUC general secretaries, Vic Feather and then Len Murray. It was as though, having abandoned his collectivist beliefs, Chapple found it temperamentally very difficult to establish any new alliances. When the Heath government came to office in 1970 he opposed its wages policies as vehemently as he had opposed the Wilson government. Nor did anything change when Wilson returned to Downing Street in 1974 after the miners' crisis of that winter. Indeed he also opposed the Labour government's 'social contract' in 1975 because it contained further wage restraint. Throughout this time Chapple continued his fight for trade unions to bargain without restraint regardless of political embarrassment to the Labour Party -- a populist role that often left him isolated among his fellow union leaders, though much admired by his members. 
In 1981 Chapple chose to become a founder signatory of the Limehouse declaration, which created the breakaway Social Democratic Party, and although he never joined the SDP he actively supported its policies and some of its parliamentary candidates. Many of his TUC colleagues wanted him -- and his union -- expelled from the Trades Union Congress, and voted him off senior committees. But under the influence of the general secretary, Len Murray, who pleaded for tolerance, Chapple was reinstated and the TUC leaders grudgingly accepted his seniority on the general council by allowing him to occupy his scheduled role as TUC president at the 1983 congress. Not that this softened Chapple's attitude towards his critics: he used his presidential speech to accuse fellow TUC leaders of 'self-inflicted absurdities' and 'infantile' threats to the elected government, in an extraordinary swipe at virtually everything and everybody ('Report of 115th Annual Trades Union Congress', 1983, 360-61). It was Chapple at his irrepressible best -- or worst. 
Chapple retired from his union in 1984 and Margaret Thatcher, with whom he had established a friendly -- even warm -- accord, made him a life peer in the new year's honours list of 1985. His retirement years were mostly devoted to a lifelong hobby of breeding racing pigeons, reading history and literature -- he could quote extensively from Shelley -- and listening to classical music. He continued to serve on a number of boards, including the Horse Race Totalisator Board (1976-90), the National Nuclear Corporation (1980-86), Southern Water Authority (1983-9), Inner City Enterprises (1983-8), and the N. G. Bailey Organisation (1989-99). He had been a member of the royal commission on environmental pollution (1973-7), the National Economic Development Council (1979-83), and several other bodies. In 1984 he published his autobiography, 'Sparks Fly! a Trade Union Life', the writing of which was largely attributed to John Grant, MP for Islington, whom Chapple supported when Grant left the Labour Party and switched to the SDP. Chapple's first wife died in 1994 after a marriage lasting fifty years. He married on 26 October 1999 Phyllis Mary Jenner, a 65-year-old widow, and daughter of Wilfred Luck, wharf manager. He died on 20 October 2004 at Maidstone Hospital, Maidstone, Kent, of a duodenal ulcer, and was survived by his second wife, Phyllis, and the two sons of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 94314


Dibnah, Frederick (1938-2004), steeplejack and television presenter, was born at 7 Alfred Street, Bolton, on 29 April 1938, the son of Frank Dibnah, a bleacher's beetler, and his wife, Betsy, later Bessie, 'nee' Travis, a gasworks charwoman. He grew up watching steam trains on the railway line that ran behind the family's terraced house and marvelled at the tall industrial chimney-stacks across the skyline, which he enjoyed sketching. His fascination with steam power was furthered by seeing various contraptions, pulleys, and belts on visits to the bleach factory where his father worked. 
After elementary education in Bolton and a short time studying at Bolton College of Art, Dibnah found employment as a joiner's apprentice. Then an interest in high buildings and a need to earn extra money led him to start a weekend job as a steeplejack. After two years' national service with the army in Germany, spent mostly using his joinery skills to renovate a farmhouse and barns at a camp used by the troops, he took up steeplejacking full-time, travelling to jobs on a 1927 AJS motorcycle and using a pair of binoculars to examine chimneys for damage before persuading their owners to allow him to restore the structures to their former glory. On 19 May 1967, at Gretna, he married the nineteen-year-old Alison Mary Foster, hairdresser, of Bolton, daughter of Leslie Arthur Foster, mechanical engineer. They had three daughters. 
In 1978 Dibnah was filmed for BBC North West's regional news programme as he repaired Bolton town hall's clock. Dibnah, who invited its reporter, Alistair McDonald, to join him, recalled: 'I had a plank going from the tower and across the face, so there he is inside the tower, looking out, and I am standing out on the plank, 200 foot up, showing off the new stone pillars we had made for the job. 'Are you coming out, then?' I asked, pointing to the plank. His reply is unprintable, as they say, but we did the interview anyway and it went out at the end of the evening news. ('The Independent', 8 Nov 2004)' This led Don Haworth, a producer at BBC North West's studios in Manchester, to make a fifty-minute documentary, 'Fred Dibnah, Steeplejack' (1979), as part of a series about people with unusual occupations. In the programme Dibnah talked about his job while demolishing or repairing factory chimneys, steeples, and towers. Restoration work was his preference, although 'doing a dropper' was sometimes necessary -- drawing large crowds of onlookers when announced -- and he took pride in not using dynamite but ensuring a neat demolition by cutting a mouth out in the bottom of the chimney, propping up the opening with sticks of wood, then burning them by lighting a large fire. 
Such was Dibnah's popularity with the public that Haworth made four television series about him: 'Fred' (1983), 'A Year with Fred' (1987), 'Life with Fred' (1994), and 'The Fred Dibnah Story' (1996). Elevated to celebrity status, he undertook steam-engine restoration projects at a sawmill in Parc Glynllifon, Caernarvonshire, and Wetheriggs pottery, near Penrith in Cumbria, and was seen as an odd-job man arriving to repair a weather vane on top of Mr and Mrs Kellogg's house in a 1996 television advertisement. The subject of so many BBC programmes, recognizable in his flat cap, boiler-suit, and watch on a chain, then became the presenter of further series, touring Britain to celebrate its industrial heritage in 'Fred Dibnah's Industrial Age' (1999), discovering the country's greatest buildings and feats of engineering in 'Fred Dibnah's Magnificent Monuments' (2000), examining the craft and engineering skills that were part of its history in 'Fred Dibnah's the Building of Britain' (2002), and tracing the development of steam power in 'Fred Dibnah's Age of Steam' (2003). Then the one-off special 'Dig with Dibnah' (2004) followed his attempt to reconstruct a part of Britain's industrial past by digging a 70 ft deep mine shaft, complete with pithead gear and steam-powered winding engine, in his own back garden. Ill health forced him to cut short filming for another series, 'Fred Dibnah's Made in Britain', in which he celebrated great engineering achievements by touring heritage sites on his newly restored 1912 Aveling and Porter steam traction engine, although the twelve programmes were screened posthumously in 2005. The irony of gaining fame for knocking down the mills and mines that once represented Lancashire's status as the textile capital of the world was not lost on Dibnah, who once said: 'It's OK for environmentalists but very sad for me' ('Bolton Evening News', 5 Sept 1992). 
Dibnah's first marriage having ended in divorce, he married on 27 February 1987 Susan Lorenz, a 28-year-old administrator and daughter of Jack Allmark, gardener; they had two sons before divorcing in 1996. On 26 September 1998 Dibnah married Sheila Grundy, a forty-year-old former magician's assistant and daughter of Arnold Grundy, milkman; Dibnah thereby became stepfather to her son. He was appointed an MBE in the 2004 new year's honours list and received honorary doctorates from the engineering departments of the universities of Birmingham and Aberdeen. He died on 6 November 2004 at Bolton Hospice, Queens Park Street, Bolton, of cancer. He was survived by his wife, Sheila, his five children, and his stepson. 


@@@@@


doc= 94320


Cameron, William (c.1787-1851), pedlar and beggar, was probably born at St Ninians, Stirlingshire, the son of Dugald Cameron of Braemar, a mashman, and his wife, Janet Paterson. As members of the Burgher Secession church the family barely feature in parochial registers, so details of Cameron's early life are mostly drawn from his autobiography. He was crippled at the age of six, and his parents destined him for a sedentary career as a tailor. He liked neither the work nor his master, and ran away on several occasions. His final break from home came when he joined a group of travelling players. When they disbanded he followed several itinerant careers, including preacher, china mender, and fortune-teller, before becoming a pedlar of songs and a beggar. To Cameron there was little distinction between selling a ballad and outright begging: 'to 'sing' on the streets requires a person who is a stranger to shame' (Cameron, 36). His wares were often worthless, mere scraps of paper. He would invent the story they were supposed to relate. It was his improvised sales patter that people paid to hear. 
According to his autobiography Cameron had travelled through most parts of Scotland and northern England, but his name is principally associated with Glasgow. It was there, in 1818, that he learnt his trade as a 'speech-caller' from Jamie 'Blue' McIndoe, another well-known street wit. The two were friends and partners for some time, before becoming rivals. In the 1820s Cameron travelled to fairs outside Glasgow, though he avoided his home area of Stirling, and was well known in Edinburgh to judge by the sheets he had prepared for him there by the printer Robert Menzies. His usual beat, however, was the Trongate and High Street areas of Glasgow, not far from the print shops and singing saloons of the Saltmarket that supplied him with his wares and his market, nor from the lodging houses and spirit shops of the Briggate slum, where he resided. He was, by his own admission and the testimony of everyone who knew him, an inveterate drunkard. 
Cameron occupied the lowest rung of the publishing industry. For a penny he would buy a dozen sheets from a Saltmarket printer, such as Thomas Duncan, which he sold for a halfpenny each. With this new capital he returned to the print shop, an operation he could repeat several times on a good Saturday night (pay-day). He also did well at executions, where he sold 'last speeches' of the condemned. Sometimes he had printers make up booklets of his own compositions, or adapted existing titles by other street writers, in this way hoping to have the monopoly of them. He got his nickname from one such sheet, a parody delivered in the voice of a cow ('hawkie' in Scots) of the Glasgow weaver and prophet David Ross. Street literature is ephemeral, but a few titles 'printed for William Cameron' survive in the National Library of Scotland and in Glasgow University Library. 
Cameron was also approached by groups to make up songs to promote their particular cause, as he did for the masons and plasterers of Edinburgh when they were in dispute with their masters in 1826-7. The vibrant social and political life of urban Scotland in these years encouraged an outpouring of poetry for use by various clubs and causes. Cameron's loyalties lay with political reformers and Chartists. According to a song published by the printer and retailer the Poet's Box, Glasgow, '
He's fond o' the Whigs, and aye praises their creed 

But aye sends the Tories to hell at full speed. 

' He was patronized by whig politicians and publishers like Peter MacKenzie, editor of the 'Reformer's Gazette'. His speciality, however, was comic pieces, particularly those aimed at women, such as the pedlar-poet Alexander Wilson's 'Watty and Meg'. He was also known for his verbal assaults on Roman Catholicism and Irish immigrants, although the latter were his neighbours and companions on the road and in Glasgow's lodging-houses. His reflections on the 'Irish question' in his autobiography (pp. 31-2) were more temperate. 
Cameron wrote his 'Autobiography of a Gangrel' for his friend and patron the publisher David Robertson, probably as a way of earning some money (popular autobiographies in this period were often a form of disguised charity), but it was not published until 1888, after both their deaths. It mostly covers his travelling years and draws on the established chapbook genre of an expose of beggars' tricks. It also describes his temporary marriages to several other itinerants, but he had no known official spouse or offspring. From 1838 he took up winter residence in the Glasgow Town Hospital, where he died on 11 September 1851. He was buried in the city's Sighthill cemetery on 13 September. 
Cameron's wit was celebrated in his own lifetime both in street literature and in Robertson's comic collections 'Whistle-Binkie' and 'The Laird of Logan'. William Gemmell, the self-taught sculptor and blacksmith of Eaglesham, made a statue of him, now at the Statue House, Eaglesham Museum. Anecdotes based on his repartee, some certainly apocryphal, fill Glasgow memoirs of the nineteenth century. It was his ability verbally to best figures of authority that was especially appreciated, although Cameron put his cheek down to drink. To give just one story, though it has many variants, during Queen Victoria's visit in 1849 Cameron was asked to guess the height of a triumphal arch at the foot of Jamaica Street; he replied 'The heicht o' hanged nonsense' (Ford, 363). 


@@@@@


doc= 94322


Durant, Henry William (1902-1982), opinion pollster and market researcher, was born at 42 Drummond Road, Bermondsey, London, on 23 October 1902, the first son and second of the five children of Henry William Durant (1870-1913), general warehouseman and later a foreman in a grain mill, and his wife, Adelaide, 'nee' Britt (1873-1940), an office cleaner. His father died of pneumonia in 1913, leaving his wife to provide for their four surviving children and three female cousins. He attended Keeton's Road elementary school, Bermondsey, from 1904 until 1914, when he left to take up a London county council scholarship at Christ's Hospital, Horsham. Although he lost his south London accent during his time at Christ's Hospital, he felt permanently marked out as a 'charity case' after receiving a secondhand uniform from the school matron on his arrival. 
In 1919 Durant left school to work as an insurance clerk, studying for the Chartered Insurance Institute examinations while he worked, being elected an associate in 1926 and a fellow in 1930. Although insurance offered a well-paid job with good prospects, he found the life of an insurance clerk unsatisfying. Seeking intellectual stimulation, he attended an evening class in philosophy at the Morley Memorial College for Working Men and Women, where he impressed the course teacher, Cyril Joad. Encouraged by Joad, he took a course in economics at Regent Street Polytechnic taught by Hugh Beales, and in 1929 was accepted onto the undergraduate programme at the London School of Economics (LSE), attending lectures in the evening while continuing to work. Family responsibilities no longer held him back as his sisters and cousins were by then financially independent, and his studies were supported by scholarships, so he decided to quit his job in insurance to study full-time. 
Durant threw himself into his academic studies with great success, taking a first-class degree in sociology in 1934, and receiving the L. T. Hobhouse memorial prize. The sociologist Morris Ginsberg persuaded him to register for the degree of PhD, which he combined with adult education teaching. He seemed set for a career in academic sociology, but found doctoral research stifling. He nevertheless completed his research and wrote his PhD thesis in under a year, and it was published as 'The Problem of Leisure' in 1938. The social and political interests that motivated his studies began to pull him away from academe. He studied the works of Marx, Engels, Trotsky, and Bukharin, wrote for the LSE student paper 'The Clare Market Review', and became involved in the British National Committee for Intellectual Co-operation, part of the League of Nations' Organization for Intellectual Co-operation. His political activities brought him into contact with the sociologist Ruth Adele Lazarus (1912-1990) ['see 'Glass, Ruth], whom he married on 12 August 1935. 
Durant's feeling that he should be the main breadwinner again led him to look for a well-paid job. Harry Field (1897-1946), an emissary from the pioneering American opinion pollster George H. Gallup, had contacted the LSE appointments bureau seeking a bright graduate who might be interested in setting up a British affiliate to Gallup's American Institute of Public Opinion. Of the six students recommended by the bureau, Field chose Durant. 
With Field's help Durant set up the British Institute of Public Opinion (BIPO). The new firm stuck closely to Gallup's original business model and methods. Durant offered to conduct postal surveys for newspapers and magazines such as 'Cavalcade'. Although 'Cavalcade' and his other clients paid handsomely for these surveys, they did not provide BIPO with a regular income. The firm's finances and future prospects remained precarious until Durant struck a deal with the 'News Chronicle'. Early in 1938 the newspaper's chairman, Lord Layton, intrigued by Gallup's polling methods, asked Durant to produce a private forecast of the outcome of the forthcoming West Fulham by-election. Durant predicted successfully that the Labour candidate Edith Summerskill would take West Fulham from the Conservatives. Impressed by the poll's accuracy and aware of their use to enliven news coverage in the American press, the 'News Chronicle' commissioned regular BIPO polls on a variety of topics, publishing the results in the paper. The relationship with the 'News Chronicle' publicized BIPO's work and helped Durant to find new clients including the head of the BBC's new listener research department, Robert Silvey (1905-1981). 
The Second World War offered Durant's business new opportunities for growth. The British government placed great importance on maintaining civilian morale and needed to find ways to measure it. Durant's first contribution in this area was to monitor German radio propaganda for the BBC. Periodic surveys revealed that a majority of civilians listened to foreign radio stations during the 'phoney war' period, many of whom tuned in to German stations. Lord Haw-Haw, Sinister Sam, and the other German radio announcers were at their most effective when reporting news embargoed by the British government. These findings prompted the BBC and the Ministry of Information to change news policy. BIPO also conducted opinion polls for the Ministry of Information to monitor civilian morale and to test public attitudes towards new policies. Durant began to realize Gallup's and Field's vision of the poll as a way to keep governments in touch with the governed. He had one other large wartime job: weighing housewives and employees in small- and medium-sized businesses for the Ministry of Food. These data formed part of the bodyweight survey and showed that rationing caused no loss of weight until 1947. 
Durant's marriage to Ruth Lazarus ended in divorce in 1941 after she left him for the sociologist David Glass. Durant took a room at Cyril Joad's house where he met his second wife, Margaret Dorothea ('b'. 1917), a laboratory technician and complaints manager, daughter of Franks Collens, meat control clerk; she was married to the medical librarian Harold Alfred Izant. After she was divorced she married Durant on 9 October 1945. They had three daughters. 
Although official work sustained Durant during the war, it was a temporary source of income. The Ministry of Information ceased to monitor morale in 1944. Government departments and the BBC conducted an increasing amount of survey work using in-house organizations. For Durant demobilization meant market research. Durant's patron George Gallup came to his rescue, pushing commercial work his way. Towards the end of 1944 the advertising agency Young and Rubicam opened a London office. At the time Gallup was the agency's research director and recommended that the company hire Durant to conduct market research in the UK. This contract and work for the 'News Chronicle' provided a solid basis for Durant's commercial operations. Durant targeted a few more clients, securing contracts with the advertising agents S. H. Benson, Ford Motor Company, British Petroleum, Philips electronics, and the British Travel Association. These six clients accounted for 70 per cent of the firm's work. The questions from smaller firms included in Durant's monthly omnibus survey accounted for the remaining 30 per cent. Durant had found a successful strategy that sustained Social Surveys, the firm's name from 1943. 
Market research secured the firm's future, but political polling, the historic core of the company's business, remained Durant's first love and the area in which he made his most significant contribution to British life. With the 'News Chronicle''s financial backing, Durant introduced political opinion polling to Britain. Politicians paid little heed to his polls until after the general election of 1945. This was Durant's first opportunity to predict the outcome of a general election since setting up BIPO in 1937 and he got it right. The Gallup poll, conducted between 24 and 27 June, predicted a Labour lead of 6 per cent. Labour topped the poll on 5 July with a lead of 9.5 per cent. The Gallup poll share of each party fell within the range of plus or minus 2 per cent. Durant consolidated his poll's reputation for accuracy in 1950 and 1951 with more accurate general election forecasts than his new rivals. The 'Daily Express' and 'Daily Mail' commissioned polls in the run-up to the 1950 general election in response to the success of the Gallup poll for the 'News Chronicle' in 1945. On the 'Chronicle''s demise in 1960 he immediately arranged a new deal with the 'Daily Telegraph'. 
When his commercial and academic rivals began to criticize his methods in the 1950s and early 1960s Durant engaged in ferocious debate. Durant had dismissed the qualitative research methods employed by Mass-Observation during the 1940s, labelling Tom Harrisson a high-class journalist. When Harry Henry, another industry pioneer, attacked Durant's use of quota sampling and untrained interviewers a decade later there were cross words at the Market Research Society, an industry body both men had helped to found in 1947. More hurtful still was the scorn of academic psephologists, as Durant retained his links with academe throughout his business career. Simplistic descriptions of his methods and unsophisticated interpretations of his poll results in the 'News Chronicle' and later the 'Daily Telegraph' did not impress the new breed of political scientists. 
Durant's reputation among statisticians remained high, while the market research industry also held him in regard. Not only did he introduce Gallup's polling techniques to the UK, but he also developed a business model copied by his rivals. His links with Gallup's other European affiliates and his personal commitment to internationalism, evident from his time as secretary to the British National Committee for Intellectual Co-operation, prompted him to play a leading role in the creation of the European Society for Marketing and Opinion Research; he was its third president (1952-4). As a lifelong socialist and supporter of the Labour Party Durant tried to be a benevolent employer. Initially the firm provided work for his first wife's sisters and mother, whom he helped to escape Nazi Germany. He also helped many young market researchers to develop their careers through both his own firm and his involvement with industry bodies. 
Durant sold Social Surveys Ltd to Mercury Securities in 1963, but continued to be involved with the firm until ill health forced him to retire from business in 1968. He died at the Royal Free Hospital, London, on 8 June 1982; his funeral was held on 19 June at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 94327


Geldray, Max (1916-2004), harmonica player, was born Max Leon van Gelder in Amsterdam on 12 February 1916, the first child of Leon van Gelder, commercial traveller, and his wife, Margarite, 'nee' Baillosterky. His father was a hard-working perfume salesman for a Spanish company, but political upheavals caused his earnings to fluctuate wildly. The young Geldray took piano lessons, but he became inspired when, at the age of sixteen, he was introduced to the chromatic harmonica, where the notes could be raised by the push of a button. He created a band of like-minded youngsters and an agent branded them 'Mac Geldray and his Mouth-Accordion Band', which the newly named Geldray changed to Max. In 1936 he and three musicians toured the UK as the Hollander Boys. He returned to the continent and played in a restaurant in Brussels, joined a dance band in The Hague, and secured a residency at the Ostend casino with its A-list clientele. In 1937 he joined Ray Ventura's band in Paris. He played with the guitarist Django Reinhardt, but with the outbreak of the Second World War, and being Jewish, he felt there would be greater security in England. In 1940 he joined the Princess Irene brigade, part of the Dutch army in exile. He often entertained troops, and played at Princess Elizabeth's sixteenth birthday concert at Windsor Castle. On 18 January 1943 he married Sarah Prentice, a 26-year-old Scottish variety artiste known as Zaza Peters, and daughter of Thomas Prentice. On active service Geldray was caught in a bomb blast during the Normandy landing, and although he survived without lasting injuries he suffered nightmares for many years. In 1945 he returned to Amsterdam and discovered that his parents and his sister, Xaviere, had been killed by the Nazis. With his life at a low ebb he returned to Ray Ventura's orchestra in Paris, and then on to London. 
In 1951 Geldray joined the cast of a new BBC radio series, 'Crazy People', which became 'The Goon Show' a year later ['see 'Goons]. Spike Milligan, Peter Sellers, and Harry Secombe had served during the war and loved to mock authority. Geldray was a comic butt as well as a musical performer. He was regularly and affectionately insulted, being called Conk because of his large nose. In one episode Milligan said that Geldray could only play the harmonica if he was torpedoed, naturally a cue for sound effects; and in 'Drums along the Mersey' (1957) Geldray was sold to the highest bidder. The musical interludes came from Geldray and the Ray Ellington Quartet, and Geldray's 'Crazy Rhythm' was the play-out music. In 1957 Geldray released an EP record of jazz standards, 'Goon with the Wind', which was produced by George Martin. The Goons were loyal to Geldray and in 1958, when a cost-cutting BBC proposed to drop him, Sellers said he would not participate if they did, and Geldray remained. The attempts to put the Goons on television were never satisfactory as their appeal relied on comic imagination, but Geldray appeared in 'The Idiot Weekly Price 2d', 'A Show Called Fred', and 'Son of Fred', all dating from the mid-1950s. 
In 1961 Geldray entertained passengers on the 'Queen Elizabeth'. He was impressed by Los Angeles and, following the collapse of both his marriage and a subsequent relationship, he decided to emigrate. He worked with Sarah Vaughan and Billy Daniels and often played casinos in Reno, Nevada. In 1962 he met and married a divorcee, Susan Deforio, and settled with her and her children, Judy, Holly, and Timmy. Together they had a son, Philip. Geldray sold clothes in a department store and then worked as the regional sales supervisor for the 'Christian Science Monitor'. He returned briefly to the UK in 1972 for 'The Last Goon Show of All', which was commissioned to celebrate the BBC's fiftieth anniversary. For all the razzmatazz, the show was hampered by a weak script and overshadowed by 'Monty Python's Flying Circus', which had been so influenced by the Goons. Princess Margaret came backstage at 'The Last Goon Show of All' and asked to be introduced to Geldray, as she admired his talent. 
In 1973 Geldray moved to Palm Springs to look after his wife's father, and played jazz in a local bar. Timmy died after a long illness and following this Geldray's wife required treatment at the Betty Ford Centre. Geldray, a very compassionate man, talked to patients and started volunteer work, establishing a patient group, the Blow Hards. He recorded an album, 'Father G and Dr B', with his son-in-law Roger Blomquist on alto saxophone, for the New Horizons Crisis Centre in Utah. He enjoyed being a grandparent to Philip's children. He died in Palm Springs, California, on 2 October 2004, and was survived by his wife, Susan, his son, Philip, and his stepdaughters, Judy and Holly. He was a very good jazz musician and it is unfortunate that he recorded so little. As it stands, he will be remembered mainly for the gentle ribbing of the Goons. 


@@@@@


doc= 94328


Gibbs, Sir Roland Christopher (1921-2004), army officer, was born at Gratwicke Hall, Barrow Gurney, near Bristol, on 22 June 1921, the younger son and youngest of the four children of Guy Melvil Gibbs (1889-1959), a farmer and stockbroker who had served as a major in the North Somerset yeomanry in the First World War, and his wife, Margaret Olivia (1890-1964), eldest daughter of Henry Percy St John. On his father's side he was related to the barons Aldenham and Hunsdon of Hunsdon, and on his mother's to the viscounts Bolingbroke and St John. 
Gibbs went to Eton College in 1934, where he excelled at games, and from where he passed high into the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in 1939. In 1940 he was commissioned into the King's Royal Rifle Corps (60th rifles), moving to Egypt in 1941 with its 2nd (motor) battalion, with which he was to spend the remainder of the Second World War. He first saw action south of Benghazi in early 1942, but it was in June of that year, when commanding a Bren gun carrier platoon, that he first demonstrated clearly that he was a gifted fighting soldier. Although his platoon was attacked by armoured cars, and under heavy shellfire, he showed the greatest coolness in positioning an artillery forward observation officer and recovering a carrier that had been hit, for which he was awarded an immediate MC. Wounded twice in north Africa, he took part in the battles of Alam Halfa and El Alamein. He was promoted major in March 1943, commanding C company until the end of the war, fighting up the east coast of Italy until returning to England in January 1944 to prepare for the landings in Normandy. The battalion landed on D + 1, 7 June, becoming involved immediately in the battle for Caen. In July Gibbs was wounded again, and in August he narrowly avoided being taken prisoner while carrying out a reconnaissance. In February 1945 he was awarded the DSO for inspiring leadership during the battle of the Rhineland. After ending the war in Hamburg he moved with his battalion to Denmark, to arrange the disarming and removal of the German forces occupying that country. During the war Roly Gibbs, as he was invariably known, through his outstanding valour and leadership in continual combat over more than three years, had won universal confidence, because he always seemed to know exactly what to do and then did it. Quietly self-assured, relaxed, and with great personal charm, he had an understated style of command. One of his platoon commanders could not recall ever having received a direct order from him. 'If I were in your shoes', Gibbs would say, 'I would go about it like this' (private information). 
In 1945 Gibbs began his long association with the Parachute regiment, first as brigade major of the 5th Parachute brigade in Malaya, then volunteering to join the 7th battalion of the Parachute regiment in Palestine, and in 1948 returning to the newly re-formed Sandhurst as an instructor and the Parachute regiment representative. In 1951 he attended the Staff College, Camberley, and in 1957 the Joint Services Staff College, Latimer. From here he had his first and only experience of being a Whitehall staff officer, as a member of an inter-service planning team in the newly formed Ministry of Defence. On 27 October 1955 he married Davina Jean Merry ('b'. 1934), artist, elder daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Eoin James Henry Merry and his wife, Jean Trefusis, 'nee' Crichton, granddaughter of John Henry Crichton, fourth Earl Erne of Crom Castle. They had two sons, Joe ('b'. 1957) and James ('b'. 1958), and a daughter, Melissa ('b'. 1966). They lived at Patney Rectory, near Devizes, which they bought during his service. 
Command of the 3rd battalion of the Parachute regiment (1960-62) with the rank of lieutenant-colonel was followed by a year with the British army staff in Washington and promotion to brigadier to command 16th Parachute brigade in 1963. Almost immediately Gibbs and his brigade were posted to Cyprus, to reinforce troops policing the so-called 'green line' separating Greeks and Turks. His skilful handling of his brigade, allied with his ability and readiness to negotiate with both sides, impressed his divisional commander, Major-General Michael Carver, as much as had his command of his rifle company in the war. From Cyprus he moved to Aden, as chief of staff to the commander-in-chief, Admiral Sir Michael Le Fanu. There he was deeply involved with the planning and execution of the complications of withdrawal from Aden and simultaneous short-term strengthening of the British presence in the Persian Gulf. He was appointed CBE in 1968 in recognition of his personal abilities and administrative skill. This period proved extremely valuable to him because, after spending 1969 at the Imperial Defence College, he returned to the Gulf as the last commander, British land forces, with the rank of major-general. It was his task to run down the British forces in the Gulf, to organize support for the sultan of Muscat and Oman, who was coming under increasing pressure in the Dhofar from Yemeni rebels, and to reorganize the Trucial Oman scouts into separate armed forces for each of the United Arab Emirates. His quiet but effective handling of affairs in the Gulf was much admired by all who witnessed or benefited from it, heightening his profile in the army and confirming him as a potential chief of the general staff. In 1972 this was marked by his accelerated promotion to lieutenant-general and command of the 1st British corps in Germany, where his apparently effortless qualities of leadership, sense of humour, and understanding and reading of his fellow men quickly earned him the respect and affection of those who had not come across him, or his style, before. He was knighted KCB the same year. 
That Gibbs was destined for the top was confirmed by his promotion to general, and his appointment as commander-in-chief, UK land forces, in 1974. Nevertheless it was with reluctance that in 1976 he accepted his appointment as chief of the general staff. He was at heart a commander, happiest when leading or with soldiers rather than languishing behind a desk. Although he was never really at home in Whitehall, the then secretary of state for defence, Fred Mulley, said of him that, if the country had to go to war, Gibbs would be the man he would want to have beside him. However, even his critics had to concede that, while he appeared to wear his responsibilities lightly, when pressed for a decision, his judgements were usually right. 
Simultaneously an ADC (general) to the queen from 1976 to 1979, Gibbs was promoted field marshal in July 1979 and retired to Wiltshire. From 1979 to 1991 he was a regional director of Lloyds Bank and a JP, from 1984 to 1990 chairman of the National Rifle Association, and from 1985 to 1990 the 155th constable of the Tower of London. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Wiltshire from 1989 to 1996; during the earlier years his elder brother, Colonel Sir Martin Gibbs (1920-1992), was lord lieutenant of Gloucestershire. He also served as colonel commandant of his old battalion, now renamed the 2nd battalion the Royal Green Jackets (1971-8), and of the Parachute regiment (1972-7). An accomplished horseman and keen shot, he was a talented amateur artist. He died at Patney Rectory on 31 October 2004, of cancer of the prostate and of the sigmoid colon. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94329


Gili, Jonathan Francesc (1943-2004), documentary film-maker, publisher, and collector, was born on 19 April 1943 at the Radcliffe Maternity Home, Oxford, the eldest of three children of Joan Lluis Gili (1907-1998), bookseller, publisher, and Catalan scholar, and his wife, Elizabeth Helen, 'nee' McPherson (1913-2011), who combined philosophy (in which she had a first-class degree) with cookery, on which she wrote two books. Long before their son went to school it was clear that he possessed unusual qualities. He taught himself to read at the age of three; and at four his favourite reading was Scholes's 'Oxford Companion to Music'. He went to the Crescent School, then the Dragon School, in Oxford, and thence with a scholarship to Bryanston School in 1956. In 1961 he won an exhibition to New College, Oxford, to read Greats, but his studies were soon eclipsed by his interest in the cinema. He became 'Isis' magazine's film editor, often watching five or six films a day. He graduated with a third-class degree in 1965. While still at Oxford he met Phillida Bovill Stone, daughter of the engraver (Alan) Reynolds Stone, at one of Lord David Cecil's Sunday morning parties. He was eighteen, she sixteen, and for Gili it was love at first sight. They eventually married on 27 July 1968 and had three children, Oliver, Daisy, and Orlando. 
After leaving Oxford Gili worked briefly in his father's bookshop, but was determined to enter film-making. Edward Roberts gave him his first break as his assistant to edit Eddie Mirzoeff's BBC documentary 'Jerusalem the Golden' (1968). His own first film as an editor was Barney Platts Mills's 'Bronco Bullfrog' (1969). Through Mirzoeff, who first realized Gili's promise as a director, he edited other films for the BBC. 
Gili's debut as a director came in 1971 with 'Incident', a short film starring Stephen Frears as a man progressively less concerned by a series of traffic accidents outside his window. But his forte was as a documentary film-maker. In 1978 London Weekend Television asked him to direct two films, 'Wedding Day', contrasting an Anglican with a Greek Orthodox wedding, and 'Soldiers', three cameos about the Salvation Army. This was a stroke of luck, for self-promotion was not one of Gili's talents. The following year Mirzoeff asked him to direct 'Public School', a film about Westminster School, which reached an audience of nearly twelve million. This was the turning point in Gili's career, and was the first of the many films he directed, wrote, and produced for the BBC, right up to his death. They were always films, not programmes (he never owned a television set). They were always about people, their hopes, quirks, interests, and loves, portrayed with a good humour never directed at the subject. This was as marked in 'To the World's End' (1985), an exploration of London's multicultural society through the 31 bus route (with a score by Carl Davis), as in 'The Other Half' (1984), about Angus Wilson and his partner, Tony Garrett. 
Between 1985 and 1990 the BBC's '40 Minutes' series included several Gili films, among them 'Mixed Blessings' (1988, about two babies accidentally swapped at birth), and three with Lucinda Lambton, 'Animal Crackers' (1985), 'A Cabinet of Curiosities' (1987), and 'The Great North Road' (1988) -- a most happy partnership, skipping hilariously through various English eccentrics and eccentricities including those of the presenter herself. Presenters usually got in the way, he felt, unless their characters were part of the film, as in the first episode of 'Fire in the Blood' (1992), in which the writer Ian Gibson explored his relationship with Spain, his adoptive country. Gili's subsequent films for Laurence Rees's 'Timewatch' series included 'Typhoid Mary' (1994), 'Gold Rush Memories' (1996), 'Tales from the Oklahoma Land Runs' and 'Tales of the Eiffel Tower' (both 1999), 'The Empire State Story' and 'Debutantes' (both 2001), and, best of all, 'The Oklahoma Outlaw' (1998). 
Gili's films were beautifully shot. An outstanding photographer himself, he used natural light as far as possible, and was prepared to wait days if necessary for the right weather conditions. As well as the lighting, the angles of the shots would convey the emotion behind the story he was filming. He also used archive footage and stills to punctuate his films. Sound was as important. For him the 'voice' in a film gave the overall tone, and could make or ruin it. Actors produced outstanding performances for Gili, and relished working for him. Music mattered too, as in his use of the slow movement of Ravel's piano concerto over lyrical shots of rusting farm machinery abandoned in the meadows in 'Year of the French' (1982). Twice Gili was able to commission music, from Stephen Oliver 'Cinderella, or, The Vindication of Sloth' (his last work) in 'The Seven Deadly Sins' (1993), and from Jonathan Dove the music for 'Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother' (2002). 
Gili's interviewing technique was unique. He took great risks, never giving his subjects a script, nor a hint of the questions he was going to ask. During the interview itself he usually kept silent, merely prompting, never interrupting, however long the silences might be. Sometimes they were very long indeed. 'I like to see people thinking', he once said (personal knowledge). Kind and humorous, he avoided filming people he disliked. He needed to feel affection for his subjects, even if he was exacting and ruthless in the interests of the film. Editors, cameramen, sound recordists, assistant producers, researchers, and personal assistants were driven mad by the demands that he made, but beguiled by his acute intelligence and irresistible stories; he charmed them into submission, and always gave proper praise when the work was well done. 
Parallel with Gili's career as a film-maker was his career as a publisher. He started 'Warren Editions' with his future wife in 1967. He inherited a passionate interest in book design and typography from his father, as Phillida did from hers. The first 'Warren Editions' book was a collection of his father-in-law's work. Other publications included work by Ian Beck, John Betjeman (the text written for Mirzoeff's 'Metro-land', with Glynn Boyd Harte's lithographs), Kenneth Clark, Harold Jones, John Nash, and Gwen Raverat. Gili's own photographs won prizes for the calendars he designed for the David Game Group. He also collected books, the poetry, prose and illustrated books of his own and earlier times filling every available surface in his house in Ifield Road, Kensington. Books, however, had to contend with other things. He collected sardine tins, 7 inch singles (11,000 of them, some odd: 'Who could resist records shaped like Elton John's hat or Barry Manilow's nose?', he wrote in 'Harpers and Queen'), printed paper napkins, hotel sewing kits, toy plastic mobile phones, snowstorms, and a hundred other things that touched his aesthetic sense, whether or not they appealed to anyone else. Sometimes they did: his friend Glynn Boyd Harte made a set of lithographs of the sardine tins, the sole text 'Contents: Sardines'. 
In 1984 Gili was diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukaemia, and given at most three years to live. In the event he lived for twenty years more, cramming his life with activity between periods of treatment in Hammersmith Hospital, his thick black hair diminishing more with each treatment. He had just finished three of the most difficult films of his career when he was admitted to hospital for the last time. 'Historians of Genius' (2004) had no dialogue other than the original text of three great writers, Carlyle, Gibbon, and Macaulay, with a brief introduction by Simon Schama. Gili had (unexpectedly) been appointed OBE in 2003, and (adding to a raft of honours for particular films) early in 2004 the Grierson documentary awards committee created the trustees' award especially to mark his outstanding contribution to documentary film-making. He died of leukaemia at Hammersmith Hospital on 1 October 2004, and was buried a week later in the churchyard at Litton Cheney, Dorset, where he had been married. He was survived by Phillida and their three children. A memorial meeting was held at the Royal Geographical Society in London on 6 March 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 94331


Alice, Princess, duchess of Gloucester (1901-2004), was born Lady Alice Cristabel Montagu-Douglas-Scott on 25 December 1901 at Montagu House, London, the fifth child and third daughter of John Charles-Montagu-Douglas Scott, earl of Dalkeith, and from 1914 seventh duke of Buccleuch and ninth duke of Queensberry (1864-1935), and his wife, Margaret Alice (1872-1954), daughter of George Cecil Orlando Bridgeman, fourth earl of Bradford. She was brought up in circumstances of stupefying grandeur, progressing from one to another of the Buccleuchs' great family seats. Unusually for a girl of her class and generation she went to a boarding school, and not a particularly fashionable one, St James's at West Malvern. She acquired no academic aspiration, but equally found the life of a debutante in London unsatisfactorily sterile -- she was happiest when fishing and hunting on the Dumfriesshire moors. 
In 1924 Alice paid her first visit to Africa, a continent for which she conceived a lasting affection. She spent long periods with her paternal uncle, Lord Francis Scott, who farmed in Kenya, and became a self-taught but highly competent watercolourist. She was an intrepid traveller -- once, disguised as a boy, smuggling herself into one of the forbidden areas of Afghanistan. She returned unscathed, but there was much indignation in official circles when news of her exploit leaked out. She finally settled back in Britain in 1935. Her father's failing health was the immediate cause but, when she was fourteen, she had had a narrow escape from drowning and had promised God that, if he saved her, she would dedicate her life to some 'superior and useful purpose'. She decided that the time had now come to honour her pledge. 
It was that sense of duty which was in part responsible for Alice's engagement to Prince Henry, first duke of Gloucester (1900-1974), third son of George V. It was intended that the marriage should be celebrated in Westminster Abbey on 6 November 1935, but her father died only two and a half weeks before, so a private ceremony in the chapel of Buckingham Palace was substituted. The king died shortly afterwards and the abdication of King Edward VIII at the end of 1936 meant that the duke of Gloucester became regent apparent, a role that effectively put an end to his military career. The Gloucesters, at the request of the prime minister, Neville Chamberlain, were the first members of the royal family to call on the duke and duchess of Windsor in their exile; the hostile response that the visit evoked among press and public convinced the government that it was too early for the Windsors to return to Britain. The Gloucesters' elder son, Prince William ['see under 'Henry, Prince, first duke of Gloucester], was born in 1941 and their second son, Prince Richard, in 1944. 
After her marriage Princess Alice plunged wholeheartedly into the official duties that, even in the 1930s, were imposed on members of the royal family. Some represented her private enthusiasms -- her presidency of the Royal Academy of Music reflected her serious interest in the subject; others, such as Invalid Kitchens, in time to become Meals on Wheels, were ideas new to her, but were none the less conscientiously supported for that reason. 
The Second World War greatly extended Princess Alice's responsibilities: she was already commandant of the St John's Ambulance Association; now she became also president of the hospital supply board of the Red Cross. In 1940 she was appointed air chief commandant of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force. She travelled widely around the country, including a visit to Coventry two days after the devastating blitz. She rarely accompanied her husband on such expeditions but one occasion when they were together was in Belfast in April 1941. The visit, planned months in advance, chanced to take place the day after Belfast had its first and most devastating air raid. Their welcome was tumultuous and their presence did much to raise morale in the stricken city. 
Early in 1945 the duke of Gloucester was appointed governor-general in Australia. It was a testing task, since many Australians would have been quick to resent anything that seemed like condescension or excessive interference. The presence of the duchess with her two young sons, her friendliness, unfeigned interest in all she saw, and obvious enthusiasm for the country, immeasurably eased her husband's three years in the post. 
Once they were back in England, Alice's official duties grew no less, but her life began increasingly to centre on Barnwell Manor, the Northamptonshire house that the Gloucesters had bought in 1938. In 1965 she and the duke had a bad motor accident. She was seriously injured; her husband, who seemed at first to have escaped unscathed, in fact suffered the first of what was to be a series of progressively more damaging strokes. Within a few years he had been reduced to frustrating inactivity. He died in 1974; two years earlier their elder son, Prince William, had been killed while piloting his plane in the Goodyear air race. In spite of these tragedies the duchess remained active for another twenty years. In 1995 the family left Barnwell, and the rest of her life was spent in the apartments in Kensington Palace which she shared with her younger son, Prince Richard, duke of Gloucester, and his family. It was there that, at the age of 102, the oldest member of the royal family in recorded history, she died of heart failure and old age on 29 October 2004; she was buried at Frogmore, Windsor, on 5 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 94333


Grant, Michael (1914-2004), numismatist and ancient historian, was born on 21 November 1914 at 18 Victoria Grove, Kensington, London, the only son of Lieutenant-Colonel Maurice Harold Grant (1872-1962), army officer, journalist, and art historian, and his wife, Muriel Ethel Fanny, 'nee' Jorgensen (1877/8-1981). His father had served in the South African War and written part of its official history, and then covered the Balkan wars for the 'Daily Mail'. During the First World War he commanded a battalion in France. In later life he took up art history, and published a series of dictionaries of British artists, including one of British medallists; he served for many years on the council of the British Numismatic Society. Grant's mother was of Danish origin. After an unhappy stay at a prep school, The Grange, Surrey, Grant went to Harrow School, where he captained his house at cricket and spent three years in the sixth form, taught by the headmaster, Cyril Norwood, and by E. V. C. Plumptre. He went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, to read classics in 1933, where after wasting his first year he settled down, and won a number of awards including the Craven studentship. As a research student he conducted the research for a thesis later published as 'From Imperium to Auctoritas: a Historical Study of Aes Coinage in the Roman Empire, 49 BC'-AD 14 (1946), whicnnovative in looking at coinages from outside Rome. He became a fellow of Trinity in 1938. He remained interested in numismatics throughout his life, and built up a collection of some 700 Roman coins, which later passed to the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. 
Soon after the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 Grant went into military intelligence and served as a duty officer at the War Office. After a short spell in Paris he was transferred in 1940 to the British Council in Turkey, where he remained for the rest of the war. In 1944 he married Anne-Sophie Beskow, from Norrkoping in Sweden; they had two sons, Patrick and Antony. In 1945 Grant returned to London as deputy director of the European division of the British Council, in which capacity he travelled in Austria, Hungary, and Germany. 
In 1948 Grant returned to Cambridge for a year, but soon left to be professor of humanity (Latin) at Edinburgh University, a post which he held until 1959, with an interval of two years (1956-8) spent as the first vice-chancellor of the University of Khartoum. During this period he produced four books on coins, and also not only a valuable study, 'Aspects of the Reign of Tiberius' (1950), but the first two of his general surveys, 'Ancient History' (1952) and 'Roman Literature' (1954), both greatly superior to all the works of this kind available at that time. From 1959 until 1966 he was vice-chancellor of Queen's University, Belfast. There he had to face grave problems arising from the political situation. Some time after his days at Belfast he expressed the view that Britain should withdraw its troops from Northern Ireland. During this period he brought out four books, including 'Myths of the Greeks and Romans' (1962), then the best such treatment of the subject for the general public. 
In 1966 Grant bought from Paolo Rossi, then the Italian minister of education, a delightful sixteenth-century house at Gattaiola, near Lucca in Tuscany. Lucca was the place where in 56 BC Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus had held a famous conference; it has Etruscan remains, and an amphitheatre of the late first century AD. There Grant continued to produce valuable work, notably 'The Gladiators' (1967), 'The Ancient Mediterranean' (1969), 'Roman Myths' (1971), and 'Who's Who in Classical Mythology' (with John Hazel, 1973), which won the Prima Latina. He wrote numerous biographies, including of Cleopatra, Herod the Great, and Nero, as well as of Jesus Christ, St Peter, St Paul, and Constantine the Great. He published excellent translations of the 'Annals' of Tacitus, and of several of Cicero's speeches and letters. His autobiography, 'My First Eighty Years' (1994), was admirably written. The long succession of his works ended with 'Sick Caesars' in 2000. He served as president of the Virgil Society (1963-6) and the Classical Association (1978-9). He was appointed OBE in 1946, and advanced to CBE in 1958. 
Grant was a man of rare personal charm, and to visit him at his Italian home was a delightful experience, much as it made his many friends regret his absence from England, to which he returned only shortly before his death. No scholar of his time did more to arouse and to satisfy the interest of the general reading public in the ancient world. He died on 4 October 2004 at St George's Hospital, Tooting, London, of respiratory failure and pneumonia, and was survived by his wife, Anne-Sophie, and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 94335


Hailey, Arthur Frederick (1920-2004), novelist, was born on 5 April 1920 at 107 Albert Road, Luton, Bedfordshire, the only child of George Wellington Hailey (1883-1973), a factory storekeeper, and his wife, Elsie May, 'nee' Wright (1887-1974), who had started work as a maid while she was a child. At the age of ten he began writing poems, plays, short stories, and 'incredibly pompous' letters to the 'Luton News' ('The Independent', 23 June 1990). He was educated at Surrey Street School, Luton, where he excelled at English but failed at mathematics. His poor results in this subject prevented him from gaining a scholarship to grammar school and he was obliged to start work in 1934. He did a variety of jobs until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, when he enlisted in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. He undertook pilot training in the United States and was posted to Canada as a flying instructor. He also saw active service in the Middle East and flew transport aircraft from Poona, India, in June 1945. In the previous year Hailey had married Joan Fishwick, with whom, over the next five years, he had three sons. Having returned to England in 1945, he was employed as editor of 'Air Clues', an aircraft training magazine for the Air Ministry. He was demobilized in 1947 with the rank of flight lieutenant and an air efficiency award, but quickly became disillusioned with the austerity of life in post-war Britain under Attlee's Labour government. 
In 1947 the Haileys emigrated to Canada, where he held a commission as a flight lieutenant in the Royal Canadian Air Force Reserve. Just before Christmas 1949 Joan left him, though the couple were to remain on good terms. That year, and following a stint as an estate agent, he had become editor of a trade magazine, 'Bus and Truck Transport'. In July 1951, having been divorced from his first wife, he married London-born Sheila Dunlop ('b'. 1927), who worked as a stenographer in the magazine's office. She was the daughter of James Watt Dunlop, a tailor's cutter. They had two daughters and a son. In 1952 Hailey became a Canadian citizen, though he kept his British passport, and a year later he took a job as a sales promotion manager for a trailer manufacturer, Canadian Trailmobile, which he held until 1956. 
In his spare time Hailey wrote television plays and pitched them, without success, to the networks. His luck changed in 1955 when, during a flight between Toronto and Vancouver, he wondered what might happen if the pilot was taken ill with food poisoning and a wartime pilot like himself was required to land the plane. Over nine days Hailey wrote a one-hour television play, 'Flight into Danger', which was immediately bought by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation for $600. It was shown in April 1956 and was subsequently picked up by NBC in the United States and later by the BBC. Now a full-time writer, his success continued with the television drama 'Time Lock' (1957), about a child trapped in a bank vault, which was filmed in England and featured an early performance by Sean Connery. A year later he co-wrote 'Zero Hour', the feature film version of 'Flight into Danger', and also co-wrote its novelization, which was published in the USA as 'Runway Zero-Eight'. It later became the reference point for the popular spoof disaster film 'Airplane!' (1980). Hailey's first solo novel, 'The Final Diagnosis', followed in 1959 and was based on his television play about a hospital pathologist who accidentally causes the death of a child. 
Hailey's first 'blockbuster' novel, 'Hotel' (1965), took him more than five years of research and writing, during which time he read numerous books about the hotel trade and interviewed many workers in the hospitality industry, though he never made notes when he interviewed people for his novels. Meticulous research became a characteristic of his most successful novels. In the opinion of the author Anthony Burgess, 'When book-buyers buy books, they look for sex, violence and hard information. They get these from Arthur Hailey, whose characters discuss problems of hotel management while committing adultery before being beaten up' (A. Burgess, 'You've Had Your Time', 1990, 25). 'Hotel' became a film in 1966 and was later made into a television series for which Hailey received $100,000 per episode. The book's success allowed Hailey and his family to move to the Napa Valley in California. For his next, and perhaps most successful, novel he returned to the world of air travel with 'Airport' (1968), the suspenseful story of a plane with a bomb and an airport closed by snow. In 1970 it became a very popular film starring Burt Lancaster and Dean Martin, and it was the progenitor of a series of disaster films during the 1970s. 
In 1969 the Haileys moved to Lyford Cay on New Providence Island in the Bahamas, initially for two years to avoid high taxes. The island became their permanent home. During the next decade he published three more novels: 'Wheels' (1971) -- a depiction of the Detroit motor industry -- made him the first writer to receive a $1 million advance, and was followed by 'The Moneychangers' (1975) and 'Overlord' (1979). He then announced his retirement as an author following his diagnosis with severe heart problems and in 1983 underwent a quadruple heart bypass. Following his operation he grew fearful of moving or taking part in any activity, should it prompt his death, until his wife told him she would rather he lived five years normally than twenty years 'tiptoeing on eggshells' ('Daily Telegraph', 27 Nov 2004). In the following decade he returned to writing and published three novels, 'Strong Medicine' (1984), 'The Evening News' (1990), and 'Detective' (1997). He maintained his earlier working methods and close attention to detail. His research for 'The Evening News', for example, included a trip to the Peruvian jungle on the trail of rebel guerrillas. 
Hailey's success and popularity were extraordinary. His eleven novels, sales of which numbered an estimated 160 million copies, were published in thirty-nine languages in forty countries. By contrast critics were typically dismissive of what they considered his laborious, repetitious prose and weak characterization. Hailey himself acknowledged his debt to his research methods -- and his fostering of a much imitated genre of 'factional' literature -- claiming that 'I don't think I really invented anybody. I have drawn on real life' (Associated Press, 16 Dec 2001). In her memoir 'I Married a Best Seller' (1978) Sheila Hailey described her husband as 'temperamental, ruthless, sensitive, impatient, emotional, unreasonable, demanding, self-centred, and excessively hard-working... also precise, pig-headed, fastidious, fanatically clean, maniacally tidy' (Hailey, 5). He died on 24 November 2004 in the Bahamas. He was survived by his wife, Sheila, their three children, and the three sons of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 94339


Hanson, James Edward, Baron Hanson (1922-2004), industrialist and financier, was born on 20 January 1922 at Wood Bank, Scar Lane, Golcar, Huddersfield, the elder son of Robert Hanson (1892-1973), businessman, and his wife, Louisa Ann, daughter of Albert Edward Rodgers. His father was a hard, domineering man who controlled several companies engaged in road haulage, coach operations, and coach travel, and whose early nineteenth-century ancestors had owned the pack-horses that carried cloth from weavers' cottages on the Pennine moors to sell at Huddersfield. Robert Hanson was for some years a master of foxhounds, and owned several successful show-jumping horses. As a boy James Hanson saw his father laboriously rebuild his business, which had been ruined by a warehouse fire. 
Hanson attended Elland grammar school in Leeds, but was too unwell to go to Uppingham as intended by his father, and had a brief, unhappy spell at an obscure boarding-school named Merlegh near Reading. On leaving there he began training as an accountant with the intention of entering the family business, but in 1939 he joined the 7th battalion, the duke of Wellington's regiment, and served during the Second World War as a staff officer. He became a director of Hanson Transport in 1946, and was enriched when it was nationalized in 1948. He and his younger brother, Bill, then went to Canada to escape the austerities of post-war Britain. They started a haulage business at Hamilton, Ontario, and with their father's backing founded Jet Petroleum, which was sold after some years to the Conoco oil company. Hanson enjoyed the company of young actresses, and in December 1951 became engaged to the film star Audrey Hepburn, although they never married. After the denationalization of his family's haulage business, he resumed working for his father. 
The death in 1954 from cancer of his brother, Bill, an Olympic show-jumper, was a profound shock for Hanson. It resulted in him forming an inseparable friendship with Bill's best friend, Gordon White, and this in turn led to them becoming a formidable and enduring business combination. Initially they formed the Hanson and White Greeting Card Company, which imported humorous American greetings cards. This venture was a modest success, and with the proceeds of its sale they bought a truck and van distribution business, Oswald Tillotson Ltd. 
Hanson had been a sickly youth but developed into a dynamic and virile-looking man: 6 feet 4 inches tall, ramrod-backed, thin, wiry, handsome, and elegant. He was punctual, immaculately dressed, and had something of the martinet about him. On 17 January 1959 he married Geraldine Kaelin (1928-2004), a divorcee who had managed the New York office of his greetings-card company. She had formerly been known as Geraldine Fernanda Kline, and was the daughter of Ferdinand Fleischmann, business executive. They had two sons, Robert ('b'. 1960) and Brook ('b'. 1964), and Hanson also acquired a step-daughter. After his marriage Hanson gave up hunting, and in 1960 left the management of Hanson Transport, although he remained on its board, and was its chairman from 1965 to 1996. 
Hanson and White determined to buy asset-rich but under-performing companies with good cash-flows, run them more profitably, and sell off the assets lucratively. 'Asset-stripping' was the pejorative epithet applied to this sort of business strategy. In 1964 the two friends sold Oswald Tillotson to the Wiles Group, manufacturers of agricultural fertilizers and sacks. They then gained control of Wiles, reorganized the company, shed its surplus management, and sold its fertilizer business. Their next acquisition was a company that shifted muck and debris, Scottish Land Development. In 1968 they bought a brick-making business, Butterley. These and other interests were consolidated in 1969 in the Hanson Trust, of which Hanson became chairman. He and White continued to take control of companies manufacturing sacks, bricks, paints, and fertilizers, although their bid for the Costain construction company was defeated in 1972. As they amassed an increasingly ramified conglomerate, they held to one key principle that distinguished them from their rivals: while adding value to the lower-valued parts of their businesses, they always sold any subsidiary part with a higher value than the parent. 
The Hanson Trust survived the crisis that bankrupted many asset-strippers in the early 1970s, but White grew disgusted with the business environment in Britain, moved to New York in 1973, and left the Hanson Trust's board. However the two men remained in close and indeed daily collaboration, and White's emigration brought a decisive turn in the Hanson Trust's fortunes. White, who revelled in the ruthless, bullying world of American corporations, formed an American company, Hanson Industries, and began buying businesses involved in fertilizers, animal feeds, and garden tools. While White identified targets for takeovers, and made the deals, Hanson ran the businesses from his London base. Hanson, too, loved the American attitude to big business, and thrived on surmounting challenges. He was a decisive, demanding, and autocratic chairman, with a fierce temper when roused. Even in its heyday in the 1980s the Hanson Trust's headquarters staff never exceeded two dozen employees, and was run on spare lines. Hanson communicated with White and their subordinates by telephone and handwritten faxes, shredded their replies, and discouraged his offices from keeping extensive files that might conceivably later be subject to subpoena. Though cool in his working relationships, he possessed real charm and an exciting air of authority. 
As a trustee of the D'Oyly Carte opera company in the 1970s Hanson met and impressed Marcia Falkender, Harold Wilson's confidential secretary. It nevertheless seemed an odd use of prime ministerial patronage when Hanson received a knighthood in Wilson's resignation honours list of 1976, for he detested socialism, and was soon to become the archetype of the Thatcherite tycoon. Indeed the heyday of the Hanson Group was the rumbustious period of free-market economics and deregulation that characterized the Thatcher and Reagan eras. Between 1979 and 1986 the Hanson Trust was a corporate raider stalking through British and American stock markets, acquiring increasingly large businesses through the medium of contested takeovers. This strategy was masterminded by White, but fronted by Hanson. He exerted his personal attractions and blunt eloquence with powerful effect on City leaders, investment analysts, and financial journalists: with the guidance of Tim Bell he became adept at public relations in the 1980s. He presented himself as a champion of shareholders' interests, and was idolized for a time by private as well as institutional investors. 
Hanson received a life peerage on Margaret Thatcher's recommendation in 1983. (White received a peerage eight years later, in Thatcher's resignation honours.) His companies were major donors to the Conservative Party, and in 1986 the Hanson Trust bought a 15 per cent stake in Westland Helicopters in order to support the merger with Sikorsky-Fiat that Thatcher desired. Hanson was keen for the Hanson Trust to benefit from the Thatcher government's privatization programme. Among other initiatives he explored the possibility of the trust taking over the denationalized National Coal Board, the government holding in British Petroleum, the privatized Horserace Totalisator Board (1989), and the privatized electricity generating organization Powergen (1990). 
The Hanson Trust's British acquisitions included the Ever Ready batteries company Berec (1982), United Drapery Stores (1983), and the London Brick Company (1984). Its takeover in 1986 of the Imperial Tobacco group, including the Courage brewery business, cost almost $2 billion, and was bitterly contested. After his opponents had finally been vanquished Hanson went to the boardroom and personally took down the portraits of the Courage and Wills family directors. Neither he nor White had any respect for entrenched company cultures, and had no interest in the proposition that strong companies have strong internal cultures: they regarded established company cultures and structures as congeries of inefficient and pompous special interests. The landmark acquisition, in 1989, of Consolidated Goldfields cost $3.3 billion. The Hanson Trust's reputation for buying low, selling high, and operating with ruthless efficiency attracted both admirers and detractors. Many observers were impressed that on average almost one-third of the cost of a Hanson acquisition was recouped through disposal in the first six months. This could only have been achieved by careful scrutiny and reflection. The value of Hanson Trust shares rose by over 31,000 per cent between 1965 and 1991. 
From the outset in the 1960s Hanson and White eschewed high-risk or capital-intensive businesses involving advanced technologies or requiring long-term investment. They stripped the businesses down to essentials and sold off extraneous parts (often for as much as they had paid for the entirety). They jettisoned the senior executives, and promoted middle management into their jobs. Typically, in 1981, they reduced the head office staff at Ever Ready batteries from 550 to 75 and removed six of its nine layers of management. To most observers this ruthless cost-cutting seemed desirable and overdue. Hanson instilled financial discipline into the promoted managers, motivated them with equity incentives which allied their interests with those of shareholders, and prided himself on his trusting and effective delegation. But his claims that he gave his top executives liberty to run their own organizations were spurious: managers had to seek authority for spending decisions (at times anything over $500) from Hanson Trust headquarters. Hanson and White also discouraged -- indeed interdicted -- long-term planning involving fundamental research or major capital investment. They abolished, for example, the research department of their Duracell battery business, although it was a technical leader in its sector. The Hanson Trust's successes meant that its practices were endorsed for many years by investment analysts, with the result that City opinion exacerbated the continuing decline of capital investment by Britain's major industrial companies. 
In 1991 Hanson Trust (then Britain's sixth biggest company) received a fatal check. It began positioning itself to launch a takeover bid for Britain's largest company, ICI, a company Hanson privately scorned as fat and complacent. This move was intended to mark the apotheosis of his and White's buccaneering careers. They proposed to rename the enlarged group Imperial Hanson Industries, to sell many traditional Hanson operations, and to spend the proceeds on developing ICI's pharmaceutical division into a global giant. ICI and its advisers, the investment bank Goldman Sachs, mustered political resistance to the move, and publicized the arbitrary and even eccentric style of Hanson and White's management. ICI's counterblast deterred Hanson Trust from formulating a bid, and City analysts realized that the Hanson-White strategy was no longer purposive: the two men would need to make ever bigger acquisitions to maintain their impetus and profitability; and if such acquisitions were impossible, there was no point in maintaining the Hanson Trust as a conglomerate. Indeed City sentiment was turning against Hanson's style of wheeler-dealing. The rise during the 1990s of private equity houses and the globalized market for corporate control made it harder to find hidden value in companies. With the death of White in 1995 Hanson lost not only his most intimate friend but also his surest guide to companies with hidden value. New rules on corporate governance were an insurmountable obstacle to Hanson's business methods, which had entailed running a conglomerate -- worth $14 billion at its zenith -- as a private fiefdom. After some restive and unsatisfactory years, the conglomerate's four main constituent parts -- tobacco, energy, chemicals, and building materials -- were separated in 1996. Following this dismantling of the trust Hanson retired as chairman in 1997, although Hanson plc survived as a building products company derived from the original brick and aggregates business. Hanson and his elder son, Robert, subsequently set up as venture capitalists working through a company named Hanson Capital. 
Hanson was robustly pro-American, and after building a house in the Las Palmas district of Palm Springs in 1982 spent his winters in California, supposedly controlling his possessions from a pool-side telephone. He had a simple, forthright patriotism, and in 1982, before agreeing to invest in a film about the Special Air Service, 'Who Dares Wins', he required assurances that the script would not denigrate Britain's armed forces. In his last years he denounced British membership of the European Union, and contributed anti-European articles to the 'Daily Telegraph' and other newspapers. He died of prostate cancer on 1 November 2004, at Kimber Cottage, Winterbourne, Berkshire (his British home). He was survived by his sons and stepdaughter, his wife, Geraldine, having died in February 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 94345


Hopcraft, Arthur Edward (1932-2004), journalist and author, was born on 29 November 1932 at 60 High Street, Shoeburyness, Essex, the youngest of three children of Arthur Hopcraft, grocer, and his wife, Bertha, 'nee' Bates, both from Fritwell, Oxfordshire. When he was a small boy the family moved to the mining village of Blackfords, near Cannock, Staffordshire, where his father managed a bread and grocery store. With a brother and a sister, respectively seven years and a year and a half older, they formed a close, respectable lower middle-class family. They were 'Methodist, and prominently so' ('The Great Apple Raid', 5): his father was a lay preacher and Sunday school teacher. He grew up amid the poverty and grime of industrial Staffordshire, attending the local primary school with the sons of miners who told him 'yo talk posh' (ibid., 9). From the start football was a passion, the best way to make friends and find a way of belonging. His love of the game continued through his isolated adolescence as a scholarship boy at the rugby-playing King Edward VI Grammar School, Lichfield. 
From school Hopcraft went straight into the local paper, the 'Stafford Newsletter'. At sixteen he was writing match reports, first watching Stafford Rangers, a team he followed all his life, and then reporting the triumphs of the team he had dreamed of playing for as a child, Wolverhampton Wanderers, now managed by Stan Cullis. From the midlands he went to work in the north-east and then on the 'Barnsley Chronicle' with the young Michael Parkinson. 'He was the first reporter I encountered who wore a bow tie, which took courage in Barnsley in the 1950s', Parkinson remembered, adding how they both already considered themselves 'football writers rather than football reporters' (A. Hopcraft, 'The Football Man', 2006 edn, vii). Hopcraft went on to write for the 'Daily Mirror' and 'The Guardian' before going freelance in 1964, working for 'The Observer' with Hugh McIlvanney, with whom he produced books on the 1966 and 1970 world cups, as well as for the 'Sunday Times', 'The Sun', and other papers. 
In 1968 Hopcraft published the work that made him famous. 'The Football Man: People and Passions in Soccer' drew on material he had published in 'The Observer' and the 'Sunday Times Magazine', expanded and reworked. A book of biographical essays, it was mainly devoted to the players themselves, but with sections on managers, directors, referees, fans, and the press. Hopcraft's chief fascination was with the footballers themselves rather than the teams. Written with economy and a judicious empathy, 'The Football Man' explored the personalities behind the performances and fitted the footballers into their localities and social landscapes, evoking a sport still rooted in the class relations and attitudes of an earlier age now confronting a new world of affluence and media-driven glamour. The description of Stanley Matthews's 'sadly impassive face, with its high cheek bones, pale lips and hooded eyes... a worker's face, like a miner's, never really young, tight against a brutal world even in repose' ('The Football Man', 29), or of Derek Dooley growing up in Sheffield 'where the city meanders in a smoky, greasy straggle of workshops into Rotherham' and learning to play football on 'patches of grit and oily grass, hemmed in by the crouched streets' (ibid., 58) were typical of the style of the book -- evocative, deeply felt, and with a command of language that hinted at the creative writing career that was to come. 
Also in 1968 Hopcraft published another book, 'Born to Hunger', an indictment of third world poverty, and the result of travelling over 45,000 miles in South America, Africa, and Asia on behalf of the United Nations. It was 'largely a travel book' about the people he met ('Born to Hunger', 4), a compelling and painful account of 'the physical condition of being underdeveloped' (ibid.), which was far from 'the mild shortage of material comfort which the euphemism suggests' (ibid., 2). Now set on a career as a writer, in 1970 Hopcraft published a memoir of his early life, 'The Great Apple Raid and Other Encounters of a Tin Chapel Tiro', drawing on autobiographical pieces he had written for 'Nova' magazine. The book sharply catches the scholarship boy's sense of displacement, uneasy in both the pit village and the grammar school, grateful to his parents -- the book is dedicated to them -- but anxious to get away. 
Increasingly claustrophobic, uncomfortable in large crowds, and loathing the London Underground, Hopcraft went to live in rural Derbyshire in 1973. By then he had embarked on a new career as a scriptwriter, having taken up a chance offer to write drama for Granada Television. His first play, 'Cyril and the Sex Kittens', was quickly followed by several others, including 'The Mosedale Horseshoe' (1971), which drew on his fondness for hill walking, and 'The Reporters' (1972), in which a thrusting young reporter on the way up meets a jaundiced older man on the way down. 'The Nearly Man' followed a Labour MP's struggle for ministerial power, appeared to critical acclaim in 1974, and was extended to seven episodes the next year. From being a football writer Hopcraft had become a household name in television drama. 'Is there any television playwright who can catch Alan Bennett', wondered the critic Stanley Reynolds in 1978. 'Perhaps Arthur Hopcraft might do it. The two have the same still voice, they deal with everyday sort of subjects... they are unmistakeably English' ('The Times', 12 Jan 1978). 
Just as his life as a dramatist began to flourish Hopcraft's career took a new turn as a screenwriter with a commission from Granada to adapt 'Hard Times' (1977). Later adaptations included 'Bleak House' (1985), 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1989), and 'Rebecca' (1997). His greatest triumph, however, was John le Carre's 'Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy' in 1979. Alec Guinness took the part of George Smiley after reading Hopcraft's screenplay, which simplified the complex plot, delighting not only the actors and the audience but the author himself. In 1982 he published his own novel, 'Mid-Century Men', which opens with a writer recovering from a hangover in his London home and follows a trail of political corruption in the north-east. 'The Times' called it 'a rich and satisfying first novel' ('The Times', 25 March 1982), but he did not pursue novel writing. 
As time passed Hopcraft increasingly divided his time between his 'semi' in Twickenham and a house near Grasse in Provence, where he could enjoy his love of good food and wine and watch English football thanks to a satellite link. He lived, as Julie Welch observed, 'like the surviving half of an elderly couple'; 'I've tried both sexes', he said, 'and ended up wishing they would always just go away' ('The Independent', 26 Nov 2004). He was a man who inspired affection and admiration in equal measure and he had a circle of close friends to whom he was deeply attached. Nevertheless his sense of being outside and alone persisted, pushing him in mid-life from the gregariousness of the sports desk into the solitary life of the creative writer. He died, after a heart attack following a kidney infection, at Kingston Hospital, Kingston upon Thames, on 22 November 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 94347


Hughes, Emlyn Walter (1947-2004), footballer and television sports personality, was born on 28 August 1947 in Risedale Maternity Hospital, Barrow in Furness. He was the second of three brothers, the son of (William) Frederick Hughes, known as Ginger, and his wife, Anne Elizabeth, 'nee' Clarke. His father was a self-employed tarmacadam contractor and a semi-professional rugby league player for Barrow, Workington, Wales, and the British Rugby League Lions. Emlyn came from prime sporting stock -- his aunt played hockey for England. Ginger Hughes, a larger-than-life character and occasional unlicensed bookmaker at nearby Cartmel races, was from Llanelli in south Wales. He was an enormous influence on his middle son, whetting his early appetite for racing and sport with tall tales about the uncompromising northern rugby league star Gus Risman. 
Hughes's older brother, David, eventually followed his father by playing rugby league, for Barrow and Blackpool Borough. Emlyn also delighted Fred Hughes by playing rugby league for Barrow Boys while at Risedale secondary modern school. But after turning to football Emlyn was rejected at fifteen by Barrow FC for being too small, and he briefly became an apprentice garage mechanic. It was Ginger Hughes who convinced his friend the Blackpool FC boss Ron Suart to give his middle son a football trial. The first division club eventually agreed to the signing, but only on condition that the scrawny boy be 'bulked up' at home on protein-rich foods. 
After eighteen months in the Blackpool A and B teams Hughes was offered a professional contract by Suart on $8 per week. Soon after, the club's reserve left back Johnny Prentis broke his leg and the predominantly right-footed Hughes was promoted into a position that became his own. In the spring of 1966 he made his Blackpool first team debut, at Blackburn Rovers, typically enraging the Ewood Park regulars with his rough treatment of the veteran local hero Bryan Douglas. The raw-edged youngster had arrived as a professional footballer. In the 1966-7 season Hughes played twenty-eight times for a Blackpool side facing relegation. 
Hughes was now being tracked by a number of top managers, including Liverpool's Bill Shankly. Shankly was especially impressed by the physical presence, sheer competitiveness, and cold-eyed nerve of the young defender. He offered $25,000 for Hughes immediately after his Blackpool debut. It was rejected. Under Shankly's gaze Hughes later accidentally broke the leg of the Chelsea star Peter Osgood during a lively FA cup tie at Stamford Bridge. A hostile crowd and intimidation from the Chelsea players and manager, Tommy Docherty, left Hughes undisturbed. The Liverpool boss had seen enough: in March 1967 he agreed to pay $65,000 for the full-back. That night Shankly scolded a traffic police officer who foolishly stopped his car ferrying the new signing back to Merseyside. What was he doing, holding up a 'future captain of England'? Hughes was nineteen years old. 
Shankly was slowly rebuilding the great Liverpool team of the early 1960s, with Hughes replacing the graceful Willie Stevenson on the left side of midfield. His leadership, boyish enthusiasm, and immense power made Hughes an instant favourite of the crowd at Anfield and eventually a great Liverpool player. Early on he revealed his rugby league roots at his new club by hauling down Newcastle United's Albert Bennett in a bear hug as the flying winger threatened to get the better of him. For this, and for his arm-flapping, head-down, all-action running style, the amused Liverpool crowd affectionately christened Hughes Crazy Horse, a label that stuck throughout his career and was the title of his autobiography, published in 1980. 
With this young tyro as its heartbeat Liverpool won the league title in 1973 (the first of four at Liverpool for Hughes) and also the UEFA cup in the same year, the club's first European trophy. Hughes's England career, which had begun against the Netherlands in 1969, eventually produced sixty-two caps (fifty-nine while at Liverpool) though he was only a squad member at the 1970 world cup finals and was later mysteriously ignored for eighteen months by the England manager Don Revie. His England service -- mainly at left back and with twenty-three caps as captain -- coincided with a poor period for the national team. But it was the regular experience in Europe for both Liverpool and England that led Shankly and later Bob Paisley to use Hughes more in a centre back role for his club. Success in European football required mobile, ball playing centre halves rather than the lumbering giants that were still dominant in the English game. 
In 1973 the ambitious Hughes urged Shankly to replace the Liverpool captain, Tommy Smith, with someone younger: Shanks took note. So in 1974 it was Hughes, not Smith, who lifted the FA cup for Liverpool after a Wembley rout of Newcastle United. Smith never forgave Hughes for this act of personal treachery and often during matches the Liverpool hard man happily urged opponents to 'get stuck into' his centre back partner. The incorrigible Hughes could also irk others in the Liverpool dressing room -- and even later some devoted fans -- with his outspoken opinions and especially his pro-monarchist and publicly expressed right-of-centre political leanings. His later celebrity persona and support of Margaret Thatcher also went down poorly in many parts of Liverpool in the 1980s. On 1 July 1972 Hughes married Barbara, daughter of Leslie Dixon; they had two children, Emlyn and Emma. 
After Bill Shankly retired in 1974 Liverpool, now under Bob Paisley, tightened their grip on the league, winning further titles in 1976, 1977, and 1979. Under Hughes's captaincy Liverpool also won the UEFA cup in 1976 and consecutive European cups, in 1977 and 1978. These achievements, and a footballer of the year award in 1977, were the crowning moments of Hughes's football career. A serious knee injury and the emergence of Alan Hansen as a rival for his place in the team finally signalled the beginning of the end at Anfield for Hughes, after 665 appearances and forty-eight goals. But he did manage to convince Paisley to select him for one last major match for Liverpool: at left back in a 1979 FA cup semi-final against Manchester United. It was a typical piece of Hughes self-confidence, but an uncharacteristically sentimental misjudgement by Paisley. The defender was blamed for United's winning goal in a replay. It was his last appearance for the Merseyside club. 
In August 1979 Hughes moved to Wolverhampton Wanderers for $90,000 and in his first season he steered his new club to a league cup triumph -- ironically a trophy he had failed to win at Liverpool. Appointed an OBE in 1980, Hughes left Wolves in July 1981 to work as player-manager at second-division Rotherham United, hauling the modest south Yorkshire club close to promotion to the top flight in his first season in charge. But by the spring of 1983 Hughes had been sacked and become disillusioned with football management. He moved on to play briefly for Hull City and for his old Liverpool ally John Toshack at Swansea City, before retiring in November 1983. 
After leaving football Hughes found a comfortable niche as a television sports personality, notably as a team captain on BBC's popular quiz show 'A Question of Sport'. In 1987 he invited his adored equestrian 'friend' Princess Anne to be one of his panel members: 17 million viewers tuned in, agog, to see him praise his royal guest: 'Well done mate, you can come back again' ('The Times', 10 Nov 2004). Hughes's TV work eventually dried up, but he kept up his personal and after-dinner appearances, local radio work, his involvement in horseracing, and a range of business interests. Typically, even after undergoing surgery for a brain tumour in 2003, the former England captain could be found bravely and provocatively addressing audiences of England football fans at public events organized by the FA. Hughes began treatment for cancer in February 2004, and died from a brain tumour at his home, 13A Whirlow Park Road, Whirlow, Sheffield, on 9 November that year. Crazy Horse was survived by his wife, Barbara, and their two children. In April 2008 a statue of Hughes was unveiled in Barrow in Furness; it stands on Abbey Road, outside a new office complex, Emlyn Hughes House. 


@@@@@


doc= 94353


Kear, Janet (1933-2004), ornithologist and conservationist, was born on 13 January 1933 at 26 Mount Park Road, Ealing, Middlesex, the younger daughter of Harold Kear, trade association clerk (later chartered secretary), and his wife, Constance May, 'nee' Betteridge. She had an older sister, Barbara, and brother, David (who became director of the New Zealand Geological Survey and director-general of the New Zealand government's Department of Scientific and Industrial Research), and, following the death of her mother in 1934, two younger half-siblings, Martin and Mary. She was educated at Walthamstow Hall in Sevenoaks, Kent, and in her teenage years attended Casper Junior College in Wyoming, USA. After returning to Britain to complete her education, she graduated from King's College, London, in 1956 and then moved to Girton College, Cambridge, where she studied the feeding behaviour of finches under the supervision of Robert A. Hinde, gaining her PhD in 1959. Shortly afterwards she took up a post as a research scientist at the Wildfowl Trust, later renamed the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust (WWT), the organization founded by Peter Scott. She worked closely with Scott in the project to protect the endangered Hawaiian goose (the nene), which included reintroducing captive-bred birds to the wild. Thereafter she held a number of posts at the WWT, with the organization providing the base for her research and conservation work for the rest of her long and illustrious career. 
During the 1960s and early 1970s Kear focused on scientific research, publishing papers on a range of subjects including bird behaviour and development, and the regulation of avian breeding cycles. She pioneered work on the potential for conflict between goose grazing and agriculture at a time when the birds were increasingly moving onto arable land. She also developed a keen interest in assessing the health of captive waterbirds, with a view to improving husbandry techniques, and was the WWT's avicultural co-ordinator from 1974 to 1977. On 2 January 1964 she married Geoffrey Vernon Townsend Matthews ('b'. 1923), the WWT's director of research and conservation, and son of Geoffrey Tom Matthews, veterinary surgeon. There were no children of the marriage, which was dissolved in 1978. 
In 1977 Kear was appointed curator of the WWT centre at Martin Mere in Lancashire, where she combined, to great effect, her knowledge and enthusiasm for wildlife with the conservation opportunities that running Martin Mere provided. Under her leadership it became one of the United Kingdom's leading wetland reserves and a major visitor attraction. Shortly after arriving at Martin Mere she met her second husband, John Victor Negus Turner ('b'. 1939), an electrical engineer and a keen amateur ornithologist who was undertaking volunteer work at the centre; they married in New Zealand in 1993. Their legendary hospitality was received by people from all walks of life; local dignitaries, businessmen, students, and fellow ornithologists were all welcomed and inspired to contribute in different ways to wildfowl and wetland conservation. 
Despite the substantial administrative workload associated with running Martin Mere, and subsequently with her role as the WWT's director of centres from 1991 until her retirement in 1993, Janet Kear succeeded in maintaining her research interests and keen awareness of ornithological issues. She considered that her main contribution outside the WWT was for the British Ornithologists' Union, acting as council member from 1980 to 1988, vice-president from 1989 to 1991, and president from 1991 to 1995. For many years she edited its journal 'Ibis' (1980-88), then the WWT's journal 'Wildfowl' (1989-2001), and was on the editorial board of the Zoological Society of London's 'International Zoo Yearbook'. Highly generous with her time, she acted for a number of other organizations, serving on the Council for the Study of Animal Behaviour, the Avicultural Society, the British Trust for Ornithology, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust, and the Nature Conservancy Council. Her substantial international reputation led to her chairing the Endangered Waterfowl Group of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (1976-87) and acting on the committee of successive international ornithological congresses (1982-98). She was vice-president at the meeting in Durban in 1998. Her work was recognized with a number of awards. She was appointed a fellow of Liverpool University (1978-92), an honorary fellow of Manchester Metropolitan University (1983), and an honorary fellow of the American Ornithologists' Union (1998), and received an honorary doctorate (with the title of professor) of Liverpool John Moores University (1990). She was also awarded the British Ornithologists' Union's medal (1998), and was appointed OBE in 1993 for services to conservation. 
A prolific author, Janet Kear wrote over ninety published papers and a number of books including 'The Mute Swan' (1989), 'Man and Wildfowl' (1990), and 'Ducks of the World' (1991). She co-edited (with N. Duplaix-Hall) the proceedings of the first international Flamingo symposium, entitled 'Flamingos' (1975), and co-authored (with A. J. Berger) 'The Hawaiian Goose: an Experiment in Conservation' (1980) and (with E. Hosking) 'Eric Hosking's Wildfowl' (1985). She also wrote a major part of 'The Swans' (1972), edited by Peter Scott and the Wildfowl Trust. Following her retirement from the WWT, she and her husband moved from Martin Mere to their country cottage at King's Nympton, Devon, where she continued to devote time and energy to her committee work (including serving as president of the Devon Bird Watching and Preservation Society, and as council member for the WWT), as well as to public speaking (notably the Bernard Tucker memorial lecture to the Oxford Ornithological and Ashmolean Natural History societies in 2002) and to writing. She had just completed her seminal work, 'Ducks, Geese and Swans' (2005), when she was diagnosed with a brain tumour in September 2004. With contributions from seventy-three waterbird specialists from across the world, the book was a fitting and enduring memorial to a lifetime devoted to the study and conservation of wildfowl. A biography of St Werburgh (a seventh-century Mercian princess who had an affinity with geese), which she was writing with her sister Mary, remained unfinished at the time of her death. She died at South Molton Community Hospital, Devon, on 24 November 2004, of glioblastoma, and was survived by her husband, John. 
Janet Kear was remarkable for her pioneering studies of birds (particularly wildfowl), for her contributions to waterbird conservation, and for inspiring a generation of researchers and aviculturalists. She particularly appreciated the importance of encouraging the next generation, and was tireless in helping those aspiring to careers in animal husbandry, research, and conservation. Many leading ornithologists and conservationists attributed their choice of career, or its subsequent development, to her enthusiasm for the subject and efforts that she made on their behalf. 


@@@@@


doc= 94359


Lennox, Lord Nicholas Charles Gordon (1931-2004), diplomatist, was born on 31 January 1931 at 12 Norfolk Crescent, London, the younger son of Frederick Charles Gordon Lennox, ninth duke of Richmond and fourth duke of Gordon (1904-1989), and his wife, Elizabeth Grace, 'nee' Hudson (died 1992), youngest daughter of Thomas William Hudson, vicar of Wendover, Buckinghamshire. He spent a happy childhood at Goodwood House, particularly under the influence of his mother, whom he described as the funniest woman he knew. In June 1940 he was sent with his brother to Canada and later to the United States. They became boy scouts in Montreal and learned to sing the 'Marseillaise', a skill that was no doubt useful to him in later life. Later they went to an excellent day school in Princeton, New Jersey, where they learnt to play baseball. They returned to Britain on a battleship in 1943 with some thirty other British boys. 
At Eton College and Oxford (entered through an exhibition to Worcester College) Gordon Lennox gave himself a wide education which went well beyond the requirements of examinations. His social success and air of easygoing achievement concealed plenty of hard work and clear thinking. Between his time at these two institutions he carried out his national service as an officer in the King's Royal Rifle Corps. Given his informal attitude to matters of dress and every kind of technical equipment, he was not a natural soldier; but he liked the army and the army liked him, as was shown later by his appointment as honorary colonel of the 4th battalion Royal Green Jackets. He graduated from Oxford with a second-class degree in modern history in 1954. 
Gordon Lennox entered the foreign service in 1954. His first overseas posting, from 1957 to 1961, was as private secretary to the ambassador in Washington, where he married (on 14 January 1958) Mary Williamson ('b'. 1934), daughter of Brigadier Hudleston Noel Hedworth Williamson, army officer; they had three daughters, Sarah ('b'. 1960), Henrietta ('b'. 1962), and Lucy ('b'. 1965), and a son, Anthony ('b'. 1969). From 1961 to 1963 he served as second then first secretary at the British embassy in Santiago. After spells as private secretary to the permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office (1963-6) and head of chancery in Madrid (1966-71) he was seconded to the Cabinet Office from 1971 to 1973. He was then head of the news department at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (1973-4), head of the North American department (1974-5), counsellor and head of chancery in Paris (1975-9), and assistant under-secretary at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, in charge of cultural and information matters (1979-84). 
Apart from his spell in Chile, Gordon Lennox's postings were all close to the centre of policy making, whether in Paris, Washington, Madrid, or the Foreign Office itself. Nevertheless he did not achieve any of the half-dozen or so positions at the very top of the service. Whether this was because he was the son of a duke or because he never pushed himself forward or encouraged others to sing his praises it is hard to say. Because his approach to diplomatic problems was permeated by a gentle sense of humour, it was possible at first to dismiss him as somewhat lightweight. This was not an impression that lasted long among those who experienced his work at close hand. For example he was an outstandingly successful head of chancery in Madrid and then Paris. The task of directing ambassadors without appearing to do so and keeping a widely disparate staff under control was far from easy. He was greatly helped by his wife, Mary. Later he was unexpectedly successful as head of the news department -- unexpectedly because no one could accuse him of excessive appetite or admiration for the modern media. Perhaps because he was not temperamentally bewitched or subservient to them, the press offered him their trust, which was the indispensable component of the job. His shrewdness was revealed in another episode when he was under-secretary for cultural and information matters. He drew the attention of Peter Blaker, the minister of state, to the dangers presented by an apparently innocuous international project entitled the 'New world information order'. If that project had flourished the results for the freedom of the press from government control could have been formidable. By alerting ministers before it was too late Gordon Lennox helped to muster the necessary opposition to frustrate it. 
Gordon Lennox spent the last five years of his career, from 1984 to 1989, as ambassador in Madrid. This was a happy and successful appointment. The steady strengthening of the friendship between Britain and the new Spanish democratic monarchy was reinforced by state visits in both directions. State visits vary a good deal in importance but between Britain and Spain at this stage they had real political substance. Gordon Lennox and his wife moved in this world of court and ceremony with ease and assurance. But always in the background was the painful dispute over Gibraltar, which if not skilfully handled by both sides could at any time have burst into the foreground and spoiled the whole relationship. No one could accuse Gordon Lennox of 'going native' or in any way failing to uphold the British case. But with his advice British ministers handled the matter with tact and care. The question of sovereignty could not be dodged but could be discussed amicably at intervals under the so-called Brussels process, without calling into question all the other matters on which Britain and Spain needed to work together. He was knighted KCMG in 1986 and KCVO in 1989 (having been appointed LVO in 1957 and CMG in 1978), but continued to be known as Lord Nicholas Gordon Lennox, the inherited title taking precedence. 
After his retirement Gordon Lennox took up several financial appointments and also became a director of Sothebys and a governor of the BBC. He developed his skill as a watercolourist and until his final illness thoroughly enjoyed life at South Nore, Snow Hill, West Wittering, on the sea below Chichester, surrounded by his wife, children, and a great circle of friends. This was a house of much friendship and laughter. He died there on 11 October 2004 of bronchopneumonia and prostate cancer and was survived by his wife, Mary, and their four children. A service of thanksgiving was held at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 19 January 2005, and another, attended by an extraordinary gathering of Spanish notables, at the protestant church in Madrid. 


@@@@@


doc= 94360


Lloyd, Maude Doris (1908-2004), ballet dancer and critic, was born in Cape Town, Cape Colony, on 16 August 1908, the only daughter of William Lloyd (1875-1960), builder, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Bird ('c'.1880- 'c'.1961); she had an older brother, Arthur (1901-1922). Her early ballet teacher, the celebrated Helen Webb, recognized a special talent and sent her at about nineteen to England on a scholarship to work with Marie Rambert. Lloyd repaid this kindness by visits to teach at Webb's school, but her career was spent in England. Her beauty and elegance were immediately apparent, and she developed a touching serenity. The expressiveness and intelligence she equally displayed became clear in 1931 when another young recruit, Antony Tudor, used her in creating his first ballet, 'Cross-Garter'd' (based on characters from 'Twelfth Night'); she played Olivia. Thereafter for eight years she was Tudor's muse, helping his rise to international fame. 
The most notable of many creations in which Lloyd and Tudor danced together were 'Jardin aux lilas' (1936), the supreme example of psychological ballet-making, showing the distress of a woman entering an arranged marriage, and the bleakly tragic 'Dark Elegies' (1937) to music from Mahler's 'Kindertotenlieder', where all the members of the cast mourn their children lost in some natural disaster. Lloyd and Tudor's many other collaborations included the comical 'Gala Performance' (1938), in which her role was the immensely grand Italian ballerina, opera ballet at Covent Garden, and several of the earliest dances on BBC television. 
Much in demand by other ballet-makers too, Lloyd was especially proud that Britain's other great choreographer Frederick Ashton used her in creating several ballets, notably his 'Valentine's Eve' (1935), to music from Ravel's 'Valses nobles et sentimentales', and chose her to succeed Alicia Markova in 'Facade', 'Foyer de danse', and 'Les masques': a highly varied selection, supplemented by Ninette de Valois's 'Bar aux Folies-Bergere' (1934). She had a strong technique -- in the 'Facade' polka, for instance, she performed the double 'tours en l'air', later generally omitted; but she was always more interested in the feeling within a dance movement. A good half-dozen aspiring young creators were glad of her gifts, and she appeared likewise in classic works by Marius Petipa, Lev Ivanov, Michel Fokine, and Vaslav Nijinsky. 
When the Second World War broke out in 1939 Tudor was in New York and, having to remain there with American Ballet Theatre, asked Lloyd to help run the company he had lately founded, London Ballet. Her most important action there was commissioning 'La fete etrange' (1940) from Andree Howard, based on Alain-Fournier's iconic novel 'Le grand Meaulnes', herself playing the Chateleine. This was to be Lloyd's last role; she now devoted herself to war work with refugees and to running a family. But in barely a decade she had shaped a handful of the most vivid and enduring characters in ballet's usually ephemeral repertoire. 
In the 1930s Lloyd had made time to teach Rambert's class of part-time amateur dancers. Among these she met 
It was Richard Buckle, editor of the magazine 'Ballet', who in 1951, after commissioning individual articles from both Gosling and Lloyd, suggested that they should collaborate to write about dance, thinking their experience and interests ideally complementary. They agreed only after Lloyd had overcome some scruples about reviewing former colleagues; and they adopted the pseudonym Alexander Bland, cheekily borrowed from Beatrix Potter's stories. It was under this pseudonym that they acted as ballet critic for 'The Observer' from 1955 to 1982. Nobody (or no other two) wrote on ballet more perceptively or with more balance; Gosling it was who put their joint ideas into words that defined and illuminated every topic, always lively and often witty -- as for instance a long review of 'Cinderella' entirely in rhyming couplets. Their 'Observer' reviews, singularly well-informed and inspired by true love of the art form, did much to make a wide audience aware of ballet's potential, its achievements and shortcomings too. 
There were six books signed Alexander Bland about dance, covering history, male dancing, Margot Fonteyn, and Rudolf Nureyev. Bland had been the first British critic to appreciate Nureyev's exceptional gifts, and when the latter first came to Britain Fonteyn, who was presenting him at a charity gala, asked Lloyd (a long-time friend) and Gosling to look after him. Thus began a relationship in which they became virtual substitutes for his far-away parents. He even abandoned his own house at Richmond, Surrey, to live in a flat within the Goslings' house in Kensington. Nigel Gosling's thoughts and comments became an important ingredient in Nureyev's planning of new ballets, while Maude Lloyd's calm home-making gave him the peace he wanted. After Gosling's death on 21 May 1982 (at St Thomas's Hospital, Lambeth, of prostate cancer) Nureyev took Lloyd with him whenever possible as a companion and carer on his frequent journeys, and did all he could to ensure that she still did some writing. 
In her last years, especially after Nureyev died in 1993, Maude Lloyd gradually became incapacitated by loss of vision, hearing, and mobility, but her long involvement in dance, combined with her kindness and generosity, ensured that she kept an unusually large circle of friends who loved her deeply and cared for her. She herself said often that she looked forward to her own decease, but she reached ninety-six years of age before that came, on 27 November 2004. She was survived by her son, Nicholas. Both Lloyd and her husband were cremated at Mortlake crematorium. One concern she had kept to the end was the resettlement of dancers after their often necessarily early retirement, and Dancers' Career Development marked this after her death by setting up a Maude Lloyd and Rudolf Nureyev bursary to fund the retraining of a former professional dancer each year. 


@@@@@


doc= 94367


Murray, Dame (Alice) Rosemary (1913-2004), chemist and university administrator, was born on 28 July 1913 at South Leigh Cottage, South Leigh, Warblington, Hampshire, the eldest of six children (three daughters and three sons) of Lieutenant (later Vice-Admiral) Arthur John Layard Murray (1886-1959), naval officer, and his wife, Ellen Maxwell, 'nee' Spooner (died 1976), daughter of the celebrated Oxford figure William Archibald Spooner. Her father served in HMS 'Agamemnon' in the English Channel and Dardanelles during the First World War, and then in the Dvina River flotilla during the north Russian campaign immediately after (in which he was wounded, and for which he received the DSO and was appointed OBE). After a series of increasingly senior postings he was senior naval officer, Red Sea, in the early part of the Second World War, until invalided in 1943. 
Both of Rosemary Murray's parents held relatively progressive views on women's education and career opportunities. She was educated at Downe House, Newbury, and at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, graduating with a second-class degree in chemistry in 1936; she stayed on to take her DPhil in 1938. She was immediately appointed as a lecturer in chemistry at Royal Holloway College, London; she taught there until 1941, then (after a brief assignment as experimental officer in the Admiralty Signals Establishment) at Sheffield University until 1942. After this she spent four years in the Women's Royal Naval Service, travelling a good deal by air to visit Wrens on overseas postings. She ended her service as a chief officer, directing demobilization at Chatham barracks. 
In 1946 Murray became a lecturer in chemistry at Girton College, Cambridge; she became a fellow in 1949 and tutor in 1951, and was a university demonstrator in chemistry from 1947 to 1952. Until 1948 Cambridge women students did not have full degree status, and even after this was granted male students outnumbered female by some ten to one. Murray became secretary of the Third Foundation for Women, an association aiming to create a third Cambridge college for women (after Girton and Newnham). In 1954 she was appointed first tutor-in-charge of New Hall, then based in Silver Street, accepting the first sixteen undergraduates that year. Student numbers were initially limited by the accommodation available, but in 1962 the Darwin family gave their home, The Orchard, on Huntingdon Road, and building work (to designs by Chamberlin, Powell, and Bon) was completed in 1965, with accommodation for up to 300 undergraduates. Murray became the first president of New Hall in 1964, remaining in post until 1981, and seeing New Hall gain full collegiate status in 1972. In 1980 she wrote a short booklet, 'New Hall, 1954-1972: the Making of a College'. 
Murray's talent for administration was soon recognized in the wider university, and, having served on numerous university committees, in 1975 she became Cambridge University's first female vice-chancellor, with typical practical flair devising her own ceremonial robes, and remaining in place for the then usual two-year term until 1977. She took over at an inauspicious time, with the university wracked by student unrest, and against a background of inflation, pay restraint, cutbacks in higher education, and industrial unrest. Nevertheless she achieved much, introducing student representation on university committees, founding the Cambridge Society, and inaugurating the clinical medical school, the new music school, and West Road concert hall. She was appointed DBE on retirement as vice-chancellor in 1977. 
Brought up to value public service, Murray served as a magistrate in Cambridge for thirty years, from 1953 to 1983, working primarily in the juvenile court. She became the first female deputy lieutenant of Cambridgeshire in 1982. She was a governor and chairman of Keswick Hall College of Education, Norwich, from 1953 to 1983, a member of council of the Girls' Public Day School Trust from 1969 to 1993, and president of the National Association of Adult Education from 1977 to 1980. Her committee skills were put to use by government in various capacities, including as a member of the Committee on Higher Education in Northern Ireland chaired by Sir John Lockwood (1963-5), which led to the creation of the New University of Ulster, and a member of the Armed Forces Pay Review Body (1971-81). She was a director of Midland Bank Ltd (1978-84), and an independent director of 'The Observer' (1981-93). She received honorary fellowships of four Oxford and Cambridge colleges, and honorary degrees from eight universities. 
Murray was multi-talented, and as president of New Hall was famed for her carpentry, plumbing, and other practical skills, which were frequently called upon. She enjoyed bookbinding and gardening (she was honoured by the naming of a new rose at the Chelsea flower show in 2004), and in retirement in Marston village, Oxford, helped out with reading practice at a local school (where she insisted on being called plain Rosemary). Her natural authority was tempered by fairness and an irrepressible cheerfulness. It was said that she 'had the enviable quality of actually liking people' ('The Times', 12 Oct 2004). She never married, but remained close to her siblings and their children. She died on 7 October 2004 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, of cerebrovascular disease. 


@@@@@


doc= 94368


Henry, Jabez (1775-1835), colonial judge and writer on conflict of laws, was born in London on 3 February 1775, the only son of Thomas Henry of Dublin. A pupil at Mr Simpson's school, London, he went to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, as a scholar, matriculating in 1803 and graduating BA in 1806, when he was admitted at the Middle Temple. He was called to the bar in 1809. 
Henry's first judicial appointment in 1813 took him to the West Indies. For three years he served as president of the court of the united colonies of Demerara and Essequibo, recently acquired from the Dutch. His observations of the local economy, with its valuable plantations, slave society, and frequent outbursts of civil disorder, shaped the remainder of his professional life and interests. In 1817 he published 'An Essay on the Roman Law of Manumission of Slaves, and its Application to the Colonies'. This was followed in 1821 by his 'Report on the Criminal Law at Demerara and in the Ceded Dutch Colonies', with an 'Appendix on the nature of the office of fiscal'. In the latter work he severely criticized the archaic nature of the criminal process which, he complained, allowed prisoners on remand before trial, mostly slaves, to be locked up almost indefinitely; the practice had already been abolished in the Netherlands. 
In 1817 Henry was transferred to the Adriatic to become chief judge at Corfu and in the Ionian Islands, where he encountered the Venetian legal system. While he was returning home via Rome in 1819 his advice was taken regarding the city's judicial system. In September 1820 he was back in Italy as leader of the team given the delicate task of interviewing witnesses who might rebut charges of misconduct that had been brought by George IV against his estranged wife, Queen Caroline. 
The only reported decision of Henry as a judge was given in May 1814, a version of which was published in 1820 by John Buck in his 'Cases in Bankruptcy'. In 'Odwin v. Forbes', Henry, after a masterly study of Anglo-Dutch cross-border insolvency practice, held that a local creditor was not at liberty in Demerara to sue a debtor who had obtained a discharge from an English bankruptcy in respect of a debt provable in those proceedings. 
Permanently back in London with chambers at 3 Pump Court, and described in the 'Law List' as 'conveyancer for the Dutch colonies', Henry proceeded to specialize in the increasingly important subject of private international law. Fluent in Dutch and Italian, and with good French, he visited Amsterdam and Paris collecting material for his next book, acquiring a copy of Johannes van der Linden's manual of Dutch law, first published in 1806, and works by other respected continental jurists. The result was the appearance in 1823 of what is conveniently known as 'Henry's Foreign Law'. In this pioneering work aimed at common lawyers Henry discussed the chaotic, confusing, and almost incomprehensible nature of various civil law systems relating to the conflict of laws. The work also contains an extended version of the judgment in 'Odwin v. Forbes' together with the texts of a neglected group of eight opinions given by counsel in London between 1711 and 1717 concerning the prospects of Dutch insolvency proceedings being recognized and enforced in England. 'Foreign Law' was well received, especially in the United States. 
Following 'Foreign Law', probably in 1825, Henry published a pamphlet of fourteen pages, 'Outline of a Plan of an International Bankruptcy Code for the Different Commercial States of Europe'. Such a convention was needed, Henry argued, to fight fraud, reduce delays, and curtail expense, but above all to achieve justice in a complex and increasingly important sphere of commercial activity. In 1828 Henry mentioned his idea to the distinguished New York lawyer Henry Wheaton, who dismissed it as quite impracticable. 
Meanwhile, encouraged by Lord Bathurst, the colonial secretary, Henry had embarked on an ambitious translation of van der Linden, which was published in 1828 as 'Institutes of the Laws of Holland'. The work was primarily intended for the expanding market of English lawyers, civil servants, and colonial administrators employed in the former Dutch possessions where Roman-Dutch law was still applicable. Besides Demerara, they included such major acquisitions as Ceylon and the Cape of Good Hope. The book is especially valuable for its lengthy chapter 'On the formation of a select law library'. Henry's own original library had been lost in a shipwreck on his Ionian travels. 
In 1824 Henry sailed again for the Caribbean where, as part of a small team, he conducted an official inquiry into the administration of justice in the West Indies and South American colonies. The commission's huge and detailed reports were presented to parliament in July 1825, March 1826, and December 1826; a summary was published in 1827. Between 1822 and 1831 Henry remained in close touch with Sir Robert Wilmot-Horton, colonial under-secretary until 1828, providing him in November 1827 with an opinion on the Spanish law of manumission. 
Henry, according to an obituary in the 'Morning Chronicle', had an extensive circle of friends and was respected as an upright, honourable man, with a kind and humane disposition. On 15 May 1823 he attended a fund-raising event at the Crown and Anchor tavern for Greek independence; at the end of July 1828, through the introduction of his friend J. T. Bowring, he dined with Jeremy Bentham. Henry's last publication was a pamphlet, 'Manifesto of a Neutral', which appeared in February 1835, a few days before he suffered a serious stroke. He died at his home, 11 Great Ormond Street, London, on 1 September 1835, leaving a widow and several sons and daughters. His eldest daughter, Elizabeth Anne, married the botanist Arthur Henfrey. 
Henry's concept of an international insolvency law ultimately became a reality in 2002 with the implementation of a European bankruptcy convention: he can justly be regarded as its spiritual father. 


@@@@@


doc= 94369


Mitchell, Sagar Jones (1866-1952), film-maker, was born at 15 Smithies Street, Blackburn, Lancashire, on 28 October 1866, the son of John Mitchell, an outdoor labourer, and his wife, Jane Eliza, 'nee' Brown. He was educated at Sherwood's Academy, Duke's Brow, Blackburn, during which time his parents owned the Alliance Temperance Hotel on Northgate. In 1887 he founded a photographic business with his father and by 1894 Sagar and John Mitchell, importers and manufacturers of optical and photographic apparatus, had moved from 17 to 40 Northgate. On 14 August 1894 in Ulverston he married his first wife, Mary Bragg (1868/9-1894), the daughter of Harry Bragg, a railway inspector, but was widowed a few months after the wedding. He was married again, at St Paul's Church, Blackburn, on 13 October 1904, to Ann Eliza Mercer, a widow with one son. 
In 1897 Mitchell went into partnership with 
Mitchell and Kenyon established a regional film company operating in the north of England. Sagar Mitchell later recalled that their first film-showing took place above their premises at 40 Northgate in Blackburn and was reported on 27 November 1897. In September 1899 they reached national prominence when they released three fiction films under their trade name of Norden. By the early 1900s they were one of the largest companies in the United Kingdom producing a mixture of fiction and non-fiction. Their surviving film reconstructions of events from the South African War and the Boxer uprising in China include 'A Sneaky Boer' (1901) and 'Attack on a China Mission' (1900), filmed on the Yellow Hills in Blackburn. However, Mitchell and Kenyon's main output was films of local events, customs, and people, which they produced for travelling cinema shows. Filming at variable speeds on their Prestwich 4 camera, Mitchell and Kenyon hired a number of camera operators to satisfy their growing clientele for specially commissioned subjects. 
Mitchell and Kenyon's first association with the cinematograph exhibitors was in April 1899, when a local showman, George Green, commissioned them to film workers leaving factories in Blackburn to be shown at the Easter fair. By 1901 the firm was selling a variety of specially commissioned local subjects to more than fifty different travelling cinematograph companies. Their geographical range covered the north-east of England, Glasgow and Dundee in Scotland, Cork, Dublin, and Belfast in Ireland, Rhyl and Bangor in north Wales, Nottingham, Birmingham, and Coventry in the midlands, and Bristol and Portsmouth in the south, with the largest percentage of titles relating to Lancashire and Yorkshire. 
As well as scenes of workers leaving factory gates, Mitchell and Kenyon covered schools, transport, sporting events, and public entertainment and leisure. Such local pageants as the Leeds lifeboat procession, the Whit day walks in Lancashire, May day processions in Knutsford, and other calendar customs like well-dressing were popular features. Founder members of the Association Football League and the Northern Union League were captured on Mitchell and Kenyon's films. Preston North End, Blackburn Rovers, and Aston Villa regularly appeared, as did newly formed teams like Bradford City and Manchester United, and now defunct clubs such as Gainsborough Trinity. Visits by prominent figures were also recorded. South African War generals including Lord Roberts and Lord Kitchener, who visited Liverpool on 11 October 1901, and General Buller, who went to Manchester on 23 May 1901, were filmed and then exhibited in the same evening. Films of Baden Powell opening the Drill Hall in Accrington on 3 March 1901 and Joseph Chamberlain at home in Birmingham in September 1902 also survive. 
The films were commissioned, purchased, or sent to Mitchell and Kenyon to be developed and printed and shown by the exhibitors in temporary venues in the locality, including music halls, fairground cinematograph shows, and town halls. The income generated must have been considerable because in September 1901 Mitchell and Kenyon, who had until this point continued to occupy their respective premises on Northgate and King Street, moved to premises at the rear of Kenyon's property at 22 Clayton Street, where they installed a laboratory and studio for the production of the fiction titles. Sixty-five fiction titles are now preserved in the Cinema Museum in London, including 'Diving Lucy' (1903), a comedy which was billed in the United States as the 'biggest English comedy hit of the year'. In 1904 the trade press referred to them as one of the leading film manufacturers in the country alongside such contemporaries as Robert Paul, Charles Urban, and the Warwick Trading Company. 
Despite their innovations in producing fiction titles Mitchell and Kenyon remained constant to their successful original formula of non-fiction local films. They continued to act on commission for the travelling exhibition circuit and went to Glasgow in 1906, and filmed in locations as far apart as Gainsborough, Llandudno, and Halifax in 1908. However, about this time there appears to have been a gradual drop in activity. Mitchell and Kenyon continued to make films together until 1913, but not outside Lancashire. Their pioneering partnership was not dissolved officially until 1922, but there is no evidence for any film production after 1913. James Kenyon moved to Southport in 1915, but returned to Blackburn, where he died at his home, 28 Granville Road, on 6 February 1925. He was buried in Blackburn cemetery. The diplomatist Sir Frank Kenyon Roberts was his grandson. Sagar Jones Mitchell, who had continued with his Northgate photographic business in partnership with his son John, died at his home, Whitecroft, Quaker Brook Lane, Hoghton, Lancashire, on 2 October 1952. 
Until recently Mitchell and Kenyon were remembered as being a 'small but hardy company which sprung up early in England', and which had 'left little trace' (Low and Manvell, 22-3). The discovery and subsequent acquisition of the Peter Worden Mitchell and Kenyon collection by the National Film and Television Archive in 2000 changed this perception and revealed the largest collection of films in the United Kingdom from the early 1900s made by a single company. Approximately 800 nitrate negatives have been restored and researched by the National Film and Television Archive in association with the National Fairground Archive. Examples of the restored footage were broadcast by the BBC in 2005. The collection has brought to light the contribution of film-makers in the north of England to the development of early British cinema, alongside the previously better-known Brighton school and London-based companies. It has also changed the emphasis of film history by revealing the importance of non-fiction production in the development of British film-making and exhibition. Mitchell and Kenyon's local films indicate how early British companies exploited a genre that continued to thrive in Europe and America well into the 1930s. Films of local people and events kept the crowds coming, and were an important factor in the development of the cinema audience in the early 1900s. The significance of the Mitchell and Kenyon collection is that it not only reveals the types of material shown but also allows us to view the audience that went to see it. 


@@@@@


doc= 94370


James Kenyon (1850-1925), film-maker, who was born at 21 William Henry Street, Blackburn, Lancashire, on 26 May 1850, the second son of Thomas Kenyon, a cotton weaver from Bolton-by-Bowland, who later became a hairdresser, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Heaton. After an elementary education in Blackburn he became a shop worker. At the time of his marriage, on 25 July 1872, to Elizabeth (1850/51-1931), the daughter of James Fell, general agent, Kenyon's occupation was recorded as general labourer. They had one daughter, Gertrude. By 1878 Kenyon was listed in the local trade directory as a fancy goods dealer living at 1 Clifton Street. In 1880 he and his wife inherited her uncle's furniture dealing and cabinet-making business based at 21 King Street, then acquired further premises at 22 Clayton Street. Subsequently he operated a penny-in-the-slot-machine manufacturing company, with strong links to the fairground and exhibition community. These proved important for his film-making venture with the photographic apparatus manufacturer Mitchell. Their differing but overlapping businesses provided the skills and contacts required to make their new company a success. 


@@@@@


doc= 94373


Reckitt, Albert Leopold (1877-1947), chemical manufacturer and benefactor, was born at Dulwich Wood Park, Upper Norwood, London, on 24 May 1877, the son of George Reckitt (1825-1900), manager of the London office of Reckitt & Sons Ltd, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Jackson (1836-1923). Both parents were devout Quakers, in the tradition of the Reckitt family since the seventeenth century. Albert's grandfather, Isaac Reckitt (1792-1862), founded Reckitt & Sons as a starch manufacturer in Hull in 1840 and upon his death in 1862 left the by then thriving starch and blue business to a partnership of George Reckitt and his two younger brothers, Francis and James (later Sir James) Reckitt. George realized his share after a disagreement and went into insurance, a venture that failed and saw him back in the company as manager of the London office (then based at 40 King William Street) by 1870. Of Albert's ten brothers and sisters only two survived past adolescence: his elder brother George Frederic, who joined the London business only briefly before being consigned to a mental home, and his elder sister Juliet, who (like Albert himself) never married, and was active in women's suffrage and social work through most of her life. 
Albert Reckitt was educated at Rugby School, leaving in 1894 to study natural sciences (including chemistry) at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1895. He graduated BA with second-class honours in 1898, duly proceeding to MA in 1902. On his father's death in 1900 he became manager of the London office of Reckitt & Sons, holding the position for the rest of his life, and in 1904 became a director of the company. In 1921 he became one of the first trustees of the Sir James Reckitt Trust, set up in support of Quaker charities and the people of Hull. He made his own contribution in establishing and endowing the Albert Reckitt Social Club in Hull Garden Village for the benefit of employees of the company, in memory of his father. In 1922 the London headquarters moved from King William Street to 40 Bedford Square, where he also took up residence. By this time Reckitt & Sons was a multinational company and, as London was the chief calling point of international visitors, he was heavily involved in the business's enterprises abroad. 
Reckitt had a deep interest in archaeology and was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He also put money towards financing Sir Leonard Woolley's excavations at Ur in Mesopotamia, in gratitude for which he was given various artefacts from there; these were left in his will to the Fitzwilliam Museum and Museum of Archaeology in Cambridge. In his capacity as a chemist he worked closely from 1929 with bacteriologist W. C. Reynolds to develop the medically endorsed and widely successful Dettol antiseptic disinfectant liquid, which was marketed by Reckitt & Sons from 1933. Regarded as an important development in the science of antisepsis, Dettol was initially marketed for hospital use, especially in maternity cases to combat puerperal fever, but soon became a household name. 
Reckitt became vice-chairman of the company under his cousin, Philip Bealby Reckitt, after the 1938 merger with its competitor J. and J. Colman of Norwich. After Philip's death in 1944 he remained chairman of Reckitt and Colman until his own death of a heart attack at his home at Bedford Square on 5 June 1947. He was buried on 10 June at Camberwell old cemetery, Forest Hill Road, London. His estate was valued at $549,354. 
Although Reckitt did not actively practise Quakerism as his parents had, he gave generous support to a variety of Quaker and other charities. Besides Dettol and the flourishing company he headed (Reckitt and Colman merged with Benckiser NV in 1999 to form Reckitt Benckiser plc, included in the FTSE index of the 100 largest quoted companies on the London stock exchange) his lasting legacy took the form of three trusts that he set up in 1946, the year before his death, to continue this support. These were confirmed under his will, but the law at the time permitted freedom from estate duty only if he had lived a further five years. In the event, 70 per cent duty was charged on his endowments, a large part of which had to come from the sale of ordinary shares in the company at a time when their value was low. Thus the trusts endowed in his will were reduced to less than a quarter, in most cases, of their intended value. 
Not being worth maintaining as independent bodies, Reckitt's research trust became a fund of the Royal Society in 1951 and his archaeological trust was transferred to the British Academy in 1950, where it funds, among other things, a biennial series of Reckitt lectures. His charitable trust set aside monies for Cambridge University and Trinity College; this capital was handed over directly to those bodies in 1950 and the university's share was used to pay the stipend of the curator of the Whipple Museum of the History of Science, and to assist with the museum's practical needs. The charitable trust itself continued to operate independently under the terms of its original deed, supporting the charities Reckitt had supported in his lifetime (although the exact list alters at the discretion of the trustees). The majority of these were charitable institutions of which Reckitt had some personal knowledge in his lifetime, many based in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 94377


Warelwast, Robert de (d. 1155), bishop of Exeter, was a nephew of his predecessor, William de Warelwast. He is not to be confused with his successor at Exeter, Robert (II) (1155-60), who broke the Warelwast hold on the church. William was a reformer who modernized his old-fashioned English church and diocese, and it seems that he looked to his nephew to continue the work. He sent him to be educated at Laon under Master Anselm and made him archdeacon of Exeter (first appearing in 1113), in effect his deputy in spiritualities. It is not therefore surprising that following William's death, on 27 September 1137, Robert was elected by the chapter to succeed him. The new king, Stephen, accepted this on 10 April 1138 at the Council of Northampton, and, as the archbishopric of Canterbury was then vacant, Robert was consecrated bishop on 18 December by the papal legate, Alberic, bishop of Ostia. 
William de Warelwast had worked closely with his powerful king, Henry I, and Robert naturally followed suit. In 1135 he had been with Henry at Caen. When Henry died on 1 December of that year his nephew, Stephen, seized the throne at the expense of Henry's daughter Matilda, who was married to Geoffrey Plantagenet, count of Anjou. The subsequent rivalry between Stephen and Matilda made difficulties during the next nineteen years for all those in positions of authority in England and Normandy. Robert seems to have accepted Stephen unreservedly -- in 1139 he was one of the English delegates to Innocent II's famous Second Lateran Council; and as his diocese was of no strategic importance in the civil war that broke out in 1139, he appears to have had a relatively peaceful existence. In charters of 1143 and 1149, both concerned with Totnes, he acknowledged Stephen as the reigning king. In 1146, however, in connection with the priory of St James, Exeter, he accepted Baldwin de Revieres, who in 1136 had occupied Exeter Castle and was then expelled from Devon, as earl of Exeter or Devon, a title conferred on him by Matilda. Robert's one recorded belligerent act was the excommunication in 1140 of Reginald fitz Roy, Matilda's half-brother whom she had made earl of Cornwall, for plundering the lands of the church. That the Exeter mint issued coinage of ambiguous authority is in keeping. The only time that Robert got into trouble seems to have been in 1148, when he was suspended for non-attendance at Pope Eugenius III's Council of Rheims. But since he obtained general grants of protection from that pope for his church's possessions and rights on 7 February 1146 and 14 March 1153, he clearly remained on good terms with him. 
It would seem that Robert graduated easily from his apprenticeship under his uncle to his role as a full bishop. Like his uncle he became a member of the Exeter Kalendar Guild. He patronized a local man, Baldwin of Forde, the future archbishop of Canterbury (1184-90), sending him to Italy to study law. More adventurous was his patronage of Richard Peche (Peccator) one of a clan associated with Salisbury which came to occupy a number of ecclesiastical offices at Exeter, who is found in Robert's entourage as early as 1143. 
Robert lasted into Henry II's reign and attended his coronation on 19 December 1154. On 7 February 1155 he translated Launceston Priory's relics to its new site, but died soon afterwards, probably on 28 March, and was buried in his cathedral. According to the 'Ordinale Exoniense' four candles should be lit on the anniversary of Robert 'Warwest', who lies in the choir. Between 19 December 1154 and Michelmas 1156 Henry II deprived the church of Exeter of its rich chapelry of Bosham for the 'crime' of making an appeal to Adrian IV. It cannot be said with certainty whether this punishment occurred during Robert's last days, during the vacancy of the see (28 March to 5 June 1155), or in the first months of Robert (II)'s pontificate. Bosham was recovered by the diocese in 1177; even so, the episode was a sad ending to the rule of the Warelwast family. 


@@@@@


doc= 94378


John the Chanter (d. 1191), bishop of Exeter, is of uncertain identity. One contemporary, Ralph de Diceto, identifies him as a former 'cantor' (precentor) of Exeter; and George Oliver believed that he had held that office for thirty years before his promotion to the bishopric. Another contemporary, Roger of Howden (followed by Oliver) describes him as subdean of Salisbury. Both dignitaries existed, and it may be a case of pluralism. It is also possible that John was a nephew or chaplain (or perhaps both) of Robert of Chichester, bishop of Exeter, who accompanied his uncle to Exeter in 1155 together with other relatives and clients. One, if not both, of John's own nephews, whom he promoted in due course in his cathedral church, was surnamed Basset; and it could be that John was related to that landed family through a sister. Even more perplexing is the problem whether the Salisbury-Exeter John was also Thomas Becket's clerk of that name. If so, he may well have been a pupil of Abelard at Paris about 1136, who had also studied at Montpellier, but is not included in Herbert of Bosham's list of Thomas's 'eruditi', the twenty-two scholars at his court. This John was a companion of the future martyr in exile and his indefatigable ambassador at the papal court, a friend who missed the martyrdom only by his absence on a mission; and one of the few who subsequently also served Thomas's successor at Canterbury, Richard of Dover. He could have returned to Exeter about the time of Richard's death (16 February 1184). He was very much a wandering star, hence the nickname Planeta sometimes bestowed on him. 
After Bishop Bartholomew's death in mid-December 1184 there was a vacancy of almost two years at Exeter, for John was not consecrated until 5 October 1186. The delay may have been caused in part by Henry II's absence in Normandy from April 1185 to April 1186, in part by disagreement over the succession. If John had been Thomas Becket's clerk that would have made him suspect to the king and to some others. It is unlikely that he was the choice of King Henry, who is more likely to have favoured the candidacy of his own clerk, Godfrey de Lucy, who was elected to the see on 1 July 1186 but declined it. Once installed, John acted very much like a new broom at Exeter. His closest helpers among the cathedral canons were not his predecessor's men, and he seems to have been the first bishop of Exeter to make use of the newfangled episcopal administrative, perhaps primarily judicial, deputy, an 'official (principal)'. Yet all parties may have been anxious for a quiet life after the turmoil of the Becket era. John was elderly when elected, and a possible lack of legal expertise may have disqualified him from acting as a papal judge-delegate. After attending Richard I's coronation on 3 September 1189 and witnessing the preparations for the third crusade, he returned to Exeter to enjoy his position. But the last eighteen months of his life may not have been tranquil. Richard had made unsatisfactory arrangements for the government of England and Normandy during his absence on a military adventure from which he might not return. He endowed his youngest brother, John, count of Mortain, with vast estates in England, including the counties of Devon and Cornwall (albeit without the castles of Exeter and Launceston) but made him promise to stay out of the kingdom for three years. In the winter of 1190-91 John broke his promise; and although he operated in the midlands, there must have been unease also in the south-west. 
John the Chanter died on 1 June 1191, seven months after the death of Archbishop Baldwin at Acre and one week before King Richard's arrival there. He was buried under the south tower of his cathedral. The see of Exeter then remained vacant until February 1194. John the Chanter enriched the cathedral treasury with a cope of baldechin, ornamented with small double-headed eagles, and, according to John Hooker, he 'was very well reported for his forwardness and liberalitie in continueng the newe inlarginge and buildinge of his Churche' (Hooker, 228). 


@@@@@


doc= 94379


Marshal, Henry (d. 1206), bishop of Exeter, was the son of John Marshal (d. 1165) and his second wife, Sybil, sister of Patrick, earl of Salisbury. He was the youngest brother of William (I) Marshal, the future earl of Pembroke and 'rector regis et regni'. The early course of Henry's life is obscure, and he seems to have owed his advancement primarily to his brother, beginning on 15 September 1189 when Richard I nominated him dean of York; he was consecrated subdeacon and deacon on the same day. Once at York he became involved in a bitter dispute with Archbishop Geoffrey, who excommunicated him early in 1190, but he was nevertheless active as dean, and also served as a royal justice. Henry remained at loggerheads with Geoffrey until early in 1194, when he secured further advancement, doubtless thanks again to his brother and also to Hubert Walter, who had preceded him as dean of York and was now both Richard I's regent and justiciar in England and archbishop of Canterbury. There had been a vacancy in the see of Exeter since the death of Bishop John the Chanter on 1 June 1191, caused largely by the king's absence on crusade and his captivity in Germany, and then, following his release, by his preoccupation with Normandy. Now Henry Marshal was nominated to Exeter by the autocratic king. Before 10 February 1194 he had been formally elected, and he was consecrated bishop at Canterbury by Archbishop Hubert by 30 March following. The appointment cannot have pleased Count John, who had been trying to act as his brother Richard's successor, for when he did become king in May 1199 the bishop had to pay him 300 marks for the confirmation of his charters, confirmation of the chaplaincy of Bosham, Sussex, and freedom of his demesne from tallage. Henry paid $100 down and owed $100 which he seems never to have paid. It looks as though he made his peace with the king; and he seems, indeed, to have been both very well connected and a friendly person. 
It is true that Bishop Henry did not care much for his predecessor's favourites. He received authority from Celestine III (died 1198) to recover those leases of the cathedral's properties made by canons without the consent of the chapter as a whole. But he seems to have been a great benefactor of the cathedral church and generous to the canons. He was remembered for his gifts of vestments and ornaments; he settled a jurisdictional dispute between the archdeacon of Exeter and the canons in the latter's favour; and he patronized a number of men who were to hold high office under his successors, including three future archdeacons and the first chancellor. He was closely connected with William Brewer, who in 1196 founded a Premonstratensian abbey at Torre Mohun, near Paignton, and in 1201 a Cistercian abbey at Dunkeswell. It is thought that he himself completed the building of his cathedral church, and he required every householder to contribute to it annually at least 1/2died at Pentecost. He also had churches built on distant episcopal estates, at Horsley (Surrey) and Westminster. In 1202 he took action against the sons of clerics who in breach of canon law were intruding themselves into benefices held by their fathers. He is credited with glossing the Pauline epistles. He died on 26 October 1206 and was buried in the cathedral, where his tomb, surmounted by his effigy, survives. Hooker, with much justification, considered him a good man. 


@@@@@


doc= 94380


Apulia, Simon of (d. 1223), bishop of Exeter, was a native of southern Italy; as bishop he used a signet featuring St Nicholas of Myra, much venerated in Bari. His parentage is unknown, and nothing can be said of his early career except that he was a lawyer, styled 'magister', and may have been the author of a 'summa'. By 1186 he was a canon of York (probably then, as later, holding the prebend of South Newbald), where he became chancellor no later than 1190, and late in 1193 was made dean. The circumstances were controversial. Archbishop Geoffrey at first chose his own brother Peter as dean, then named Simon (who may previously have been his clerk), and finally opted for Philip of Poitou when Simon refused to give up his chancellorship. However, the cathedral canons wanted Simon and duly elected him (the first time they had elected their dean, who had hitherto been appointed either by the archbishop or the king), after which Simon went to Rome and secured nomination by Celestine III, who invested him on 17 May 1194. A payment of 1000 marks secured royal approval. Probably to keep out of Geoffrey's way Simon did not return to York until the following February, and relations between them were almost always bad afterwards; a reconciliation in 1200 failed to last long. In 1195-6 Simon administered the see of York during the archbishop's suspension. In 1201 he claimed the provostship of Beverley, probably unsuccessfully. 
Simon of Apulia remained dean of York until 1214, when he was made bishop of Exeter. Bishop Henry Marshal had died on 26 October 1206. The long vacancy that followed, the third such at Exeter in thirty-nine years, was caused by King John's quarrel with Innocent III over the latter's nomination of Stephen Langton as archbishop of Canterbury, which led to a papal interdict on England (1208-14) and John's excommunication (1209-13). In 1209, following the pope's order to the chapter to elect a bishop, the canons elected Henry of London, archdeacon of Stafford, although ineffectively. But in April 1214, following John's submission to the pope, the king and the papal legate, Pandulf, forced the chapter to elect Simon, and on 5 October following Langton consecrated him at Canterbury. The first Italian to obtain a place on the English bench since Anselm, Simon almost immediately departed for Rome, where he attended the Fourth Lateran Council. He had returned to England by 28 October 1216, when he took part in the coronation of the young Henry III at Gloucester. 
England was severely disturbed by civil war and foreign invasion during the early years of Simon's episcopate. In January 1218 there was a dispute over the sheriffdom of Devon, and in February the regent, William (I) Marshal, and the papal legate, Guala Bicchieri, visited Exeter and left Robert de Courtenay, lord of Okehampton, in charge there. But the area remained unsettled for some time. In 1220 Simon (who seems to have been on friendly terms with the king's guardian, Peter des Roches) helped to restore royal authority in the south-west when he led a delegation from Cornwall to the royal council, which successfully offered 500 marks for the replacement of Henry fitz Count (dangerously independent in the council's eyes) with a local man as sheriff of the county. As bishop, Simon seems to have managed adequately with the difficult situation. But little documentation of his government has survived, only two original 'acta' and ten copies, four of which come from the Truro cartulary. None of his 'acta' is dated and only two have a witness list. For the first time, however, the name of the bishop's official -- Mr John -- is revealed. It also seems, on the evidence of the 'Exeter Chronicle', that in 1222 Simon fixed the parishes of the city of Exeter. His nephew, Simon, was archdeacon of Cornwall (1218-21). Bishop Simon died on 9 September 1223 and was buried in his cathedral, on the south side of the lady chapel. He was remembered for continuing the rebuilding of the cathedral church and as a generous donor of vestments and ornaments to its treasury. 


@@@@@


doc= 94381


Blund, Richard (d. 1257), bishop of Exeter, was a scion of a family prominent in the city of Exeter. As Mr Richard Blund, 'chancellor of the church of St Peter', he was the first witness to a confirmation by Hilary, son of Hugh Blund, of his undated enfeoffment of a miller with his land on Exe Island, Exeter. Hilary, Richard's brother, was provost of Exeter ('c'.1219 and 'c'.1222-3) and mayor (1224-30 and 1234?-1235). Little is known of Richard's early life, but the fact that he was styled Master indicates that he attended a university. Following the death of William Brewer, bishop of Exeter, on 24 November 1244, the chapter continued its reforming programme by electing Blund (also variously known as Albus, Blundus, Blond, and Blondy), who had long been a canon and was now the cathedral's chancellor, to succeed as bishop. Henry III assented to their choice on 30 January 1245, and again on 17 April, and on 29 September he made Blund a gift of six fallow deer from the forest of Aliceholt, Hampshire, for his consecration feast; he was consecrated bishop on 22 October by Archbishop Boniface at Reading. 
Matthew Paris considered Blund an excellent choice because of his worthy character and good education. Of his education, however, nothing is known, and of his deeds little. Only thirty-five of his 'acta' can be identified, of which five are originals. Only eight are dated and none is witnessed. On 6 January 1247 he confirmed his predecessor's 'inspeximus' of Bishop Henry Marshal's settlement of the jurisdictional dispute between the chapter and the archdeacon of Exeter. But he made revisions to restore episcopal authority: for example, he removed the dean and chapter's power to impose an interdict on the city. Occasionally he appeared on a wider stage. Thus on 17 June 1244 he attended the dedication of Beaulieu Abbey church in the presence of the king and queen, while in spring 1253 he was present in parliament, and with other bishops excommunicated offenders against the charters. 
The most memorable event of Richard Blund's episcopate occurred as he lay dying or dead in his chamber in his palace at Exeter on 26 December 1257. His household took the opportunity to draft and seal a number of episcopal charters by which various benefices were granted. Present were, eventually, the bishop's chancellor and chamberlain, Walter of Loddiswell, priest, and Mr Richard of Totnes, his clerk and notary. But the actual perpetrators were a group of nine clerks and laymen from the bishop's household. Apparently the documents were drafted by John fitz Robert, the bishop's official, and Gervase of Crediton, engrossed by Thomas of Molland and Richard of Totnes (the chancellor's clerk), and sealed by Henry, the bishop's chaplain. Others named as being present were Thomas, the bishop's pantler, Thomas's son, Reginald, and Caynoc, an episcopal chamberlain. The reasons for this belated activity, although the event was investigated by the bishop's successor, Walter Bronescombe, are unknown. The affair was rather hushed up and petered out in 1259. 
Blund's church remembered him as a benefactor of the cathedral's treasury, the donor of vestments and ornaments. His obit, however, was celebrated in the cathedral with only two candles (as for a dean) compared with the four for Bishop Henry Marshal and the eight for Bishop William Brewer. Hooker judged him 'a mild spirited man but stowte in his church's cause and liberal to the building thereof' (Hooker, 230): a man of blameless life and learned attainments. 


@@@@@


doc= 94382


Nicholson, William Edward (1919-2004), footballer and football manager, was born on 26 January 1919 at 15 Vine Street, Scarborough, Yorkshire, the second youngest of the nine children (five sons and four daughters) of Joseph Nicholson and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Gowan. His father looked after horses, working in the winter as a groom and in the summer as the driver of a horse-drawn cab along the front at Scarborough. Bill was one of two children in the family who managed to pass the scholarship examination to Scarborough high school. He had little interest in academic studies, and never thought of playing football as a career. He left at sixteen to go into a local laundry where he worked for six months for $2 a week. Out of the blue, so he always said, a letter arrived in February 1936 inviting him for a trial at the north London club Tottenham Hotspur. He had been playing for a local Saturday football team, the Young Liberals, managed by a dentist, and it is presumed that the dentist recommended him to a scout who in turn informed Spurs. His parents had no idea where Tottenham was. 
After a month's trial at Spurs Nicholson was taken on as a ground staff boy, again on $2 a week. He was 5 feet 8 inches tall, weighed 10 stone and 12 pounds, and was then playing as an inside forward (he later moved to left back). As he later told Hunter Davies, 'I spent most of the summer painting the girders under the stands from eight to five almost every day'. The only training was on Tuesdays and Thursdays, but even then Nicholson and the others had to fit in a day's work beforehand. 'I remember we used to play football under the stands, using a piece of old cloth as a ball' (Davies, 69). After two years, in August 1938, he became a professional player, appearing eight times in the first team before the outbreak of the Second World War. In 1939 he joined the Durham light infantry and served for six and a half years, working as an infantry training instructor and then in the Army Physical Training Corps, rising to the rank of sergeant. On 1 March 1942, while home on leave, he married, at St Mary's Church, Tottenham, Grace Lilian Power, a machinist, and daughter of Alfred Thomas Power, secretary. Grace, who was always known as Darkie, was his first and only girlfriend, and lived on Farningham Road, where Nicholson had lived in digs following his arrival from Scarborough. 
After the war Nicholson went straight back into the Tottenham first team, playing now as right half. Under the manager Arthur Rowe, who created the famous 'push and rush' team of the early 1950s, Spurs won the second division title in 1950 and the first division title in 1951. It was the first time Spurs had won the league championship in their history. As members of the title-winning side Nicholson and Alf Ramsey, the Spurs' full-back, were both known for their consistency, their careful distribution of the ball, and fierce tackling rather than their flair or creativity. Off the pitch Nicholson neither attracted nor courted the limelight. In May 1951 he was picked to play for England against Portugal, managing to score a goal within thirty seconds in what became a 5-2 victory. He never appeared for England again, though he was a reserve on twenty-two occasions. It was unfortunate for him that during most of his career Billy Wright, England's captain, was England's first choice as right half. In all, Nicholson made 341 league and cup appearances for Spurs, before his retirement as a player during the 1954-5 season. 
By this time Nicholson had become a qualified coach, having decided not long after his return from the war to take his football coaching badge. The discipline and experience of his army training helped him to pass first time. While still playing for Tottenham he coached the Cambridge University football team, despite the fact that he always believed that football players should not be too smart: 'I prefer players not to be too good or clever at other things. It means they concentrate on football' (Davies, 70). He also coached the England youth team and assisted with the under twenty-three team. On his retirement as a player in 1955 he joined the Spurs coaching staff. 
On the morning of Saturday 11 October 1958 it was announced that Jimmy Anderson, the Spurs manager, was resigning, and that Bill Nicholson, his assistant since 1957, was taking over. Nicholson had been informed of this news three days earlier, but had not told anyone, including his wife. The match that day was against Everton. Spurs won 10-4. On his arrival home for his tea his wife still did not know of his appointment. It was only when his mother-in-law arrived and congratulated him, having heard the news on the radio, that Bill finally told Darkie that he had become Tottenham manager. Throughout his career, both as a player and as a manager, Nicholson believed that women had no place in football, not even on the terraces. He refused to let Darkie, or his two daughters, Linda and Jean, ever come to a game in which he was involved. 
In 1961 Tottenham won the first division title, making Nicholson one of the few people to have won the championship as both player and manager. In that same season Spurs won the FA cup, thus completing the 'double', the first time this had been achieved since 1897. The FA cup was retained in 1962 and in the following season Spurs won the European cup winners' cup by beating Atletico Madrid 5-1, in a game which is still considered one of the most exciting European finals. It was also the first European trophy to be won by a British club. 
As a player Nicholson had been solid, safe, determined. As a man, he was dour, stern, taciturn. He didn't throw things in the dressing room at half time, or scream and shout, but his silences and barely controlled anger could have the same effect. He found it very hard to praise his players, even after a thumping win, and was always quick to point out things that had gone wrong. 'In the army, I discovered that it's best to tell people that there's always a bit to go, that they must try harder, they can do better' ('The Times', 25 Oct 2004). And yet as a manager he built teams that had flair and romance, that exuded excitement and verve, the very opposite of his own dour, negative character. He was a hard taskmaster as a coach, tough on discipline and order, but on the pitch he encouraged creativity. His first great team was built round the flair of Danny Blanchflower and the toughness of Dave Mackay. In 1962 he bought Jimmy Greaves from AC Milan for $99,999 -- deliberately keeping the transfer fee under $100,000 to minimize the publicity. Nicholson was often at odds with Blanchflower, his captain, who was eloquent, loquacious, and positive, while Nicholson could be gruff and negative. However, they made a good partnership: before the 1963 European final, for example, Nicholson had given a downbeat team talk, extolling all the virtues of the opposition. Blanchflower, sensing their heads going down, then gave a pep talk of his own, praising their talents and strengths. 
Under Nicholson, Spurs won another FA cup in 1967 and a second European trophy (the UEFA cup) in 1972, as well as the league cup in 1971 and 1973. In all, during his sixteen years as Spurs manager, he won eight major trophies. Throughout this time he never signed a contract, never once contemplated going anywhere else, and continued to live in the same modest semi-detached house, just ten minutes from the ground, that had been provided for him by the club, though he eventually managed to buy it. His working life was totally devoted to the club. At the wedding of his daughter Linda, his wife, Darkie, noticed that he had tears in his eyes, which surprised her, as he was never known for messy emotions. 'I never saw her growing up', he sobbed as his daughter walked down the aisle (Davies, 75). 
Nicholson announced his retirement as manager in September 1974, with little warning. He felt he had had enough and done enough. He had begun to feel out of touch with modern football, and especially with modern players, whom he found harder to motivate. His own character had been formed by his Yorkshire childhood during the depression and by the war. His language and attitudes harked back to his wartime experiences, which increasingly became a foreign world to younger players. He was upset by the money, fame, and power that modern players seemed to be achieving. The early 1970s also saw a new style of manager, one who sported jewellery and a bouffant hairstyle, and who could put a kindly arm round his players when needed, as well as lambasting and criticizing them. 
Following a short spell at West Ham United as a scout Nicholson returned to Spurs in 1976, on the scouting side, and as a consultant. In 1975 he was appointed OBE and in 1998 received the freedom of the borough of Haringey. In 1991 he was appointed club president and eight years later the little road off Tottenham High Road that leads to the main entrance to the club was renamed Bill Nicholson Way. Bill Nicholson was Spurs' most successful manager and also one of England's greatest post-war managers, along with Matt Busby, Bill Shankly, and Alf Ramsey. He died of prostate cancer at Potters Bar Community Hospital, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, on 23 October 2004; he was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94386


Pease, (Rendel) Sebastian (1922-2004), physicist, was born at 9 Brunswick Walk, Cambridge, on 2 November 1922, the son of Michael Stewart Pease (died 1966), geneticist, later director of poultry research in the school of agriculture, University of Cambridge, and his wife, Helen Bowen, 'nee' Wedgwood (1895-1981), eldest daughter of Josiah Clement Wedgwood, first Baron Wedgwood, politician, a cabinet minister in the first Labour government. On both sides of his family the links with the Labour Party were strong: his paternal grandfather was Edward Reynolds Pease, one of the founders of the Fabian Society. 
Pease was educated at Bedales School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read physics and was chairman of the Labour Club. Forced to curtail his studies by the Second World War, from 1942 to 1946 he served as a scientific officer in the operational research service at RAF Bomber Command, High Wycombe, where he worked on navigation equipment. He returned to Cambridge in 1946 to complete his physics degree, and the following year took up a post as scientific officer at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell. On 9 August 1952 he married the 21-year-old Susan Spickernell (died 1996), daughter of Sir Frank Todd Spickernell, naval officer; they had two sons and three daughters. 
At Harwell Pease carried out research into radiation damage to the structure of solids, and published a paper with George Kinchin in 1955 that remained a key to damage mechanism analysis for decades. When it became possible to use beams of neutrons to study solids in a way analogous to their study by X-rays, and using the fact that they are scattered by hydrogen atoms, which are invisible to X-rays, Pease had also, in collaboration with George Bacon, by 1952 completed another seminal study elucidating the role of hydrogen atoms in potassium di-hydrogen phosphate as the origin of its piezoelectric power. 
In 1961 Pease moved to the Culham Laboratory for Plasma Physics and Nuclear Fusion, as division head. In 1967 he became the assistant director of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority research group. The following year he became director of the Culham Laboratory, and in 1981 the programme director for fusion, a post he held until his retirement in 1987. 
In 1957 Pease had first been offered the chance to work in the field of fusion, where atoms of hydrogen isotopes are forced together to form helium and release energy -- the process at the heart of the hydrogen bomb and the source of the power of the sun. The possibility of making a device to release this energy on a useable scale had engaged the interest of several groups of researchers since the Second World War, mostly in universities at first. When it was realized that the physics involved overlapped to some extent with the science of weapon development, all the work was pooled into two groups under the Atomic Energy Authority, where it was classified as secret. However, in 1958 the major powers all presented papers on their work at the 'Atoms for peace' conference in Geneva. The problem with fusion was to maintain a body of gas big enough, dense enough, and hot enough to sustain the reactions. Experiments up to 1958 had shown that current apparatus was too small to reach all of these conditions simultaneously, though projects like the Zeta (zero energy toroidal assembly) experiment at Harwell, which Pease had led, showed that the toroidal configuration known as the Tokamak, developed by the Russians, could produce discharges lasting many milliseconds. 
In 1957 Euratom (the European Atomic Energy Community) formed a fusion research committee in Brussels that gave financial support for specific major projects at the national fusion laboratories. Although the UK was not yet a member of Euratom, Pease was permitted to attend its meetings. At Culham he proposed a twenty-year plan culminating in the construction of a prototype electricity-generating device. This plan was too ambitious for the Atomic Energy Authority. A similar discussion in Euratom led to the conclusion that a multinational project was needed. Then, in 1973, the UK was admitted to Euratom and so joined the fusion research committee formally. Pease enthusiastically supported this scheme for a multinational project. It was largely due to his efforts that agreement was reached to set up a team under Paul-Henri Rebut to design the joint European torus (JET). With typical flair, Pease offered accommodation and full general support to site the team at Culham. This was accepted and the design group arrived at Culham in 1973. A satisfactory design was tabled by 1976 but the selection of a site for its construction was difficult. After much discussion, the choice was narrowed to Germany or Britain. In October 1977 the UK helped Lufthansa to rescue the German plane and passengers that had been hijacked at Mogadishu and, in a moment of gratitude, the Germans conceded that JET should be constructed at Culham. The construction went ahead on a site adjacent to Culham, with many support services provided from Culham until JET built its own infrastructure. Pease had to balance this support with his own duty as director of the fusion programme within the Atomic Energy Authority, still a substantial research effort involving lines of work not necessarily allied to JET. He accomplished this with his usual flair and charm. 
Pease received many honours, including honorary degrees from Surrey, Aston, and City universities. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1977, and was a member of the Royal Society's group that in 1998 produced an influential report on the management of separated plutonium. He was active in several other learned societies, and from 1978 to 1980 was president of the Institute of Physics. A lifelong Labour supporter and a member of the Fabian Society from 1942, he was also a committed member of the Pugwash movement (urging limits to the spread of nuclear weapons while advocating the civilian use of nuclear energy), chairing its British group from 1988 to 2002. 
Pease was a man of boundless energy, fertile imagination, and charm, all coupled with a determination bordering on rebelliousness at times. He and his first wife, Susan, lived a full and happy life, sharing their passion for music until, after some forty-four years together, Susan died. On 4 April 1998 Pease married Jean Frances White, a sixty-year-old retired personnel officer (and daughter of John Trentham White, also a personnel officer), who brought him happiness for a short time but died herself less than two years later. His last years were spent in the company of Eleanor Mary Barnes, a retired social worker (and daughter of John Robert Spray, company executive); they married on 22 March 2004, when she was aged sixty-nine. Throughout the last ten years of his life, Pease also had the loving and unstinting support of his children. He died at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 17 October 2004, of necrotizing fasciitis and cancer of the oesophagus. He was survived by his third wife, Eleanor, and the five children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 94387


Peel, John (1939-2004), radio and television broadcaster, was born on 30 August 1939 at Heswall Nursing Home, Heswall, Cheshire, the eldest of three sons of Robert Leslie Ravenscroft and his wife, Joan Mary, 'nee' Swainson. His father was a successful cotton merchant and fought in north Africa during the Second World War. Peel wrote, 'Father, I decided, probably didn't exist at all, remaining, for the first six years of my life, a figure as remote and improbable as the characters in 'The Blue Fairy Book'' (Peel and Ravenscroft, 9). As for his mother, Peel claimed that she was scared of him and told him 'that she was never sure what I was for' ('Daily Telegraph', 27 Oct 2004). He listened to radio news bulletins in an air raid shelter at the bottom of the garden during the war and it was his childhood ambition to broadcast for the BBC. 
Like many involved in the 1960s counter-culture in Britain, Peel came from a comfortable middle-class background against which he eventually rebelled. From the age of seven he attended Woodlands School, Deganwy, Caernarvonshire, with his brother Francis, until the spring of 1953 -- the year his parents separated. 'I think I regretted the loss of our home in Cheshire more than I regretted the divorce. People came and went, as they do, throughout our childhood, but the house was a constant' (Peel and Ravenscroft, 189). At thirteen he went to Shrewsbury School, gained four O-levels, and practised an obstinate nonconformity for which he was often beaten. His housemaster, R. H. K. Brooke, wrote in one school report, 'perhaps it is possible that John can form some kind of nightmarish career out of his enthusiasm for unlistenable records and his delight in writing long and facetious essays' -- an accurate description of Peel's career ('Sunday Telegraph', 31 Oct 2004). Peel dedicated his posthumously published autobiography to Brooke. One lifelong obsession already in place was football. Peel supported Liverpool Football Club from the age of eleven, and it is said he once pinned a picture of Liverpool footballer Kenny Dalglish on the wall at Radio 1 with the caption 'God -- a likeness' (or in other versions 'God -- an informal pose'). 
The other obsession started when the young Peel heard Elvis Presley's 'Heartbreak Hotel' and Lonnie Donegan's 'Rock Island Line' in 1956. Of the latter he said, 'It had... a kind of take-it-or-leave-it spirit that made everything that had gone before sound overcooked and claustrophobic' (Peel and Ravenscroft, 46). He described hearing Elvis as 'the defining moment of my life... There was something frightening, something lewd, something seriously out of control about 'Heartbreak Hotel', and alarmed though I was by Elvis, I knew I wanted more' (ibid., 47-8). The effect of this experience remained with him. A few months before he died Peel revealed that he could envisage being a disc jockey at seventy or eighty because 'I'm still looking for the next Elvis. The next thing that will seem so astonishing to me that it's almost frightening' ('Sunday Telegraph', 31 Oct 2004). Peel was soon an enthusiastic attender of concerts by the likes of Gene Vincent and Joe Brown at the Liverpool Empire. 
After school Peel did national service in the Royal Artillery as a B2 radar operator (1957-9) and then worked as a mill operative in Rochdale (1959-60). At the behest of his father he was sent to the United States to gain experience for the benefit of the family business. In fact he worked in a variety of jobs there, and eventually broadcast on radio after he phoned a local Dallas station to correct a fact about the Beatles. Thereafter he broadcast as a self-styled Beatles expert throughout his time in America. More than once he 'interviewed' George Harrison, as played by himself. One happy consequence was that: 'I was suddenly confronted by this succession of teenage girls who didn't want to know anything about me at all. All they wanted me to do was to abuse them, sexually, which of course I was only too happy to do. ('Daily Telegraph', 27 Oct 2004)' For a time Peel had a steady girlfriend in Nancy Bowling, a seventeen-year-old student at Bryan Adams School, Dallas, whom he described as the girl (second only to his later wife, Sheila) he had loved most. Perhaps memories of this relationship explain Peel's legendary passion for the Undertones' song 'Teenage Kicks' (1978), a record guaranteed to make him cry. It is not obvious why a raucous punk song with distorted guitars would induce tears -- unless it had become associated with an intense memory such as his relationship with Nancy in Dallas. Peel said he wanted the words 'Teenage dreams, so hard to beat' from the lyrics on his gravestone. In Dallas Peel had what he called his 'brush with history'. He exchanged a few words with John F. Kennedy and took several photographs when Kennedy drove through Dallas in 1960. When Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 Peel pretended to be a reporter from the 'Liverpool Echo' to gain access first to Dealey Plaza, and later to a news conference, where he found himself next to Jack Ruby who within forty-eight hours would shoot Lee Harvey Oswald. Peel was a disc jockey at KOMA radio in Oklahoma and then KMEM radio in San Bernadino, California, for eighteen months apiece. In 1965, while in the USA, he married a fifteen-year old Texan, Shirley Anne Milburn, who had lied about her age and had been assisted in this deception by her family. Two years later Peel returned to Britain with his young wife. They lived in Fulham for a time before the relationship broke down, a divorce being granted in 1973. 
Peel's broadcasting career took off in 1967 when he joined Radio London, a pirate radio station anchored off Felixstowe, for six months. His show, 'The Perfumed Garden', broadcast from midnight to 2 a.m. In the United States he had broadcast under his birth name (or as Ravencroft while in California); at Radio London he became John Peel on the suggestion of a secretary at the station. Mindful of the 'Marine Offences Act', which would outlaw such pirate stations, he wrote to the BBC in July about their plans for a new pop music station. Of the twenty disc jockeys who turned up for work in August 1967 at Radio 1 only Peel was to last into the 1990s. Something of the pirate station ethos never entirely left him. As Billy Bragg put it, 'Although he became an institution at the BBC, he was, in effect, running his own pirate radio station from within the corporation' ('The Guardian', 27 Oct 2004). He took over the Radio 1 show 'Top Gear' in February 1968 with the producer John Walters. 
In these years Peel wholeheartedly embraced the idealism of the hippy counter-culture, with the exception of drug taking. He was not a smoker, and took LSD once by choice. A second encounter with LSD came involuntarily when his drink was spiked. His biography notes, 'for three or four days he was incapable even of writing his own name... he described [taking LSD] as like visiting Stratford-upon-Avon: having done it once he felt no pressing need to do it again' (Peel and Ravenscroft, 173). 'Top Gear''s low-key theme tune, Grinderswitch's 'Picking the Blues', would be followed by a list of bands to be featured, a list that sometimes included a silly made-up name. As the names of many of the actual groups were just as unlikely the impostor was hard to spot. Peel promoted the 'underground' bands whose music scorned commercial success. His time in America had given him first-hand knowledge of groups like Captain Beefheart, the Doors, Jefferson Airplane, and the Grateful Dead. He also featured the Incredible String Band, Soft Machine, King Crimson, Fairport Convention, and Steeleye Span, as well as comic acts like the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band, and spoken poetry. He was allegedly the first person to play tracks by Leonard Cohen and Jimi Hendrix on the BBC. In the early 1970s he championed the art-glam band Roxy Music and the reggae of Bob Marley and the Wailers. He played Mike Oldfield's 'Tubular Bells' in its entirety, the success of which helped launch Richard Branson's Virgin record label. Little of the music he played between 1967 and 1975 stayed with him in later life. 
Eschewing the hyperventilated babble of daytime popular radio, Peel talked about music in a laconic manner, with a dry wit and self-deprecating jokes. Simply by not talking over the records, which was unusual, he implied that music mattered. Listeners got the impression that he was speaking to them, not at them, and no matter what his age Peel seemed a voice for disenfranchised youth. His audience was modest in number but loyal and perpetually renewed itself. As his fellow Radio 1 broadcaster Andy Kershaw put it, 'he spanned generations because he remained a fan himself. Frankly, at times the music was unlistenable to, but that wasn't the point -- you listened to Peel for Peel' ('The Guardian', 13 Nov 2004). Robert Hanks described Peel's style as 'an extensive education in modesty, kindness and gentle sarcasm', which demonstrated that 'an appreciation of the music of rebellion and hate doesn't necessarily preclude grace of manner and tolerance' ('The Independent', 27 Oct 2004). Peel broke many of the rules of broadcasting. At Radio 1 he was the first disc jockey to play a record twice in a row. He got into hot water by admitting on air in the 1969 discussion show 'Night Ride' that he had once been to a VD clinic. This led to a row in which the BBC had to apologize to the prime minister, Harold Wilson. 
A key personal and professional relationship for Peel from the late 1960s was with the guitarist-singer Marc Bolan. Peel wrote in the music paper 'Sounds' not long after Bolan was killed in 1977, 'In the late 1960s Marc and June Child were as good friends as the Pig [Peel's name for his wife, Sheila] and I had.' He insisted that Bolan's acoustic duo Tyrannosaurus Rex accompany him to gigs where he was the disc jockey, and played their records despite complaints from listeners and the controller of Radio 1, who told him to stop because Bolan's bleating vibrato sounded like Larry the Lamb. He read two of Bolan's fey children's stories on the Tyrannosaurus Rex albums. Peel was overjoyed when Bolan, having gone electric and now leader of a four-piece group, scored a number one hit as T. Rex with 'Hot Love' in March 1971. However, their relationship fractured that summer when Peel decided not to play the follow-up 'Get It On' on his show. It was an early example of Peel's tendency to move on once bands reached a certain level of success. Bolan took offence as only someone who is struck by the first secure glow of fame can. The friendship between the two and their wives was extinguished, sharpening Peel's awareness of how success often changed people. He disliked pretension, and became a celebrity who didn't want to behave like one, who wanted to hang on to ordinariness. A happier experience was his participation at the edge of the alcohol-fuelled camaraderie of Rod Stewart's group the Faces. In 1971 the band arranged for Peel to mime playing mandolin for 'Maggie May' on 'Top of the Pops'. He sometimes said that it was the Faces who re-energized him after the laid-back hippy years. 
For years Peel travelled across Britain as a disc jockey on the college circuit, and was often disc jockey or compere at rock festivals, including the long-running ones at Reading and Glastonbury. He once quipped that rock festivals were 'the post-war generation's substitute for National Service' (Peel and Ravenscroft, 57). Later he developed a fear of crowds after being present at the Heysel stadium football disaster in 1985. Peel's idealism also led him to try his hand at running a record label called Dandelion from 1969. The duo Medicine Head gave the label its sole top thirty single with 'Pictures in the Sky' in the jugband boogie style of groups like Mungo Jerry and Canned Heat. The label signed singer-songwriters such as Clifford T. Ward, Bridget St John, and Kevin Coyne, released twenty-six albums (later highly collectable), but closed in the early 1970s with debts. 
In November 1968 Peel met his second wife, Sheila Mary Gilhooly, a teacher and the daughter of Denis Gilhooly of Shipley, Yorkshire. The couple married on 31 August 1974 at Islington register office and had two sons and two daughters. For thirty-three years they lived in a seventeenth-century thatched cottage, nicknamed 'Peel Acres', at Great Finborough, near Stowmarket, Suffolk. He once said: 'It seems almost the most perfect life. I could be taller and have more hair, but that apart I cannot imagine how my life could be improved.' As for his job, 'You get free records, you get paid for playing them on the radio, I choose all the music for my own programmes' ('The Guardian', 27 Oct 2004). 
Peel was the only disc jockey able to encourage much of his audience across the ideological divide in British popular music that opened in 1975-6. Those who declined switched to his fellow disc jockey Bob Harris. The catalyst for this change in 'Top Gear''s programming came in 1976 when Peel was excited by the Ramones' debut. He abandoned progressive rock and embraced the punk or new wave of the Sex Pistols, the Clash, Elvis Costello, the Fall, Joy Division, and the Undertones, for whom he provided the first radio play of 'Teenage Kicks' in 1978. They were signed the day after. In the 1980s he promoted such groups as the Smiths, the Cure, New Order, Pulp, and the Jesus and Mary Chain. In the 1980s Peel became an unlikely co-presenter on BBC television's 'Top of the Pops' chart show. He always looked as out of place as an undertaker at a wedding. Most of the fun of watching was to catch the witty barbs Peel sneaked through the programme's inanity and tinsel. On one occasion he expressed his disapproval of bands who performed in apartheid-era South Africa by introducing Queen as 'the boys from Sun City'. Contrary to all expectation, and with the support of his producer John Walters, Peel survived periodic culls of presenters at Radio 1, his tenure at the station lasting thirty-seven years. In the 1990s his show played post-punk, jungle, Madchester bands, Brit pop, hip hop, Chicago house, Detroit techno, ambient electronica, death metal, and alternative country music. He was magnetically drawn to anything that was outside the mainstream. His fondness for obscure music was a pursuit that carried with it self-renewal; he was always catching trends early. 
In later years Peel lent his unmistakable voice to television commercials and documentaries. In the early 1990s he wrote a column for the 'Radio Times', 'John Peel's family album', which eventually led in 1998 to the successful 'Home Truths' programme on Radio 4, where he connected with a maturer audience. Sentimental in a typically British understated way, idiosyncratic, often moving, and wide-ranging, 'Home Truths' was built around droll accounts of domesticity (including his own) and a celebration of the ordinary. The rebel became an unlikely hero of middle England. 'Home Truths', which drew a million listeners, won four Sony awards in 1999, but for Peel it was more like work than his music show. In 1989 he was interviewed on 'Desert Island Discs' and on ITV's 'This Is Your Life'. A decade later the BBC marked his sixtieth birthday by having a 'John Peel night'. He received a broadcaster of the year citation in 1993, a 'godlike genius' award from the 'New Musical Express' in 1994, and was voted top disc jockey by 'Melody Maker' readers eleven times. In 2002 he was awarded the Sony gold award for his outstanding contribution to broadcasting. Among his seven honorary degrees were an MA from the University of East Anglia (1989) and a DMus from Anglia Polytechnic (1999). He was appointed OBE in 1998. 
Outside music Peel was fond of Anthony Powell's novel sequence 'A Dance to the Music of Time' and the books of W. E. Johns. His self-effacing humour was illustrated by his entry under recreations in 'Who's Who': 'making plans to go and live in France, staring out of the window'. He had a good ear for the potential comedy of verbal and written cliches, which informed his broadcasting. Describing a school football match during which he scored two match-winning goals, he wrote, 'I can close my eyes and see the heavy, sodden leather ball arcing away from my heavy, sodden leather right boot and beyond what sports writers call 'the goalkeeper's despairing grasp'' (Peel and Ravenscroft, 53). 
In his last years Peel struggled with weight problems and he was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes in September 2001. He maintained a demanding schedule, writing the early parts of his autobiography, listening to demonstration tapes, and commuting between Suffolk and London each week. He was unhappy when his radio show was moved from 10 p.m.-midnight to 11 p.m.-1 a.m. and told Andy Kershaw that this timetabling was 'killing' him. His last Radio 1 show was broadcast on 14 October 2004. Six weeks before his death he was interviewed by 'Insight', an alumni magazine of the University of Liverpool. He admitted that his greatest fear was of death: 'The fact of it and the manner of it, really. I'm one of those people who lives their life in sort of imaginary newspaper headlines. So, whenever a car goes past our house that I can't identify, because we live in quite a remote part of Suffolk, I immediately think in terms of: 'Torture Slaying Of Village Couple'.' He said he wanted to be remembered 'as quite a good Dad' ('Sunday Telegraph', 31 Oct 2004). 
Peel and his wife were nearing the end of a three-week holiday in Peru when he died of a heart attack on 25 October 2004 in the Inca city of Cuzco. They were having a pre-dinner drink at the lobby bar of the Hotel Monasterio. Ironically, half an hour before he died, Peel was recalling his long-time producer John Walters (who died in 2001), saying 'I wish I'd spent more time with him before he died' (Peel and Ravenscroft, 253). There was a history of early mortality in the Ravenscroft family (his father had died when Peel was twenty-eight). When his death was announced the BBC received over 30,000 calls and emails in a single day from all over the world. On 13 November a service was held at Bury St Edmunds Cathedral, with about 2000 members of the public outside, followed by a private funeral. He was buried in the graveyard of St Andrew's Church, Great Finborough, and was survived by his wife, Sheila, and their four children. 
Peel had the irreverent, glum, unmalicious rebelliousness of a talented but misunderstood teenager. John Walters once said 'We are in real trouble if Peel ever hits puberty.' Uninterested in moving beyond a fan's simple enthusiasm for the music that consumed most of his life, Peel was addicted to novelty and the next exciting new thing. While it is true that he gave airtime to a vast number of singers and bands who would not otherwise have been heard, the majority had only wafer-thin talent. The dust jacket of a biography cites his 'unstinting championing of musical talent', but 'unstinting sympathy for people who 'thought' they had musical talent' would be more accurate. He helped popularize a 'garage' aesthetic in which the rougher the performance and the further from mainstream musical norms, the more 'authentic' the music. Peel estimated that he received about 400 demonstration tapes a week: 'Disposing of these demos is just about the most depressing aspect of what we'll laughingly call 'my work'... Last night... I was moodily carrying boxes of CDs -- most heard, some unheard, all at least a year old -- to the skip in the driveway. Amongst these are letters from and photographs of the bands. It's when you look at these that the enormity of what you're doing hits you. (Peel and Ravenscroft, 129)' 
'Top Gear' itself was a programme more acknowledged than listened to. The story that Peel once listened to the BBC's electronic buzzing test-tone and commented 'that sounds like something I might play on my show' accurately captures how many viewed the programme, even if it is apocryphal. His death prompted much affection and some overstatement. It was an exaggeration to say, as Feargal Sharkey of the Undertones did, that Peel was 'the single most important broadcaster we have ever known', since there is more to broadcasting than popular music. Nor could 'The Independent''s 'He was the most important person in British music since the birth of rock'n'roll' be true of a disc jockey. One dissenting voice among the eulogies was Kevin Myers, who wrote in 'The Independent' that 'Only that bizarre [British] tradition of collecting meaningless things could elevate to national celebrity someone who dedicated his entire life... to trawling through thousands of hours of anguished youthful vacuity, shouted and set to drums.' 
John Peel's legacy of a life in music included an estimated 40,000 albums on vinyl and CD, as well as singles and tapes, a range of BBC Peel sessions (some commercially released), many amateur off-air recordings boxed in attics up and down the country, and thousands of letters from the musicians themselves. His uncollected columns and articles appeared in a variety of publications including 'Oz', music papers like 'Disc' and 'Sounds', 'Punch', 'Radio Times', newspapers, even a piece on the Isle of Man (TT) race for a motorcycling magazine. His trip to Peru was to be the basis for a travel article in the 'Daily Telegraph'. He left personal diaries from 1967 to 1983 and was said to have been advanced $1.6 million for an autobiography. A section of this -- Peel's life to the mid-1960s -- together with a biography written by his wife, Sheila, was published in 2005 as 'Margrave of the Marshes'. 


@@@@@


doc= 94388


Perkin, Harold James (1926-2004), social historian, was born on 11 November 1926 at 3 Arthur Street, Hanley, Staffordshire, the eldest of the five children (four boys and one girl) of Robert James Perkin (1903-1975), building worker, and his wife, Hilda May, 'nee' Dillon (1905-1946). He attributed his later interest in social history to his solidly working-class background and a burning desire, developed early, to understand how industrial Britain and its class system came into being. In 1929 he was sent to the nursery department of the local Cannon Street infants' school and in 1931 he moved on to the Shelton junior Church of England school, where he won prizes every year and became head boy. He won a scholarship to Hanley high school in 1938. He grew up as a classic working-class scholarship boy, bright, confident, and aspiring, backed and encouraged by his parents. At fifteen he gained distinctions in all nine subjects of the school certificate. 
Perkin won a major scholarship in history to Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1945, graduating three years later with the rare distinction of a starred first, one of only two awarded in a field of 330 candidates. He applied to Cambridge to do a PhD but was rejected with the comment: 'Your ability... does not seem to us to be in the direction of academic research' (Perkin, 82). He attributed the rejection to the fact that he had not presented a conventional academic profile while he was an undergraduate. He had been the news editor of 'Varsity', had danced with the Ballet Joos, performed with the Footlights, and rowed as well as studying what he chose rather than what he was directed towards. But there looks to have been more than a touch of class snobbery in the decision. On 3 July 1948 he married Joan Griffiths, then working as a clerk in the Ministry of National Insurance, but later a social historian, at Salem Methodist Church, Smallthorne, Stoke-on-Trent. The couple had met four years earlier through their involvement in the Co-op Youth Movement; she was the daughter of Henry Griffiths. They had two children: Deborah Jane ('b'. 1958), later a BBC television producer, and Julian Robert ('b'. 1964), later director of technology strategy at the 'Financial Times'. 
After national service in the RAF (1948-50), and while his contemporaries who had gained an unstarred first or even a 2.1 were receiving the coveted Cambridge research studentships, Perkin took a post as assistant lecturer in the extramural department of Manchester University. In 1951 he was appointed at Manchester to the first ever lectureship in social history in Britain. He found the broad-based teaching of the subject, mainly from primary sources, an invaluable background to his own research which was initially into the social history of the landed aristocracy. Impatient of the tyranny of the authoritarian senior professors at Manchester -- the 'old lags' as he called them -- he became in 1958 secretary of the local branch of the Association of University Teachers (AUT), campaigning for non-professorial representation in the university's senate. During eighteen years of work for the AUT he rose to be national president (1970-71), fighting for better pay, conditions, and pensions for academics. He also wrote the jubilee history of the AUT, 'Key Profession' (1969). He was an early 'telly don', writing and presenting two successful series for Granada which he later expanded into books, 'The Age of the Railway' (1970) and 'The Age of the Automobile' (1976). 
Having fallen out with his head of department at Manchester, who he thought was sabotaging his attempts to develop his subject, Perkin applied for a post at the new University of Lancaster. He was appointed in 1965 as senior lecturer and in 1967 became the first professor of social history in the United Kingdom. It was while he was at Lancaster that he pioneered -- along with historians such as Asa Briggs, E. P. Thompson, and Peter Laslett -- the establishment of social history as an academic discipline. Fully aware of the need for an institutional academic infrastructure, he had launched the 'Studies in Social History' series at Routledge in 1957. For thirty years it was the premier series of monographs on the subject. In 1976 he initiated the foundation of the Social History Society, chairing it for ten years. With its annual conferences and regular newsletters, it became a vital forum for the interchange of ideas. At Lancaster he set up the Centre for Social History (1975-6) and inaugurated the first MA in social history. His enduring scholarly legacy is the monumental trilogy of works 'The Origins of Modern English Society' (1969), 'The Rise of Professional Society' (1989), and 'The Third Revolution' (1996), in which he charted the emergence and eventual triumph of the professional classes first in Britain and later globally. It was these books that confirmed him as one of the most visionary, gifted, and dynamic historians of his generation. 
At Lancaster Perkin developed another area of expertise. He was commissioned to write a book-length report on the new universities for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ('New Universities in the United Kingdom', 1969) and he became a member of what he called 'the higher education mafia', writing and lecturing on higher education all round the world and eventually producing twenty-five publications on the subject. Disenchanted by the rise of Thatcherism and its deleterious effects on British universities, in 1985 he accepted the offer of a chair at Northwestern University in Chicago, where he remained until his retirement in 1997. Back in England, he continued to lecture and write (including an autobiography, 'The Making of a Social Historian', 2002) until the onset of his final illness. 
Harold Perkin was a man of forthright views, often trenchantly expressed, about people, issues, and events. But he was instrumental in establishing, defining, and promoting the discipline of social history. It was largely uncharted territory when he began his career but by its end was a flourishing, respected, and influential branch of history. He died of stomach cancer in St John's Hospice, Westminster, on 16 October 2004. After a private cremation, his ashes were interred at the church of St Mary's, Paddington, London, on 27 October. He was survived by his wife, Joan, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94390


Potter, Lynda Lee- (1935-2004), journalist, was born on 2 May 1935 at The Firs maternity home, Leigh, Lancashire, the daughter of Norman Higginson, a painter and decorator, of 76 Gordon Street, Leigh, and his wife, Margaret (Peggy), 'nee' Berry, who later ran a wallpaper and paint shop. She was educated at Leigh Girls' Grammar School, which she referred to as 'the escape route for ordinary children and the pathway to a new life'. However, as she later made clear, the real architect of her escape from a working-class provincial northern background to join the metropolitan middle classes was her mother, who determinedly encouraged her only child to have 'ideas above my station' (Lee-Potter, 3). 
Lynda Higginson's new life began at the age of eighteen when she obtained a place at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, and began the process of social class transformation. She later wrote: 'I got on a train at Warrington Bank Quay Station with a Lancashire accent and got off at Euston without it' (Lee-Potter, 11). After graduating she adopted the stage name of Lynda Berrison and won a part in a Brian Rix farce, 'Dry Rot', at the Whitehall Theatre. Before going on tour with the play she met a medical student, Jeremy Patrick Lee-Potter ('b'. 1934), the son of Air Marshal Sir Patrick Lee Potter, and entered, by her own account, 'a different social milieu' (ibid., 19). He later became an eminent consultant haematologist, chairman of the British Medical Association (1990-93) and deputy chairman of the General Medical Council's professional conduct committee. They married on 26 October 1957 and had a son and two daughters. 
In 1961 Jeremy Lee-Potter was posted, as an RAF doctor, to Aden. It was there that Lynda Lee-Potter started her journalistic career, by contributing articles to the 'Aden Chronicle' about life as an expatriate. On her return to England she wrote on a freelance basis for magazines, notably 'Nova', before taking a job with the 'Woman's Mirror'. In 1967 she was hired by the 'Daily Mail' as a feature writer. She had been on the paper for five years when she was asked by the editor, David English, to write a column. She later said: 'I went in and did it. Every week I thought somebody else would probably take over. But it's just carried on' ('Daily Telegraph', 21 Oct 2004). Her elevation had come about because the 'Mail's' then celebrated female columnist, Jean Rook, left to join the rival 'Daily Express'. English was outraged by Rook's desertion and was desperate to prove to Rook that she was not irreplaceable. According to a 'Mail' colleague, Peter Black, English ruthlessly 'processed' Lee-Potter's copy 'into a likeness of the strident Rook's' (Taylor, 70). But Lee-Potter proved more than equal to the task, becoming the voice of the 'Daily Mail' by embodying English's vision of the ideal woman reader in a mythical middle England. The 'Mail''s historian, Sally Taylor, observed: 'In some guises she was the conscience of middle-class womanhood; in others a carping fishwife; in still others a highly sophisticated social commentator. It was a tribute to the flexibility of Lee-Potter's talent that she could carry out English's scenario without compromising her own creativity. (Taylor, 70)' Indeed, though Rook was billed as 'the First Lady of Fleet Street', Lee-Potter secured the title for herself by eventually surpassing Rook's fame. 
Lee-Potter's weekly page, with its highly opinionated mixture of commonsensical wisdom, candid criticisms (usually of celebrities), and moments of compassion, made her one of Britain's best-known journalists for more than three decades. She dismissed frequent accusations of bitchiness by remarking, with her trademark wide smile, 'I just write what I think'. Her other great journalistic skill was as an interviewer of countless celebrities and politicians. She often elicited from interviewees all manner of headline-making indiscretions by drawing in her columnar claws to offer them a sympathetic ear. She was appointed OBE in 1998 and garlanded with journalistic awards, twice winning the accolade of columnist of the year, in 1984 and 2001, being named feature writer of the year twice, in 1987 and 1993, and woman writer of the year in 1989. In a profession dominated by the cult of youth, two qualities helped to maintain her longevity as a celebrity journalist. First, she regarded being a journalist as a privilege, retaining a youthful enthusiasm that few, if any, veteran hacks could match. Second, she viewed journalism as a trade rather than a profession, an activity requiring continual effort and thought. 
Lee-Potter's belief in the virtues of hard work sprang from her appreciation of her mother's energetic approach to life, as she revealed in her only book, 'Class Act: How to Beat the British Class System' (2000). The autobiographical sections charted her own climb up the British class ladder, even defending snobbery because it 'has certainly motivated me all my life' (Lee-Potter, 53). As one reviewer noted, Lee-Potter 'is both proud of being working-class and triumphant for having risen out of it, for what is snobbery but the entrepreneurial spirit?' (Maddox, 69). Lee-Potter died from a brain tumour on 20 October 2004 at her home, Icen House, Grange Road, Stoborough, Wareham, Dorset, and was cremated on 27 October. She was survived by her husband, Jeremy, and their three children, all of whom followed her into journalism. 


@@@@@


doc= 94392


Relph, Michael Leighton George (1915-2004), film producer and production designer, was born at Riffelberg, Broadstone, Dorset, on 16 February 1915, the son of George Walton Relph (1888-1960), a distinguished stage and screen actor, and his wife, Deborah Caroline, 'nee' Nansen (later Harker), a former actress who subsequently ran Old Times Furnishing, a theatrical and film supply company. He was educated at Bembridge School, Isle of Wight, after which, at the age of sixteen, he spent six months working as a jackaroo on a sheep-station in north-western Australia. His maternal grandfather had been attorney-general of Western Australia and Relph accompanied his grandmother when she returned to live there. 
When he returned to England Relph was accepted into the apprenticeship scheme set up by a family friend, the producer Michael Balcon, at Gaumont-British Studios, Elstree, where the legendary German designer Alfred Junge headed the art department and strongly influenced the young Relph. The latter became assistant art director, first at Elstree, then at Warner Brothers studios in Teddington, where he shared art-director credits with Peter Proud on such films as the 'quota quickies' 'Who Killed John Savage?' (1937) and 'Many Tanks, Mr Atkins' (1938), and, more notably, on Arthur Woods's well-regarded crime drama 'They Drive by Night' (1939). On 27 September 1939 he married Doris Gosden (1904-1978), the divorced wife of John Montague Gosden and daughter of James Ringwood, licensed victualler. They had one son, Simon ('b'. 1940), who became a major force in British cinema in the later twentieth century, as a producer and industry figure. Relph's first marriage ended in divorce, and on 22 September 1950 he married Marie Rose Law (1919/20-2003), the divorced wife of Michael Evelyn Murray Law and daughter of Gerald Woolman, accountant. They had one daughter, Emma, who acted in several films in the 1980s. 
Throughout the 1940s Relph was in demand as a stage designer. He won a reputation for his versatility, his range comprehending Aldwych farce ('Nap Hand'), serious drama ('Watch on the Rhine'), tough American gangster fare ('The Petrified Forest'), Shavian philosophical talk-fest ('Heartbreak House'), Utopian allegory ('They Came to a City'), social drama ('Frieda'), the brittleness of Noel Coward ('Relative Values'), wise-cracking Americana ('The Man Who Came to Dinner'), and gentler mannered domestic drama ('Quiet Wedding' and its sequel 'Quiet Weekend'). A designer who could meet the demands of such a pot-pourri of different genres was clearly going to be widely respected. Concurrently with his West End stage work Relph was also making his mark in films, and few contemporaries were more diversely involved in the British film industry than he was, fulfilling as he did the functions of art director (production designer, to use the later term), producer, director, and writer, as well as holding a number of important administrative posts. However, he was best known for two of these roles: as an Oscar-nominated designer and for the string of successful films he made, usually as producer, in partnership with Basil Dearden. 
Relph first went to Ealing Studios in 1942, where Michael Balcon was now installed as production chief and 'took him under his wing' ('The Guardian', 8 Oct 2004). Dearden was already established there as co-director with the comedian Will Hay on several of Hay's starring vehicles, the last of which was 'My Learned Friend' (1943), on which Relph worked as art director, having first designed for Dearden's solo-directing debut, 'The Bells Go Down' (1943). So began one of the longest and most productive associations in British cinema. Relph designed the evocative rural Welsh-inn setting for the fantasy 'Halfway House' (1944) and the deliberately stylized theatricality of Dearden's next film, 'They Came to a City' (1944), which Relph had also designed for the stage production of J. B. Priestley's socialistic vision. Charles Barr later praised Relph's 'remarkable work in his construction of two quite different styles of environment' in these two films (Barr, 187). 
The other Ealing colleague with whom Relph was notably associated at this period was the Brazilian Alberto Cavalcanti, of whom Relph later said that 'he became the sort of 'eminence grise' of the studio and had a tremendous influence on Balcon' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema', 481). His designs for Cavalcanti's productions of 'Champagne Charlie' (1944) and 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1946), as well as episodes of the portmanteau horror film 'Dead of Night' (1945), were striking visual achievements, adding enormously to the atmosphere in these very diverse films. The sketches for 'Champagne Charlie', for instance, recreated with a style and bravura that went beyond mere realism the opulence of the music hall and the decrepitude of Victorian living quarters. Of Relph's work at this time, that other noted designer Edward Carrick wrote: 'His designs are made in crayon and wash, and as designs show a distinct theatrical influence but when built in the studio become essentially cinematic' (Carrick, 110-11). 
According to Relph it was Cavalcanti who 'suggested to Balcon that he should team Basil [Dearden] and myself, and I think it was a very good arrangement. Basil was a very easy person to work with and I was able to convey any creative ideas I had through him. We complemented each other' (McFarlane, 'British Cinema', 481). Though some of their films carried the credit 'Produced and Directed by Basil Dearden and Michael Relph', it was fairly clearly understood that Dearden directed and Relph produced. Relph later said that he did not feel he had the temperament for directing. His name appeared as solo director (with Dearden as producer) on several films, including 'Davy' (1957), which starred his father, George Relph, and the comedian Harry Secombe, and 'Rockets Galore!' (1958), the post-Ealing sequel to 'Whisky Galore!', which lacked the astringency of the original. Relph believed, though without acrimony, that he only directed those films Dearden didn't want to. 
Ealing was characterized by a number of producer-director combinations; indeed, this was common elsewhere in British cinema (as with John and Roy Boulting, Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, and Ralph Thomas and Betty Box). The Dearden-Relph team was prolific, and too much enamoured of film-making to be willing to wait, as some at Ealing were, for exactly the ideal project. As a result their output may have been more variable than that of some contemporaries, but their adaptability undoubtedly attracted its fair share of popular and critical success. At Ealing it was the usual practice for Balcon to be credited as producer, with the person who actually filled this role being listed as associate producer, and this was the case with Relph until the early 1950s, when, though his function didn't change, he was billed as producer. 
The Dearden-Relph partnership began with the tense and moving prisoner-of-war drama 'The Captive Heart' (1946) and lasted through a further fifteen films. These encompassed an unusually wide generic range. There were socially conscious dramas such as 'Frieda' (1947; Relph had designed the stage play), in which a German war-bride is introduced into a hostile English environment; 'I Believe in You' (1952), dealing with the work of probation officers in relation to youthful offenders; and, most famously, 'The Blue Lamp' (1950), a realistically set tribute to the police force faced with a new kind of post-war delinquent as well as continuing to comfort old ladies with missing pets. The latter film made a star of Dirk Bogarde as a violent, sexy young thug, but, perhaps even more remarkably, so enshrined Jack Warner in the popular imagination as the fatally shot PC Dixon that the screenwriter Ted Willis resuscitated him for the BBC television series 'Dixon of Dock Green' (1955-76). The film's use of location filming and realistic sets, along with its pervasive sense of a barely contained criminal underworld, had a powerfully authentic ring to it in 1950. 

'The Blue Lamp' was a far cry from the team's previous film, 'Saraband for Dead Lovers' (1948), on which Relph was not merely producer but also chiefly responsible for the film's sumptuous production design. This was not a popular film at the time, being much more sombre than the Gainsborough costume melodramas that had been such box-office successes, but it later acquired a higher reputation, largely perhaps for its lavish decor and use of colour, and Relph richly earned his Oscar nomination. In 1997 he said that 'It was an attempt to make a big international historical romance' and its failure 'made Ealing return to a very parochial type of subject' (Burton, Sullivan, and Wells, 245). The Duchess Sophia's library in Hanover remains one of the most striking achievements in British production design. Relph himself wrote at the time: 'Here then, in these settings of Hanover, should lie the doom of the little Princess of Celle' ('Saraband', 80), and for him matters of colour and design were essentially at the service of the drama. The other Ealing costume film on which Relph worked as producer was Robert Hamer's sublime black comedy, 'Kind Hearts and Coronets' (1949). 
Among Dearden's and Relph's other Ealing productions were several further omnibus films, including the less successful 'Train of Events' (1949), tracing the fortunes of four victims of a train crash; the realist drama 'Pool of London' (1951), described by Charles Barr as an 'examination of the interlocking destinies of a group, this time the crew of a merchant ship who come ashore for a weekend' (Barr, 202); 'The Square Ring' (1953), with its cross-section of boxers and their world; and 'Out of the Clouds' (1955), set among passengers and staff at Heathrow airport. More interesting, especially in the Ealing context, was the bold melodrama of 'Cage of Gold' (1950), which gave a real whiff of post-war change and discontents as it went about its histrionic meal of relationships. One of Dearden's and Relph's most ambitious Ealing films was another drama of post-war malaise, 'The Ship that Died of Shame' (1955), in which a wartime boat put to illicit peacetime uses becomes a metaphor for a declining spirit of national consensus. One later commentator described it as 'a particularly interesting example of a film which in fact says more than it seems to be saying... offering a critique of... looking back' to a past 'from which the only escape can be through violence and excess' (Cook, 366). 
After Ealing, Dearden and Relph, more noticeably than other studio alumni, continued to have productive careers, perhaps because of their willingness to tackle a diversity of projects. The next main phase of their work was their involvement in Allied Film Makers, a consortium of production units initiated by Bryan Forbes and Richard Attenborough under the distribution umbrella of the Rank Organisation. The Dearden-Relph contribution to this worthy venture included 'The League of Gentlemen' (1960), in which they continued their critique of post-war Britain in the guise of a witty heist thriller, and three films dealing with social issues of the day: 'Sapphire' (1959), focusing on racial prejudice; 'Victim' (1961), the first mainstream treatment of a homosexual plot-line, quite courageous in its time; and the engrossing but commercially unsuccessful 'Life for Ruth' (1962), which explored concepts of religious fundamentalism and medical ethics. While the issues in these films later lost their immediacy, their canny packaging as taut melodramas meant that they remained eminently watchable. 
When Allied Film Makers folded, partly as a result of 'Life for Ruth''s failure to 'cover its cost, much less get into profit' (Walker, 248), Dearden and Relph showed their customary resilience and made a further half-dozen films together in the 1960s. These included 'The Mind Benders' (1963), a gripping study of brainwashing procedures; the youth-orientated drama 'A Place to Go' (1963), described as 'a sympathetic attempt to keep up with Woodfall' ('Films and Filming', July 1966; Woodfall was the production company that made several 'angry young films'); and the enjoyably lush melodrama of family passions 'Woman of Straw' (1964). Dearden then made a couple of films with other producers but was reunited with Relph for 'The Assassination Bureau' (1969), a period spy spoof that Relph also designed, and 'The Man Who Haunted Himself' (1970), which Relph and Dearden co-wrote. 
After Dearden's death in a car accident in 1971 Relph's career lost some of its momentum. Nevertheless he continued to exercise influence in the British film industry in several ways. An urbane and conciliatory man, he was well placed to occupy some important administrative posts, including the chairmanship of the Film Production Association of Great Britain (1971-6) and of the British Film Production Board (1972-9), the latter set up to encourage young film-makers. He was also a governor of the British Film Institute (1972-9). From 1978 to 1982 he was in charge of production for the enterprising Boyd's Company, set up by Don Boyd; he was executive producer for Boyd's controversial 'Scum' (1979), and co-produced 'An Unsuitable Job for a Woman' (1982), a quirky version of P. D. James's thriller. In 1999 he was made an honorary DLitt by De Montfort University. 
More than many who worked creatively in cinema, Relph was knowledgeable and perceptive about how it also functioned as an industry and as a cultural force in the national life. He understood its connections with literature and the stage, with the British class system at the time of the Ealing heyday, and with the American dominance of British screens. But it was as an inventive designer and as one half of an astute producer-director partnership that he was most notable. He and Dearden made a valuable contribution to the continuity and quality of British cinema when it was at its most British. He died in a nursing home, the Old Malt House, High Street, Selsey, Sussex, on 30 September 2004, of bronchopneumonia and obstruction of the airways, having spent his last year there, and was cremated at Chichester crematorium on 11 October. He was survived by his son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 94398


Rubens, Bernice (1923-2004), author, was born on 26 July 1923 at 9 Glossop Terrace in the poor Splott district of Cardiff, the third of the four children of Eli Reuben, a travelling tallyman (a seller of clothes on credit), and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Cohen. Her maternal grandfather, Wolf Cohen, a master tailor, had left Poland with only his sewing machine. Eli Reuben fled from Latvia carrying only two violins, one full-sized and one half-sized. He arrived in Cardiff thinking it was New York, for which he had purchased a passage from Hamburg. The Reubens were practising Orthodox and Zionist Jews, tightly embedded in Cardiff's close-knit Orthodox cousinhood. Never not conscious of being 'Ostjuden' exiles from antisemitic terror, they were active in helping refugees from Hitler's Germany (they took in Hugo Gross, a boy from Hamburg, whose parents perished in Auschwitz, as an honorary son). Like their father, the children were very musical. Bernice's older brother Harold was a child piano prodigy; her older sister Beryl and younger brother Cecil became professional musicians (she played viola in the Welsh National Orchestra, he played first violin in the Liverpool Philharmonic and after that in the London Symphony Orchestra). The family 'listener', Bernice took up piano and cello -- refusing the small violin. She often said she would rather have been a professional musician than a writer. When writing she was wont to reward herself for good sentences with a short session on the cello. 
Bernice Reuben attended local schools: Tredegarville and Roath Park infants' schools and, having passed the eleven-plus 'early', Cardiff High School for Girls. She went on to read English at University College, Cardiff. Her choice of subject was a mistake, she came to think: it was hampering to a would-be novelist to have Jane Austen and George Eliot looking over her shoulder. She graduated in July 1944, towards the end of the Second World War, during which the family narrowly escaped being bombed out. She taught briefly at Handsworth Grammar School for Boys (from which she was sacked for protesting at the head's use of corporal punishment); moved to London; and did bits of acting (her dance of the seven veils in a Peter Zadek production of 'Salome' stayed on as a favourite party piece). She taught briefly at a progressive school in Hampstead. On 29 December 1947 she married, at Cardiff's Windsor Place Synagogue, Frankfurt-born (Hans) Rudolf Nassauer (1924-1996), a tutor, and son of Franz Leo Nassauer, wine merchant. His family were prosperous, assimilated 'Ostjuden'-despising Jews, refugees from Hitler's Germany. A budding poet, Nassauer produced eight novels between 1960 and 1986. They settled in London, and had two daughters, Sharon and Rebecca, born in 1949 and 1951. Bernice Nassauer kept a kosher house, and would go on for a long time keeping the Friday night Sabbath meal. She never lost a sense of the need to remember the long history of Jewish exile. 
In the early 1950s Bernice Nassauer taught English, turning to novel writing later in that decade. The first of her twenty-five published novels, 'Set on Edge' -- a tone-setting black comedy about a noisy Welsh Jewish family obsessed with marriage and death, densely peopled with caricature versions of her own family -- appeared in 1960 in the name of Bernice Rubens, by which she was known thereafter. In the 1960s she got into the documentary film business, specializing in childhood issues. Her prizewinning feature 'Stress' (1968), about handicapped children, led to her being hired by Granada Television. On the strength of 'Dear Mum and Dad', a Granada film about a children's home, she went to work for the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, filming in Java and other parts of Asia, Africa, and South America, making documentaries especially about women in rural development. For some years she alternated documentary film making with writing novels. Perennially forgiving of her philandering husband, who kept a long-term mistress with whom he had a son, Rubens finally divorced him in 1969 -- though they became close again before his death in 1996. 
Bernice Rubens's novels were almost immediately successful. Her fourth, 'The Elected Member' (1969), about a rabbi's son of intense promise turned drug addict and paranoid hallucinator, stuck in a lunatic asylum (a terrifying take on the breakdown of her brother Harold's promising musical career), won the second Booker prize (1970). 'A Five Year Sentence' (1978), featuring a suicidal spinster, jilted by a cruel lothario, who strangles the heartless old matron of her childhood orphanage, was shortlisted for the Booker. 'Our Father' (1987), the story of a God-bothered explorer who smothered her half-brother -- the child of her father's adultery -- in his pram and who loses her own son, the outcome of a visiting plumber's rape, in an act of divine eye-for-an-eye punishment, netted the Welsh Arts Council prize. Other novels became successful movies. 'I Sent a Letter to My Love' (1975), in which an unmarried Welsh woman finds herself in a lonely hearts correspondence with her own crippled brother, became 'Ma chere inconnue' starring Simone Signoret (1980). The film version of 'Madame Sousatska', Rubens's second novel (1962), about a Welsh boy prodigy's zany London piano teacher (based on her brother Harold's own teacher), was directed in 1988 by John Schlesinger and starred Shirley MacLaine. 'Mr Wakefield's Crusade' (1985), a story of mistaken identities and gender-crossing sparked by papers lifted from a man who drops dead in a post office queue, became a TV mini-series. 
Rubens began making a living by writing after her Booker prize, on the basis of the home sales, foreign rights, and film rights. She soon became a well-known London woman of letters, a classic Camden Town intellectual. She was great friends with other London novelists, especially Paul Bailey and Beryl Bainbridge. These friendships were cemented not least when teaching creative writing courses for the Arvon Foundation and representing British writing on overseas tours for the British Council. (Rubens first met Beryl Bainbridge on one such trip to Israel.) She became a serial judge of literary prizes -- the Booker, the Whitbread, the Orange, the Commonwealth writers'. She was active in International PEN, becoming one of its vice-presidents. In 1982 she was deported from Moscow after illicit meetings with refusenik writers. In that year she was made a fellow of University College, Cardiff. The University of Wales made her an honorary DLitt in 1991, and she became a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 2001. 
Rubens's novels are macabre, mordant, gothic, bleak, and black even when they essay comedy. 'A Solitary Grief' (1991), for instance, in which a father strangles the Downs syndrome daughter whose face he cannot bear to look at and then hangs himself, or 'Autobiopsy' (1993), in which a blocked writer trepans his dead mentor and siphons off his brain for inspiring drinks, are only par for the Rubens course. Her people are terribly troubled, full of hatred of self and others, especially their own kin; they are suicidal, killers, or utterly confused about gender -- there are several notable transvestites, as in 'Sunday Best' (1971) and 'Mr Wakefield's Crusade'. Several of her unhappy old ladies actually enjoy being raped by strong young men of the lower classes -- as in her gothic cruise-ship novel 'Birds of Passage' (1981). The pervasive troubledness of these selves is often manifestly fired by immediate particular personal experience, not least in the extremely angry novels about unfaithful husbands and 'parasitic' women who 'batten off married backs' -- as in 'Mate in Three' (1966), 'Autobiopsy', and Rubens's bitter post-divorce novel 'Go Tell the Lemming' (1973). But it is the pains of a traditional Jewish selfhood and of bad Jewish history that most haunt and condition these sufferings -- ancient, biblically inspired distresses, the teeth of the children perpetually 'Set on Edge' by the fathers' doings (as that novel's epigraph from 'Ezekiel' has it), the dementedness of being chosen as God's elected people, the curse of being prodigiously blessed, which entails, for Rubens, being doomed as history's perennial scapegoats, picked out for pain as the subjects of diaspora, exile, pogrom, and holocaust. This grand theme of 'Brothers' (1983), the multigenerational 'Ostjuden' saga that Rubens valued most of all her fictions, pervades everything she wrote. Antisemitism, the acme of racism for Rubens, is a universal. 'I, Dreyfus' (1999) finds the Dreyfus case being replayed in the framing of a Jewish headmaster for murder. Typically for Rubens, the evil machinators are led by an old Nazi settled in an English village. Unrepentant Nazis live sturdily on in her novels. They work for the United Nations in her Java novel 'The Ponsonby Post' (1977). Nice old Mrs Green in the Hollyhocks old people's home in 'The Waiting Game' (1997) has to be winkled out as Heidi Schoss, responsible for the deaths of thousands of Jewish women and children at Auschwitz-Birkenau. These antisemites and their ilk must be exposed. There must be no forgetting of what Germans have done to Jews -- and (a keynote of 'Brothers') no forgiving either. 
What gives Rubens's fictions so much of their power is indeed their repeated acts of remembering, of bearing witness, especially to the terrors inflicted again and again on Jews. What gives her testimonials their special edge is their uncompromising refusal to have truck with anything like forgiveness. One of the most memorable recallings of 'When I Grow Up' (2005), the memoir Rubens managed to complete before she died in 2004, is of reading the Auschwitz section of 'Brothers' at the annual British Council shop-window for British writers at Walberberg, near Cologne. 'The very word Germany stuck in my throat.' 'Enraged', overwhelmed emotionally, instantly regretting her choice of passage, she none the less read on in a very awkward silence. Auschwitz and its like 'must not be forgotten or myth-translated', especially not by Germans ('When I Grow Up', 175-6). Truth-telling like this was for Rubens a lifelong compulsion, however personally hurtful -- even when it came to painful revisionism of long-held promised land hopes, as the state of Israel's treatment of Arabs worsened through the 1980s and 1990s. The Israeli 'God that failed' was one of her latterday themes, not least in 'When I Grow Up'. The emotional demon-facing intensities of her last novel, 'The Sergeants' Tale' (2003), which told the terrible story of two kidnapped British sergeants executed by the Jewish terror group Irgun amid the 1947 birthpangs of the state of Israel, make it arguably one of her finest. This father- and fathers-haunted writer was glad, she said, that her father had not lived to witness Israel's invasion of Lebanon. 
Rubens died on 13 October 2004 at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, of a stroke combined with chronic bronchitis -- a classic illness of smokers. This was the final price perhaps for all the years of pleasurably gossipy smoking with Beryl Bainbridge at the Cafe Delancey in Camden Town -- both of them having pretended to give up on doctors' orders, peering, as Bainbridge put it, 'anxiously out of the window through a mist of smoke' ('The Independent', 15 Oct 2004). 


@@@@@


doc= 94399


Russell, Conrad Sebastian Robert, fifth Earl Russell (1937-2004), historian and politician, was born on 15 April 1937 at Telegraph House, Elsted, Sussex, the son of the philosopher and political campaigner Bertrand Russell, third Earl Russell (1872-1970), and his third wife, Patricia Helen (Peter) Spence. Conrad (named after Joseph Conrad, a novelist Bertrand knew and admired) had a disrupted and unhappy childhood, dragged around America as his father failed to settle into a succession of academic jobs. On his return to a fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge, Bertrand and his wife used Conrad as a means to further their increasingly bitter feud. In 1949 Peter left, taking Conrad with her. All this took a great toll. Indeed, as he entered manhood Russell twice actively considered suicide. He did not see his father again until 1967, and when he did so it was in the clear knowledge that his mother would refuse ever to see him again. It is difficult not to conclude that he was drawn not to his father but to what his father represented -- 400 years of aristocratic radicalism: the Russell tradition of self-conscious progressivism that had seen the fourth earl of Bedford stand up to Charles I, William Lord Russell die on the scaffold for plotting against Charles II, the fourth duke of Bedford as the leading Foxite in the Lords, Lord John Russell the epitome of nineteenth-century reforming whiggery, and his own father as a firebrand pacifist and social radical. Across his career Conrad Russell hesitated between supporting the Labour Party (being selected as its candidate in 1968 for the constituency of Mitcham and Beddington) and the Liberal (later Liberal Democrat) Party. When he inherited his title in 1987 he took the Liberal Democrat whip in the Lords, and he was indeed elected by his seventeen fellow hereditary Liberal Democrat peers to represent them in the reformed House of Lords in 1999 (the nearest modern times has seen to an election for Old Sarum). He was in many ways the last great whig, while paradoxically he was seen as the greatest champion of anti-whig history. He was, indeed, no stranger to paradox in any aspect of his life. 
Deeply wounded by the feuding of his parents, Russell was sent to Eton College in 1950, where he was initially bullied and unhappy; it was only when he went to Merton College, Oxford, in 1955 that he began to emerge from his shell. He combined an old Etonian flamboyance (striding around in a scarlet cape) with helping to found the university Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament group, and heading the campaign to get women admitted to the Oxford Union. He graduated with a first-class degree in 1958. He began research on early Stuart treason laws under Christopher Hill, then establishing himself as the most influential scholar in the world on the English revolution; but the relationship was not a good one, and once Russell began working as a lecturer at Bedford College, London, then an all-women's college, in 1960, the doctorate was abandoned, although fragments of it were published as articles that were still being read forty years later. He was drawn instead into a lifelong passion for the group of MPs in both houses of parliament who coalesced around his ancestor Francis Russell, fourth earl of Bedford, and especially his man of business John Pym. In the last two years of his life, when he had more or less given up writing history, he prepared the lives of both Bedford and Pym for the 'Oxford Dictionary of National Biography' -- both delivered at more than twice the length he was given, and both quite brilliant. 
For more than forty years Russell threw himself into the life of a university teacher, and was very good at it. He enjoyed the cut and thrust of debate and the exchange of ideas, and he was solicitous about the well-being of his students. Although eyebrows were raised when he married one of them, this was to be one of the great blessings of his life. His wife was Elizabeth Franklyn Sanders (died 2003), daughter of Horace Sanders, an electrical engineer and manager; the couple married on 11 August 1962 and had two sons. Elizabeth's influence on Conrad was profound. She brought him the emotional stability denied him by his parents; she brought a cheerful practicality that modified the dysfunctionality of his domestic life (though she could not deal with his sartorial incompetence); and she was to prove the perfect intellectual partner and no mere sounding board. She herself worked on the reign of Mary I and was decades ahead of the field in her views on the successes of that reign (this explains the startling line of argument adopted by Conrad in his 1971 textbook 'The Crisis of Parliaments, 1509-1660'). She was at his side throughout his career, reinforcing his natural kindness and sharpening his wit. 
By 1975 Russell was thirty-eight and a reader at Bedford College. Yet he had written no monograph, had edited one collection of essays directed at students, and had written seven recondite articles in learned journals. His reputation rested on those and on 'The Crisis of Parliaments', a clever, quirky, and prescient textbook that was always the book able students were told to read second. Within three years he had one of the top jobs in British history in the USA -- as successor to the abrasive Jack Hexter at Yale -- and he was in huge demand as a lecturer and keynote speaker on both sides of the Atlantic. It was a very dramatic and entirely proper rise to prominence. 
The turning point in Russell's career came in the early 1970s when he began to teach a special subject on the parliaments of the 1620s with Nicholas Tyacke. This brought him for the first time into a close scrutiny of parliamentary records, and he was hooked. He wrote two short books for A-level students (so obscure that they are not in the list of his writings prepared by Elizabeth Russell for his Festschrift, do not appear in the 'Royal Historical Society Bibliography Online', and are not in at least two copyright libraries in the UK), one entitled 'The Reign of James I' and the other 'The Reign of Charles I, 1625-1642', both published in 1974. Here was revisionism 'avant la lettre' -- full of aphorisms that looked to the future: 'if the country Charles I inherited was ready for civil war, it was not for any sort of social reasons' ('Reign of Charles I', 29); 'The House of Commons did not want power; it merely wanted freedom to criticise the holders of power' (ibid., 34); 'the English Civil War was a war forced on unwilling men by the pressure of events' (ibid., 75). 
It was these books rather than his well-known edited collection of essays by his colleagues and contemporaries, 'The Origins of the English Civil War' (1973), that reflected the lessons of Russell's teaching and set him up for the work that transformed a whole field of study: an article published in 'History' in 1976 entitled 'Parliamentary history in perspective, 1604-1629'. This gave him an agenda for the next twenty years and, overnight, it made him a scholar in relation to whom everyone else in the field defined themselves. It was a manifesto for early modern revisionism. Whole issues of several leading journals were devoted to his demolition of the notion that there was a 'high road' to civil war in the early seventeenth century. There was misgovernment and there was incompetent kingship. There was no constitutional opposition, no 'winning of the initiative by the house of commons', no use of the power of the purse to clip royal prerogative wings; and the struggles for power at court were amplified within the houses of parliament. The arguments of this famous essay were developed in a succession of more detailed essays and in 'Parliaments and English Politics, 1621-1629', which appeared to general acclaim in 1979. Based on an intimate knowledge of the diaries privately made by MPs recording the speeches of their fellow members, it both captured the drama and gave a flavour of the cut and thrust of debate, in which those in power and those aspiring to power struggled to impress a dazzled and mute majority. This gave free rein to Russell's love of paradox, along with his eye for the vivid quotation that made his point and raised a smile: 'at the beginning of the [1626] session, earls were being created, whom Rudyard wryly described as 'cardinals to carry the consistory, if there be occasion'' (p. 269). In this book above all his others Russell's love of the physicality of the manuscript and a magpie's instinct for the quotation that glistened in the light of day allowed him to make a close reading of particular parliaments stripped of all anachronistic presuppositions. This was to remain a major strand in his research up to his (unpublished) Trevelyan lectures in Cambridge in 1995, although as time went by he placed less emphasis on misgovernment and more on England's growing ungovernability. He had changed his mind, he told his Cambridge audience, about there being no great political crisis in the 1590s: there was a political crisis, and the crisis consisted in politicians not knowing there was a crisis. 
Thus began Russell's dominance of the field, which straddled the years 1976 to 1991. It coincided with his occupancy of the British history chairs at Yale (1979-84) and University College, London (1984-90). In 1990, dismayed by the willingness of his colleagues at University College to take the college out of the federal degree structure of the University of London and to set up on its own, to the detriment, as he saw it, of the smaller colleges, he resigned as Astor professor of British history and moved to King's College, where he remained until his retirement in 2002. Throughout his teaching career he was a conscientious teacher, famed for making his students think 'How do we know that?' and 'What difference does it make?' He was very committed to teaching the history of political thought from ancient to modern times as well as early modern politics; and the breadth of his teaching informed his writing, where he would charactistically say that the English won no major battle on the continent of Europe between Agincourt and Blenheim (C. Russell, 'The Causes of the English Civil War', 1990, 168). Oddly, although he was a great help to graduate students from all over the world who came to work in and around the Institute of Historical Research, he had very few research students of his own. In 'Politics, Religion and Popularity: Early Stuart Essays in Honour of Conrad Russell', a Festschrift presented to him in 2002, only three of the twelve essays were by his own students: but there was no shortage of academic godchildren honoured to honour him. 
Russell's position in London from 1984, the fame of the Tudor-Stuart history seminar at the Institute of Historical Research (he was very much 'primus inter pares' among its sponsors) attended by visiting scholars from around the world, the invitations to return to North America as keynote speaker at conference after conference on the civil wars and on the 'new' British history, gave him the basis from which to beguile the profession with learned, startling, and stimulating presentations. He bestrode the field. No year went by without at least one important new article in a leading journal or in a Festschrift, and his range was spreading. He had always had an interest in religion, and he allied himself closely to Nicholas Tyacke's view of Laudianism and its polarizing effects. But the most potent new line of argument he adopted was the one announced in his inaugural lecture at University College ('The British problem and the English civil war'), that the English polity was destabilized first and foremost by the ungovernability of the multiple kingdoms of the Stuarts, and that there was a 'billiard ball effect' as crises in each in turn had dynamic implications for the other kingdoms. This lecture had as electrifying an effect as his 1976 article (if a more polarizing one), was to be central to all his later work, and found full fruition in his late books. Three more articles teasing out implications of this thesis followed, one after another scintillating contribution to the 'British' origins of the 'English revolution' given as his inaugural lecture at King's College. The best of the work from the 1980s was brought together in the provocatively entitled and defiantly revisionist 'Unrevolutionary England, 1603-1642' (1990). But the most powerful expression of all the themes that had come to dominate his studies, and in many ways the pinnacle of his academic career, was the hugely successful series of Ford lectures he delivered in Oxford during the Hilary term of 1988 and published in 1990 under the title 'The Causes of the English Civil War'. Here there was a rare range -- not just the period 1559-1642 referred to in chapter titles, but the ability to make much bolder links across time and space, as in his sweeping comparisons of the trajectories of Reformation across a century and throughout three kingdoms, or in the magisterial depth of his account of the canker of want that ensnared successive rulers from before the Armada to beyond the revolution of 1688. 
These lectures met head-on the charge that the revisionists had lost sight of long-term causes. Russell's riposte was to show how the Reformation, the problems of managing a complex composite monarchy, and the inability of the political elite to manage institutional change all produced an ungovernable polity. The civil wars were not like a plane crash caused by pilot error (to adapt one of his own metaphors), but the result of metal fatigue that those in the cockpit failed to recognize as they blamed one another for the juddering sounds running through their craft. Yet, brilliant as they were as lectures, they did not quite transfer to the printed page. The book was promoted as a textbook but its allusiveness and combination of bold generalization and esoteric detail were off-putting. And there was an intellectual problem in relating the very broad survey of contexts for breakdown with the particular form that the actual breakdown took. In an understandable but in the end enervating abdication of responsibility Russell produced simultaneously with 'The Causes' a full-scale, 572-page narrative of the descent to civil war -- 'The Fall of the British Monarchies, 1637-1642' (1991) -- that combined a penetrating account of Charles I's miscalculations with the desperate attempts by elites in three kingdoms to restrain him from wilful pursuit of religious policies they found repugnant and political programmes they thought hazardous to noble privilege and the rule of law. The books are, sadly, less than the sum of their parts, although 'The Fall' is as brilliant a reconstruction of the high politics of a composite monarchy as it is possible to imagine. Anyone accepting its premises is drawn into a gripping story of a polity under intolerable pressure. They are better books than 'Parliaments and English Politics', but they did not get the ecstatic reviews. If the 1979 book had opened a field, the books of 1990-91 closed it. Disappointment at the response to these books was a factor in his withdrawal from the front line of historical debate. He also felt increasing dismay at the state of the field he dominated and he also came to regret errors of professional judgement. But these reasons were less important than the allure of trading the study of politics for the practice of politics. 
In 1987 his half-brother died and Russell inherited his title. John Russell had been prevented by chronic mental illness from being an active presence in the House of Lords. Conrad Russell lost no time in taking his seat and accepting the Liberal Democrat whip. For the rest of his life the Lords came more and more to replace the Institute of Historical Research as his spiritual home. He would conduct PhD vivas there, especially if the subject related to parliament; he became an expert on Lords' procedure and as much a critic as any seventeenth-century Russell of discretionary power passing from the legislature to the executive -- as in his passionate speeches against skeleton bills and statutory instruments. He was spokesperson for his party on pensions and social security, and his mastery of detail, together with his strong sense that many of the problems of the poor were perennial and that many of the remedies attempted in the distant past were at least as enlightened as anything the Major or Blair governments could come up with, enlivened the debates in the house. His love of aphorism -- his dry-witted quips could come as readily from James Bond or Bertie Wooster as from Sir Edward Coke or much more obscure early Stuart followers of the Russells -- was even more evident in the house than in his lectures. His 'Intelligent Person's Guide to Liberalism' (1999) was a personal political and social credo that displayed a suspicion of all forms of authority (in education as well as in church and state), a deep rationalism, and a hostility to all forms of corporatism. He was a founder member of the John Stuart Mill Institute and a willing servant of the British Academy (of which he became a fellow in 1991), the Royal Historical Society, and many other learned bodies. But he was temperamentally averse to exercising leadership and convinced that all power corrupts. He was a whig who was suspicious of the next change. This temperamental conservatism extended even to technology, where he refused to switch from his sit-up-and-beg typewriter to anything more advanced. Given his tendency to lend the only copy of papers he had written to others, it is just as well he had a photographic memory. 
Although a vigorous swimmer throughout his life, Russell neglected his body. He was an unrepentant chain-smoker who also drank gallons of coffee a day with several heaped spoonfuls of sugar per cup, and his diet was no better. All this prematurely aged him and he developed emphysema in his early sixties. It was this, together with an inconsolable grief at the death of Elizabeth in 2003, that caused his steep decline. He died on 14 October 2004 of respiratory failure at the Central Middlesex Hospital, Park Royal, north London, and was survived by his two sons. 
Conrad Russell was an exhilarating lecturer and public speaker, a man of immense personal courtesy and kindness, especially to the young, a historian of astonishing clarity of mind and depth of knowledge, and a student of politics notorious for his poor predictions of the political future -- he was indeed the Micawber of the Liberal Democrat Party. He continuously predicted the downfall of successive governments, and he once predicted the election of a candidate for the Liberal Democrat leadership on the seventh ballot who was eliminated on the first. His memorial service in St Margaret's, Westminster, in June 2005 would have pleased him. It was a parliamentary occasion, not a religious one; the appreciations were by establishment politicians, and by that most waspish and anti-establishment of establishment historians, David Starkey. Baroness Hamwee, representing the former, recalled that at party gatherings he would gleefully sing 'Lloyd George gaoled my father'. The anecdote sums up Russell's pride in the tradition he inherited and represented, it displays his whimsy, and it was surely accompanied by the engaging laugh that accompanied all his best lines. 


@@@@@


doc= 94409


Vane, Sir John Robert (1927-2004), pharmacologist, was born on 29 March 1927 at Ivydene, Hollywood Lane, Wythall, Worcestershire, the third child of Maurice Vane, builder, and his wife, Frances Florence, 'nee' Fisher. His father was the son of Russian immigrants while his mother was from a Worcestershire farming family. He attended elementary school locally, and subsequently King Edward VI School, Birmingham. Inspired by the chemistry teacher, Perky Lambert, and aided by a Christmas gift of a chemistry set at the age of twelve, he had developed an interest in experimental science, although his early essays in this art, which were conducted in the family kitchen, came to an abrupt end when a minor explosion showered the wall with chemicals, ruining the decor. His father, whose business was the construction of portable buildings, eventually erected a small laboratory for him in the garden, in which he was able to nurture what became a lifelong passion for experimenting. At King Edward VI School he pursued his interest in science, after which 'it seemed natural to move to the University of Birmingham (which was just across the road from the school) to study chemistry' (Vane, 177). This he did, and graduated BSc in 1946. 
There was no hint at this time of the dramatic directions Vane's career would eventually take. He had no biological expertise at all, and in later life he maintained that he became a pharmacologist entirely by accident. Being a confirmed experimentalist by nature he found the actual practice of chemistry, with its emphasis on reaction yield and product purity, rather tedious, but while discussing this issue with his head of department, Maurice Stacey, he learned that Harold Burn in Oxford was seeking graduates to be trained in pharmacology. He later wrote: 'without hesitation I grasped the opportunity and immediately went to the library to find out what pharmacology was all about!' (Vane, 178). It was a sentiment familiar to the practitioners of a discipline which was not, at that time, widely known outside specialist laboratories. Despite this unexpected start he found the study of experimental pharmacology, as practised by Burn, to be fulfilling in a way that chemistry was not. After graduating BSc in pharmacology at Oxford in 1949 he spent a year as a researcher in the pharmacology department at Sheffield University. Evidently he didn't enjoy this experience very much, because while at a British Pharmacological Society meeting he met up with an old Oxford friend, Geoffrey Dawes, and inquired about the possibility of joining him in the Nuffield Institute for Medical Research. Dawes joked about needing someone to clean the glassware and offered him a postgraduate place. In 1953 the bottle washer was duly awarded a DPhil. These years were formative for Vane in more ways than one. While in Oxford he had met (Elizabeth) Daphne Page, a domestic science teacher three years older than him. She was the daughter of Jackson Page, schoolmaster. They married at Lyndhurst Road Congregationalist Chapel, Hampstead, on 5 April 1949, and had two daughters, Nicola and Miranda. 
At that time it was common for newly qualified postdoctoral scientists to gain experience in the USA, and Vane was invited by Arnold Welch to join the department of pharmacology at Yale as an assistant professor. Two years later, in 1955, he returned to the UK and joined W. D. M. (Bill) Paton's department of pharmacology at the Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, originally sited in Queen's Square in London, but subsequently relocated to the Royal College of Surgeons in Lincoln's Inn Fields. In 1960 Paton was succeeded by Gustav (Gus) Born, a friend of Vane's from his Oxford days. Vane rose quickly through the academic hierarchy, becoming a reader in 1961 and gaining a personal chair in 1966. The department, guided by Born and Vane, developed a collegial intellectual environment which nurtured an astonishingly productive team of researchers. It trained many students from the UK and abroad, a large proportion of whom went on to achieve prominence in their own fields. It was within this friendly and intellectually stimulating environment that Vane perfected his signature bio-assay system which enabled him to measure, with astonishing rapidity and specificity, the levels of many blood hormones simultaneously. It was a technique that suited him greatly, for his insights and ideas came quickly and he was impatient to test them. 
During his time at the Royal College of Surgeons Vane made two major breakthroughs. Working with Sergio Ferreira, Y. S. Bakhle, K. K. F. Ng, and others, he performed the crucial experimental work demonstrating that inhibition of the generation of the hormone angiotensin II would be a useful therapy for hypertension. At the time he was a consultant for Squibb in the USA where Welch was research director. Welch backed Vane's idea and the result was the development of the ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme) inhibitors, a class of drugs which revolutionized the treatment of hypertension. A few years later, in 1971, Vane executed what is generally regarded as his finest piece of experimental work. Aspirin was a useful analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic drug (and indeed prototype of an entire class of similar medicines) of unknown mechanism of action, that dated back to the 1890s. While writing a review on the release of mediators from the lung one weekend Vane conceived the notion that it worked by inhibiting the generation of prostaglandins, a family of hormones known to be important in initiating inflammation, fever, and pain. He turned again to his bio-assay system for the wherewithal to test this idea, and within a few days was confident that this indeed was the mechanism that had so long eluded the pharmacological community. This concept, which he further developed with Ferreira, Salvador Moncada, and R. J. (Rod) Flower, had a profound influence on the development of future anti-inflammatory drugs as well as resolving a long-standing pharmacological enigma. 
The year 1973 saw a change in Vane's circumstances, with the break-up of the Royal College of Surgeons group. Born had accepted the offer of the chair of pharmacology in Cambridge and Vane was offered the position of group research and development director of the Wellcome Foundation, an unusual pharmaceutical company whose profits were gifted to the charitable Wellcome Trust. This presented him with a new and very different set of managerial and scientific challenges. Although he now had little time for laboratory work as such, he continued to influence research directly through his personal 'prostaglandin research group', which he started, bringing several of his old colleagues from the Royal College of Surgeons and encouraging them to 'follow their instincts' in the quest for new drugs. Moncada, Richard Gryglewski, and Stuart Bunting from this group soon discovered prostacyclin, a short-lived hormone of the prostaglandin family that dilates blood vessels and prevents platelet aggregation. A chemical derivative was later commercialized for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension. During Vane's term as research and development director Wellcome produced several other important drugs, including anti-viral agents, anti-gout drugs, and muscle relaxants. 
Vane's own work was by then widely acclaimed. He had been made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1974, shortly after his move to the Wellcome Foundation, and a series of high-profile international awards followed, among them the Albert Lasker basic medical research award in 1977. In 1982 he won the Nobel prize for physiology or medicine, together with Bengt Samuelsson and Sune Bergstrom, for his work on the prostaglandin field. He was knighted in the new year's honours list of 1984, for services to pharmaceutical science. Over fifty honorary degrees and fellowships followed over the years. 
Vane left the Wellcome Foundation in 1986. A less energetic man might have taken a well-earned retirement, but he had other plans. An invitation to set up a laboratory on the Charterhouse Square campus of St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school, coupled with some start-up funding from Glaxo Group Research, provided him with a new opportunity. His technique, under such circumstances, was to build around him a group of trusted and respected colleagues that he felt able to work with. He invited teams headed by Born, Flower, Erik Anggard, Iain MacIntyre, Brendan Whittle, Derek Willoughby, and David Tomlinson to join him and to establish a 'federation' of (mainly self-funded) scientists devoted to research into inflammation and cardiovascular disease. His vision culminated in the formation in 1991 of the William Harvey Research Institute as a separate, free-standing medical charity within the medical college. Expansion was facilitated by major funding from Ono Pharmaceuticals in Japan and in time the institute employed some 120 people, and 'spun off' a small commercial company and conference organization. Although rarely doing laboratory work himself during this period, Vane, working with a new generation of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, focused his interests on hormones influencing the heart and blood vessels as well as the pharmacology of the COX-2 inhibitors. He retired as full-time director in 1995 but still maintained his office in the institute and continued to influence the course of research and to direct young people. Following the merger of the institute with the medical college in 2000 he took over the role of honorary chairman of the charitable William Harvey Research Foundation. 
Like many scientists Vane was a committed internationalist. His boast was that UK scientists usually constituted a minority in his laboratories, and at the William Harvey Research Institute he once counted scientists from seventeen nationalities on the roster. He had developed a particularly close relationship with the Polish scientific community. Beginning in the late 1960s, during the cold war era, invariably accompanied by his wife, Daphne, he travelled to Poland virtually every year, often bringing scarce scientific equipment and reagents with him. He invited many of the Polish scientists he met to visit the West or to work in his laboratory, and during these visits he made many close friends. In 2003, on the occasion of his last visit, he was awarded the Polish order of merit in recognition of his contributions to Anglo-Polish scientific collaboration, a rare honour for a foreign scientist. 
Although rather shy by nature, Vane was a very sociable person, loyal to his friends and generous to his colleagues. He and his family were lavish in their entertainment, whether at their home or at numerous restaurants and venues around the world. Their summer garden parties were much anticipated events in the social calendar. Daphne Vane, ever the graceful hostess, seemed unperturbed by the constant influx of scientists into her home despite the fact that her own background was in the liberal arts. Close colleagues were adopted as part of an 'extended family' that burgeoned as the Vanes made many lifelong friends. 
Vane's legacy consisted of the drugs that he was directly or indirectly responsible for producing, some of which became among the most utilized of any in the pharmacological arsenal. He championed the scientific evaluation of medicines and their mechanisms of action, and in doing so perpetuated a tradition that had driven the pharmacological agenda since the discipline began. He strongly disapproved of the claimed health benefits, unsupported by good evidence, of the many unregulated substances on display in pharmacies and health food shops. In 1992 he underwent heart surgery and made an excellent recovery, but a further procedure in 2002 took its toll. An unlucky fall resulting in a fractured hip together with subsequent complications confined him to his bed. He died peacefully at the Princess Royal University Hospital, Farnborough, on 19 November 2004, of pneumonia. He was survived by his wife and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94413


Wilkins, Maurice Hugh Frederick (1916-2004), molecular biologist, was born at Pongaroa, North Island, New Zealand, on 15 December 1916, the son of Edgar Henry Wilkins, medical practitioner, and his wife, Eveline Constance Jane, 'nee' Whittaker. Both his parents were of Irish descent. William Wilkins, headmaster of Dublin high school, was his grandfather, and George Wilkins, professor of Hebrew at Trinity College, Dublin, was a great-uncle. In 1923 his father, a doctor in the school medical service (and an educated man, a vegetarian, and would-be epidemiologist), obtained a post in Birmingham, and the family moved to England. 
Wilkins was educated at Wylde Green primary school and King Edward's School, Birmingham. While a young boy he developed a keen interest in astronomy, and in optics, and constructed his own telescopes and microscopes in a workshop his father built for him. He won a scholarship to St John's College, Cambridge, to study physics; one of his tutors was Mark Oliphant, until the latter's move to Birmingham in 1937. At Cambridge he was active in the university Socialist Society, and the Cambridge Scientists' Anti-War Group; he also joined the Communist Party. Perhaps as a result of spending so much time on political activities he gained a disappointing lower second in part two of the natural science tripos in 1938. Nevertheless his tutor Oliphant had been impressed by his ability and his interest in thermoluminescence and phosphorescence, and as a result of Oliphant's recommendation John Randall took Wilkins on as a research student at the University of Birmingham, in his luminescence research group. Wilkins obtained his PhD in 1940 for a thesis on thermoluminescence in solids, and was recruited by the Ministry of Home Security and Aircraft Production to work on the improvement of radar screens. Next he worked under Oliphant as part of the Tube Alloys project, studying the feasibility of producing an atomic bomb, his own role being to make mass spectrograph studies of the separation of uranium isotopes. In 1944 he followed Oliphant to the University of California at Berkeley, to work on the Manhattan project (to produce an atomic bomb). He stayed there for one year, during which time he contracted a short-lived marriage to an art student named Ruth, with whom he had one son. Like Oliphant he became increasingly concerned at the ethical implications of atomic weapons, especially after the dropping of an atom bomb on Hiroshima and another on Nagasaki, and he resolved not to pursue a career in atomic physics. Instead he turned to biophysics, the application of physics to biology. 
In 1945 Wilkins rejoined Randall's research group, first at St Andrews University, then from 1946 at King's College, London, where Randall had been appointed Wheatstone professor of physics, and where the Medical Research Council had provided funds for a new Biophysics Research Unit. Wilkins remained at King's until his retirement in 1981, becoming deputy director of the biophysics research unit in 1955 and in 1970 succeeding Randall as director of the unit (subsequently renamed the neurobiology unit in 1972 and the cell biophysics unit in 1974). He was appointed a lecturer in biophysics in 1958, professor of molecular biology in 1963, and professor of biophysics in 1970. On 14 March 1959 he married Patricia Ann (Pat) Chidgey, a 27-year-old schoolteacher for London county council, and daughter of William James Chidgey, transport official. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Having read the physicist Erwin Schrodinger's little book 'What is Life?' (1944) Wilkins had become enthusiastic to explore the nature of the gene. Instead of treating fruit flies with X-rays or chemicals he explored the effects of ultrasonics on chromosomes. In London he soon dropped this unpromising research when Randall handed over to him a topic from his research programme on spermatozoa -- a study of the changing distribution of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) in the living cell. For this agenda Wilkins skilfully developed a reflecting microscope that could be used with optical, ultraviolet, or infra-red light. 
In the spring of 1947 Wilkins received a visit from a physicist who, like him, wanted to switch to biophysics and was seeking a host laboratory. This was Francis Crick. The latter was not attracted by what he saw. Wilkins's ultrasonic research had not yet been dropped, and the laboratory programme as a whole was at the cellular level. Crick wanted to work at the molecular level. None the less Wilkins's enthusiasm and his friendliness attracted Crick and they became lifelong friends. 
The topic that Randall handed to Wilkins brought him face to face with DNA. Then he learned from his young colleague Geoffrey Brown about the evidence at the Rockefeller University, New York, that DNA has the power to transmit hereditary qualities. Another colleague, Gerald Oster, urged Wilkins to turn from his microscopes to X-ray crystallography to study the structure of DNA. Already he had one of the glass phials containing the excellent DNA preparation that the Swiss biochemist Rudolf Signer had offered at a meeting in London in May 1950. The purpose for which the unit had been funded did not include X-ray crystallography. Nevertheless Wilkins and Randall's graduate student Raymond Gosling succeeded in producing the first crystalline diffraction pattern of DNA with clear spots (intensities) by the dozen. Gosling and the theoretician Alec Stokes established the character of this crystalline DNA as monoclinic C2, thus defining the kind of symmetry it possessed. These details they did not publish, but speaking in 1951 at a conference at the Naples Zoological Station, Wilkins showed a slide of their crystalline DNA diffraction pattern and remarked that such studies 'may help one to approach more closely the problem of gene structure' (Wilkins, 'Ultraviolet diochroism and molecular structure in living cells', 'Pubblicazioni della Stazione Zoologica di Napoli', 23, 1951, suppl., 105). In the audience was James Watson. Now, the latter judged, it ought to be possible to solve the structure of the genetic material. Thus had Wilkins lighted the fuse that was to set Watson off on a trail leading to the solution of the structure of DNA. 
By this time Wilkins had been joined at the King's laboratory by Rosalind Franklin, a crystallographer and post-doctoral fellow hired by Randall to study proteins in solution. At Wilkins's nudging, Randall suggested and Franklin agreed to work on DNA instead. But she and Wilkins clashed, and while Wilkins was on holiday Randall effectively sidelined him, giving Franklin to believe that she would have sole oversight of the X-ray work on DNA, transferring the talented Gosling to her supervision, and entrusting to her the DNA sample originally provided to Wilkins by Signer. Wilkins continued to work on DNA, but from much poorer-quality samples, and from this point there was in effect no collaboration and very little communication between him and Franklin. The latter succeeded in distinguishing two forms of DNA, for besides the crystalline 'A' form discovered by Wilkins and Gosling she found a new form, the 'wet' or 'B' form, and was able to convert the one form into the other by changing the humidity. In May 1952 she and Gosling further succeeded in obtaining a superb photograph (known as 'photograph 51') of the diffraction pattern of the B form, but she set this to one side until 1953 in order to concentrate her effort on the crystalline form. When, in 1953, she returned to the B form she came close to solving the diffraction pattern before she left the unit to work at Birkbeck College, London, under J. D. Bernal. Her departure relieved the tensions Wilkins had been under. But he had already been preparing for an onslaught on DNA, and had been collaborating with a new post-doctoral fellow, Herbert Wilson, who had been working at the unit since the autumn of 1952. At this point Gosling passed on to Wilkins a copy of 'photograph 51'. Wilkins showed it to Watson, Watson described it to Crick, and a month later the Watson-Crick model was born in Cambridge (on 28 February). Their famous paper appeared in 'Nature' on 25 April 1953. They had invited Wilkins to add his name to the paper but he declined. Instead he contributed a paper (published in the same issue of 'Nature') with Stokes and Herbert Wilson, alongside another by Franklin and Gosling, reporting their X-ray diffraction work. 
Not until Wilkins wrote his autobiography, 'The Third Man of the Double Helix' (2003), did he reflect publicly on the events so skilfully described in Watson's best-seller, 'The Double Helix', thirty-five years before. Angered by the tone and frankness of Watson's manuscript, Wilkins, together with Crick, had succeeded in preventing its publication by Harvard University Press, but not its publication elsewhere. From the several accounts by the actors in the DNA 'drama' it is clear that Wilkins was his own worst enemy. Had he stood up to Randall and Franklin, refused to leave the bench, and demanded effective collaboration, the leadership in the pursuit of the structure of DNA might not have been snatched from the group at King's. 
Wilkins had been deeply hurt but not deterred from pursuing DNA. The Watson-Crick model was a proposal, supported by the work from King's College, but in need of more detailed support. Until that could be provided there would be debate and sniping over alternative structures. Wilkins and his group worked long and hard to enrich the data and to refine the model. They concentrated on the positions of the bases and the phosphates in the model, and in the process they corrected the erroneous shape of the sugars, the ring structure of which can take either of two different forms, one found in crystalline DNA, the other in the B form. Watson and Crick had used the wrong form in their model for the latter, causing the bases to be too far from the centre of the cylindrical molecule and rendering them less accessible from outside. 
When in 1962 DNA was the subject of the Nobel prize in physiology or medicine, the work of the biophysics research unit at King's was recognized. Rosalind Franklin had died in 1958. But Wilkins was included in the award. He had initiated the DNA studies at King's, with Gosling had discovered the A form, had shown that the diffraction pattern from extracted material was of the same form as that from DNA in the cell, and had gone on to refine and modify the Watson-Crick structure to the point where the model and the X-ray data were in close agreement. In the two decades following the award of the Nobel prize he applied the techniques developed in the study of DNA to a variety of other biological structures including ribonucleic acids (RNAs) and chromosomes, and went on to promote research at the unit on membranes and neurobiology. 
Although quiet, reserved, and shy, Wilkins was nevertheless unfailingly generous in supporting students and colleagues, and popular among the technical and ancillary staff at King's. In the unit 'he was referred to as 'Uncle', accurately reflecting how his colleagues regarded him: too distant to be fraternal, not powerful enough to be paternal, essentially benevolent and without malice and occasionally a useful intermediary with the somewhat capricious Randall' (Arnott and others, 462). He had a long-standing interest in the arts -- he had met his wife, Pat, at an Institute of Contemporary Arts meeting -- and welcomed contact and correspondence with artists and musicians (including the composer Karlheinz Stockhausen) who were interested in helical structures; at one point the Leverhulme Trust funded an artist-in-residence at his unit at King's. He also retained his lifelong left-wing sympathies, though he had left the Communist Party when the Soviet Union entered Poland in September 1939. He was a member of the Russell committee against nuclear weapons, a founding member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (and a frequent speaker at both national and branch meetings), and an active member of the Pugwash movement. In 1969, with Cecil Powell, he co-founded the British Society for Social Responsibility in Science, and served as its president from then until 1991. He was also president of Food and Disarmament International from 1984. Besides the Nobel prize he received many honours, including the Albert Lasker award of the American Public Health Association (also jointly with Crick and Watson) in 1960, and honorary degrees from Glasgow, Birmingham, and London universities, and Trinity College, Dublin (his father's alma mater). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1959 and appointed CBE in 1963. He was making bookshelves at his home in Blackheath, London, when he suffered a cerebral haemorrhage. He died at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woolwich, on 5 October 2004, and was survived by his wife, Pat, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94415


Wilson, Bryan Ronald (1926-2004), sociologist, was born on 25 June 1926 at 3 Proctor's Terrace, Leeds, the third son and fourth child of Alice Elizabeth Wilson, 'nee' Clarke (1885-1961), a clothing club collector. His father is unknown, but he took the surname of his mother's first husband and father of her other children, Jesse Wilson (1884-1918). In 1933 his mother married her second husband, Harry Little. Educated at Meanwood Road elementary school (1931-2) and Cowper Street elementary school (1932-9), in Leeds, Wilson left school aged thirteen, spent a year working for an accountant, then worked as a junior at the 'Yorkshire Post' before being called up for military service in 1944. Demobilized in 1948, he studied at University College, Leicester, for the external University of London BSc in economics, and obtained a first-class honours degree in 1952. He continued his studies at the London School of Economics, where in 1955 he was awarded the Hutchinson medal for the best research of the year for his doctoral thesis, a study of Christadelphianism, Elim Pentecostalism, and Christian Science, later published as 'Sects and Society' (1961). 
After he had spent seven years as a lecturer in sociology at the University of Leeds, in 1962 the University of Oxford appointed Wilson a reader in sociology. The following year he became a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, which became his home for the next thirty years. A confirmed bachelor, he revelled in the life of an Oxford don, serving as sub-warden (1988-90) and as domestic bursar (1989-93) of his college, and taking considerable pride and pleasure in being steward of All Souls' well-stocked wine cellar. He also devised the visiting fellowship programme, which brought hundreds of scholars to Oxford. He did not, however, welcome the arrival of women, fearing that they might disrupt the scholarly ambience by discussing domestic trivialities. 
Wilson was undoubtedly one of the most influential social scientists of his day. His theoretical insights were always supported by meticulous attention to empirical detail. Over a hundred publications (including eleven books and seven edited volumes) embraced such subjects as education, rationality, and moral responsibility, but the greater part of Wilson's work concerned the sociological aspects of religion. A staunch defender of the 'secularization thesis', Wilson set the stage for subsequent debates in his 'Religion in Secular Society' (1966), methodically adducing evidence to demonstrate that Europe (at least) was undergoing 'a process whereby religious thinking, practice and institutions lose social significance' (p. 14). He also pointed out, however, that religion often continues in the private sphere, sometimes acquiring new forms of expression in tune with contemporary society. His elaboration of different types of nineteenth-century sects in 'Religious Sects: a Sociological Study' (1970) and of African religions in 'Magic and the Millennium' (1973) was followed by research into newer, twentieth-century religious movements. He was particularly fascinated by the Soka Gakkai Buddhists, whom he studied in Europe and Japan, but appointments as a visiting professor at universities in Australasia, Africa, North America, and Europe enabled him to study at first hand an exceptionally wide variety of religious groups and to draw upon them from a comparative perspective, as was evidenced in his 'New Religious Movements in Contemporary Society' (1990). 
An avowed agnostic, Wilson described his approach as one of 'sympathetic detachment'. While employing studious objectivity as a social scientist, he courted controversy by defending the rights of minority religions, appearing as an expert witness and writing affidavits for groups such as Scientology, the Unification Church, and the Exclusive Brethren. The honours conferred on him included a doctorate from the Catholic University of Leuven in 1992. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1994. As its president from 1971 to 1975 Wilson played a crucial role in the development of the Conference Internationale de Sociologie Religieuse (later the Societe Internationale de Sociologie des Religions, or in English the International Society for the Sociology of Religion). 
Wilson commanded the respect, admiration, and affection of his many students and colleagues around the world. Generous with his time, and always the perfect host, he had a delightful, sometimes mischievous sense of humour, and could occasionally display a rare talent for mimicry. He was, however, essentially a private person for whom correct protocol played an important role -- few ever saw him not wearing a suit and tie. 
On his retirement in 1993 Wilson moved to a flat in Headington. The onset of Parkinson's disease restricted, but did not entirely prevent, his writing the occasional article, travelling around the world for lectures, or sometimes a holiday. He continued to enjoy the company of his friends, especially when sharing a fine claret. His death from a heart attack on 9 October 2004 followed a good meal at the Jersey Arms, Middleton Stoney, after a day's drive in the Oxfordshire countryside; he was pronounced dead on arrival at the Horton General Hospital, Banbury. Prior to his cremation at the Oxford crematorium on 21 October his family, friends, and colleagues gathered from North America, Japan, and Europe to celebrate his life at a ceremony in All Souls chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 94418


Wormald, (Charles) Patrick (1947-2004), historian, was born on 9 July 1947 at Townfield, Mill Street, Neston, Cheshire, one of four sons of Brian Harvey Goodwin Wormald (1912-2005), historian, and his wife, Rosemary (died 2003), daughter of Edward John Boydell Lloyd and sister of Anthony John Leslie Lloyd, Baron Lloyd of Berwick ('b'. 1929), judge. His father, a fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge, for 66 years, was an eccentrically conservative figure, whose 'wardrobe ran to silver-buckled shoes and a monocle, and whose loathing of pedantry, teetotalism and the creeping spread of lower-middle-class values could be expressed in the most forthright of Anglo-Saxon terms' ('The Independent', 8 April 2005). Ordained an Anglican priest in 1943, in 1955 he converted to Catholicism (a faith to which both he and his son remained unswervingly attached thereafter). He published a well-regarded book on Clarendon in 1951 and a less well-regarded one on Francis Bacon in 1993, and little in between. Wormald's mother, Rosemary Lloyd, had obtained a double first in classics at Cambridge. She and Wormald's father separated after the children had grown up, but remained on amicable terms. 
Wormald was educated as a king's scholar at Eton College, and at Balliol College, Oxford, where Maurice Keen was a tutor. He graduated with a first-class degree in modern history in 1969, and won a prize fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, in the same year. He there began research for a DPhil (never completed) on Anglo-Saxon law, under the supervision of Michael Wallace-Hadrill. (Wormald later co-edited Wallace-Hadrill's Festschrift, 'Ideal and Reality in Frankish and Anglo-Saxon Society', 1983.) In 1974 he became a lecturer in medieval history at Glasgow University, where he taught wide-ranging courses on early medieval Scottish, British, and European history. While there he met and married Jennifer (Jenny) Brown, a fellow historian; they had two sons. In 1989 Wormald moved back to Oxford, as a lecturer, and from 1990 student (that is fellow) and tutor, at Christ Church. 
Wormald did not originate but he powerfully contributed to the revival of interest in Anglo-Saxon England and appreciation of its cultural and political sophistication that gathered momentum from the 1970s. Wormald's particular contributions were largely scattered in journal articles and lectures (sometimes published), but also in conference and seminar contributions, influencing the work of others. He published in particular on Bede, 'Beowulf', the administrative machinery of the Anglo-Saxon state, and the development of Anglo-Saxon law. His chapters on Bede, Offa, and Alfred in James Campbell's 'The Anglo-Saxons' (1982) were particularly well-regarded, and accessible to non-specialists. (He also wrote seven articles for the 'Oxford DNB', including the entries on Alfred and Archbishop Wulfstan.) In 1999 a selection of his essays was published as 'Legal Culture in the Early Medieval West: Law as Text, Image and Experience'. The same year saw the publication of the first volume of his 'magnum opus', some twenty years in the making, 'The Making of English Law: King Alfred to the Twelfth Century'. By means of meticulous reassessment of all surviving Anglo-Saxon law codes, together with detailed comparisons with contemporary continental law codes as well as Anglo-Norman law and legal writing, he argued powerfully for the precocity of Anglo-Saxon law, and for a continuous history from Anglo-Saxon law to medieval and Tudor common law. At the same time he insisted on the wide cultural significance of the Anglo-Saxon law codes: they were not only legal texts but also a literature. The book was acclaimed by Wormald's fellow historians, Henry Mayr-Harting describing it as a 'masterpiece' ('The Guardian', 13 Oct 2004), and James Campbell suggesting that it was 'one of the most important books written by an English historian in recent years... a monument of detailed learning which almost recreates its subject' ('The Independent', 7 Oct 2004). Wormald was working on the second volume when he died. A further selection of his articles was published posthumously as 'The Times of Bede' (2006), edited by Stephen Baxter. 
A man whose intellectual brilliance had led to many glittering prizes early in life, and who retained his boyish good looks until late in life, Wormald always had something of the Wunderkind about him. He could be generous and loyal to friends, colleagues, and students, and he was both a compelling lecturer and a remarkable and much loved tutor. But he could also be difficult, irresponsible, self-centred, and attention-seeking. He constantly craved appreciation, and found criticism difficult to take. It was said that he 'was unwilling to admit that he had ever been wrong; though pleased to explain how the critic had come to misunderstand him' ('The Independent', 7 Oct 2004). He was increasingly prone to alcoholism and related mood-swings, which saddened his friends but frequently infuriated his colleagues. He was forced to give up his studentship at Christ Church in 2001, and was divorced from his wife Jenny the same year. 
Wormald died on 29 September 2004 at his home, 44 Surman House, Mandelbrote Drive, Littlemore, Oxford, of alcoholic liver disease. He was survived by his two sons. His published work amounted to less than either he or others had hoped. Nevertheless his impact on the understanding of Anglo-Saxon England was considerable. 


@@@@@


doc= 94419


Hoernle, (Reinhold Friedrich) Alfred (1880-1943), philosopher and social reformer in South Africa, was born in Bonn, Germany, on 27 November 1880. 
His father, 
Like his father, R. F. A. Hoernle was a British subject by birth and spent his early years in India. He was educated first in Germany at the Gymnasium Ernestinum in Gotha and the Gymnasium Pforte in Naumburg before proceeding to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1899, to prepare for a career in the Indian Civil Service. Influenced by his tutor, J. A. Smith, and the master of Balliol, Edward Caird, Hoernle turned to philosophy. After gaining a second in classical moderations (1901) he took a first in 'literae humaniores' (1903), and was awarded the Locke scholarship in mental and moral philosophy in 1903. In 1904 he was elected to a senior demyship at Magdalen College, where he studied for a BSc (completed in 1907), but in late 1905 moved to the University of St Andrews to serve as assistant to the professor of moral philosophy, Bernard Bosanquet. 
Recommended by Caird, Bosanquet, and Smith, as well as by F. H. Bradley and Henry Jones, Hoernle was appointed professor of philosophy at the South African College in 1908. From 1912 until 1914 he held the newly established professorship at Armstrong College, Newcastle (England). On 23 March 1914 Hoernle married Agnes Winifred Tucker (1885-1960), a former philosophy student at South African College, and the daughter of the South African senator William Kidger Tucker. She later became a leading ethnographer and the doyenne of South African anthropologists. They had one son, Alwyn (1915-1991). In the summer of 1914 Hoernle was appointed assistant professor of philosophy at Harvard University, where he was able to engage at first hand some of the leading American philosophers. In 1920, however, he returned to his former chair at Newcastle. The ostensible reason for this was his wife's health, though it also likely that it had to do with his disappointment at not being promoted at Harvard. 
Hoernle left Newcastle in 1923 to succeed John Macmurray as professor of philosophy at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South Africa, where Winifred Hoernle was appointed to a post in anthropology. With the exception of visiting professorships at Bowdoin College, Maine (1926), and at the University of Southern California (1930), he spent little time outside South Africa until his death. 
Hoernle's early work was in metaphysics, epistemology, and philosophical psychology, and in 1916 he and his wife completed an authorized translation of Rudolf Steiner's 'Die Philosophie der Freiheit' ('The philosophy of freedom'). Hoernle was particularly concerned with two issues: the relation between the mental and the physical (focusing on volition and mental states), and the current debates between idealists and the 'new' realists. He believed he could address these issues through the 'empirical' statement of idealism or 'speculative philosophy' represented by Bosanquet. In his 'Studies in Contemporary Metaphysics' (1920) Hoernle presented essays on scientific method and the 'mechanism versus vitalism' controversy, insisting that, in biology at least, teleology is dominant over mechanism. His 'Studies' reflected a systematic philosophy, showing that 'experience, taken as a whole, gives us clues which, rightly interpreted, lead to the perception of... a graded order of varied appearances [in the universe]' (p. v). It also exhibited his 'synoptic' approach, 'which itself rests on the assumption that truth has many sides, and that to the whole truth on any subject every point of view has some contribution to make' ('On the way to a synoptic philosophy', 138). 
Hoernle's 'Matter, Life, Mind, and God' (1923), based on extramural lectures given in Newcastle to a popular audience, similarly discussed the limitations of both mechanistic and contemporary behaviouristic theories. Critics were somewhat receptive of the book, noting especially Hoernle's 'limpid clearness' in style. In 1924 he published a short volume, 'Idealism as a Philosophical Doctrine', expanded in 1927 as 'Idealism as a Philosophy'. Designed initially as a 'map' to guide students through the different schools of 'idealism' still current in Anglo-American philosophy, the key chapters trace the distinction between the idealism of Berkeley on the one hand and of Kant, Hegel, and their successors on the other. The volume was dedicated to the memory of Bosanquet -- Hoernle described himself as a Bosanquetian -- but his views are best understood as being inspired by, rather than extending, Bosanquet's work. 
When Hoernle arrived at Witwatersrand in 1923 his teaching included courses in logic and psychology. Practical concerns, however, were never far from his mind, and he and his wife soon became actively involved in social issues. For Hoernle there was a close relation between speculative thought and 'the practical task of meeting the varied incidents of human life with steadfast wisdom' (Hoernle, 'Race and Reason', p. xvi). His wife was a pioneering social anthropologist and one of the first scholars of Bantu studies in South Africa, and Hoernle himself developed an interest in the black peoples of the region and the impact of western civilizations on them. He also became fluent in Afrikaans so that he could give courses of lectures and public addresses throughout the country. He was active in university affairs, and in 1927 was controversially passed over for the principalship of Witwatersrand; he was the senate's proposed candidate, but the university council appointed Humphrey Rivaz Raikes. 
Hoernle was a founding member (1929), member of the executive (from 1932), and president (from 1934) of the South African Institute of Race Relations. He was also chairman of the Bantu Men's Social Centre in Johannesburg, of the Johannesburg Joint Council of Europeans and Natives, and of the Society of Christians and Jews (from 1937), which was founded to counter antisemitism in South Africa. In addition from 1934 he was a government-appointed member of the South African Council for Educational and Social Research -- the first national research grant council -- and one of the six South African delegates to the British Commonwealth Relations conference held near Sydney in September 1938. During the Second World War he was the initiator of the Army Educational Corps of which he became honorary lieutenant-colonel. 
Despite his extensive committee work Hoernle still published occasionally on philosophical topics. The focus of his writing, however, particularly after 1931, was increasingly applied -- for example on the concept of race, race relations, and how local cultures might develop in relation to dominant cultures. Hoernle's view was decidedly 'liberal', and some of his essays were collected and republished after his death as 'Race and Reason' (1945). Perhaps the best example of Hoernle's social and political views is found in his 'South African Native Policy and the Liberal Spirit', the Phelps-Stokes lectures at the University of Cape Town for 1939, which he repeated in Afrikaans at the University of Stellenbosch. Hoernle's political philosophy was attentive to individual interests, but he believed that classical liberalism would not work in multicultural states like South Africa. Drawing on the idealist notion of positive liberty, Hoernle saw that freedom required allowing social groups to develop their unique characters, but held that native cultures would tend to assimilate into the 'western'. 
A ferocious critic of the policy of racial segregation proposed by the government of J. B. M. Hertzog from 1924 onwards, Hoernle viewed segregation as entrenching white domination and the exploitation of the non-European peoples. Despite an earlier optimism, his 1939 Phelps-Stokes lectures gained him a reputation for taking a pessimistic view of race relations in South Africa. He argued that in the face of white resistance, racial integration or assimilation -- involving a non-racial franchise and the removal of the colour-bar in industry -- was unrealistic in the immediate future. So long as the economy of white South Africa depended upon cheap black labour drawn from the native reserves, segregation would be inherently exploitative. He noted that liberals could consider the option of attempting to reconstitute original, racially distinct, communities that would permit genuine social, economic, and cultural development, and work to ensure that one group would not be dominated by another, but he saw this as 'utterly impossible' and 'impracticable' ('Race and Reason', 103, 108). Presciently, perhaps, Hoernle saw that change in race relations would come about as a result of 'world forces', not from within South African society (ibid., 167). In the short term, then, the only hope of protecting the non-European races lay in the notion of temporary trusteeship, represented by pragmatic, ameliorative measures in such fields as education, health, housing, and recreation. In 1941 he had an important correspondence with Geoffrey Hare Clayton, Anglican archbishop of Cape Town, in which both sought to resolve these dilemmas. Praise for Hoernle in one of the most popular novels about the South African situation, Alan Paton's 'Cry the Beloved Country' (1948), gives an indication of the widespread recognition of his leadership in the movement against segregation. 
Hoernle's death, following a heart attack and brief illness, in Johannesburg on 21 July 1943, was attributed largely to the stress of his extensive administrative work. His remains were cremated, following a funeral service at St Mary's Cathedral, Johannesburg, at Braamfontein crematorium. Former students collected some of his early writings in a volume entitled 'Studies in Philosophy' (1952). Although the political impact of Hoernle's work was significant in his time, the philosophical impact of his views on culture and community remains relatively limited. 


@@@@@


doc= 94432


Jabavu, Davidson Don Tengo (1885-1959), educationist in South Africa, was born in King William's Town, Cape Colony, on 20 October 1885, the eldest child of John Tengo Jabavu (1859-1921), newspaper editor and politician, and his first wife, Elda Sakuba (1864-1900). Both parents belonged to the Mfengu (Fingo) ethnic group, refugees from early nineteenth-century wars to the north who had settled in the eastern Cape. The Mfengu were early converts to Christianity, who had acquired education from mission schools. Jabavu's families were staunch Methodists: his maternal grandfather, James B. Sakuba, was an ordained Methodist minister. Along with other Africans from similar backgrounds the Jabavus aspired to full citizenship under Cape Colony's colour-blind franchise, while at the same time maintaining their African identity. Named after an advocate of African rights, the Revd John Davidson Don, and his paternal grandfather, Jabavu's name (usually shortened to D. D. T.) reflected this dual identity. 
Jabavu received an education fitting for the senior son of the prominent editor of the Xhosa-language paper 'Imvo Zabantsundu'. After attending a local mission school in 1892 and continuing from 1898 to 1900 at a missionary teacher training college in Morija, Basutoland, he spent a year at the well-known Lovedale missionary institution. Jabavu's father next sought to enrol him in the local government secondary school for white boys. Rebuffed, Jabavu was sent to Wales, where from 1903 to 1906 he attended the African Training Institute at Colwyn Bay. He then went to University College, London, graduating BA in English in 1912; he received a secondary teacher's diploma from the University of Birmingham in 1914. Three months visiting Tuskegee Institute in Alabama, USA, in 1913 further expanded his intellectual and social horizons. At the behest of the South African minister for native affairs he prepared a report, ultimately published in his book 'The Black Problem' (1920), that examined how Booker T. Washington's educational philosophy and practices might be applied to higher education for Africans in South Africa. 
Jabavu returned home in 1914, and in 1916 became one of the two initial academic staff members of the South African Native College at Fort Hare, in the founding of which his father had played a key role. Over the coming decades it was the principal provider of university education for African students from throughout southern Africa. As Nelson Mandela, one of Jabavu's students, later noted: 'Fort Hare and Professor D. D. T. Jabavu are virtually synonymous' (Mandela, 38). In August 1916 Jabavu married Florence Tandiswa Makiwane (1895-1951), a Lovedale teacher and daughter of the prominent Presbyterian minister Elijah Makiwane (1850-1928). She later headed the college's women's hostel. The couple had four children, Nozipo (1917-19), Helen Nontando (Noni) ('b'. 1919), Alexandra Kerr ('b'. 1926), and Tengo Max (1928-1955). Jabavu remained associated with Fort Hare until his retirement in 1944, having been promoted to professor in 1942. He taught a wide range of subjects, including Xhosa, Latin, history, and social anthropology. In 1954 Rhodes University recognized his pioneering role in African higher education by awarding him an honorary doctorate. 
Jabavu's academic position provided him with the visibility and stature for active engagement in, and leadership of, a wide range of civil society activities. He sought to promote teacher welfare through founding the Cape Native Teachers' Association in 1920, and the South African Native Teachers' Association the following year. The government invited him to participate in the annual native conference that it launched in 1920 to gauge African opinion. His social and political outlook led naturally to his active involvement in the interracial joint councils, where he worked with white liberals interested in improving African social conditions. He became vice-president (1932-59) of the successor organization, the South African Institute of Race Relations. 
Jabavu also became more overtly involved in political activities from the mid-1920s in response to Prime Minister Hertzog's assault on the African franchise. This led him to publish 'The Segregation Fallacy and Other Papers' (1928). The government's growing pressure on African rights led, in 1935, to a conference of more than 400 delegates representing opposition organizations from across the political spectrum. The All-African Convention emerged from the conference, with Jabavu as its president, a position he held until 1948. Utilizing the tactics of petition and pushing for moderate reforms to defend African civil rights, the All-African Convention was unable to deter the government's determination to entrench yet further white domination. Within a few years, the momentum of African politics bypassed the All-African Convention and its gradualist approach. 
Jabavu was particularly interested in improving the lot of African farmers. Indeed, his commitment to the welfare of rural Africans differentiated him from most of his contemporaries among the African educated elite. Tuskegee's extension work among black farmers stimulated him to adapt what he had learned during his 1913 visit to South African conditions. In 1918 he began organizing native farmers' associations in the eastern Cape, and in 1925 he helped found the South African Native Farmers' Congress, serving as its secretary for two decades. The Zenzele movement, which his wife launched in 1927 to improve African women's domestic skills, complemented his agricultural extension work. 
Upon retirement Jabavu moved to rural Middledrift. He continued his prolific writing, but instead of dealing with broader political or educational issues he now focused more on Xhosa history and culture, publishing books such as 'Imbumba yamanyama' ('Unity is strength'; 1952) and 'Izithuko' ('Praise poems'; 1954). The 1950s brought major personal transitions: the death of Florence in 1951; the murder of his son Max in Johannesburg in March 1955; and, two weeks later, his own marriage to Betty Marambana, a widow and mother of four children. He retreated from the public stage that he had so long occupied and spent his final years quietly. He died in hospital in East London, Cape Province, South Africa, on 3 August 1959, having been hospitalized for three months with an infected ulcer on his leg. He was buried in Middledrift on 10 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 94434


Duncan, John (1866-1945), painter and illustrator, was born in Dundee on 19 July 1866, the second of six children of William Gardiner Duncan, grocer (he was later described as a schoolmaster and a cattle dealer), and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Thomson, a power loom weaver. At the age of eleven he began his studies at the Dundee School of Art, then based at Dundee high school; he left, aged fourteen, in 1880, when he began his artistic career as an illustrator and etcher, working mainly for local periodicals like 'The Wizard of the North'. In the 1880s he often signed himself as John T. Duncan, and a group of etchings (Dundee Art Gallery) bearing this signature has been confirmed as his work. Their dominant themes of fairies, demons, and mythological characters show his strong predilection for the fantastic and romantic. They also reflect his prodigious talent as a draughtsman. In 1887 he left Dundee for a two-year stint in London doing book illustrations. 
Becoming disillusioned with what he later described as 'hack work', and wishing to become a painter, Duncan went abroad in 1890 and studied for several months at Antwerp School of Art under Verlat, whose naturalism repulsed him. After a short period at Dusseldorf Art School he returned to Dundee to paint portraits. His extended trip to Italy later that year aroused an enthusiasm for Botticelli, Fra Angelico, Crivelli, and other artists of the fifteenth-century Renaissance movement. The influence of the Italian quattrocento remained paramount for the rest of his life; he loved the pure translucent colours of its frescoes, its refined decorative qualities, and above all its spirituality. 
Duncan is best known as the leading artist in the Celtic revival movement. On his return from Italy in 1890 he met Patrick Geddes, who was at the hub of the Celtic revival activities in both literature and art in Edinburgh. Geddes had a major influence on Duncan's career, involving him in his projects, notably the four-week summer meetings and the Old Edinburgh School of Art, of which Duncan was appointed director from 1893 to 1897. In the same period Duncan painted murals depicting the evolution of pipe music in Geddes's home in Ramsay Gardens, Edinburgh, as well as a series of murals of scenes from Scottish history and Celtic mythology, notably 'The Awakening of Cuchulain' for the common room of University Hall, a student residence. Duncan's most important collaboration with Geddes was in producing 'The Evergreen: a Northern Seasonal', four books of essays, poetry, and artworks: 'Spring' and 'Autumn' appeared in 1895, followed by 'Summer' in 1896 and 'Winter' in 1897. As well as contributing poems and full-page illustrations, such as the much admired 'Anima celtica', Duncan was the chief designer of the series. The books are adorned throughout with inspired headpieces and tailpieces 'after the manner of Celtic Ornament', which were created by John Duncan himself and his young female pupils. Their bold and innovative designs reflected the international style of the moment, art nouveau; but at the same time they owed much to Duncan's research into such ancient artworks as Pictish symbol stones and the 'Book of Kells'. 
In 1900, again through the influence of Geddes, Duncan was appointed to the post of assistant professor of fine art at the Chicago Institute, where he taught art to schoolchildren. On his return to Scotland in 1903 he settled permanently in Edinburgh. The next fifteen years saw the production of many of his most important works in the field of painting. One of his most ambitious works, 'The Riders of the Sidhe' (1911; Dundee Art Gallery) shows how much he was influenced by the European symbolist movement. The work depicts the sidhe, fairy folk in Celtic myth who each year on midsummer night ride forth to the sacred circle to initiate mortals into their mysteries. The frame is inscribed 'The Riders of the Sidhe, Lords of Life, bearing as symbols the Tree of Experience, the Love-Cup, the Sword of Will, and the Stone of Quietness'. His notebook of the period reveals that he agonized over the exact meanings of his chosen symbols, which finally boil down to four words: 'to know', 'to love', 'to do', and 'to endure'. His brilliance as a decorator is evident in his masterpiece, 'St Bride' (1913; National Gallery of Scotland), which combines intricate, minute detail and glowing colours within a composition with two large angels bursting out of the frame. He had an ability imaginatively to recreate convincing Celtic and medieval costumes, armour, and other trappings. Other major works of the period depicting Celtic myths and legends include 'Tristan and Isolde' (1912; Edinburgh City Art Centre) and 'The Children of Lir' (1914; Edinburgh City Art Centre). In 1910 he was elected an associate member of the Royal Scottish Academy. 
On 27 April 1912, aged forty-five, Duncan married (Alice) Christine ('b'. 1885), daughter of Thomas Isaac Allen, railway superintendent; she was nineteen years his junior. They had two daughters, Bunty ('b'. 1913) and Vivian ('b'. 1915). His elder daughter recalled the effects on their home life of his experiments with tempera, using egg yolk, water, and mastic varnish: 'The house stank of tempera, made with the egg yolks only. We ate meringues for breakfast, lunch and dinner [to use up the egg whites]' (private information). He adored his daughters and was grief-stricken when the marriage failed in 1925, and Christine departed for South Africa with both girls. 
In 1923 Duncan was made a full member of the Royal Scottish Academy, his diploma work being non-Celtic, 'Ivory, Apes and Peacocks'. He was a popular teacher at Edinburgh College of Art from 1919 until 1922, and from 1925 until his death he was the academy's librarian. He was elected a member of the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour in 1930. 
For the last three decades of his life Duncan concentrated on producing commissioned altarpieces and other artworks for churches, a typical work being the five painted panels, 'Christ Enthroned with Four Archangels' (1917), set within a carved oak reredos in St Mary's Episcopalian church, Broughty Ferry. About 1930, attracted by the pure colours and luminosity of stained glass, he taught himself the craft of glass-cutting -- with spectacular results. His greatest achievements in this field were the three-light 'Creation' window in North Morningside church, Edinburgh (later the Eric Liddell Centre), and the 'Coats Memorial Window' in Paisley Abbey. Graphic and modern-looking with blues, aquamarines, and purples set off with flashes of crimson, Duncan's stained glass windows are among the finest that Scotland has produced. 
One of Duncan's best friends described him as 'a man apart, living in a world of his imagination' (Herries, 253). He joined the Edinburgh Theosophical Society in 1909 and remained a keen member; he was an erudite and thoughtful man, who saw visions and heard fairy music while he painted. During his summers in the Outer Hebrides he learned Gaelic and painted the turquoise beaches of Iona and Barra long before Samuel Peploe and Francis Cadell discovered them -- at his instigation. He was popular and amusing, his Thursday afternoons 'at home' in his studio attracting art students, literati, and visitors who enjoyed intellectual discussions. 
In 1941, near the end of his life, Duncan was awarded the then unprecedented honour for a living artist of a major retrospective exhibition of over 100 works in the National Gallery of Scotland. He died of a cerebral thrombosis at his home, 29 St Bernard's Crescent, Edinburgh, on 23 November 1945. His trustees thereafter donated many of the larger paintings left in his studio to the principal Scottish museums. 
In 1910 Duncan wrote in his notebook, 'Desiderata: Decorative Arrangement / Large scale of figures / Breadth of effect / Perfection of finish' (notebook 3, NL Scot., acc. 6866). Overall his style is outside the mainstream of Scottish art, his pictures being usually two-dimensional and static, rather like medieval tapestries. Illustrations in the best sense, they are concerned with ideas and content rather than realism, his consummate skill as draughtsman and decorator producing exquisite recreations of ancient Celtic legends. 


@@@@@


doc= 94435


Nicholson, (Lorna) Rosemary (1919-2004), garden historian and museum founder, was born on 3 July 1919 at 17 Alexander Road, Southport, Lancashire, the youngest of the five children of Robert Foster Jeffrey Weeks, a mining engineer and a former officer in the Royal Engineers, and his wife, Louise Wilhelmina, 'nee' Black. Rosemary's father had been badly gassed during the First World War and, on account of his poor health, the family moved to South Africa soon after her birth. She grew up there and in India and returned to England with her mother following her father's death during her teenage years. Rosemary's return was prompted by her gaining a place at the Slade School of Art in London. However, she did not take this up after her mother was told that the art school was not a respectable institution for a young woman. 
On 21 September 1940 Rosemary married 
In 1974 the Nicholsons visited the church of St Mary, Lambeth, on the south bank of the River Thames. They had come to see the graves of the gardeners and plant collectors John Tradescant (died 1638) and his son, also John ('bap'. 1608, died 1662). In one of the most public sites in London, close by Westminster Bridge, opposite the Houses of Parliament, and next to Lambeth Palace, they found an embarrassingly derelict church and churchyard. Two years after their first visit, they learned that the church, which had been deconsecrated in 1972, was scheduled for demolition. Ardent garden-lovers, they were dismayed by this news and with their customary vigour set about doing something about it. They felt that the history of this most English art, and the graves of two of its most historically significant exponents, should be properly acknowledged. In 1977 they founded the Tradescant Trust in a bid to save the church and churchyard of St Mary, Lambeth, by establishing what would be the world's first museum of garden history. The Nicholsons assembled a notable board of trustees -- including David Piper, director of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the Tradescants' biographer, Prudence Leith-Ross. Their children having now grown up, the trust and museum became the driving force in the Nicholsons' lives. The first meeting of the Tradescant Trust took place inside the church building, but required its initiates to use umbrellas and rainwear because of the openweave state of the roof. Within three years there were sufficient funds to construct a roof for the church, to clean the building, and to clear the churchyard, which revealed not only the graves of the Tradescants but also those of the naval officer William Bligh and his wife. 
In 1981 the Museum of Garden History held its first exhibition, to commemorate the 350th anniversary of the death of the explorer and governor of Virginia Captain John Smith. Two years later the museum's garden -- designed by the dowager marchioness of Salisbury -- was opened by Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, who was an early supporter of the Nicholsons' work. By 1993 the building restoration, which included the east tower of the church, had been completed and the garden was in full maturity. Designed in the style of a seventeenth-century knot garden, the museum's churchyard garden, with its knots and period plants, took account of an important memorial to the Tradescants (erected in the seventeenth and remade in the mid-nineteenth century when St Mary's was restored). There is also a significant Coade stone memorial to Captain Bligh, whose career was also of botanical interest, and another to James Sowerby (1757-1822), the renowned botanist and illustrator of William Curtis's 'Botanical Magazine'. Despite the noise of London traffic only a little distance away, the museum garden was then, and remains, a place of peace. 
Early in the museum's development Rosemary and John Nicholson initiated a policy of acquisition and donation, through which they built up an interesting permanent collection of historic tools, plans (including some by Gertrude Jekyll), and a considerable library of horticultural images and books (including John Evelyn's copy of the 1656 'Musaeum Tradescantianum', the catalogue of the Tradescant collection). From its origin, the Nicholsons foresaw the museum as a place of formal and informal gatherings -- from popular and accessible lectures on garden history and other plant-related subjects, to book launches and exhibitions. Moreover, they managed not only to establish the museum but to keep it open with free entry. Its running costs were entirely financed by voluntary donations. John Nicholson -- a quietly unassuming and widely respected man -- had considerable financial and practical acumen; it was largely due to him that the museum's assets were safeguarded and developed. His death, on 25 September 1997 at Trinity Hospice, Clapham, was a profound loss to his wife and to the museum. Nevertheless Rosemary Nicholson had an indomitable will and, despite ill health, continued to work daily at the museum into her eighties. 
Rosemary Nicholson was accurately described as 'redoubtable' by a volunteer but accompanied this with generosity, warmth, and charm. The immense care and pride she took in her work was acknowledged when she was appointed MBE in 1989 and awarded a gold Veitch memorial medal six years later. She resigned as chairman of the museum in 2000, reluctantly yielding her place to a professional chief executive. She died on 28 October 2004 from heart disease at her home, 74 Coleherne Court, Old Brompton Road, Kensington, London. In January 2005 a stone plaque commemorating Rosemary and John Nicholson was unveiled in the garden by the museum's president, the dowager marchioness of Salisbury. In this way their memory, like that of the Tradescants, became part of the historic fabric of the museum they created. 


@@@@@


doc= 94450


Littlebury, Martin of (d. 1274), justice, was perhaps a younger son of the John of Littlebury who held lands by knight service of the bishop of Ely at Littlebury in Essex and Wisbech in Cambridgeshire, and who died in or before 1234, and of his wife, Margery. He seems to have had at least two brothers, John and Ralph, and possibly a third named Saer. The younger John was perhaps the John of Littlebury who had succeeded his father by 1234. Martin's first known appearance in official records is in an enrolment from the Kent eyre of 1241. His brother Ralph, who had been engaged in land litigation in the county, is recorded as entrusting the lands he held at Hastingleigh and Wingmere in east Kent (and perhaps elsewhere) in right of his late wife to Martin to hold as trustee for Ralph's children, Martin's nephew and niece, until they came of age. This Ralph is probably the Ralph of Littlebury who appears with his brother John as witness to a charter of Martin's of 1252 which established a chantry at Wisbech and endowed it with 50 acres of land there. 
Martin of Littlebury is first described in official records as a king's clerk in 1242. He had probably already been in the king's service for some time by that date, for in 1242 the king presented him to a moiety of the Lancashire church of Blackburn, and it was probably his service to the king that also secured a papal indulgence for him in February 1245, allowing him to hold an additional benefice with cure of souls. It is not, however, entirely clear what service he had been rendering the king. He may have been a clerk of chancery, like the other royal clerk given an indulgence at the same time, Robert of Shottenden. More probably he was a clerk in the service of one or more of the king's justices. By 1245 he had been presented to the Cumberland church of Kirkoswald by Thomas of Moulton, either the royal justice of that name (died 1240) or his son, perhaps as a reward for clerical service to Thomas in the common bench and on eyre. By 1250 he had also become a canon of Salisbury Cathedral. The bishop of Salisbury who collated him to the prebend of Stratton was almost certainly William of York (died 1256), who before his election in 1246 had been a senior justice of the common bench and had also been the senior justice of the Kent eyre of 1241. 
Martin of Littlebury served occasionally as an assize justice in the late 1240s, but his real service as a royal justice did not begin until the 1260s. He served as a junior justice on the three eyres of the circuit led by Gilbert of Preston in the first half of 1261, and after the eyres resumed in 1262 became senior justice on a separate circuit of his own. His final eyre was one held in Lincolnshire in the summer of 1263, which was never completed because of the outbreak of civil war. He did not serve as a justice during the period of Montfortian rule after the battle of Lewes in 1264, nor again until appointed chief justice of the common bench in Hilary term 1268. Chronicle evidence indicates that his was one of the voices of moderation after the Montfortian defeat at Evesham in 1265, urging on the king the need to make proper provision both for the widows of those who had fallen in rebellion against him, and for the wives of his living opponents who had been disinherited. It is possible that he played some part in the drafting of the 'Statute of Marlborough', enacted in November 1267, which gave permanent force to the provisions of Westminster, one of the major achievements of the 'period of baronial reform', and added some further clauses. Littlebury served as chief justice of the common bench until the end of Michaelmas term 1272 and thus to the end of Henry III's reign. He appears in some of the earliest surviving law reports, but they give little impression of his conduct as a justice. With the beginning of the new reign he was transferred to the court of king's bench and became its senior justice. He served for less than two years, dying some time between 28 June 1274, when he received his final judicial commission, and 23 September of the same year, when a successor was collated to the prebend he had held at Exeter Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 94451


Fontane, Theodor (1819-1898), novelist and travel writer, was born in Neuruppin, Brandenburg, Prussia, on 30 December 1819, the son of Louis Henri Fontane (1796-1867), apothecary, and his wife, Emilie (died 1869). Of French descent, he was baptized Henri Theodore Fontane, but was usually known by his German name. When he was eight his family moved to Swinemunde, where his father had bought an apothecary's shop. He briefly attended the 'Gymnasium' (grammar school) in Neuruppin, and then the K. F. Klodens School of Commerce in Berlin. In 1836 he began work as an apothecary's apprentice in Berlin. In 1839 his first published work appeared, the novella 'Geschwisterliebe'; his first poems appeared in 1840. In 1842 he translated Chartist lyrics into German; in 1843-4 he translated 'Hamlet'. In 1844 he volunteered for a year's military service in the Kaiser Franz Gardegrenadier regiment. 
Between 25 May and 10 June 1844, at the invitation of his friend Hermann Scherz, Fontane took leave of his army duties and made his first journey to England. They sailed by steamer from Hamburg to London, anchoring near the Tower of London. Apart from the customary tourist sites, Fontane visited Brighton, Greenwich, Blackwall, Woolwich, and Windsor. His detailed and enthusiastic diary shows him to be already steeped in Shakespeare, Byron, and other English authors; as he puts it, he 'had long looked towards England like the Jews in Egypt to Canaan' (Fontane, 'Wanderungen', 1.59), seeing it as a land of political and journalistic freedom. His grasp of English was as yet insecure, but he enjoyed English pubs, beer, and plum pudding. 
From 1849 to 1878 Fontane worked primarily as a journalist and critic, but also held various Prussian government posts on a short-term basis. These included working as a correspondent for the central press agency, and as secretary to the Academy of Arts. In 1850 he married Emilie Rouanet-Kummer (1824-1902), with whom he had two sons and a daughter. 
Beset by poor health and financial problems, and low in spirits, Fontane obtained permission from the literary cabinet of the Prussian government to spend the summer of 1852 in London as a foreign correspondent. Resident there between 22 April and 25 September, he published sketches and essays in various German newspapers, combining them with reminiscences from his earlier visit in the volume 'Ein Sommer in London', published in 1854. Among the essays are an atmospheric evocation of the empty crystal palace left deserted after the Great Exhibition of 1851, and a passionate defence of Lady Hamilton against rigid Victorian morality. 
Fontane returned to Britain for a third visit between 10 September 1855 and 15 January 1859. Working for the Prussian government as a press agent, he was officially employed to write reports on the English press, with an eye to Anglo-Prussian relations. His relationship with the Prussian bureaucracy was a precarious one; Berlin was suspicious of his literary style, his personality, and his (supposedly too liberal) politics. From early in 1856 onwards he worked primarily as a freelance journalist for various German newspapers. In the same year he visited Oxford, where he met Friedrich Max Muller, and wrote a series of essays on the British university system; his observations on the power struggle between the Oxford colleges and the university are acute. His wife and children joined him in London, where he had rented a house, in 1857. In August 1858 he travelled to Scotland with his friend Bernhard von Lepel. His route took him from Edinburgh north to Stirling and Inverness, then west to Oban, Staffa, and Iona; a lover of Walter Scott, he also visited Melrose and Abbotsford. 

'Aus England: Studien und Briefe uber Londoner Theater, Kunst und Presse' and 'Jenseit des Tweed' ('Beyond the Tweed') were both published in 1860, using material that had for the large part already appeared in newspapers. 'Aus England' concentrates on the London theatre, with particular reference to Shakespeare; it includes a contemporary and historical survey of the English press, and a description of industrial Manchester, which Fontane visited in 1857. 'Jenseit des Tweed', with its combination of topography, history, local legends, and literary interest, provided the model for the massive, four-volume project 'Wanderungen durch die Mark Brandenburg' (1862-82). His approach to travel writing is summarized in a letter of 1864: 'Every square-foot of earth has its story, and tells it, too... one only has to be willing to listen to its voices, quiet as they often are' (letter to Ernst von Pfuel, 18 Jan 1864, 'Theodor Fontane: Werke, Schriften und Briefe', 1979, 'Briefe', 2.115). 
Fontane's translations of ballads from Thomas Percy's 'Reliques of Ancient English Poetry', Joseph S. Moore's 'Pictorial Book of Ballads', and Walter Scott's 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border' were published as 'Balladen' in 1861; Fontane also composed a number of original poems on English and Scottish themes between 1842 and 1859. A vast amount of correspondence, diary entries, and journalism, some of it as yet unedited, survives from his years in England. 
In 1878 Fontane left government service to devote himself to writing on a full-time basis. Despite recurrent financial difficulties and periods of acute depression, these last two decades of his life proved extraordinarily productive. He wrote no fewer than fifteen novels, as well as poems and travel guides. His masterpieces include 'L'adultera' (1882; translated as 'The Woman Taken in Adultery', 1979), 'Irrungen Wirrungen' (1888), 'Effi Briest' (1895; English translation 1967), and 'Der Stechlin' (published posthumously in 1898). 
Fontane's novels draw extensively on his travel writings and diaries. Many are larded with English sayings and expressions, reflecting how English had supplanted French as the fashionable foreign language in late nineteenth-century Prussia. Frequent references to English (and Scottish) culture, fashions, and the ideal of the 'gentleman' occur. The British characters in the novels include vignettes such as Mister Nelson, the vapid Liverpudlian merchant in 'Frau Jenny Treibel' (1893) and the patriotic coachman Mister Johnson in 'Der Stechlin'. 'Cecile' (1887) has a Scottish protagonist, the engineer Major Robert von Leslie-Gordon. In 'Der Stechlin' the theme of England receives its fictional apotheosis. Although the novel is set in Berlin and Fontane's homeland of Brandenburg, sojourns in and journeys to England figure largely. The younger Stechlin is called as a representative of his regiment to Windsor to meet his commander-in-chief, Queen Victoria. The Barby family, into which he marries, has spent twenty years in London, and attitudes to England and the English form the symbolic yardstick by which the various characters are judged. 
Fontane's attitude to Britain changed over the years; the youthful enthusiasm of the army officer in 1844, his love affair with London, and the vivid account of what he saw as the journey of a lifetime, the sixteen days in Scotland, give way in his last letters from England to disillusionment with the London climate. Although he never returned to Britain after 1859, he retained to the end of his life an affection for the English and an interest in their politics. His autobiographical work 'Von Zwanzig bis Dreissig' ('From twenty to thirty') includes a retrospective account of his English years, written in 1894-5. It included his observation that: 'The most modest people -- ludicrously enough, the only modest people -- are the English. They do cherish an enormous degree of national pride, but in what they achieve 'personally', they like to adopt a subordinate position' ('Autobiographische Schriften', vol. 2, 'Von Zwanzig bis Dreissig', 1982, 48). In the last two years of his life Fontane had a lively correspondence with James Morris of London, who sent him English newspapers and magazines. Writing in 1896 Fontane took pleasure in the rise of Keir Hardie: 'The bourgeoisie is dreadful, and the nobility and clergy are died-in-the-wool, always the same. The new, better world will only begin with the Fourth Estate' (letter to James Morris, 22 Feb 1896, 'Theodor Fontane: Werke, Schriften und Briefe', 1979, 'Briefe', 4.539). Fontane died in Berlin on 20 September 1898, and was buried four days later in the cemetery of the French Reformed church. 


@@@@@


doc= 94459


Backhouse, Janet Moira (1938-2004), scholar and curator of manuscripts, was born on 8 February 1938 at Marley, 90 Pickwick Road, Corsham, Wiltshire, the daughter of Joseph Holme Backhouse, cattle-food salesman, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Chivers; they also had a son, the sculptor David John Backhouse ('b'. 1941). She was educated at Stonar School, Wiltshire, of which she later became a governor. She retained a lifelong penchant for public-school food and the 'Chalet School novels', and in adulthood her manner could veer between enthusiastic schoolgirl and stern schoolmistress. As an undergraduate she read history at Bedford College, London, under Dame Lillian Penson. Focusing on 'The age of Bede' engendered an enduring association with Northumbria, for Backhouse seldom relinquished that for which she felt passion. 
On 17 September 1962 Backhouse took up the position of assistant keeper in the department of manuscripts of the British Museum library. It was characteristic of this forceful personality that she arrived in trousers, to the consternation of her male colleagues, for professional women were still quite new to these fringes of the civil service. She abandoned her postgraduate study of litanies under Francis Wormald in favour of learning on the job. During thirty-five years in the department she came to know the illuminated collections better than anyone, forged a close working relationship with her complex colleague Derek H. Turner and, having succeeded him in building a vibrant exhibitions programme, accompanied many international loans. Prominent among these adventures for Backhouse (who enjoyed the spotlight and handled publicity well) were escorting the gospels of Tsar Ivan Alexander back to Bulgaria (1977) and taking the 'Lindisfarne gospels' to Durham Cathedral during the 1300th anniversary of the death of St Cuthbert (1987). She reverently laid the book upon his tomb before placing it on exhibition; thenceforth she would holiday on Holy Island annually. 
Backhouse relished the high and low brow with equal aplomb. Her interests were wide and she blossomed in the face of the demanding range of manuscripts in the collections. Training was broad and immersion complete: although she was a medievalist an early task was arranging and cataloguing the papers of Lady Anne Blunt, co-founder of the stud of Arabian horses at Crabbet Park. She later contributed to the stud's centenary celebrations and each year attended Badminton horse trials. 
During a distinguished and colourful career Backhouse's scholarly contribution to major exhibitions included 'Renaissance Painting in Manuscripts' (1983), 'The Golden Age of Anglo-Saxon Art, 966-1066' (1984), 'The Age of Chivalry' (1987), and 'The Making of England: Anglo-Saxon Art and Culture, AD' 600-900 (1991). Her publications ranged from facsimile commentaries and a plethora of academic papers to well-written booklets on individual treasures of the British Library -- including 'The Luttrell Psalter' (1989), 'The Bedford Hours' (1990), 'The Isabella Breviary' (1993) -- and popular studies, 'Books of Hours' (1993), 'The Lindisfarne Gospels' (1981), 'The Illuminated Page: Ten Centuries of Manuscript Painting in the British Library' (1997), and 'The Sherborne Missal' (1999). She also contributed 'The Royal Library from Edward IV to Henry VII' to the third volume of the 'Cambridge History of the Book in Britain' (1998). It was the people who made and owned the manuscripts who really intrigued her and, although held in great respect as a scholar by her peers, she sought to appeal primarily to a wider audience (her 'Joe Public'). She would lecture with equal vivacity and commitment to prestigious conferences and amateur societies, maintaining that the needs of those who drew creative inspiration from illuminated manuscripts were as valid as those of academics. 
In 1973 the British Museum library was absorbed into the newly created British Library, which moved to St Pancras in 1998. Fortunately this was the year of Backhouse's retirement, for she remained to the last a museum person; the brave new world of the digital library held no allure. A productive retirement beckoned, marked by the presentation of a Festschrift in her honour, 'Illuminating the Book: Makers and Interpreters' (1998). She divided her time between a flat in Richmond, Surrey, and a country cottage near her birthplace, and threw herself into further publishing and learned society work. She was a member of the Henry Bradshaw Society and of the advisory council of the National Art Collections Fund (1995) and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries (1983) and of the Comite Internationale de Paleographie Latine (1993). She also served on the steering committee of the Harlaxton Medieval Symposium, editing its 1998 proceedings. In 2004 she was diagnosed with cancer, which advanced rapidly. She continued to work on an article on the French illuminator Jean Bourdichon and on 'Illumination from Books of Hours' (2005) in the Royal United Hospital, Bath, where she died, unmarried, on 3 November 2004. The funeral service (followed by cremation) in Bath was attended by family and close friends, and a memorial service was held in St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, on 25 May 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 94461


Best, Richard (1916-2004), film editor, was born Augustus Percy Best on 28 June 1916 at Sandford, Ferens Avenue, Hull, Yorkshire, the son of George Augustus Blakeney Best, a wholesale provision merchant then serving as a private in the 10th battalion of the East Yorkshire regiment, and his wife, Vera, 'nee' Bantoft. He attended a dame school in Acton, west London, and St Paul's School, London. He was fascinated by the cinema from an early age and found a way into the industry through the approach of his mother to J. Arthur Rank, the Rank family having been neighbours of hers in Hull as a child. He began as a lowly assistant in the cutting rooms at the British and Dominions Film Corporation, and later worked on the editing team of David Lean for the production of 'As You Like It' (1936), before graduating to editing assistant on low budget films produced by Anthony Havelock-Allan at Pinewood. Best recalled this hectic and exciting period as the most enjoyable of his career. 
On 3 September 1939, the day that Britain declared war on Germany, Best married, at Ruislip parish church, Margaret Charcella Warren ('b'. 1914), secretary, and daughter of Samuel Higgs Warren, accountant. Best was called up in 1940, when he joined the Royal Berkshire regiment, but found a more suitable role back at Pinewood with the army film unit, which he joined in 1942. There he worked on numerous training and documentary films, most importantly on the acclaimed 'Desert Victory' (1943), which enjoyed great success in America and won the Oscar for best documentary film, and 'Burma Victory' (1945), his first collaborations with the director Roy Boulting. Both films were decidedly cinematic, with Best ably cutting to Boulting's vision, as in the celebrated 'gun flash montage' of 'Desert Victory', the dynamic sequence that heralds Montgomery's break-through at Alamein. Following the war Best edited three of the Boulting brothers' feature films. 'Fame is the Spur' (1947), an adaptation of the Howard Spring novel, was not a commercial success, but was distinguished by an impressive visual design for which Best offered able dramatic support. He created considerable tension in the sequence of the striking miners storming a pithead, with the fluid movement of the body of men through the narrow cobbled streets punctuated with closer shots of angry and anxious faces. Best had the highest regard for the Boultings and made significant contributions to 'The Guinea Pig' (1948) and 'The Magic Box' (1951). The latter -- the industry's official contribution to the Festival of Britain -- was a biography of the cinema pioneer William Friese-Greene, and required the editor to contend with a complicated flashback structure. 
On the recommendation of John Boulting, Best joined ABPC Studios at Elstree and stayed there for eighteen years and thirty-three films. He wisely requested to join the production of 'The Dam Busters' (1954), which became a huge commercial success and a classic of the war film genre. Best's editing skilfully kept the story moving forward and integrated the different lines of development: the invention narrative of Barnes Wallis; the training of the aircrews under Guy Gibson; and the final raid. While the film was quite stately and matter of fact in approach -- there were a large number of scenes played in a single master shot -- Best countered this static quality through 'shock' cuts to the following scene, thus imposing a forward-moving dynamic to the narrative. The extended raid sequence proved a masterclass in film editing: though played without any music, it achieved a remarkable tension through expert cutting between each of the three raiding parties and the officers anxiously waiting on events back at base. 
Best developed a close working relationship with the stylish director J. Lee Thompson on six features during the 1950s. They first worked together on 'The Yellow Balloon' (1953), a technically proficient crime film, but had greater critical and commercial success with 'Yield to the Night' (1956), a controversial drama about capital punishment produced a year after the Ruth Ellis affair. The brilliant skills of Thompson, Best, and the cinematographer Gilbert Taylor were evident in the acclaimed pre-credit sequence, a three-minute montage of disquieting angles, reflected images, and disembodying close-ups as the protagonist -- marvellously realized by Diana Dors in her first serious dramatic role -- stalks her victim. Best and Taylor made significant contributions to the social dramas 'Woman in a Dressing Gown' (1957) and 'No Trees in the Street' (1959), but the outstanding film of the period was the ground-breaking war film 'Ice Cold in Alex' (1958). Unconventionally, the film depicted a British officer, nerves shattered by war, struggling to bring an ambulance and crew through the desert to Alexandria. Best responded brilliantly to the opportunity for cranking up the tension and executed a series of classic set pieces: the nerve-wracking journey through the mine field; the desperate attempts to pull a colleague out of quicksand; and the laborious and painful efforts to manhandle the truck up a sand dune. It was the film Best was most proud of. He worked with Thompson again on 'The Most Dangerous Man in the World' (1969), a highly unsatisfying experience marred by interference from the American Fox company. 
Best had little sympathy for the innovations or politics of the 'new wave' in the late 1950s. He detested working on Tony Richardson's adaptation of 'Look Back in Anger' (1959) and largely ruled himself out of some of the more interesting directions British cinema took in the 1960s. Instead he found himself working on low-grade comedies like 'Go to Blazes' (1962), vapid international productions such as 'The Double Man' (1967), and derivative horrors including 'Psychomania' (1971). One high spot in this period of mediocrity was his work on the prestigious television series 'The Avengers', for which he edited fourteen episodes in 1965-66. He ended his career in the early 1980s at British Transport Films, back in documentary film-making. 
Best's first marriage ended in divorce, and on 2 June 1956, at Harrow register office, he married (Mabel) Noreen Ackland ('b'. 1921), also an editor, who had a long professional association with the film-maker Michael Powell. She was the daughter of William Henry Ackland, driving instructor. He died at his home, 39 The Greenway, Ickenham, Uxbridge, Middlesex, on 19 December 2004 following a heart attack, and was survived by his wife and two children (a son and a daughter). 


@@@@@


doc= 94465


Turri, Nicholas de (d. 1270/71), justice, came from Dorset, where his family's principal estates were at Berwick and Starthill, both between Abbotsbury and Bridport. His parentage is not entirely clear. His father may have been the Gregory de Turri recorded in 1225 as holding half a hide of land in the manor of Swyre, Dorset, where nearly twenty years later Nicholas himself acquired half a hide and 2 acres of meadow. But although Gregory is known to have married a woman named Emma, a papal dispensation in 1258 shows that Nicholas was illegitimate. Consequently his exact relationship with John de Turri, described as his brother, and with Alice, said to have been his sister (and married to James of Dover), also remains unclear. 
The dispensation of 1258 shows that at an unrecorded date Turri took orders, but the course of his career is recorded almost entirely in secular terms, as a royal servant. It has been suggested that because he later held land and acquired connections in Cambridgeshire, he may have owed his start in the king's service to Jeremy of Caxton, sheriff of Cambridgeshire (1232-6) and later a justice 'coram rege'. But this is far from proven, and he may also have had links to Hugh de Turri, the buyer for the royal wardrobe under Henry III. Nicholas is first recorded in early 1241, acting as an attorney in the court 'coram rege', and he is possibly to be identified with the 'N. the clerk' who was serving as an official of that court at Michaelmas 1243. By mid-1245 he was certainly employed there as the king's attorney in a dispute concerning land in Hampshire. However it is not until the later 1240s that he becomes regularly visible. In 1248-9 he was commissioned to hear assizes in Essex and Middlesex in association with Henry of Wingham; and although the first explicit reference to him as a king's clerk dates only from March 1252, he probably enjoyed that status by August 1250, when he was granted $10 to maintain himself in royal service. In January 1252 he was granted an annual salary of $40, after becoming a puisne justice in the court 'coram rege' in the previous autumn. He continued to sit there throughout the 1250s, alongside such illustrious colleagues as Gilbert of Seagrave, Henry of Bratton, and Henry of Bath, and also took numerous assizes. In March 1256 he was appointed with Roger of Thirkleby to investigate the death of Hugh of Lincoln, the alleged child-victim of ritual murder by Jews in the previous year. 
The wording and the date (10 October 1258) of the papal dispensation from illegitimacy, which was specifically granted to Turri 'that he may receive and hold a bishopric' ('CEPR letters, 1198-1304', 360), strongly suggest that Henry III planned to reward Turri's services through ecclesiastical promotion, and that the see in the king's mind was probably Lincoln, whose bishop, Henry of Lexinton, had died on 8 August. But by the time the indult was issued the canons of Lincoln had already elected Richard of Gravesend, and it may be a sign of King Henry's political weakness in the late summer of 1258 that he made no recorded effort to press the claims of his own candidate. As it was, Bishop Gravesend proved to be a staunch Montfortian. The fact that Turri appears to have fallen ill about this time may have been another reason for his failure to secure a diocese. However, he had recovered sufficiently by early 1260 to hold sessions in Oxfordshire and Berkshire of the special eyre set up after the crisis of 1258-9 to redress grievances throughout the kingdom. 
The death of Henry of Bath in November 1260 left Turri as the only justice sitting in the court 'coram rege'. Between 1261 and 1263 he also served on nine eyres in central and eastern England, while in August 1262 he is recorded as one of the justices for the Jews. In April 1265, during the period of Simon de Montfort's ascendancy, Turri was still acting as a justice in the court 'coram rege'; indeed, he and his colleague Ralph of Braham appear to have been responsible for keeping the court going in the turbulent months between the battles of Lewes and Evesham (May 1264 - August 1265). He then served as senior justice 'coram rege' from Michaelmas 1265 until Hilary 1268, prompting the comment that Turri was 'instrumental... in re-establishing the King's Bench after the troubles of the previous years', and that he has 'a better claim to be considered the first chief justice ['coram rege'] than his successor Robert Brywes, even though the title was never used of him' (Meekings, 'Justices'). He presided as chief justice over another three eyres in 1268-9, in Wiltshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk, as part of the last great visitation of Henry III's reign, but his death prevented his completing the circuit prescribed for him. He may have died late in 1270, and was certainly dead by 26 February 1271, when Simon of Coleshill, one of his executors, brought Turri's eyre rolls into the exchequer. 
In addition to his family lands in Dorset, Turri had property in Essex, Cambridgeshire, Devon, and Hertfordshire. He had been building up his estates at least from the early 1240s, notably at Aythorpe Roding in Essex, where he began acquiring land early in 1244. And some time in the later 1260s he became rector of the Glastonbury living of Grittleton near Chippenham in Wiltshire, valued at $10 per annum. Turri's heir was his putative brother John. 


@@@@@


doc= 94466


Briwes, Sir Robert de (d. 1275/6), justice, has often in the past been the victim of a confusion of identities, his toponymic surname Briwes or Brywes having caused him to be linked with the Brus family which claimed the Scottish throne at the end of the thirteenth century. In fact his principal interests lay in Somerset, where his family held lands from at least the 1170s. Robert's immediate parentage is uncertain, and it can only be said that he was the son of one of two men, father and son, both named John de Briwes, who both served as royal justices in Cornwall in 1201. One John was also involved with exchequer business in 1207, and one had a wife, Margery, and property interests in Surrey and Wiltshire. Margery may have been the mother of Robert, who on 31 May 1229, as John's son and heir, did homage to the king for his father's lands at Staple Fitzpaine in Somerset. In April 1233 Robert was granted the right to hold a market there, and he still held the manor at his death. 
Briwes served as sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk in 1232-4, and again in 1237-9, while in 1239-40 he was a justice itinerant under Robert of Lexinton in Northamptonshire. In 1248 Lexinton became the vassal of Briwes, when the latter granted him custody of his manor of Theydon Mount in Essex, with the advowson of its rectory. His association with Essex resulted from his first marriage, to Beatrice, daughter of Walter of Evermuth, which had taken place by June 1239, when they were granted a market and fair at Theydon Mount. His marriage also brought Robert lands at Runham in Norfolk, which were granted to him and Beatrice by Walter of Evermuth in 1239-40, and which Briwes still held at the time of his death. He and Beatrice also held property jointly in Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire. 
After an interval of several years Briwes resumed his career in the king's service in the early 1250s. In August 1250 he was commissioned to hear assizes in south-west England, including a dispute in Somerset between the bishop of Bath and Wells and the abbot of Glastonbury; and also to adjudicate (together with Henry of Bath) between the men of the archbishop of York and those of the bishop of Lincoln. He was added to the panel of justices for the Norfolk and Suffolk eyres of 1250-51, and then took part in the eyre to northern and midland counties which began in September 1251. He continued to receive regular commissions during the rest of the 1250s, and had been knighted by the end of the decade. On 13 April 1257 Briwes was appointed a puisne justice of the court 'coram rege', and by the early 1260s at the latest he was receiving an annual fee of $40. As well as continuing to serve on numerous commissions he acted once more as a justice in eyre. In the visitation of 1261-3, for example, Briwes headed the circuit for Devon, Cornwall, and Somerset. 
Briwes remained loyal to the king throughout the 1260s. About the end of 1261, after Henry III had freed himself from baronial control, Briwes acted as temporary keeper of Taunton Castle. A royalist during the civil war that followed, he was heavily, and sometimes controversially, involved in the settlement of territorial claims following the battle of Evesham on 4 August 1265. The Essex manor of Theydon Mount had passed from Robert of Lexinton to his brother John, who died in 1257, and thence to John's great-nephew Robert of Sutton. But Robert was a Montfortian, and consequently Henry III regranted the manor to Briwes in October 1266. However, Briwes's neighbour in Essex, Richard de Tany, lord of Stapleford, was keen to secure the manor for himself and produced a charter purporting to show his own prior claim. Eventually Briwes established in the court 'coram rege' that Tany's charter was a forgery, and the manor was restored to him, but he had lost it again by the time of his death, when it was back in the custody of Robert of Sutton, presumably rehabilitated after his rebellion. Similarly at Michaelmas 1268 Briwes was involved in another dispute, this time over land in Somerset and Wiltshire, against his fellow loyalist Robert Walerand. The outcome of the case is not recorded, and its significance lies largely in Walerand's assertion that Briwes had begun his action at a time when he was 'chief justice of the bench without colleague or counter-roll' ('capitalis justiciarius de Banco sine socio et sine contrarotulo'; TNA: PRO, KB 26/186, m. 13d). This is the first known explicit reference to the office of chief justice of the bench. It is not possible to be certain precisely when Briwes was acting in this way, but it was probably before 8 March 1268, when he was 'appointed to be justice to hold pleas before the king during pleasure' ('CPR, 1266-72', 202), and granted an annual fee of 100 marks. 
Briwes's tenure as senior justice of the court 'coram rege' was brief, for on 6 November 1269 he was replaced by Richard of Staines, and ordered to deliver up his rolls, writs, and other documents. He continued to act on commissions of assize and gaol delivery until at least 1272. But there are indications that he had fallen from royal favour, and he may have retired around that time. Three times between the end of 1274 and the summer of 1275 he was ordered to hand over rolls in his possession, while an order of 24 June 1275 stipulated that he should pay all his debts to the king in two instalments over the following year. Briwes was dead by 28 August 1276, when orders were given for inquests into his lands. His wife Beatrice had predeceased him, and Briwes had married as his second wife a woman named Margery. His heir was his son, Sir John de Briwes, evidently the son of Beatrice, and there was also a daughter. At his death Briwes held manors in Norfolk, Gloucestershire, Hampshire, and Surrey, as well as his principal estates in Somerset and Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 94467


Staines, Richard of (d. 1277/8), justice and administrator, may have been born in Staines, Middlesex, where he acquired property in 1254 and 1276, but his origins are otherwise obscure. He was possibly the son of a John of Staines who held property in the city of London, and he had two sisters, of whom it can be said only that one may have been a half-sister, and that one of them was called Margaret. He probably had a university education, however, as he was usually referred to as Master during his professional career. He is recorded as an attorney in several cases in the common bench in the late 1250s and early 1260s, but first appears in royal service in 1262, when he was one of the commissioners appointed to inquire into the lands -- extending across several counties -- of the late Richard de Clare, sixth earl of Gloucester. He does not reappear in government records until 1267, however, when he was expressly referred to as a royal clerk, working as such on a variety of inquests. During that year he also acted as the keeper of the bishopric of London, which had been taken into the king's hand following the suspension of the Montfortian Henry of Sandwich. 
In the years that followed Staines became increasingly involved in the administration of justice. At the end of 1267 he appears to have received his first appointment as a royal justice, on the eyre circuit headed by Nicholas de Turri, and in the following year he was one of the junior justices appointed for an eyre in Cornwall. In 1268-9 he served as itinerant justice in Wiltshire, Norfolk, and Suffolk before being transferred to the court 'coram rege', or king's bench, in mid-1269. At first he acted as a puisne justice there, but in November of that year he succeeded Robert de Briwes as the court's senior justice. By Easter 1273, however, despite his annual salary having been raised in the previous year from $40 to 100 marks, Staines had been replaced as chief justice of the court by Martin of Littlebury. He remained a puisne justice of king's bench until Easter 1274, when he was transferred to the common bench, where he served until Easter 1276. In the meantime Staines also continued to act as a justice in the localities. About July 1273 he was appointed with Roger of Seaton to take assizes in Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Hampshire, Oxfordshire, and Berkshire, and he was regularly nominated to commissions. One of the last recorded of these, in July 1276, involved inquiring into alleged escapes from the Tower of London. 
After his departure from the common bench Staines's career appears to have changed direction somewhat, since he moved to the royal exchequer, being described as chancellor of the exchequer in January 1277. He may have died before the end of that year, and was certainly dead by 18 June 1278, when his executors were ordered to hand over his 'coram rege' and assize rolls. The fact that he was a clerk in minor orders would not have prevented his marrying, but there is no evidence that he did so. In August 1271 Henry III had presented Staines to the living of Bocking in Essex, and in 1272 confirmed a grant made to him of lands in Oxford by a Jew of that town named Jacob; but it is not clear what happened to his estate after his death. No inquisition post mortem survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 94468


Malberthorpe, Sir Robert (d. 1331/2), justice, was the son and heir of Sir William of Malberthorpe, lord of the manor of Mablethorpe, Lincolnshire, where in 1296 he was licensed to have a private chapel and from which his family took its name. Robert Malberthorpe seems to have been destined for the legal profession from the start, being recorded as a serjeant, or countor, in the common bench as early as 1299. By 1311 he was being employed by the city of London, while in 1313-14 he was one of a number of leading serjeants, or 'narratores', to be retained by Thomas, earl of Lancaster. He remained active in the common bench until 1320, when on 1 August he was appointed a justice of king's bench, a promotion which T. F. Tout believed that Malberthorpe, together with such distinguished contemporaries as John Stonor and Geoffrey Scrope, owed to their 'distinction as advocates' (Tout, 369). In the same year Edward II granted Malberthorpe the wardship and marriage of Adam Welle, the heir to considerable estates in Lincolnshire and elsewhere. It is a measure of the grantee's professional earnings that he could undertake to pay 1800 marks for this, in six annual instalments. By 1326 he had been knighted. 
Malberthorpe inevitably became involved in the administration of justice in the localities, being appointed to numerous commissions, especially for Lincolnshire and its neighbouring counties, as well as to one in November 1323 investigating corruption by royal and local officials in Derbyshire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire. He was also intermittently involved in national politics. In 1320 he was named -- along with Sir Bartholomew Badlesmere and Hugh Despenser the younger -- to commissions intended to help the Despensers deal with the opposition they faced from John Mowbray and his allies over their claims to the lordship of Gower. Then on 20 March 1322, following the battle of Boroughbridge, it was Malberthorpe who in the king's name passed judgment of death on the defeated earl of Lancaster -- an act for which he would need a pardon following Edward II's deposition. On 30 May 1323 he attended the great council at Bishopthorpe, near York, which negotiated a truce with the Scots, having been ordered 'to come with all speed by day and night to York there to await the coming of the king, who desires to have counsel and treaty with Robert and others of his council' ('CClR', '1318-23', 712), while in 1324 he was appointed to a commission to inquire into those who had assisted the recent rebels in Shropshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, and Herefordshire, and to take ransoms and fines from those convicted. 
Despite having apparently enjoyed the favour of Edward II, Malberthorpe continued to thrive during both the minority regime of Roger Mortimer and Queen Isabella and (from 1330) the majority of Edward III. He retained the wardship granted to him by the latter's father, and in July 1327 he was commissioned with other barons and justices to give 'effect to the statute annulling all fines, sales etc after the time of the exile of Hugh the elder and Hugh the younger made under distress' ('CPR', '1327-30', 153). In February 1329 he was involved in the sessions at the London Guildhall that judged the rebels led by Henry of Lancaster against the regime of Isabella and Mortimer. Malberthorpe had continued to serve as a justice of king's bench, and on 1 May 1329 he was made chief justice of that court, a position that he held until 28 October following. His replacement by Sir Henry Scrope was doubtless due to his having been appointed on 22 October a justice for eyres in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire. Proceedings at Derby were not concluded until May 1331, but earlier that year Malberthorpe was recalled to Westminster, having been appointed a justice of common pleas on 18 January, a position he held into the following Michaelmas term. He had died by 21 January 1332, however, when the escheator was instructed to take his lands into the king's hand, as those of a tenant-in-chief. But no will or inquisition post mortem survives, and there is no record of his having married or had children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94469


Hillary, Sir Roger (d. 1356), justice, was one of at least five sons of William Hillary and his wife, Agnes. The Hillarys, a well-propertied family holding lands in Lincolnshire, Warwickshire, Staffordshire, and Leicestershire, appear to have been related to the Bereford family of Coleshill, Warwickshire, whose members included Sir William Bereford, successively a puisne and chief justice in the court of common pleas from 1294 to 1326. For Roger Hillary, who is recorded as an attorney in that court from the summer of 1310, the connection is likely to have been a useful one. In 1324 he became a serjeant-at-law, and thereafter he is frequently mentioned as an advocate in the year-books, while by 1322 he was being named to oyer and terminer commissions, including politically sensitive ones investigating the rebellious activities of John Mowbray and Roger Clifford in 1322. But in the later years of Edward II's reign Hillary kept a relatively low profile, and apart from judicial commissions his only noteworthy activities were his acting, along with his brother Richard, as a parliamentary proctor for the prior of Coventry, and his being retained about 1326 by John Sutton of Dudley, one of the leading barons in the west midlands, for a yearly robe and 60's'. fee. 
Hillary's career began to prosper after the deposition of Edward II. Married to a woman named Katherine by the spring of 1320, he added to his estates in his home county of Staffordshire, acquiring the manor of Fisherwick, near Lichfield, in 1326-7, and securing a life grant of the mill at Bentley, with its ponds and meadows, about the same time. Professionally a major advance came in 1329 with his appointment as chief justice of the common bench in Ireland, a position that he held for eight years. In fact Hillary's association with Ireland seems to have remained purely nominal, for the number and importance of his appointments to offices and commissions in England now began to increase dramatically. In 1332, for instance, he was named to a commission to deal with disturbers of the king's peace in Staffordshire, and in 1335 he was appointed to investigate the activities of the king's officers in the west midlands, while on 18 March 1337 he was made a justice of the English court of common pleas, having been knighted in the previous year. A number of his judgments are recorded in the year-books. They show him to have been capable both of a measured conservatism, as when he declared in 1342 that 'We will not and can not change the ancient usages' (Putnam, 106), and of a no less considered flexibility, when he ruled a year later in favour of extending the statute on executors of 1335 to cover detinue as well as debt, even though the statute spoke only of the latter. He also continued to receive important commissions away from Westminster: thus in August 1338 he was appointed to inquire in Herefordshire and Shropshire into the fate of the jewels, plate, and money of the second earl of Arundel, executed in 1326, while in 1340 he became involved in the levying of taxation, acting variously as an assessor, collector, and supervisor of the ninth on moveables in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire. 
His obvious competence led to Hillary's being appointed chief justice of common pleas on 8 January 1341, replacing Sir John Stonor, who had been dismissed as part of the previous autumn's purge of the royal administration. On 9 May 1342, however, Stonor recovered his former position, while a few weeks later, on 4 June, Hillary once more became a puisne justice of the bench. He remained very active in that capacity, and it is a sign of his standing that in 1344 he was named to a special commission of councillors and high-ranking justices to discuss the terms demanded by the Commons in return for a grant of taxation. In the autumn of 1348 he was appointed a justice for an eyre in Kent which, however, never took place, while in March 1351 he was made a commissioner for the enforcement of the 'Statute of Labourers' in Worcestershire. Two years later he became involved in the process whereby Roger Mortimer, the grandson of the earl of March executed in 1330, recovered his inheritance. Then early in 1354 Sir John Stonor retired and, on 20 February, Hillary was again appointed to succeed him as chief justice of the bench, and in that capacity took part shortly afterwards in the king's proceedings against the disgraced financier Sir William de la Pole. He remained chief justice for the rest of his life. 
Hillary was not only active in the service of the king, for he also became a valued servant of Edward, the Black Prince. He was listed as a member of the prince's council in 1347, occurs in the witness lists to the prince's charters, and was also appointed a justice for a forest eyre in north Wales. In September 1353 he was recorded as justice of Chester, an appointment controlled by the Black Prince, and he seems to have been a very active member of the latter's council well into the 1350s. His dependability in the prince's eyes is further shown by his being one of a number of the prince's servants who were appointed to try petitions, and thus to ensure that their master suffered no embarrassment from them, in the parliament of 1352. 
His good and energetic services to the king and his heir brought Hillary a considerable amount of royal patronage. In 1336 Queen Philippa granted him the marriage of William, son and heir of William Plaunke, a landowner in several midland and southern counties, whom Hillary duly espoused to his own daughter Elizabeth. On 4 May 1344 he received a grant of free warren on all his demesnes in Staffordshire and Warwickshire, while in October that year he was given the marriage of Joan, sister and heir of John Bokeland, specifically 'for long and laborious service especially as chief justice of the Bench' ('Calendar of the fine rolls', 22 vols., PRO, 1911-62, 5.400). On 13 February 1345 he was licensed to crenellate his house at Bescot, near Walsall, which was presumably his principal residence. In October 1349 he inherited his own brother Richard's estate. Finally, in May 1354, for a payment of $60, he was secured the marriage of John, son and heir of William Helyng. He also seems to have been moderately active in the land market, and had acquired the Staffordshire manor of Stretton-on-Fosse by 1344. 
On 17 June 1351, perhaps in response to the black death, Hillary and his wife were granted a papal licence to choose their own confessors. But it was only on 1 June 1356 that Hillary died, whereupon his son Roger, who was also a lawyer, had seisin of his father's properties, which included a substantial estate in Staffordshire as well as smaller holdings in Leicestershire and Warwickshire. In his will Sir Roger left bequests totalling some $330. Katherine Hillary, who in addition to her dower received $100 worth of silver, died less than three weeks after her husband, on 20 June. Sir Roger had requested burial in the church of All Saints, Walsall, where his effigy showed him in full armour. It was recorded by the antiquary William Burton in 1613, but has since disappeared. 


@@@@@


doc= 94476


Juyn, Sir John (d. 1440), justice, was the son of John Juhyne (died 1390), a prominent Bristol wool merchant, and his wife, Margery, from whom he inherited estates in Bristol, and in Bedminster and Knowle, Somerset. His connections with the Bristol merchant community were to serve him well throughout his career; he was recorder of Bristol from at least 1422 until 1438, and acted often as a feoffee in the property transactions of the town's leading merchants. Indeed his first appearance in the records is as a mainpernor in chancery in 1407 for Bristol merchants sued for debt in London, by which time he was undoubtedly practising law at Westminster. His opinions were first reported in the year-books in 1409 and frequently thereafter. Called to the order of serjeant-at-law in February 1415, he managed to avoid the bestowal of this degree, with its heavy financial burden, until Trinity term 1418. As counsel to the duchy of Lancaster between 1416 and 1422 he took a leading role in the division of the Bohun inheritance between Henry V and his cousin Lady Anne Stafford, settling the 'scire facias' writ of 1420 and engrossing the final partition, with his fellow serjeant James Strangeways, in 1421. He was also retained by the king's brother, Thomas, duke of Clarence, from at least 1418 until 1420. 
Juyn rode the western circuit as an assize justice in the period 1422-4, before switching to the home counties circuit, following his double appointment as chief baron of the exchequer and justice in the court of common pleas on 5 May 1423. He was knighted in May 1426, during the Leicester parliament, with the king and many others, attired in vestments of cloth of gold. A trier of parliamentary petitions from 1425 to 1439, he was often summoned to advise the king's council during the same period. Most notably, he attended the council at Reading in November 1426 for fifteen days, when ordinances were drawn up to ensure the peace between Cardinal Beaufort and Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, and was granted a tun of wine yearly from the port of London for his expenses. 
Despite his national prominence, Juyn's interests retained a regional focus. He was named to every peace commission in Somerset, where he resided, from 1419 until his death, and raised loans there for the government of Henry VI in the 1420s and 1430s. He was frequently appointed to commissions of inquiry throughout the west country, particularly regarding mercantile matters, such as customs offences, or when the interests of the many regional magnates whom he served were involved. He was employed by the baronial families of Lovell, Berkeley, Bonville, Botreaux, and Hungerford, and by Nicholas Bubwith, bishop of Bath and Wells, and acted as executor of the latter's will of 1424. Because he was counsel and friend to both Walter, first Baron Hungerford, and William, third Baron Botreaux, he was chosen as the final arbiter of the contract drawn up for the marriage of their children in 1420. He was also appointed to arbitrate, among other aristocratic disputes, in the famous lawsuit over the Berkeley inheritance, and made no less than three awards upon it, including the settlement of 1425, which was accepted by both parties until the death of the thirteenth earl of Warwick in 1439. 
At least one of Juyn's two wives had a noble connection. The parentage of his first wife, Edith, remains obscure. The couple was granted life tenure of two estates in Somerset -- Fisshewerez in Chew Magna, by Bishop Bubwith in 1424, and the manor of Belluton, by James Botiller, earl of Ormond, in 1427 -- but nothing else is known of Edith. By 1436, after her death, childless, he had married Alice, daughter of William Bythemore, esquire, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Richard de la Warr, younger son of Roger, Lord de la Warr, who settled the Somerset manor of Battleborough upon the couple and their issue. Three of Sir John's other manors (in Long Ashton and Stanton Drew, Somerset, and West Hanham, Gloucestershire) were probably acquired by purchase. He resided, however, in a fortified manor house known as Inyn's Court (now Inn's Court), at Bishopsworth, in Knowle, near Bristol. According to local tradition, this impressive residence had seven towers, a moat, and a central courtyard, some of which survived into the nineteenth century. 
On 9 February 1436 Juyn was appointed chief justice of the common pleas, still retaining his position as chief baron of the exchequer, and was granted an additional annual reward of 140 marks. Although never a puisne justice of the king's bench, on 20 January 1439 he became its chief justice, as the senior representative of a depleted judiciary. Only upon this promotion did he relinquish his exchequer post, as well as the chief justiceship of the common pleas, but was commanded thrice to continue as an assize justice, despite the statutory exemption of the chief justices from assizes. His annual reward of 180 marks was augmented in July 1439 with a further 40 marks per annum and a tun of wine from the port of Bristol, probably in recognition of these extra duties. These evidently took their toll; Juyn held his new office for only a year before becoming ill. By his will of 21 January 1440 he bequeathed the contents of his chapel and the cloth of gold worn at his dubbing ceremony to the lady chapel of the church of St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, where he was buried under a fine monumental brass, still 'in situ'. He died on 24 March 1440, and was survived by his wife, who afterwards married John Chudderlegh of Hinton St George, Somerset, and their two children -- Elizabeth, later the wife of Robert Kenn of Kenn, Somerset, and his heir, William, then eighteen months old. After William's death in 1503, the Juyn estates, which cannot have been worth less than $100 per annum, passed to William's daughter, and eventually to Elizabeth's heirs. 


@@@@@


doc= 94478


Carpenter, Humphrey William Bouverie (1946-2005), author, broadcaster, and musician, was born on 29 April 1946 at the Radcliffe Maternity Home, Oxford, the only child of Harry James Carpenter (1901-1993), warden of Keble College and later bishop of Oxford, and his wife, Urith Monica, 'nee' Trevelyan (1909-1995), a Froebel-trained teacher who went on to read English at Oxford. He grew up in an atmosphere of purposeful activity, mental and physical, and was encouraged by his mother in particular to take his own line and think for himself. Contemporaries remembered a small, determined figure tricycling round the Keble quadrangle and lighting up pantomimes with spirited and mischievous performances. He was educated at the Dragon School in Oxford (at the time offbeat and bohemian in character), at Marlborough College, where he was less comfortable, and at Keble College, Oxford, where he read English. He followed this with a year's teacher training in Oxford, but in 1968 accepted a BBC general traineeship, with placements in television, regional news, the World Service, and (the then experimental) local radio. 
Carpenter's crackling intelligence and fluency could have taken him a long way inside the BBC, but in 1970 he chose to return to his beloved Oxford to work on the fledgeling BBC local radio station, where he moved with ease between serious and intellectual programming, surreal comedy, and a manically giggly disc-jockey show entitled 'Humf'. On 31 March 1973 he married a colleague at that radio station, Mari Christina Prichard ('b'. 1947), daughter of the Welsh poet and novelist Caradog Prichard. They had two daughters, Clare ('b'. 1978) and Kate ('b'. 1981), and lived at 5 Polstead Road, Oxford, until 1977, 61 Observatory Street until 1980, and then 6 Farndon Road until the end of his life. All these homes lay within a small patch of north-west Oxford, where he was a familiar part of the community, singing in the St Barnabas church choir intermittently for much of his life, although his formal religious belief ran out, according to close friends, around 1980 (when he was working on the Oxford University Press 'Past Masters' biography of Jesus). 
From the mid-1980s Carpenter ran, with considerable brio, a children's theatre group called Mushy Pea. 'It is not', he said, 'a kind deed to be looking after other people's children on Saturday mornings. It is a way of getting my own works performed by enormous casts' ('The Times', 19 May 1993). His taste for the music and shows of the first half of the twentieth century found a spectacular outlet when in 1993 -- largely at his own expense and with the observation that 'oh, some people spend that kind of money on a car' (ibid.) -- he took a company of some sixty children to perform two of his shows at the Shaw Theatre in London. The youngest of the cast was only four years old. One show was 'Mr Majeika: the Musical', based on his own children's books, the other 'Babes', about the lives of Hollywood child stars. Both his daughters performed, the younger doing a startlingly Mermanesque impression of Ethel Meglin, dance school proprietress. 
Meanwhile, however, Carpenter's work as a biographer was flourishing. After his authorized biography of J. R. R. Tolkien (1977) he turned to group biography, evoking with great skill C. S. Lewis's Oxford friends (in 'The Inklings', 1978, which won the Somerset Maugham award). Later he was to do the same with American writers in 1920s Paris ('Geniuses Together', 1987), the Evelyn Waugh circle ('The Brideshead Generation', 1989), the 1960s satirists ('That Was Satire That Was', 2000), and the 1950s rebels ('Angry Young Men', 2002). It is significant that he excelled in this area, for sociability was one of his most marked characteristics. John Walsh, the journalist, observed that 'He loved company, harmony, communion, the humming convivium of a party, the shared endeavour of musicians, the sight and sound of human beings working together' ('The Independent'). With his wife, Mari, he edited the 'Oxford Companion to Children's Literature' (1984) and a year later published 'Secret Gardens', a study based on a lifelong interest in the personalities and beliefs of children's authors in the 'golden age'. He began to write his own books for children with 'The Joshers' (1977) and from 1984 the Mr Majeika series, about an irrepressible, eccentric, and accident-prone wizard working as a primary school teacher. 
Carpenter's individual biographies included those of W. H. Auden (1981, which won the E. M. Forster award of the American Academy of Arts and Letters), Ezra Pound (1988, which won the Duff Cooper memorial prize), Benjamin Britten (1992), Robert Runcie (1996), Dennis Potter (1998), and Spike Milligan (2003), but in the course of writing them he confessed that he often discovered such marvellous stories that it was a torment to keep them to himself until publication, and he was tempted to tell all at parties. Sometimes he did. Some attacked him for his breezy openness about the sexual oddities of his subjects, notably Britten and Potter, and his inclusion of remarks by Runcie that were indiscreet, though not 'off the record', caused the latter some embarrassment; but his research was rigorous, his sources solid, and if there was a difference between him and those who criticized him it was that he was slower to condemn the strange byways down which life leads nervous and creative people. It was notable that even if his work was treated intemperately by rival writers, he managed to forget the slight and return to cordial relations with them in no time. As one contemporary said, 'He didn't do feuds, he didn't do grudges' (private information). His family life was conspicuously happy and stable. 
Carpenter's performing career continued through much of his life; he was a regular radio presenter on Radio 3 and Radio 4, and in 1983 he founded Vile Bodies, a mixed group of professionals and amateurs who played dance music and jazz from the 1920s to the 1940s. This combo had a residency at the Ritz Hotel in London from 1987 to 1994, thus providing possibly the only opportunity to see a leading literary biographer and arts broadcaster wrapped up in a giant sousaphone under pink lighting. In 1994 he became programme director of the Cheltenham literary festival for three years, and livened up the hitherto rather staid world of English literary festivals by introducing jazz, cartoonists, and numerous children's and science events, in between the interesting unknowns and the literary and intellectual big-hitters. He often personally chaired sessions, rushing from room to room in a happy blur. His own book reviews were acute, occasionally mischievous, but generous in spirit. 
Suffering from Parkinson's disease in the last years of his life, characteristically Carpenter continued working, kept quiet about it as long as he could, and gathered information and helpful gadgets. He also began writing a musical about the illness entitled 'Shake it all About', with a lament on the difficulty of 'putting on my socks' set to the tune of 'Puttin' on the Ritz'. After his sudden death from a heart attack on 4 January 2005 (he was pronounced dead at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford) it was performed by his friends as a fundraiser for a project on public awareness of the illness. He was buried on 14 January in Wolvercote cemetery. His untimely death brought an avalanche of tributes from friends, all trying to evoke the vivid, beaky, dishevelled tornado that was Humphrey Carpenter. One fellow church choir singer wrote, 'He is the only person I know competent to sing any of the four parts of choral music -- treble, alto, tenor or bass', adding that 'during the more boring parts Humphrey, naughty choirboy of 34, his uncombed mop poking from his surplice, could be seen bent over a novel' ('Evening Standard'). Another observed, 'he seemed to want to clasp the world to his manly bosom, gleefully, greedily, to have as much going on simultaneously as one life could bear' ('The Independent'). His wife, Mari (who survived him, along with their two daughters), oversaw the publication of his final works. Two were published posthumously: the fourteenth Majeika story, which owed something to his experience of Parkinson's disease, and a history of the publisher John Murray, which was once again an account of what he loved best: the world of creative, turbulent literary and artistic co-operation. 


@@@@@


doc= 94481


Coker, Peter Godfrey (1926-2004), painter and etcher, was born at the Royal Free Hospital, St Pancras, London, on 27 July 1926, the only child of Edwin Henry Coker, gold polisher and later manager of a wholesale confectionery company, and his wife, Elsie Violet, 'nee' Goode. His parents were then living in Old Ford on the edge of the East End, but soon after his birth they moved to 1 Moyers Road, Leytonstone, Essex, an area that was close to open countryside. This house was let to friends when they moved again, in 1936, to a new house in a still more rural setting, at Havering-atte-Bower. There Coker, at the age of twelve, resolved to become a painter, having been encouraged at Pettits Lane School by the art teacher. Even when he was a teenager his working method was thorough and ordered. One of his grandfathers, on the paternal side, was a book-edge marbler, while the other had an engraving workshop, where the array of tools and purposeful atmosphere awoke in the young boy awareness of the dignity and pleasure in craftsmanship. Another significant factor in his early life was his mother's artistry and flair, made evident in her appearance through her own dressmaking skills, and in her talent as a pianist and singer. She held musical evenings in the home and also took her son to concerts and the opera, thereby ensuring, as he once said, that music became for him 'a second string' (Gore). 
Coker's wish to enter art school was resisted by his father, and on leaving school in 1940 he became an assistant in his father's firm, Kerland and Haskin. Miserable in the confectionery trade, he was rescued by a regular customer who obtained him a job at Odham's Press in Long Acre, Covent Garden. When a new employee arrived Coker was moved up a grade. He offered to trade his pay rise for a full day at the nearby St Martin's School of Art, where he was already attending evening and weekend classes. Before long he was also taking classes in lithography and etching under W. P. Roberts at the Central School of Arts and Crafts. In 1943, aged seventeen, he volunteered for the Royal Navy but owing to an auditory problem was eventually placed in the Fleet Air Arm. By the end of 1946 he was back at St Martin's as a full-time student with a war-service grant. A ready student, he gained from Vivian Pitchforth and James Stroudley, by advice and example, a solid grounding as a painter. 
Coker's education, up to this point, had been within a very English mould. His frame of reference was expanded by two visits to Italy and France, in 1949 and 1950, and in particular by his first-hand experience of French painting. Previously he had been excited by one of Courbet's Etretat paintings which he found, by chance, in a central fold in the 'Saturday Evening Post'. But it had not fully prepared him for the audacity, breadth, and scale of Courbet's 'Funeral at Ornans'. It set a benchmark for his work at the Royal College of Art, which he entered in September 1950, staying four years. Wholly engaged as a student, Coker yet belonged to no group. One reason for this is that he returned home every evening to 1 Moyers Road (which still belonged to his parents), to his wife -- Vera Joyce Crook ('b'. 1926), a mathematician involved in scientific research, and daughter of Charles Robert Crook, civil servant -- whom he had married on 31 March 1951; the couple had a son, Nicholas, who was born in 1952. 
Though his manner of painting and choice of subject matter linked him in the public mind with the 'kitchen sink' painters, Coker had only minimal connection at the Royal College with John Bratby, Derrick Greaves, Edward Middleditch, and Jack Smith. A realist approach was prevalent at that time, in French art as much as in English, and Coker's firmly and thickly painted canvases of butcher's shops, or still lives with a flayed hare, a chicken's carcass or a sheep's, had a visual splendour as well as a brutal toughness. Coker always denied that his work had political intent. Nevertheless, these paintings betray a strain and melancholy that can be related to the tensions of the period. They associated him with the 'kitchen sink' painters, though he never exhibited with them at the Beaux Arts Gallery, but took his work to Zwemmer's, which gave him in all five one-man shows, in 1956, 1957, 1959, 1964, and 1967. After Zwemmer's closed he was associated first with the Thackeray Gallery, then with Gallery 10, both in London, exhibiting also at many galleries and institutions in the provinces. 
Though Coker occupied a persistent presence in the art world over four decades he did so for much of the time in an adverse climate. The arrival in Britain in the late 1950s of American abstract expressionism almost overnight terminated interest in realist art and for the next two decades the British art scene was very much in thrall to the influence of American art and art theory. Subjectless abstraction was unattractive to Coker, who once said 'The whole question of a subject is finding something to identify with'. He remained resolute in his commitment to the thing seen, and he continued, triumphantly, to uncover sensations, moods, and emotions that were anchored to specific places. His affiliation with European realism and, more particularly, the French pursuit of 'belle peinture', may have limited the recognition he received, but it meant that he was pitting himself not so much against his contemporaries as against a greater, more far-reaching tradition. He worked with fierce passion, stubborn ambition, and great tenacity, and his pictures remained powerfully conceived, strong and straightforward in execution. From 1955 onwards landscape became the chief focus of his art, and in between teaching commitments at St Martin's and elsewhere he travelled in England and France, often to places associated with painters he admired. From 1962, to the end of his life, his home was the Red House at Mistley, on the edge of Manningtree, Essex, where his friendship deepened with other painters in East Anglia, in particular John Nash and Edward Bawden. There too he enjoyed a quietly civilized existence, a sense of quality and appreciation pervading every aspect of his domestic life. 
In 1965 Coker was elected an associate of the Royal Academy, becoming an academician seven years later. His loyalty to this professional body was pronounced, even though he sometimes profoundly disagreed with its policies. Not only did its summer exhibitions offer a useful outlet for his work, but the academy twice made him a steward of the David Murray travel awards. In this role he travelled England, visiting students in different parts of the country. A fellow academician, Frederic Gore, was the first to observe that as he moved up the Pennine Way, through Yorkshire and into the South Tyne Valley, his attitude to landscape began to change. Formerly it had provided him with subjects on which he could exercise the practice of good painting: now he became more aware of how the surrounding landscape was constantly changing owing to effects of light, weather, and the seasons. His increased alertness to its mobility, combined with the large sweep of certain northern scenes, inclined him towards the use of thinner paint. He made studies in watercolour on the spot and a few small oils, but the larger paintings he continued to reconstruct from sketches and memory in his studio. Throughout his career his work attracted a strong following among private collectors, and prime examples entered most of the national collections and many public art galleries. 
There was a noticeable change in the tenor of Coker's work after the death of his highly talented son in 1985, as became visible in a series of paintings made at Badenscallie in north-west Scotland, of salmon nets strung out to dry. Then in 1990 he suffered two serious heart attacks and a debilitating stroke. Earlier, in 1959, he had been diagnosed with Cushing's syndrome, which had been followed by a major operation to remove his adrenal glands. Now, once again, he was beset with a series of medical problems. With Vera's help he continued to work, but gave up in 1992, owing to physical difficulties. However, his artistic sensibility remained active and was fed by his voracious interest in exhibitions and books and by travel, even in circumstances that were sometimes far from easy. Then after ten years, though now confined to a wheelchair, his pent-up creativity burst out in a fresh bout of endeavour, stimulated by the rediscovery of a set of drawings he had made in Paris some twenty years before. An astonishing body of work developed over a short space of time and it formed an exhibition that opened at the Graves Art Gallery, Sheffield, in 2004 and subsequently toured to other places. He died on 16 December 2004 at the Oaks Hospital, Colchester, Essex, to the end intensely aware that he was a proud inheritor and exponent of a great artistic tradition. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 94485


Cropper, Dame Hilary Mary (1941-2004), businesswoman, was born on 9 January 1941 at 6 Oldham Street, Bollington, near Macclesfield, Cheshire, the daughter of Arnold Trueman, a commercial clerk then serving as an aircraftsman second class in the RAF, and his wife, Madeline Emily, 'nee' Sutton. She was educated at a convent school in Stockport, then took a sandwich course at the University of Salford, combining a mathematics degree with an apprenticeship in computer programming at an electrical engineering company in Trafford Park that produced gas turbines and industrial engines. There she was one of only three women among hundreds of men. On 16 September 1963 she married Peter John Cropper, a 23-year-old fellow computer programmer, and son of Samuel Duncan Cropper; they had two daughters and one son. In 1970 she moved to ICL, the computer manufacturer, initially working part-time while her children were small. She rose to become head of a division supplying software to customers, and ICL's most senior female employee. 
In 1985 Cropper was headhunted by Stephanie (Steve) Shirley to become chief executive of F International (FI). Shirley had founded the company (as Freelance Programmers) in 1962 as a collective to offer home-based, part-time work to women computer programmers. The principal activity of the firm was developing software for client firms. Freelance Programmers was renamed F International in 1971, with the aim of establishing overseas subsidiaries. Cropper was not an entrepreneur in the mould of Shirley, but rather she had a gift for building up an expanding organization. Over a period of nearly twenty years she transformed FI from a modest enterprise, with a largely female workforce and a turnover of $7 million, to one of Europe's most successful computer services firms with sales of $450 million in 2003. Cropper was not a doctrinaire feminist, preferring to see an equal gender balance. As FI grew, both women and men took senior positions, though the company was always unique in the high proportion of women in top positions. In 1988 FI was renamed the FI Group and relocated to new headquarters in Hemel Hempstead. By means of two acquisitions the company's operations were extended to include personnel recruitment and training for information technology (IT). In addition the firm moved into 'outsourcing', whereby it took over the entire IT operations of major firms. 
In 1991 Cropper led an employee buyout of the FI Group. She was particularly proud that when the company was floated on the stock market five years later, valued at $70 million, more than a third of the shares were retained by staff. With the boom in value of computer-related companies in the late 1990s, more than 50 of her staff became millionaires, and a further 1000 saw their personal fortunes exceed $100,000. At the same time, with a salary, shares, and benefits package worth $17.4 million in 1999, Cropper was twice named Britain's highest-paid businesswoman. 
Towards the end of the 1990s, serving variously as chief executive, deputy chairman, and executive chairman, Cropper delegated operational matters in order to play an increasingly strategic role. The FI Group expanded rapidly, making four major acquisitions to fill out the firm's portfolio of computer services. In 1998 it acquired the Indian software company IIS Infotech, which enabled FI to maintain its competitiveness by using offshore development personnel. In 1999 its consulting operations were boosted by the acquisition of the OSI Group, a UK business consultancy. In 2000 FI merged with Druid, a leading UK specialist in business software. The following year FI acquired Synergy International Consulting, based in Reno, Nevada. In 2001 FI was rebranded as Xansa. From this point the company was able to compete in global markets in a full range of computer services that included outsourcing, software development, consultancy, recruitment, and training, and it was able to survive the 'dot-com' crash of 2000-02 relatively unscathed. 
Cropper was an advocate of strong non-executive directors, within Xansa and without. She was herself an external director of TSB, the Post Office, and Barclays Bank, and a director of the development agency London First (1996-9). She was a founder of the Worshipful Company of Information Technologists in 1992 (a livery company of the City of London), a governor of the University of Hertfordshire (1995-2000), a member of the government's New Deal Taskforce (2000-01), and an external adviser on civil service senior appointments (2000-03). She was given the freedom of the City of London in 1987 and appointed CBE in 1999. She became executive chairman of the FI Group in 2000 (and of its successor Xansa the following year), but was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2001. At first she concealed her illness from her colleagues, but her worsening condition forced her to step down as executive chairman of Xansa in 2002, becoming non-executive chairman. In her final years she became an active fund-raiser for the charity Cancer BACUP (a telephone- and internet-based advice service for cancer sufferers and their carers). She was appointed DBE in 2003. She died at her home in Somerton Randle, Somerton, Somerset, on Boxing day 2004, and was survived by her husband and three children. Her estate was valued for probate purposes at just over $9 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 94491


Emery, Sir Peter Frank Hannibal (1926-2004), politician and businessman, was born at 100 Greencroft Gardens, Hampstead, London, on 27 February 1926, the son of Frank George Emery, a commercial traveller for a ladies' costumier, and later a small-scale clothing manufacturer, and his wife, Phyllis Marjorie, 'nee' Thomas. He owed one of his middle names to his great-great-grandfather Captain Hannibal, whose grain-carrying schooners sailed between Plymouth and Australia. He was educated at Scotch Plains, New Jersey, before returning to Britain in 1944 to serve as an RAF pilot. After the war he won a scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford, where he was awarded a fourth-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1950. But his lasting contribution at university (and arguably during his whole political career) came earlier the same year when, while serving on the committee of the Federation of University Conservative Associations, he co-founded (with Bruce Griffiths) the Bow Group, a successful Conservative effort to counter the intellectualism of the Fabian Society. In the words of Geoffrey Howe, one of its early members, the Bow Group sought 'to make the Tory Party fit for 'Observer' and 'Guardian' readers to live in' (Howe, 25). Emery and Griffiths tossed for the chairmanship, and the former lost, taking on the role of secretary, which included drafting the Bow Group's constitution. 
Emery had begun his political career in local government in 1949 when he was elected as a councillor in Hornsey. After leaving Oxford he combined political activity with working as a salesman for the family firm. In October 1959 he entered parliament as MP for Reading, having defeated the leading Labour left-winger, Ian Mikardo, who was on the executive of the Association of Supervisory Staffs, Executives and Technicians, of which Emery was a rank-and-file member. Much of Emery's motivation for being a trade union member (and indeed for the formation of the Bow Group) derived from the fact that he wanted to broaden Conservatism's appeal to the working class. Defeat followed at the 1966 election, but he was soon returned to parliament at the Honiton by-election a year later, serving in that constituency until 1997. His support for Michael Heseltine in the Conservative leadership contest of November 1990 led to an unsuccessful attempt to deselect him in 1990, but he completed four decades in parliament as the Conservative MP for Devon East (following boundary changes) from 1997 to 2001. He was married twice. On 3 July 1954 he married Elizabeth Nicholson, the 23-year-old daughter of Frank Philip Nicholson, stockbroker; they had a son and a daughter. Following their divorce, on 15 December 1972 Emery married Elizabeth Monnington, a 31-year-old personnel manager, and daughter of Gilbert John Richard Monnington, farmer; they also had a son and a daughter. 
In parliament Emery earned a reputation from his colleagues as 'an amiable blunderbuss' ('The Independent', 17 Dec 2004). Such an impression must have gained currency early on when he was drafted onto the Scottish grand committee to counter Labour's inbuilt majority. The whips expected Emery's loyal silence. Instead he spoke for ninety minutes in full highland dress. He was hastily dropped. Years later, in 1993, Emery's scheme to confine Sunday trading to newsagents and petrol stations until lunchtime was met with ridicule, and he withdrew his ill-considered amendment amid laughter. 
Emery's ministerial career never really took flight. From 1960 to 1963 he served as parliamentary private secretary in the Foreign Office, first under David Ormsby-Gore and then, from 1961, under Joseph Godber, whom he followed to the War Department and then the Ministry of Labour in 1963-4. He became joint honorary secretary of the Conservative back-bench 1922 committee in 1964, and was finally rewarded with a front-bench post a year later when Edward Heath, whom Emery had supported in the Conservative leadership contest, made him part of the Treasury team. But Heath did not reward Emery with a post in government until 1972, when he appointed him parliamentary under-secretary at the Department of Trade and Industry. In the dying days of the Heath government Emery served briefly under Lord Carrington, as parliamentary under-secretary at the newly created Department of Energy. In opposition Margaret Thatcher failed to include Emery on her front-bench team. With the Conservatives back in government after 1979 Emery devoted his energies to serving on back-bench committees (most notably as chairman of the procedure committee from 1983 to 1997) and to his considerable business interests, the latter not without controversy. In 1980 he was sharply criticized by the public accounts committee for 'gross profiteering' on a government contract entered into by Shenley Trust Services (formerly Emery and Emery, of which he was chairman) to operate the underwater training centre on a loch near Fort William. In 1983 he attracted further controversy when he wrote an article for 'The Times' praising the puppet apartheid regime in Bophuthatswana, without first declaring that he had accepted an indirect payment from the South African government. Such controversies did not prevent Thatcher from recommending Emery for a knighthood in 1982, and John Major (to whom Emery was conspicuously loyal over the 'Maastricht bill') selecting him to join the privy council in 1993. Much of Emery's personal fortune was made while chairman of the Winglaw Property Group (1984-2000). He also served on the boards of Property Growth Insurance (1969-72) and Phillips Petroleum UK (1964-72). 
Towards the end of his parliamentary career Emery campaigned on behalf of his fellow asthma suffers. In 2001, in his capacity as chairman of the National Asthma Campaign, he bravely attacked his own side for their failure to support the Labour government's bill to ban tobacco advertising. Before his retirement from the House of Commons in 2001 he also served as the treasurer of the 1922 committee. Throughout his life he was an enthusiastic bridge player, and for many years he captained the House of Commons bridge team. He died of leukaemia on 9 December 2004 at Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, London, and was survived by his wife, Elizabeth, and his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94500


Gardiner, Margaret Emilia (1904-2005), patron of the arts, was born on 22 April 1904 in Berlin, the only daughter and second of the three children of Sir Alan Henderson Gardiner (1879-1963), Egyptologist, and his wife, Hedwig (Heddie), 'nee' von Rosen (died 1964), who was of part Hungarian Jewish and part Scandinavian descent. Her elder brother was (Henry) Rolf Gardiner (1902-1971), ecological campaigner. The family was wealthy, in large part through inheritance from her paternal grandfather. 
In 1911 the family moved from Berlin to London, where Gardiner attended the Froebel School in Hammersmith before going on to Bedales School, Hampshire. In 1923 she went to Newnham College, Cambridge, to read modern languages, switching in her second term to moral science. Later she dropped her university studies in favour of Russian. She wrote, 'I wasn't taking work very seriously. For me there was too much else in Cambridge, all the intoxicating excitements of meeting people, of talk and ideas. And besides, I didn't really need to work', noting that 'I took it for granted that every young man I got to know would fall in love with me' (Footprints, 4-5). Many did. She was attractive, with an intelligent, eager face and a bob of thick hair. Later in life she wore jewellery from the south seas or Asia and loose colourful clothes. Her scarlet nail polish horrified Barbara Hepworth during the Second World War. 
Gardiner's first great love was (Arthur) Bernard Deacon (1903-1927), an ethnologist she met in 1925 just before he left Cambridge to study marriage systems in Malekula in the New Hebrides. Unresolved before they parted, love developed through a series of letters in which he called her 'Margou... the pet name my family sometimes used' ('Footprints', 2). He died of blackwater fever aged twenty-four in 1927, just as Gardiner was poised to live with him in Australia. She travelled to Vanuatu to visit Deacon's grave on the fifty-sixth anniversary of his death and in 1984 published a memoir, 'Footprints on Malekula'. 
After Deacon's death, rudderless, Gardiner studied at the Froebel Institute of Education and briefly became an elementary school teacher in Cambridgeshire, but her liberal ideas, influenced by A. S. Neill, clashed with those of the headmaster and parents. She moved to Hampstead, initially lodging in Elm Row with H. S. (Jim) Ede, then an assistant at the Tate Gallery and later the creator of Kettle's Yard, Cambridge, to be near Barbara Hepworth, to whom she had been introduced by the zoologist Solly Zuckerman, Gardiner's then boyfriend. When her affair with Zuckerman ended Gardiner became involved with Adrian Stokes, the painter and art critic. He described her 'genius for friendship' ('The Times', 10 Jan 2005); Gardiner herself recognized that 'everything in my life has resulted from friendships' ('Scatter of Memories', 22), which included those with Louis MacNiece, W. H. Auden, Stephen Spender, and Stevie Smith. Some of her pieces of writing, fictional, autobiographical, or memoir, were later published together in 1988 as 'A Scatter of Memories', while her friendships inspired a Channel 4 documentary, 'Time is a Country', broadcast on Christmas day the same year. 
Gardiner became Hepworth's confidante when the sculptor first met Ben Nicholson. Later unofficial godmother to Hepworth and Nicholson's triplets, Gardiner often visited the circle of artist friends who moved to St Ives during the Second World War. Enjoying a private income, she supported Hepworth and Nicholson through purchases of their work as well as practical help like cooking. Gardiner and Hepworth later travelled to Greece together and she provided the guarea wood for some of Hepworth's finest sculptures. She also acquired works from many other artists, including Naum Gabo and Alfred Wallis, the fisherman painter. She saw these works, and others bought from a younger generation of St Ives artists, not as a formal collection but as evidence of personal connections. She said she was not fundamentally interested in visual art but loved the company of artists. Nevertheless she was later one of the founders of the Institute of Contemporary Arts. 
The art Gardiner acquired was of a domestic scale appropriate to the small regency house with its modernist interior in Hampstead where she lived from 1937 until her death. She lived there with her son, Martin ('b'. 1937), but not with his father, (John) Desmond Bernal (1901-1971), a distinguished Cambridge scientist with active interests in art and politics and a complex relationship with women. Once, introduced as Mrs Bernal and being challenged, Gardiner is supposed to have replied brightly, 'Oh. There are hundreds of us' (private information). 
Politically Gardiner was on the left, like Bernal, but she was never a member of the Communist Party. Swept up in the anti-fascist movements of the 1930s and a brilliant organizer, she was the driving force behind For Intellectual Liberty, and its secretary. A close political colleague at this time was Leonard Woolf, whom she liked, but whose wife Virginia she found 'very snubbing, very unpleasant' ('Daily Telegraph', 7 Jan 2005). She later supported American draft resistance during the Vietnam War and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, and was treasurer of the International Confederation for Disarmament and Peace. 
Gardiner's most remarkable achievement was the permanent home she created for her works of art. She and Martin Bernal visited Orkney in 1956 while he was on leave from national service in the RAF and discovered Orcadian archaeology and hospitality. On a whim, she purchased a house on Rousay and later, at her son's suggestion, gave the people of Orkney the bulk of her art collection. As the collection was enlarged by numerous gifts from artist friends who had become highly successful, this was an outstandingly generous gesture. Her organizing skills and persuasive talents created a museum, the Pier Arts Centre, which linked Stromness to the sites most associated with British modernism and with her life: Hampstead, Cambridge, and St Ives. Ben Nicholson commented that the Pier was so far away. 'It all depends where you start from', retorted Gardiner (private information). Having reached a century, she died on 2 January 2005 at Heathgrove Lodge nursing home, 837 Finchley Road, Golders Green, London, of cardiopulmonary degeneration. She was survived by her son, Martin, a distinguished sinologist. 


@@@@@


doc= 94502


Goossens, (Annie) Sidonie (1899-2004), harpist, was born at 78 Seaview Road, Liscard, Cheshire, on 19 October 1899, the fifth and youngest surviving child of Eugene Goossens (1867-1958), violinist and conductor, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Cook (1860-1946), opera singer. Her father was conductor of the Carl Rosa Opera Company, as had been his father, also Eugene; her mother was the daughter of Aynsley Cook, operatic bass singer. She was known throughout her life as Sid. There were other Sidonies in the family: her grandmother was a dancer whose stage name was Madame Sidonie, and her brother Sir Eugene Aynsley Goossens (1893-1962) in 1932 became the father of Sidonie, also a harpist, usually known (to avoid confusion) as Donie. Her other surviving siblings were a sister, Marie Henriette (1894-1991), and two brothers, Adolphe (1896-1916) and Leon Jean Goossens (1897-1988). An elder sister (a twin to Eugene, also called Sidonie) had died in infancy. The children were all intended to enter the music profession. Apart from Adolphe, a most promising horn-player who was killed in the battle of the Somme, they all went on to achieve distinction in that profession. 
Sidonie Goossens's first harp teachers (and Marie's, for they were to run largely parallel lives) were a Mr Evans of the Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra and Edith Mason, sister of Gwendolen Mason. All the children studied at the Royal College of Music, Sidonie for one year only, 1915-16, where Miriam Timothy, harpist of the London Symphony Orchestra from its inception, taught both sisters. At that time the college did not award degrees. A very glamorous figure, Sidonie Goossens had a strong leaning towards the stage, but was dissuaded by her father from pursuing an uncertain and probably briefer career than that which he had intended for her. However, she later made appearances as a member of the BBC Amateur Dramatic Society, where she was acclaimed as a singer and dancer. 
Goossens's professional career began in London theatres, notably in 'Chu Chin Chow' (from 1918), and James Elroy Flecker's 'Hassan' (1923), with music by Frederick Delius, conducted by her brother Eugene, with her oboist brother Leon also in the orchestra. She played alongside her sister in some performances of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes and made her symphonic debut in 1921, playing second to Marie, at a Promenade Concert under Sir Henry Wood. 
The new medium of radio beckoned, and Goossens joined the British Broadcasting Company in 1923, playing a wide range of music with the Wireless Orchestra and the Wireless Quartette for station 2LO. She was increasingly in demand elsewhere, with Sir Thomas Beecham and the London Symphony Orchestra, and in Wagner's 'Ring' cycle at Covent Garden under Bruno Walter. From 1924 she made gramophone recordings both under her own name and, for contractual reasons, as Gwynneth Evans, appropriately in arrangements of Welsh traditional airs. Later she took part in television experiments with John Logie Baird, and was the first solo harpist to appear on television, in 1936. Much later she wrote about her career in early broadcasting in an article published in the United Kingdom Harp Association magazine in 1981. On 26 April 1924 she married Hyam (Bumps) Greenbaum (1901-1942), a highly regarded musician who became the first director of music for BBC television; he was the son of Solomon Greenbaum, tailor. Their only child died at birth. 
In 1930 the BBC established its symphony orchestra, and Goossens was appointed to the position of harpist, which she was to hold until her belated retirement in 1981: a record of longevity rarely equalled by any other orchestral harpist. From its earliest times the orchestra was committed to espousing the cause of new music, as well as maintaining the classic repertoire. This suited Goossens, who worked with leading modernists from Schoenberg to Boulez, and she enjoyed a reputation as one who was able to surmount all technical challenges. During later years she was much in demand for advanced and experimental work with ensembles such as the London Sinfonietta and the Fires of London. She was in the orchestra at Westminster Abbey for the coronations of both George VI and Elizabeth II, and played many concerti for the BBC, including William Alwyn's 'Lyra Angelica', written for her in 1954, and in 1958 with Marie and Leon under her brother's direction, Eugene Goossens's 'Concert Piece' for solo oboe, two harps, and orchestra. It was perhaps the last time their father was to hear them all together. 
Goossens's life was not without its darker moments. On holiday in Spain in 1936, when that country's civil war broke out, she was rescued and brought home by HMS 'Gallant'. War was soon closer to home, and for safety in 1939 the BBC moved its symphony orchestra to Bristol. There many of her possessions (but not her harp) were destroyed by bombing, while she was sheltering elsewhere. On 13 May 1942 she was widowed, but on 19 December 1945 she married Major Norman Kinnaird Millar (1906-1991) of the Black Watch, who had been wounded at El Alamein. The son of James Myles Millar, joiner, he had been an insurance official before the war, and after the war was involved in arts management, working for Sir Thomas Beecham and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, and later at the Old Vic Theatre. From 1949 they lived in a sixteenth-century farmhouse near Reigate, with two pigs (a gift from Beecham) and poultry. For many years Sidonie would rise daily at 5.30 to collect the eggs, which she would then take to her customers in the orchestra, before long days of rehearsing and performing. 
From 1960 until 1990 Goossens was professor of harp at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, producing some outstanding pupils. In 1971 she was made a fellow of the Guildhall School, and she was the recipient of a number of further honours, including the MBE (1974) and OBE (1980). In 1981 she received a specially commissioned Salvador Dali statuette from Krug Champagne as an award of excellence. She was president for life of the United Kingdom Harp Association (from 1988) and received the Cobbett medal from the Worshipful Company of Musicians (1990). Her final playing engagement was at the last night of the Proms at the Royal Albert Hall in 1991, when Dame Gwyneth Jones sang 'The Last Rose of Summer' accompanied by Goossens playing her own arrangement. Her 100th birthday was marked by two concerts, which she attended. One, in the Wigmore Hall, reflected every stage of her life and career, while from the royal box at the Royal Festival Hall she listened to a concert dedicated to her by her old orchestra, in a specially chosen programme of music by Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern. 
Goossens remained true to the Roman Catholic church of her Belgian forefathers, and despite a series of illnesses retained her incisive mind and amazing recall until the last few weeks of her life. She died on 15 December 2004 at her home, Woodstock Farm, Gadbrook Road, Betchworth, Surrey. After a requiem mass at St Joseph's Church, Dorking, on 30 December, her remains were cremated and the ashes scattered in Betchworth, where she had lived for the previous fifty-five years. The feelings which her friends and colleagues had for her were summed up by Pierre Boulez, writing in the 100th anniversary concert programme: 'She loved her metier, her instrument, devoted her whole existence to it; this could be felt every time she played... All this, really, was the reflection of her personality for which I have had from the first instant not only the greatest admiration, but also an immense affection.' 



@@@@@


doc= 94504


Hadingham, Reginald Edward Hawke (1915-2004), businessman and tennis administrator, was born on 6 December 1915 at 30 Beukplein, The Hague, one of four sons of Edward Wallace (Tim) Hadingham, naval officer and businessman, and his wife, (Ethel) Irene Penelope, 'nee' Gwynne-Evans. He was born in the Netherlands as his father was interned by the Germans during the First World War but was allowed to have his wife join him. His forenames are attributed to Reggie Doherty, the Wimbledon champion in 1897-1900, to whom his mother had once been engaged, and to his father's favourite admiral who vanquished the French at Quiberon Bay. He himself preferred the sobriquet Buzzer bestowed on 'my baby buzzer' (brother) by Tony, his two-year-old elder sibling. 
After the war the family went to live at Wimbledon -- within walking distance of the courts of the All-England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club -- where he remained for the rest of his life. He attended Rokeby preparatory school and became captain of cricket and rugby and head of house; his secondary education was at St Paul's in west London. In 1933 he joined Slazenger, the sports equipment firm, where his father was managing director. Seven years later, on 13 January 1940, he married Lois Pope, daughter of Edward and Nova Pope; the couple had two daughters, Susan and Steffie. During the Second World War Hadingham served as a Royal Artillery anti-tank specialist in north Africa and Italy, rising to the rank of lieutenant-colonel and being awarded the Military Cross and bar. He converted to Roman Catholicism on his return from war service. In 1946 he resumed his Slazenger business career, in which capacity he used his fluent French and German as an export manager. He became sales director in 1952, managing director in 1969, and chairman in 1973, finally retiring in 1983, by which time the company had become a world leader in its field. During this last decade he served on the Sports Council and was chairman of Crystal Palace National Sports Centre. His retirement enabled him to take on an even bigger task in sports administration from 1983: chairmanship of the All-England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, with responsibility for hosting the Wimbledon tennis championships. 
Although, in his own words, Hadingham was 'totally committed' to Wimbledon's role as 'guardian of tradition' ('The Times', 28 Nov 1985), he was not against innovation. During his six years as chairman he oversaw the introduction of yellow tennis balls, the opening of the gates before noon, the start of play before 2 p.m., and the upgrading of facilities for media coverage, especially for television. He was a diplomat: following an altercation between two journalists, both emerged from a meeting with Hadingham convinced that they had been vindicated. However, he had less success in trying to persuade John McEnroe to modify his on-court behaviour, particularly his outbursts against the Wimbledon match officials. He resigned from his Wimbledon duties in 1989 to spend more time with his wife, who had suffered a stroke. 
Hadingham's appointment as OBE (1971) and CBE (1988) was in recognition not just of his business activities and sports administration but also his charity work. In the 1950s he joined Sportsmen Pledged to Aid Research into Crippling Diseases (later SPARKS), when its focus was on the National Polio Fund. Between 1968 and 1994 he was the charity's chairman and played a significant role in establishing it as a major funder of children's medical research. An enthusiastic communicator who loved to speak at sporting events and fund-raising dinners, he persuaded both Douglas Bader and Leonard Cheshire, his favourite tennis partner, to serve terms as president, and Princess Michael of Kent to become its royal patron. 
Hadingham was a clubman. As well as the All-England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club he was a member of Queen's, the Hurlingham, the International Lawn Tennis Club of Great Britain, and the Fitzwilliam Lawn Tennis Club in Dublin. In 1984, after being embarrassed by a former finalist's not having a ticket for the Centre Court, he established a Last-Eight club for singles quarter-finalists. Membership allowed them tickets for themselves and a guest, discounts at the players' hotels, and entry to several social functions. Organizers of the other grand slam tennis tournaments later followed suit. Earlier, in 1948, he had joined the Sette of Odd Volumes, a private dining and literary club founded in 1878. A membership proposal, based on his writings on ancient Assyria, had been promised by a fellow army officer during a shared sojourn in a hazardous trench provided they both survived. A humorous, dapper man with great personal charm, Buzzer Hadingham played tennis into his eighties (before being halted by a second hip operation), wrote verse, and enjoyed bridge. He died of cancer at St George's Hospital, Tooting, London on 27 December 2004 and was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94507


Sisam, Kenneth (1887-1971), Anglo-Saxon scholar and publisher, was born in Opotiki, Bay of Plenty, North Island, New Zealand, on 2 September 1887, the youngest of eight children of Alfred John Sisam (1844-1928) and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Knights (1846-1895). The family name came from the village of Syresham in Northamptonshire; in 1863 his father had emigrated from Warwickshire to New Zealand where he became a police constable before, in 1896, being allotted land there which he farmed. Kenneth won a scholarship to Auckland grammar school in 1905, and another in 1906 to University College, Auckland, whence he graduated MA with first-class honours in English and Latin in 1910. In the same year he won a Rhodes scholarship, and matriculated at Merton College, Oxford. Here he produced as a BLitt thesis an edition of the 'Salisbury Psalter' (Salisbury Cathedral MS 150), supervised by Arthur Napier, professor of English; the degree was awarded in 1915. 
Work on the 'Psalter' led Sisam to a wider study of Anglo-Saxon manuscripts, and to correspondence with Edmund Bishop, the leading liturgical scholar in England, and with the eminent patristic scholar Dom Andre Wilmart. From 1912 he took over some of Napier's teaching, his pupils including J. R. R. Tolkien. On 12 January 1915 he married Naomi Irene Gibbons (1885/6-1958), whom he had met when he boarded with her aunt in Auckland; she was the daughter of Robert Pearce Gibbons. Overwork and illness combined to restrict Sisam's access to employment, and barred him from military service, but in 1915 he took on part-time work for the 'Oxford English Dictionary' to supplement teaching. In 1916 he published in the 'Modern Language Review' a long article on the 'Beowulf' MS, demonstrating for the first time how the various texts assembled in the 'Beowulf' MS had been chosen by the compiler, and why they were combined. 
In 1917, Sisam's health having greatly improved, he and his wife moved to London and he began work at the Ministry of Food, rising quickly to become director of bacon contracts in 1919. In his spare time Sisam wrote reports on books for Oxford University Press, which they found severe but constructive, and in 1922 he was appointed assistant to John Johnson, then assistant secretary to the delegates of the press. When Johnson became university printer in 1925 Sisam succeeded him as assistant secretary. The Sisams had a house, Yatsden, built for them on Boars Hill, where their neighbours included Arthur Evans, John Masefield, Gilbert Murray, and Robert Bridges, whose literary executor he was. Sisam spent most of his leisure time in a garden created from an old clay pit. Here the Sisams brought up their children, Hugh (1923-1989) and Celia ('b'. 1926). Sisam had found time for scholarship after the war, and his 'Fourteenth Century English Verse and Prose' was published by the press in 1921; it became a standard work, and by 1972 had sold 60,000 copies. In 1925 he narrowly failed to obtain the chair of Anglo-Saxon, in competition with Tolkien. It was rumoured that R. W. Chapman, secretary to the OUP delegates since 1920, urged the chairman of the appointing committee to choose Tolkien so that Sisam's services could be kept by the press. Sisam published three pioneering papers on the transmission of AElfric's 'Catholic Homilies' (1931-3); in 1932, in his Gollancz lecture to the British Academy on the poetry of Cynewulf, he established for the first time that Cynewulf's four signed poems were composed in Mercia in the early ninth century. He also published a series of articles on textual corruption in the four Old English poetic codices. These substantial contributions to scholarship were recognized in his election to the British Academy in 1941. 
From 1922 until 1942, when Sisam succeeded him, his superior at the press was Chapman, secretary to the delegates. The two men were very different, but worked well together: 'they have been described as two men who never met... Sisam came to assume the role of senior civil servant, content to let Chapman play minister' (Sutcliffe, 198). He developed a daily office routine beginning with 'morning prayers': the sorting and discussion of incoming letters, often used to give advice to his juniors ('The Record' [Oxford University Press], 1971). Sisam's time at the Ministry of Food had given him valuable administrative experience, but he was also responsible for several important initiatives. One became the development of reference publishing, including dictionaries, in the early 1930s. The lexicographical team built up for the 'Oxford English Dictionary' was employed after the dictionary's completion in 1933 in further work on both English and Latin. Another was the expansion of OUP's largely humanities publishing into science, after Sisam visited Ralph Fowler and Peter Kapitza in Cambridge in 1928. The result was the 'International Series of Monographs on Physics', begun in 1930 with Paul Dirac's 'Principles of Quantum Mechanics'. Yet another was the support for refugee scholars, mostly German Jews, for which Sisam secured financial backing from the Rockefeller Foundation from 1941. The scholars included Paul Jacobsthal, Rudolf Pfeiffer, Arnaldo Momigliano, and Paul Maas; Maas became a regular guest at tea at Yatsden. 
When he became secretary to OUP in 1942 Sisam was made a professorial fellow of Merton College. At this point the press was suffering from shortages of both staff and paper, and most of its work was concerned with security printing for government and the armed services; Sisam was largely responsible for bringing the firm through the war and the continuing austerities of the post-war years. He retired in 1948 to the Isles of Scilly. He and his wife had long holidayed there, and a house, Middle Carn, had been built for them on the island of St Mary's in 1937. Sisam refused invitations to Oxford and Cambridge, but continued to be consulted on press matters, including a controversy over word-divisions in the press emblem 'Dominus illuminatio mea' ('Dom-inus' or 'Domi-nus?'); he had published on the subject in 1929 (Society for Pure English Tract 33). Visitors found him happily spending his days boating and fishing. New and previously published work was collected in 'Studies in the History of Old English Literature' (1953). His daughter, Celia, by then a tutor at St Hilda's College, Oxford, spent much of her vacations with him, and they worked together on an edition of the 'Salisbury Psalter', published in 1959, and on the 'Oxford Book of Medieval English Verse' (1970). He also produced a short book, 'The Structure of Beowulf' (1965), 'characteristically terse and penetrating' (Davis, 1971). Middle Carn also provided an annual refuge from his hectic Oxford life for Dan Davin, who had become assistant secretary to OUP on Sisam's retirement. Davin was the last of a long line of New Zealanders who had been encouraged and helped in Oxford by Sisam; others included John Mulgan, Jack Bennett, and James Bertram. 
After his wife's death in 1958 Sisam lived alone at Middle Carn. He became involved in the local community, collecting local stories, giving legal advice, and contributing to the local journal, 'The Scillonian'. It was locally believed that he was a retired lawyer, and this occupation was entered on his death certificate after his death, at the Manor nursing home, Lelant, St Ives, Cornwall, on 26 August 1971. The medievalist Eugene Vinaver described him as 'a scholar whose example and inspiration have been unequalled in the field of medieval studies in this century. His was perhaps the most acute and penetrating philological mind that I have ever known' (Vinaver). To Sisam's colleagues at OUP, Vinaver wrote that 'Everyone knows what a terrible mistake Oxford made when they by-passed him for the Chair of Anglo-Saxon' (Sutcliffe, 270). He belonged to a remarkable tradition combining publishing with scholarship in Oxford which began in the 1900s with Charles Cannan and ended with Colin Roberts in the 1970s. Sisam's colleague Peter Spicer remembered him as 'a big man with an upright carriage. His skin was brown and shiny; his eyes, gray-blue. He had a bulbous nose... he wiped a hand across it from time to time with a horizontal motion of his flipper-like hand. In his Scillonian home, one was irresistibly reminded of a great grey seal' ('The Record' [Oxford University Press], 1971). 


@@@@@


doc= 94519


Kamal-ud-Din, Khwaja (1870-1932), Islamic scholar and missionary, was born in Lahore, Punjab, British India, the son of Khwaja Aziz-ud-Din. He came from a Kashmiri family with a tradition of distinguished public service: his grandfather, Abdur Rashid, was at one time the 'qazi' (chief Muslim judge) of Lahore during the Sikh period (1762-1849). Educated at Forman Christian College, Lahore, Kamal-ud-Din graduated in 1893 and was awarded the Punjab University medal in economics. He was then appointed to the chair of history and economics at Islamia College, Lahore, later becoming its principal. On qualifying as a barrister in 1898, he established a lucrative law practice first in Peshawar and then in Lahore. Following his wife's death in 1912, aware of mounting pressures on Islam and Muslims globally, and inspired by his spiritual mentors Mirza Ghulam Ahmad and Maulana Nur-ud-Din, he answered 'a strong insistent call from within' ('Islamic Review', Jan 1932, 1) and sailed for Britain to inaugurate his ''jihad' by persuasion' in Europe ('Islamic Review', Dec 1949, 5). 
On his arrival in London Kamal-ud-Din first settled in Richmond. Speakers' Corner in Hyde Park provided him with the platform for his first public lecture on Islam. His speeches, sermons, and published articles made a powerful impression on his predominantly non-Muslim audiences. He made effective use of his considerable knowledge of the 'Bible', acquired during his student days, in theological discussion with Christian scholars. In 1913 he decided to take over the Shah Jahan mosque in Woking, built in 1889 by the retired registrar and principal of the University of Punjab, G. W. Leitner, but which had fallen into disuse following its founder's death in 1899. When Leitner's heirs, who planned to sell the property, tried to evict him, Kamal-ud-Din refused to go, had its disposal stopped, and laid the foundations of the Woking Muslim Mission as Britain's main centre for the propagation of Islam. For the first time since its construction, the mosque was now open to public worship, with Kamal-ud-Din one of its trustees and its first imam. Indeed his commitment to it was reflected in his later decision to create a trust and leave his entire property, valued at 150,000 rupees, as a Wakf for the Woking Muslim Mission. 
In February 1913 Kamal-ud-Din started publishing at his own expense an authoritative monthly journal, the 'Islamic Review'. (Its urdu version was published from Lahore under the title 'Risalae Isha'at-i Islam', 'Journal for the propagation of Islam'.) He remained its editor for the rest of his life (his son Khwaja Nazir Ahmad succeeding him in this role), and on its pages elaborated his views on Islamic doctrines as well as the many controversies and criticisms then being levelled against Islam. A prolific writer, he wrote over 100 books devoted mostly to Islam (including 'The Secret of Existence, or, the Gospel of Action', 1923, and 'The Ideal Prophet', 1925) and other religious issues. In particular, his treatise, 'The Sources of Christianity' (1924), was noteworthy. His publications, imbued with rigorous scholarship, made a substantial impact on the British religious scene. Rarely, and only when he perceived there to be a direct attack on Islam and Muslims, did he feel moved to intervene politically. (For instance, his book 'India in the Balance: British Rule and the Caliphate', 1922, was a powerfully argued plea to the British government against the dismemberment of the Turkish caliphate.) 
Kamal-ud-Din believed that for Islam to prosper in Britain, and conversion to make headway, it would have to shed its 'exotic' and 'alien' image. Instead of highlighting differences between Christianity and Islam, he emphasized commonalities within the Abrahamic tradition. His was thus a modernist interpretation of Islam: apostasy was not punishable by execution; likewise, Islam respected individual freedom of religion and conscience. Wearing the veil in the British environment was deemed by him to be impracticable; music and fine art were a blessing for humanity. His efforts soon bore fruit. A steady trickle of conversions, including that of Lord Headley, publicly announced in 1913, followed. Together with Headley as its president, Kamal-ud-Din was instrumental in founding the Muslim Society of Great Britain. Under its auspices, weekly lectures were conducted at the Woking Mosque and later at different venues in London. 'At homes', garden parties, and gatherings of Muslims and non-Muslims took place in fashionable London tea-rooms, hotels, and restaurants where questions about Islam were encouraged in relaxed informal settings. These public gatherings generally involved both women and men, as did religious festivities and larger congregations. With growing interest in new ideas of spirituality among London's influential circles, Kamal-ud-Din played a part in some notable conversions: Marmaduke Pickthall, novelist and 'translator' of the 'Quran'; Sir Archibald Hamilton, deputy surgeon-general of the Royal Navy; and Lady Evelyn Cobbold, whose account of her pilgrimage to Mecca in 1934 (the first European woman to do so, notably unaccompanied by a 'mahram') aroused much interest. 
Under Kamal-ud-Din's leadership the mosque at Woking emerged as the leading symbol of Britain's worldwide Muslim community, and was visited by Muslim dignitaries from many places and denominational backgrounds: the head of the Shi'a Ismaili sect, the Aga Khan, was welcomed with the same degree of dignity and warmth as the Sunni Amir Faisal of Saudi Arabia or King Faruq of Egypt. This non-sectarian acceptance was all the more remarkable since Kamal-ud-Din was a high-profile member of the Ahmadiyya community, considered by orthodox Sunnis as outside the fold of Islam. (He belonged to the Lahore section of the Ahmadiyya community which, while not claiming its founder Mirza Ghulam Ahmad as a prophet, did recognize him as a 'mujaddid', or renewer of the faith). Aware of the dangers inherent in allegations of any kind of doctrinal bias, Kamal-ud-Din consciously rotated those who led the mosque's congregational prayers. 
From the time that Kamal-ud-Din took over the Woking mosque, his reputation as an eloquent Islamic orator grew rapidly. Much sought after internationally by both Muslims and non-Muslims, he travelled widely in pursuit of his missionary duties, first to Europe and then to Africa and the Far East. After the First World War he visited France, Germany, and Belgium to assess their potential for missionary activities. Accompanied by Lord Headley, he travelled to Egypt and Saudi Arabia (where they performed the Hajj) in 1923, and in 1926 they visited South Africa at the invitation of Cape Town's Muslims; visits to Singapore and Java followed later. 
Kamal-ud-Din gained much acclaim in his native India for his religious erudition. His services were recognized by Aligarh Muslim University when it conferred a fellowship on him, and appointed him to its court of trustees. When he died, in Lahore on 28 December 1932, particular mention of his 'unique and unsurpassed' services to Islam was made among the condolences expressed at the All-India Muslim League session at Delhi in November 1933 (S. S. Pirzada, ed., 'Foundations of Pakistan: All-India Muslim League Documents, 1906-1947', 1970, 2.210). But it is as the leading light and spiritual leader of British Islam in the early decades of the twentieth century that he will be best remembered, his pre-eminence marked by the British press's bestowal of the honorific 'Very Reverend' upon him during his lifetime. 


@@@@@


doc= 94524


Cohen, Sir (Benn) Jack Brunel (1886-1965), campaigner for former servicemen, was born at Ethelstone, Alexandra Drive, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, on 5 October 1886, the sixth son of nine children (one of whom did not survive infancy) of Louis Samuel Cohen (1844/5-1922) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Levy (died 1914). His maternal grandfather, Lewis Wolfe Levy (1815-1885), was a businessman and politician in New South Wales, where his paternal grandfather, Samuel Cohen, was also an MP. His father was a prominent member of the Jewish community in Liverpool, where he was a Conservative councillor and in 1899-1900 served as mayor. The family owned the Liverpool-based firm of Lewis's department stores, of which Cohen's father became head after the death of the founder, David Lewis (1823-1885). 
Cohen was educated at Cheltenham College (1899-1903), where he boarded in the house for Jewish boys run by the Russian master Ivan Nestor-Schnurmann. He then joined the family retail business in Liverpool. On 22 April 1914, at the New West End Synagogue, London, he married Vera Evelyn (1894-1994), daughter of Sir Stuart Montagu Samuel, first baronet, banker, and radical MP for Whitechapel; the Liberal politician Herbert Samuel was her uncle. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Cohen joined the 1st volunteer battalion of the King's Liverpool regiment in 1906, and remained in the territorials until the outbreak of war. Two of his elder brothers served in the regiment: George Hubert Cohen (1878-1915) was killed in action, and Stanley Samuel Gilbert Cohen (1880-1944) was wounded and later invalided out after being gassed. Cohen was disappointed by his sheltered posting to the depot battalion and, early in 1917, got himself sent to the western front. In June he was promoted to the rank of major. On 31 July 1917, during the third battle of Ypres, he was severely wounded by machine-gun fire and both his legs had to be amputated above the knee. Although he was able to walk short distances and drove a car, he spent most of his adult life in an electric wheelchair. He coped well with his disability and he became a champion and advocate for all disabled former servicemen, and indeed for all people with disabilities. 
After a short stint in banking, and encouraged by his father and the Liverpool Conservative organizer Archibald Salvidge, Cohen stood for parliament at the general election of December 1918. He won the Liverpool (Fairfield) constituency as a Conservative, and held it against Labour opponents until 1931, when he decided not to contest the seat again. In his maiden speech, on 14 February 1919, he spoke on the need not only to teach disabled former servicemen a trade, but also to find them jobs. In July 1919 he raised a parliamentary question about the exclusion of wounded former servicemen from the peace procession held in that month; they were left to view the parade from the sidelines. He served on more than thirty government committees and voluntary bodies concerning the welfare of former servicemen and servicewomen and the disabled, including one concerning the design of artificial limbs. 
As a representative of the Officers' Association Cohen attended the Unity Conferences held between the rival former service organizations in 1920-21. In this capacity he helped to shape the constitution of the new, unified, body, the British Legion, which was agreed at a delegate conference on 15 May 1921, and which came into existence on 1 July 1921. Cohen became the first honorary treasurer of the British Legion, a post he held for twenty-five years until 1946 with only a two-year break in 1930-32, when he served as vice-chairman. 
Cohen became known as the British Legion's representative in the House of Commons. He served on the select committee of 1922, chaired by John Davidson, on the training and employment of disabled former servicemen, which recommended that if conditions did not improve, firms should be required to take a proportion of disabled former servicemen on their payrolls. He took up war-pension issues and in June 1923 threatened to vote against the Conservative government, and did so in May 1925. One of his most famous interventions concerned the legion's national public petition of 1925. This was an attempt by the legion to raise public awareness of the inequities contained in the 1919 war pensions warrant. The legion hoped that, after the delivery of 824,105 signatures in the largest petition since the Chartist petition of 1848, parliament might be persuaded to amend the pensions warrant. On 30 July 1925 Cohen presented the first page of the petition to the speaker of the House of Commons, followed by many large bundles of signatures, which were dumped on the floor of the house. The legion's campaign raised public awareness of the meagre provision and unfair regulations surrounding war pensions, but it had little direct effect on government policy. 
After the end of his parliamentary career Cohen continued his work for the British Legion, war veterans, and the disabled. He served on numerous committees of the legion and was involved in a wide range of its activities for many years. He was a member of the board of the Poppy Factory, which employed disabled former servicemen at Richmond, Surrey, and served as chairman of the legion school that trained former servicemen to be taxi drivers. He was president of the Legion Village, Preston Hall, near Maidstone, Kent. 
Cohen was also involved in the British Legion's attempts to bring peace and understanding through international meetings of former servicemen. At the first International Conference of the Federation Interalliee des Anciens Combattants in New Orleans in 1922 he suggested that the former servicemen of the allied nations needed to extend the hand of friendship to their former enemies in the cause of peace. Controversy arose when the legion renewed these attempts in 1935 with the new Nazi regime of Germany. While avoiding the league delegation's visit to Germany (he instead visited Austria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia), he was criticized by the Jewish community for his endorsement of the legion's 'foreign policy', and in particular for receiving the reciprocal German delegation to Britain early in 1936 in his official capacity as the British Legion treasurer. He made a statement acknowledging the German government's mistreatment of Jews and other minorities, but insisted that exchange visits between former servicemen should be pursued as a means of preventing a future war ('The Times', 17 Feb 1936). He helped many German Jewish refugees who had managed to escape on their arrival in England. 
During the Second World War Cohen served as an army welfare officer for the Auxiliary Territorial Service and was chairman of the national advisory council (Ministry of Labour) on employment for the disabled, which gave rise to the 'Disabled Persons (Employment) Act' of 1944 and thus achieved his longstanding aim of requiring employers to have a quota of disabled people among their workforces. He became the chairman of the Ministry of Labour's national advisory council to oversee the working of the legislation. Cohen stood down as the British Legion's treasurer in 1946, but in that year became vice-chairman of Remploy Ltd, which grew out of the Disabled Persons Employment Corporation, founded in 1945, and was its chairman in 1955. 
Cohen was also prominent in the politics of the Jewish community in Britain. In 1935 he had expressed his opposition to a separate organization for Jewish former servicemen. In 1944, after Zionists secured a majority on the Board of Deputies of British Jews, Cohen, along with Basil Henriques and others, established the Jewish Fellowship to promote their view that Jewish people constituted a religious rather than a political or national entity. He was founding president of the fellowship, which was dissolved in 1948 following the creation of the Jewish state. Cohen visited Israel in 1960. 
In politics Cohen was generally known as Major Cohen, and in public life as Brunel Cohen; friends knew him as Jack, and he usually ordered his initials J. B. B. He was a member of the council for St Dunstan's for forty years and a governor of St Thomas's Hospital for thirty-three years. He was also a member of the council of Cheltenham College. His outstanding services for former servicemen and the disabled were recognized with a knighthood in 1943, and appointment as KBE in 1948. His autobiography, 'Count Your Blessings', appeared in 1956. He died at his home, 82 Portland Place, London, on 11 May 1965. A memorial service was held at the West London Synagogue. 
In later life Cohen became a symbolic figure for the millions of people who watched the television broadcast of the British Legion marching past the Cenotaph every remembrance day. Riding alongside the leader of the parade in his electric wheelchair, Cohen was a visible reminder of the terrible cost of the conflict that had given birth to the rituals of remembrance and the British former service movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 94544


Fyncheden, Sir William (d. 1374), justice, was a native of the West Riding of Yorkshire, taking his name from Finsdale in Morley parish (the place name was still recorded as Fincheden in the early seventeenth century). He was presumably the William son of Henry Fincheden who on 20 July 1340 conveyed a 10's'. rent in Woolley, Royston parish, to Sir John Darcy (died 1347), a powerful figure both in Yorkshire and at court, where he was successively steward of the household and king's chamberlain. The Master William Fyncheden recorded as Darcy's steward in 1343 was doubtless a kinsman, one close enough for the two Williams to be recorded as 'elder' and 'younger' when they witnessed a deed together in 1354. By then, perhaps with Darcy's assistance, William Fyncheden junior was practising as a lawyer. He is first recorded as an advocate in the Westminster courts in 1350, and in the same year he was named to a commission of embankments in Yorkshire. Thereafter he was a regular appointee to special commissions of oyer and terminer during the 1350s, mostly in Yorkshire but some also in Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and Lincolnshire. In March 1351 he was made a peace commissioner in the West Riding, an appointment that was regularly repeated thereafter. He was also several times appointed a justice of labourers, in both Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire. 
By the mid-1350s Fyncheden's judicial and administrative activities were visibly expanding. In February 1355 he was appointed to investigate all unauthorized alienation from royal lands in the four northernmost counties, along with Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire. Then in February 1359 he was named to a commission to investigate trespasses against the king and queen and their tenants within the lordship of Richmondshire. The high standing that Fyncheden had gained in the king's eyes is further shown by his appointment in July 1360 to inquire whether lands belonging to the late Roger Mortimer, second earl of March, had been held of the king or were part of the principality of Wales: Fyncheden and his colleagues found for the latter. In June 1362 he was made a king's serjeant. 
Fyncheden's career continued to develop in the 1360s. The geographical scope of his commissions expanded, to include commissions of oyer and terminer from Sussex, Huntingdonshire, Cambridgeshire, Kent, and Gloucestershire, as well as Yorkshire. On 29 October 1365 he was raised to the bench of common pleas, and later that year he was knighted, receiving a grant of $40 a year. His new position on the bench probably led to his first attendance at parliament, in May 1366. In this parliament, and all subsequent assemblies until 1373, Fyncheden is recorded as a trier of petitions, always (except once) handling cases from England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. He received personal summonses to parliament in 1368, 1369, 1371, and 1373. He acted repeatedly as a justice of assize and of gaol delivery; in the former capacity he was mainly employed in the home counties and west midlands, but in the latter he most often visited the northern counties. His appointments to peace commissions were restricted to single regions -- either Lancashire or the West Riding -- until 1368, when his duties took him to all three Yorkshire ridings, Northumberland, Cumberland, Gloucestershire, and Newcastle. During these years Fyncheden had also been acquiring an estate, nearly all of it in the West Riding. By 24 July 1364 he was married to a woman named Alice (her surname is unknown), with whom he received a joint grant of land in Methley; he also secured, either for life or in fee, the manors of Wrenthorpe, Barnby Dun, Slaithwaite, and Woodsome, three-quarters of the manor of Hickleton, and property in Doncaster, Bentley, Wheatley, Woolley, and Notton. It was doubtless for professional reasons that he bought a house in London. 
On 14 April 1371 Fyncheden was appointed chief justice of the common bench. He had long been associated with John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, whom he served both as a lawyer and as steward of Pontefract and Tickhill, and it seems likely that he owed his elevation to the duke's influence. His tenure was uncontroversial, however, and in any case relatively brief. He was still in office in Trinity term 1374, but the appointment of Sir Robert Bealknap to succeed him on 10 October that year suggests that Fyncheden died during the summer. He is not known to have had any children. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 94545


Charleton, Sir Robert (d. 1395/6), justice, was the son of Wibert Charleton (died in or before 1362), a member of a minor landowning family which took its name from Charlton in Wiltshire, a few miles north-east of Malmesbury. Robert, who had at least one brother, named Richard, is first recorded in July 1375, when he was appointed a peace commissioner for Wiltshire and Somerset, and thereafter his judicial activities were fairly widely scattered across the west of England and the counties of the Welsh marches. In September 1377 he was commissioned to investigate confederations in Wiltshire of men who claimed, on the authority of 'exemplifications' taken from 'Domesday Book', to be exempt from labour services. This commission was one of three (the others were appointed in Devon and Surrey) to be created in response to a surge of peasant unrest in these regions -- the so-called 'great rumour'. When the peasants' revolt broke out four years later Charleton was one of the justices who in June 1381, immediately after the rebellion, were entrusted with the task of 'resisting and punishing' the insurgents in Wiltshire and Gloucestershire. Then in March 1382 he was a member of a second commission, for Gloucestershire only, which was charged by parliament with arresting rebels and leading the county posse against any overlarge gatherings within the county. In other commissions Charleton seems to have been particularly closely associated with the town of Gloucester: one commission, in May 1381, required that he and his colleagues should investigate whether the men of Gloucester had the right to throw filth on a plot of land in the town near the castle gate, a practice which was reported to be causing a horrible stench and great annoyance to people living in the vicinity; another, in March 1382, involved the reformation of abuses in the town's hospital of St Bartholomew. 
In January 1383 Charleton was made a serjeant-at-law, and from this point he regularly served on commissions of assize or gaol delivery, while continuing to receive appointments to 'ad hoc' commissions in Wiltshire, Gloucestershire, and Shropshire, and to peace commissions. In November 1385 he was appointed a JP in Herefordshire, Oxfordshire, Bristol, and Wiltshire, and in August 1386 he served on the peace commission for Staffordshire. He was also appointed to a commission for embankments covering the Thames region in Essex in June 1384. Charleton's career to this point had followed a steady if rather unspectacular upward trajectory. On 30 January 1388, however, his position was transformed by his appointment as chief justice of the common bench. An annuity of $40 and a grant of two tuns of Gascon wine accompanied his new office. Since he had no previous experience on the bench this represented a remarkable elevation. Nothing is known of any direct connection between Charleton and the lords appellant, who had control of government at this point and who were no doubt responsible for his appointment, but he was evidently close to William Wykeham, bishop of Winchester, for whom he several times acted as a feoffee in the early 1380s. This provides the likeliest explanation for Charleton's extraordinary promotion, for Wykeham was sympathetic to the appellant cause and had benefited directly from the downfall of Richard's favoured courtiers and ministers (including, significantly, that of Charleton's predecessor on the bench, Sir Robert Bealknap). 
Just as remarkable as Charleton's promotion was his ability to steer what appears to have been an uncontentious path through the difficult months of 1388. A man in his position would have found it difficult to avoid active involvement in the dubious proceedings of the Merciless Parliament of February 1388, when many of Richard II's courtiers were tried and executed; and yet in May 1389, soon after Richard II had reasserted his authority, Charleton was granted 80 marks and two robes a year, in addition to the largess he had received from the appellants. It was also at this point that he was made a knight-banneret. He attended at least seven of the eight parliaments that met between February 1388 and January 1395 (records do not survive for the assembly of September 1388), and served as a trier of petitions on each occasion. Charleton remained both chief justice of the common bench and an active commissioner until Michaelmas 1395. A fine of 12 November 1395 indicates that he was still alive then, but his subsequent disappearance from the records suggests that he died soon afterwards; his successor on the bench was appointed on 15 January 1396. He appears to have married twice. A fine of 1379 records him with a wife named Katherine, who seems likely to have been the mother of his son and heir, Walter. She died at an unknown date, and Sir Robert married Elizabeth, sister of John Huntercombe (died 1382), lord of the Buckinghamshire manor of Eton. She died childless in 1391. 


@@@@@


doc= 94546


Cottesmore, John (d. 1439), justice, is of unknown origins. He is first recorded in 1403 in Oxfordshire, a county that was the focus for much of his early legal work, culminating in his first appointment to a commission of the peace, for the town of Oxford in 1418. By this time he was a serjeant-at-law. His work now began to expand. In 1420 he was named to commissions of the peace for Cambridge and Cambridgeshire, soon extending to East Anglia and the midland counties, and from this point he was regularly a justice of assize. In 1423 he was created a king's serjeant, and his work as an assize justice and JP expanded further, into the south-west. In 1425 he was among the serjeants summoned to parliament. He was not only employed by the crown. He is recorded as acting for the abbot of Osney and for Edmund Ferrers, fifth Baron Ferrers of Chartley, and was among the lawyers retained by Richard Beauchamp, thirteenth earl of Warwick. From the early 1420s his name begins to appear in the year-books, and later in the discussions of legal issues among justices and senior serjeants in the exchequer chamber, for instance in 'Thomas Beauchamp's case' in 1426. 
The development of his career in legal practice and administration evidently brought Cottesmore attention and respect, for on 15 October 1429 he was appointed a justice of common pleas. His elevation was followed by an increase in his nominations to peace commissions and government employment of all kinds, including the collection of taxes, across the whole of central and southern England. In 1437, for instance, he was sent to Norwich with the bishop of Carlisle to oversee the mayoral elections, which the king's council feared would give rise to disorder. Two years later, on 20 January 1439, he was promoted to be chief justice of common pleas, with an annual salary of $93 6's'. 8died and two robes. But he lived hardly long enough to enjoy his winter robe, for he died on 29 August following. On 14 October his administrators were instructed to deliver all his records to Richard Newton, the new chief justice, and told to meddle no further with them. 
Perhaps because his career as chief justice was so brief, Cottesmore left little by way of a judicial legacy, though modern literature on contract law cites his comments on the 'Statute of Labourers', on bailment, on tort and contract, and on corporations sole, along with his views on the reception of canon and civil law. Possibly for the same reason he failed to build up much of an estate. His few properties were concentrated in south-east Oxfordshire, where he inherited or acquired the manors of Brightwell Baldwin, Britwell Salome (shortly after 1428) and Little Milton, which was known as Cottesmore manor by 1474. At a date that is unrecorded, but cannot have been later than 1420, he married Amice Bruley, whose family held the manor of Waterstock, a few miles west of Thame. They are represented in two memorial brasses in Brightwell Baldwin church (comparisons make it clear that neither contains portraits). The earlier, presumably from about the time of John's death, is placed in the chancel floor and depicts the couple under canopies, with their eighteen children below. The second, which is set in the north wall of the chancel, shows John and Amice kneeling (the image of the Trinity which was once set between them is now missing). A lengthy Latin verse inscription records that at his death John left Amice with eight children, commenting that there can be no doubt that their marriage was blessed by heaven. It also, and more unusually, comments on his secular career, lauding his concern for justice and for the rights of the church, and the way that 'judging civil suits with wondrous power, he was not swayed by love, money, fear or hatred nor by the prayers of the great' (Norris, 'Memorials', 1.98-9). Following Cottesmore's death his widow married Matthew Hay, but when she died, about 1445, she was buried beside her first husband. The latter's estates descended to his eldest surviving son, another John Cottesmore. 


@@@@@


doc= 94547


Wode, Sir Thomas (d. 1502), judge, was perhaps the most obscure chief justice of the Tudor period. Although some of the heralds placed his origins in Fulbourn, Cambridgeshire, and others have placed him in Cheshire and Suffolk, the armorial evidence shows all those families to have been different; the lawyer's distinctive arms, granted in the reign of Edward IV, included three demi-woodmen carrying clubs, in allusion to his name. Sir Thomas seems rather to have originated in the south of England, since he mentions Salisbury in his will as his mother church, and his first known retainer was as counsel to Winchester College in Hampshire from 1475 to 1485. He is mentioned as a gentleman of London in 1473, suggesting that he was born in the 1450s or earlier, and the inn of court to which he belonged by the 1470s may be supposed (by elimination) to have been the Middle Temple, for which there is no list of benchers from this period. Wode's name occurs as counsel in the year-books for 1477, and the following year he became a justice of the peace for Berkshire and member of parliament for Wallingford. By then he had acquired an estate at Childrey in the same county, and he later married Margaret, 'nee' Delamare (died 1499), widow of Robert Leynham (died 1491) of Tidmarsh. She had a young son, Henry, from her first marriage, who was still a minor when Wode died and whom he treated generously in his will. 
In 1486 Wode was called to the degree of the coif, and two years later made one of the king's serjeants; many of his arguments are reported in the year-books and in Caryll's reports. It may be supposed that he became a member of Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, next to the Whitefriars (Carmelites) because he made a bequest to keep a white friar of London a scholar for seven years. On 24 November 1495 he was appointed one of the puisne justices of the common pleas, and on 28 October 1500 was advanced to the chief justiceship of the same court, with a knighthood the next year. As an assize judge he went on the western circuit from 1487 to 1500, but as chief justice he took the home circuit. Wode's presidency of the common pleas was short and unremarkable, ending with his death on 31 August 1502. In accordance with his last will, made three days earlier, he was buried near the lady chapel of Reading Abbey, which was demolished in the sixteenth century. He left a gold ring with a ruby and two books to Thomas Frowyk, serjeant-at-law, who succeeded him as chief justice before the following term. His sole daughter and heir, Elizabeth, married Sir Thomas Stukeley of Aston in Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 94548


Talbot, Neville Stuart (1879-1943), military chaplain and bishop of Pretoria, was born at Keble College, Oxford, on 21 August 1879, the second son and third child of Edward Stuart Talbot (1844-1934), then warden of Keble College and later bishop of Winchester, and his wife, Lavinia, 'nee' Lyttelton (1849-1939) ['see 'Talbot, Lavinia], daughter of George William Lyttelton, fourth Baron Lyttelton. He was educated at Leeds grammar school from 1890 to 1892, and then from 1892 to 1899 at Haileybury College, where his uncle Edward Lyttelton was headmaster. In his teenage years he was strongly influenced by Henry Scott Holland, like Neville's father a contributor to 'Lux mundi' (1889), the influential high-church essays which sought to reconcile traditional Christianity with science and philosophy. 
On leaving school Talbot joined the rifle brigade and served as a lieutenant in South Africa during the South African War, taking part in the relief of Ladysmith. From 1902 to 1903 he was aide-de-camp to his uncle Sir Neville Lyttelton, commander-in-chief of the British forces in South Africa. In 1903 he went to Christ Church, Oxford, and read 'literae humaniores', taking a second-class degree in 1907. He became involved in the Student Christian Movement while at Oxford, and was an enthusiastic speaker at the Oxford Union, of which he was president in 1907. 
After a year at Cuddesdon Theological College Talbot was made deacon at Ripon Cathedral on 14 June 1908, serving his title briefly as curate at Armley parish church, Leeds. Ordained priest in Lent 1909, he went to Balliol College, Oxford, as chaplain, fellow, and tutor. He contributed the introductory essay, 'The present situation', to 'Foundations' (1912), edited by B. H. Streeter. Ronald Knox famously likened Talbot's theological optimism to an attempt to reconcile the antithetical views of Benjamin Jowett and Henry Manning. 
Though Talbot was a popular college chaplain, the intellectual climate of Balliol did not wholly suit his robust, practical nature, and on the outbreak of war in August 1914 he volunteered for chaplaincy service in France, with his brother Edward Keble Talbot, later superior of the Community of the Resurrection, Mirfield. He was attached to the brigade field ambulance, and his frustration at not being allowed near the front led him to transfer to his old regiment, the rifle brigade. He is credited by some with forcing the army's eventual abandonment of the rule that forbade Anglican chaplains to accompany men on active operations. His younger brother, Gilbert, was killed in July 1915 at the battle of Hooge. He was wounded himself shortly afterwards and awarded the Military Cross in January 1916. 
Based at Poperinghe in Belgium, Talbot co-founded Talbot House, named after his dead brother, with Philip (Tubby) Clayton, another army chaplain, in late 1915. Talbot House provided rest and recreation facilities for officers and men, and was the origin of Toc H, the international charity for peace and reconciliation. Talbot was appointed assistant chaplain-general to the Fifth Army in October 1916. He was a leading voice in the dissatisfaction of army chaplains with the ineffectiveness of the Church of England's ministry among the working men who composed the core of the British army in France. 
On 13 April 1918 Talbot married his cousin Cecil Mary (1887-1921), daughter of William Seymour Eastwood, barrister; a daughter, Elizabeth, was born in 1919 and a son, Gilbert, in 1921. At the end of the war he returned briefly to Balliol, but he was elected bishop of Pretoria in April 1920 and consecrated at St Paul's Cathedral on 24 June that year. Cecil died after giving birth to Gilbert, soon after their arrival in South Africa, and was buried in the cemetery of the convent of the Wantage Sisters at Irene. Talbot's episcopate was marked by controversy over the division of the diocese into two (creating the diocese of Johannesburg in 1922), and by his growing opposition to the discriminatory policies of the South African and provincial governments. When his health began to fail, he resigned his see in 1933 and returned to England to be vicar of St Mary's, Nottingham, and assistant bishop in the diocese of Southwell. He declined the bishopric of Croydon in 1942, and suffered a series of heart attacks in December that year. Convalescing at Backsettown, Henfield, Sussex, he died of heart failure on 3 April 1943. He was cremated in Brighton on 7 April, and his ashes buried in the churchyard of All Hallows Barking, London, the religious headquarters of Toc H. 
Talbot was a huge, physical, and boisterous man -- 6 foot 7 inches tall -- whose forceful personality and immense energy struck contemporaries. He was variously described as being physically magnificent, impetuous, unconstrained, and explosive in speech. These were valuable qualities in army chaplaincy and in South Africa. They were married to a rugged common sense. He could seem tactless, and was certainly fearless in his adoption of unpopular views. His chief legacy to the Church of England was his role in the founding of Talbot House at Poperinghe (where there is now a museum), and his influence among the small group of army chaplains whose sharp criticism of the failures of the pre-war church helped to shape the concern for social welfare that emerged under the leadership of William Temple between the two world wars. 
Talbot's theology, and moderate Anglo-Catholicism, was characteristic of the socially committed incarnationalism of his father and Scott Holland and their friends, though he shared the ecumenical sensibilities of the early leaders of the Student Christian Movement. He wrote a number of small books, none of which was original in thought, but which were all clear and fresh expressions of his concern to relate Christian faith to the modern world. They include 'The Mind of the Disciples' (1914), 'Thoughts on Religion at the Front' (1917), 'Thoughts on Unity' (1920), and 'Great Issues: Studies in Reconciliation' (1936). 


@@@@@


doc= 94551


Fischer, Abraham (1850-1913), politician and lawyer in the Orange Free State, was born in Green Point, Cape Town, on 9 April 1850, the younger of the two sons of Johannes Jacobus George Fischer (1807-1861), a government official in Cape Town, and his wife, Catharina Anna Margaretha Brink (died 1873). After the death of his father Fischer and his mother lived in the house of Abraham Denyssen, whose wife was a sister of Fischer's mother. He was educated at the Dutch school, Tot Nut van 't Algemeen, in Cape Town and, from the age of eleven, the South African College School in Newlands, Cape Town, where English was the language of instruction. During his initiation there, his right eye was injured and had to be removed. He nevertheless excelled at school and went on to study law at the South African College. 
After completing his legal studies Fischer worked as an attorney's clerk in Cape Town, then as a clerk for Judge C. T. Smith in Grahamstown. In 1872 he started his own practice as an attorney and notary in Kimberley, where a few years earlier diamonds had been discovered. He married on 9 October 1873 Ada Robertson (died 1927), an English-speaking woman from the Orange Free State (OFS), whose father, Thomas Robertson, a medical doctor, and mother were Scottish immigrants. After his marriage Fischer's home language was English, a circumstance that in due course led to suspicion against him in some Afrikaner circles. 
In 1875 the Fischers settled in Bloemfontein, the capital of the OFS Boer republic, where they lived in a house called Fern Lodge. In 1895 they moved to the farm Hillandale, just outside the town. In Bloemfontein Fischer practised as an attorney and advocate in the supreme court, but from 1905 onwards only as an advocate. A successful legal practitioner, he became a friend of his fellow advocates M. T. Steyn (state president of the OFS from 1896 to 1902) and J. B. M. Hertzog (prime minister of the Union of South Africa from 1924 to 1939). 
On 9 January 1879 Fischer was elected unopposed as member of the OFS parliament for Philippolis, which he represented until 1882. The demands of his legal practice made it impossible for him to sit in parliament between 1882 and 1886, but he went on to represent Fauresmith (1886-90), Ladybrand (1890-95), and Smithfield (1895-6). He was an independent thinker and did not regard himself as bound by the wishes of the voters in his constituency. When this attitude brought him into conflict with the Smithfield voters he chose to resign as a member of parliament on 7 April 1896 rather than change his views. However, President M. T. Steyn had so high an opinion of Fischer's abilities that he appointed him a member of his executive council (cabinet), in which capacity Fischer served from 29 May 1896 to 10 March 1900. 
Fischer played a leading role in the development of the OFS. In 1895 his far-sighted ideal of compulsory education (albeit only for whites) was realized. He also propagated the development of the railways in the OFS (with a view to linking the country with the colonial south and republican north), as well as the expansion of the telegraphic communication network. He favoured closer political and economic ties with the Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek (the Transvaal) of President S. J. P. Kruger in the republican north. He also encouraged a South African customs union. 
In the wake of the failed Jameson raid (December 1895-January 1896) Fischer came to the fore as the most prominent republican mediator between Steyn and Kruger on the one hand and Sir Alfred Milner, governor of Cape Colony and British high commissioner in South Africa, on the other. Fischer distinguished himself as a diplomat and adviser because he was acceptable to all parties: the Boers trusted him because he was outspoken in favour of peace and republican independence, while Milner regarded him as a progressive and as the most influential man in the OFS. Consequently Fischer chaired the Bloemfontein conference (31 May - 5 June 1899), a last-ditch attempt to avert war; but it failed and the South African War broke out on 11 October 1899. 
Fischer believed that if one wanted peace, one had to prepare for war. When war became inevitable Fischer wrote the final version of the Boer ultimatum, and spared no effort to ensure that the final preparations for military action went smoothly. During the first few months of the war he visited commandos to boost their morale, discussed tactics, and reported back to Steyn. In March 1900, when the war tide had turned dramatically against the Boers, Fischer was appointed chairman of a deputation that was sent overseas to obtain aid from and intervention by one or more of the great powers. His fellow members of the deputation were A. D. W. Wolmarans (Transvaal) and C. H. Wessels (OFS). They visited Italy, the Netherlands, the United States of America, France, Germany, and Russia. They were received sympathetically in all the countries, but politically did not achieve any positive results. The deputation then settled in the Netherlands, although Fischer spent most of his time in Belgium (in Brussels). Through the press and public addresses in the Netherlands (as well as in other countries) the deputation continued to pursue the Boer cause, and collected money for the victims of the war in South Africa. Fischer was in due course joined in Europe by his wife and two sons. 
Although the conflict ended on 31 May 1902, Fischer was regarded by the British as an 'irreconcilable' and was only allowed to return to the Orange River Colony (as the British now called the former OFS republic) at the beginning of 1903. There he became the co-founder and first chairman of the Orangia-Unie (1906), a political organization founded in the Orange River Colony to assist Afrikaners in finding their feet again. Fischer campaigned for responsible government and the interests of Afrikaners. 
When responsible government was obtained, Fischer became prime minister of the colony in November 1907. He now worked for closer ties between the Afrikaans- and English-speaking inhabitants and for closer unity between the British colonies in South Africa. At the national convention (1908-9) he played an important role in the establishment of the Union of South Africa (31 May 1910), and in Louis Botha's first union cabinet he served as minister of lands and irrigation. From June 1912 he also served as minister of the interior. He was sworn of the privy council in 1913. 
By the beginning of 1913 the political strife that had developed in Afrikaner ranks regarding the course they should take to ensure their future as a people had taken its toll on Fischer's health. He suffered from nervous tension, and developed peritonitis and later pneumonia. Physically and emotionally worn down, he died at the Mount Royal Nursing Home, Cape Town, on 16 November 1913. He was buried in Cape Town's Woltemade cemetery on 18 November. Fischer's wife survived him. They had two sons, Harry Fischer ('b'. 1874) and Percy Ulrich Fischer (1878-1957), who studied law at Cambridge and became judge-president of the supreme court in the OFS. Percy's eldest son, Abraham (Bram) Fischer (1908-1975), also became a prominent advocate, joined the Communist Party of South Africa, defended Nelson Mandela and other accused during the Rivonia trial in 1964, and was himself sentenced to life imprisonment in 1966. 
Abraham Fischer is remembered as a sober-minded person, an adroit politician, a capable administrator, an apostle of progress and development, and a great diplomat. A true OFS republican and patriot, he was also a co-founder of a unified South Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 94556


Ainsworth, John (1864-1946), colonial administrator, was born at 29 Lyme Street, Chorlton upon Medlock, Lancashire, on 16 June 1864, the son of John Dawson Ainsworth, commercial traveller, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Bond. His eight years of formal education were meant to prepare him for commercial employment. At the age of twenty he visited the west African coast; this led to employment with an English trading company in the lower Congo basin. After returning to Britain in 1889 he took employment with the Imperial British East Africa Company. He spent just over two years in charge of the company's transport and supply operations in what later became known as Kenya. In February 1892 he was placed in charge of the company's Machakos station. When in 1895 the British government assumed the administration of what was then known as the British East Africa Protectorate, Ainsworth remained in charge of Machakos as sub-commissioner of Ukamba province. In this role he completed the process of establishing control over the Machakos Kamba. Just as important, he helped lay the foundations of the British alliance with the Maasai, so crucial for the early history of Kenya. Also at Machakos, he met Ina Cameron Scott, a Scots-American who had come to the region as a missionary. She was the daughter of John Scott, of Brooklyn. They married in November 1897. 
With the arrival of the Uganda railway at Nairobi in 1899 Ainsworth switched his provincial offices to the future capital of Kenya. As chief government official in Nairobi during the first years of its existence he played a central role in the development of the new township, where he remained until 1906. While in Nairobi he founded the East African Agricultural and Horticultural Society and edited its journal, the 'East Africa Quarterly'. He was also deeply involved with the start of European settlement in the protectorate after 1902. Nevertheless he soon became concerned at the way in which land was being provided to European farmers at the expense of Kikuyu households. He was at least able to gain acceptance of the policy of setting aside land reserved for the Kikuyu, and later the Maasai, that could not be alienated. He was influential in gaining acceptance of the creation of two reserves for the Maasai that were recognized by treaty in 1904. His success in the initial years of British rule was recognized by his being made CMG in 1900. He enjoyed further success when in 1907 he took charge of Nyanza province. For the next ten years his efforts led to the establishment of the most efficient administrative unit in the protectorate. By the start of the First World War Nyanza had become the leading producer of exports from the protectorate, generating profits for the railway and revenue for the protectorate. The war brought huge challenges for Ainsworth. His success in mobilizing increased production and supplies of manpower led to his being appointed military commissioner for labour with the rank of colonel in March 1917. His main responsibility was to arrange for the forcible recruitment of African men as porters for the military campaign in southern German East Africa (Tanganyika). He was awarded the DSO in 1918 for his achievement. 
In June 1918 Ainsworth was appointed adviser on native affairs, and later in the year the protectorate's first chief native commissioner. Down to his departure from Kenya in August 1920 (the year after he was made CBE) Ainsworth was under continual attack from European settlers for what they perceived as his pro-African attitude while they experienced a post-war shortage of labour for their farms. The governor, Sir Edward Northey, took the side of the settlers, and in October 1919 he issued a labour circular over Ainsworth's name that required government officials to recruit labour for settler enterprises. Ainsworth disagreed with the circular and Northey's policy of giving state support exclusively to European agriculture, but he was unable to undertake any effective opposition until after his retirement. Faced with the huge controversy that had developed in Britain over the labour circular, the Colonial Office consulted Ainsworth in 1921. His advice led the Colonial Office to alter Northey's policy. 
Ainsworth and his wife retired initially to Manchester and then to Guernsey, but in late 1923 they decided to move to South Africa. They made the move in 1925 after he had completed a study of administrative arrangements in the mandated territory of New Guinea, on behalf of the Australian government, in 1924-5. He settled at Somerset West in Cape Province and enjoyed an active retirement there, serving as mayor of the town during 1928-30. He died at Somerset West on 31 March 1946. 
Ainsworth played a most influential role in the first quarter century of British rule in Kenya. His career illustrated one of the fundamental contradictions in the colony's history: should it be developed economically by African peasant production or by European farmers? Ainsworth believed that African production was vital to the territory's future economic viability. 


@@@@@


doc= 94559


Moore, Sir Leopold Frank (1868-1945), newspaper proprietor and politician in Northern Rhodesia, was born on 26 February 1868 at 25 Healey Street, Kentish Town, London, the son of Benjamin Moore, commercial traveller, and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' May. He was educated at Wyggeston School, Leicester, and, after qualifying as a pharmacist in London, moved to Cape Town in 1892, and to Mafeking the following year. On 9 August 1894 he married (Katherine) Maud Tait, daughter of Alfred Tait, of Bulawayo; there were no children of the marriage. By 1898 he had set up a pharmacy in Bulawayo and soon displayed a talent for political agitation, campaigning against the chartered British South Africa Company's plan to import Chinese labour for the mines. By 1903 his business was bankrupt; he claimed that this was the result of a boycott organized by the chartered company. In 1904 he moved to the Old Drift, a malarial settlement on the north bank of the Zambezi near the Victoria Falls, in what was then North-Western Rhodesia (and became Northern Rhodesia in 1911). After the building of the Victoria Falls Bridge had rendered the Old Drift redundant, he reluctantly transferred his pharmacy -- a corrugated iron shed -- to the new town of Livingstone, which was established on the healthier sand belt about 6 miles away in 1905. His first journalistic venture was the 'Livingstone Pioneer', which he launched in January 1906, but he differed with his partner in that venture and set up the 'Livingstone Mail' in competition with it in March 1906. The 'Pioneer' lasted just over six months, but the 'Mail' lasted for almost sixty years. 
The 'Livingstone Mail' was Moore's most remarkable achievement. It took great energy and perseverance, and some literary ability, to produce a readable weekly newspaper in frontier conditions for nearly four decades. In later years he employed editors, but for much of the time he relied on the assistance of his remarkable wife, who acted as editor and manager during his lengthy absences overseas on political business. Moore not only contributed leading articles and news reports, but also short stories. 
Moore was an autodidact with an understandable contempt for the products of Oxford and Cambridge. His characteristic political position was one of opposition to the government, but his politics were populist and difficult to pin down. Described by Stewart Gore-Browne as 'old Moore, the Bolshevik chemist' (Rotberg, 178), he was closer to anarchism and socialism than to liberalism, conservatism, or fascism, but was a staunch libertarian. He may not have been an atheist but he was certainly anti-clerical and anti-missionary. Members of Livingstone's Jewish community thought that he was of Jewish descent but they resented his opposition to Zionism and to the immigration of German Jewish refugees in the 1930s. Although he defended the reservation of jobs for white labour, and rejected the idea of 'native paramountcy' for territories north of the Zambezi, his paper was usually free of colonial racism. He showed some sympathy for African interests, education, health, and welfare, and published material by missionaries and others on African history and culture, as well as letters from African correspondents from an early date. His opposition to, and alleged libels of, the Belgian administration in the Congo resulted in his detention in prison in Elisabethville for two weeks in 1913. He and his paper were brought close to bankruptcy by a successful action for criminal libel which was brought against him by Northern Rhodesia's chief veterinary officer, John Smith, in 1924. 
For the first twenty years of his political life, which was more or less inseparable from his journalistic life, Moore's main motivation was passionate opposition to the British South Africa Company. He never tired of pointing to the 'paradox of a company of financial adventurers out for gain -- and gain on a large scale -- being allowed not only to exploit the natives of a territory, legally the wards of the British Crown, but British subjects as well' (Denny, pt 2, p. 336). He questioned the land rights of the company and asserted that the colonists of Northern Rhodesia 'will have to make up their minds whether they are to become the serfs and retainers of a modern capitalistic feudalism or whether they will maintain the freedom and independence of their race' (Denny, pt 1, p. 227). He opposed municipal rates, stamp duties, and income tax -- with the slogan 'no taxation without representation'. He was elected to the advisory council, which was set up in 1918, but soon resigned from it in protest against an emergency proclamation allowing for detention without trial, and against the administrator's edict that the council could not discuss 'politics'. After the end of chartered company rule and the transfer of Northern Rhodesia to the Colonial Office in 1924 he became first a nominated member of the legislative council and then, from 1926, leader of the elected or unofficial members. 
Moore had a strong claim to be Northern Rhodesia's first nationalist, and was in his own eccentric and cantankerous way a democrat and a libertarian. He was one of the first people to think of Northern Rhodesia as a separate and viable country, suggesting a distinctive name for it, Zambezia, in 1924. For most of his political career he was an opponent of plans for the incorporation of the territory in a wider Union of South Africa or a Central African Federation, or for its amalgamation with Southern Rhodesia. It was only in the mid-1930s, in the wake of the depression, and after his failure to stop the transfer of the capital from his beloved Livingstone to Lusaka, which he portrayed as cold, dusty, and windswept, that he became an advocate of amalgamation. He attended the coronation of George VI in 1937 as one of two representatives of the Northern Rhodesian settlers, and was knighted the same year. It was as a result of his pressure for amalgamation at that time, and that of Godfrey Huggins, prime minister of Southern Rhodesia, that the Bledisloe commission on closer union was set up. He resigned from the legislative council in 1939 in protest against the failure of this commission to back amalgamation. He was re-elected unopposed at a by-election, but lost his position as leader of the unofficial members to Gore-Browne. He lost his council seat to a member of Roy Welensky's newly formed Labour Party in 1941. A most unusual knight of the realm, he was for nearly forty years Northern Rhodesia's most conspicuous white settler, and a thorn in the side of, successively, the British South Africa Company and the Colonial Office. He died in Livingstone on 15 May 1945, and was given a masonic funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 94560


Labotsibeni (c.1858-1925), queen mother and queen regent of Swaziland, was born at Luhlekweni in northern Swaziland about 1858, the daughter of Matsanjana Mdluli. At the time of her birth, her father was away fighting the people of Tsibeni in what became the Barberton district of the Transvaal -- hence her name. Following the death of her father she moved with her uncle Mvelase Mdluli to the royal homestead at Ludzidzini in the Ezulwini Valley, central Swaziland. It was there that she received some training in statecraft from the old queen mother, Thandile ('LaZidzi'), widow of King Sobhuza I and mother of Mswati II. She became one of the wives of the young 'ngwenyama' or king of the Swazi, Mbandzeni Dlamini ('c'.1857-1889), soon after his succession in 1874. They had four surviving children, three sons, Bhunu ('c'.1875-1899), Malunge ('c'.1880-1915), and Lomvazi ('c'.1885-1922), and a daughter, Tongotongo ('c'.1879-1918). 
Labotsibeni's husband, King Mbandzeni (also known as Dlamini IV) was an attractive person, and an essentially fair-minded ruler, who was unable to stop, and may indeed have encouraged, the army of concession-hunters who invaded his country in the wake of the gold rush to Barberton in the late 1880s. By the time of his death in October 1889 he had granted numerous overlapping and conflicting land concessions, and a variety of equally contentious monopolies, including one which purported to give its holder the right to collect 'the king's private revenue'. Critics alleged that many of these were granted in exchange for greyhounds and gin, but a good deal of money changed hands, much of it finding its way into the pockets of corrupt white advisers, including the egregious and venal Theophilus 'Offy' Shepstone, the eldest son of Sir Theophilus Shepstone. These concessions were to be the subject of endless litigation and several commissions of inquiry over the ensuing twenty years. They had the effect of involving the governments of Great Britain and the South African Republic (the Transvaal) in the affairs of Swaziland in support of the competing claims of their citizens. The complex and long-running nature of the litigation that they engendered played a part in ensuring that Swaziland avoided complete incorporation into the South African Republic before 1899, the British colony of the Transvaal after 1902, or the Union of South Africa in 1910. 
After the selection of her eldest son, Bhunu, as the successor to his father in 1889, Labotsibeni became the 'ndhlovukazi' or queen mother. There is little doubt that in choosing Bhunu as the heir to his father the old queen mother, Tibati, and the members of the inner council were influenced by their knowledge of his mother's strength of character. It is said that King Mbandzeni had himself recommended her to be the mother of his heir. In the early years of Bhunu's minority Labotsibeni had to take second place to Tibati, who served as queen regent. While Tibati remained at the royal homestead of Nkanini, Labotsibeni established a new headquarters for her son a few miles away at Zombodze. There was some tension between the two rulers, which lasted until Tibati's death in October 1895, but by 1894-5 Labotsibeni had emerged as the stronger of the two. She played a leading role in opposition to the third Swaziland convention of 1894, which provided for the establishment, in February 1895, of a Transvaal protectorate over Swaziland. This replaced the tripartite system of administration involving Great Britain, the Transvaal, and the Swazi nation, that had been set up in 1890. It also represented a concession by the British to the claims of the Transvaal over Swaziland, though they were not prepared to allow Swaziland's incorporation into the Transvaal. It was at this time that Labotsibeni emerged as a remarkably intelligent, articulate, and astute spokesperson for the Swazi nation; she dominated the debate at 'indabas', and got the better of the argument at meetings with such representatives of the Transvaal as the vice-president, N. J. Smit, and the commandant-general, Piet Joubert, as well as with the republic's special commissioner in Swaziland, J. C. Krogh, and successive British consuls in Swaziland, James Stuart and Johannes Smuts. 
Although Bhunu had been installed as 'ngwenyama' or king, with the title Ngwane V, in February 1895, Labotsibeni retained considerable authority. As queen mother she was, in terms of the unwritten constitution of the country, a dual monarch with political influence equal to that of the king, and with the supernatural power to make rain. Her position was strengthened by the reckless behaviour of Bhunu, who established his own base at Mampondweni in the Mdzimba mountains above Zombodze. When he was implicated in the murder of Labotsibeni's senior 'induna', Mbhabha Nsibandze, and two other 'indunas', at Zombodze in April 1898, the Transvaal administration sought to bring him to trial. Accompanied by his brother, Malunge, he fled across the border into the British colony of Natal. He was saved from deposition by the intervention of the British high commissioner in South Africa, Lord Milner, who held that the Transvaal's attempt to try him was 'ultra vires'. He returned to Swaziland under British protection and a commission of inquiry imposed a fine on him, holding that he had allowed disorderly behaviour within his kingdom. Britain and the Transvaal then combined to add a protocol to the Swaziland convention that purported to reduce his status from king to paramount chief, and removed his powers of criminal jurisdiction. 
On the outbreak of the South African War in October 1899 the Transvaal's special commissioner, J. C. Krogh, and the British consul, Johannes Smuts, withdrew from Swaziland. General Piet Joubert wrote to Bhunu, indicating that the South African Republic was leaving Swaziland in his hands. He resumed full authority over his kingdom, but he did not live long to enjoy untrammelled power: he died two months later at Zombodze on 10 December. Labotsibeni now became queen regent as well as queen mother and acted in the name of Bhunu's son, Mona, also known as Nkhotfotjeni, who was chosen to succeed at the age of six months; he eventually became paramount chief, and later King Sobhuza II. It was widely believed that Labotsibeni would have preferred her second son, Malunge, a handsome, intelligent, eloquent, and able young man, to succeed Bhunu. His succession would have avoided a very long minority, but it would have been an unacceptable break with Swazi custom. 
For most of the three-year crisis of the South African War, Labotsibeni was, with the support of a co-regent, Prince Logcogco (a son of King Mswati II), and her council, the last independent ruler in Africa south of the Zambezi. During this period she adopted the habitual stance of a Swazi monarch. While leaning towards the British, she sought to preserve Swaziland as a neutral space and maintained a diplomatic relationship with the South African Republic's forces. She was largely successful in keeping Swaziland out of the war. Exceptional incidents were Thinthitha Dlamini's attack on a party from the Piet Retief commando near Hlatikhulu in February 1901, and General Tobias Smuts's attack on a small unit of the British irregular force Steinacker's Horse at Bremersdorp in July 1901. Labotsibeni had apparently called in the Boers to remove this troublesome group of freebooters and to release Prince Mancibane, a member of the royal family whom the British had detained on suspicion of spying, but she regretted the Boers' destruction of the small town. 
As the war came to an end, Labotsibeni and the Swazi council hoped for the establishment of a British protectorate. They were disappointed by Lord Milner's initial decision that Swaziland should be administered through the Transvaal. Labotsibeni and her council protested strongly against the terms of the Swaziland order in council of 1903 and the Swaziland administration proclamation of 1904, which set up the machinery of government under a resident commissioner. Prince Malunge led a Swazi deputation to meet Milner's successor as high commissioner, Lord Selborne, in Pretoria in 1905, to protest over these and other issues, and Selborne himself paid a visit to Swaziland in September 1906. On that occasion he announced that the administration of Swaziland would, in view of the imminent restoration of self-government to the Transvaal, be transferred to the high commissioner. As a result of Labotsibeni's pressure, the threat posed by the recent Zulu uprising, and the still unresolved issue of the land concessions, Swaziland thus became a high commission territory like Bechuanaland and Basutoland, though it was never formally declared to be a British protectorate. 
Labotsibeni and her council also protested vigorously against the terms of the land partition, which was proclaimed in 1907, and subsequently carried out by George Grey, brother of the Liberal cabinet minister Sir Edward Grey. This divided Swaziland between the Swazi nation, the white concessionaires, and the British crown. Robert Coryndon, who was brought in from north-western Rhodesia as resident commissioner in that year, sought to take a hard line with Labotsibeni, Malunge, and those whom he described as 'the Zombodze faction'. He was not, however, able to get support from his superiors for a plan to depose Labotsibeni and replace her by Mona, the infant heir. After a year in office Coryndon described Labotsibeni as 'a woman of extraordinary diplomatic ability and strength of character, an experienced and capable opposition with which it [the administration] was for some time incapable of dealing' (Jones, 402). Prince Malunge was the effective leader of a Swazi deputation to London, which met the colonial secretary, Lord Elgin, in February 1908. They got little or no redress on the land issue, apart from a disputed, and subsequently dishonoured, promise that they would be able to buy back the crown land. Three years after the return of the deputation, Labotsibeni and Malunge became, with the consent of Coryndon, the prime movers behind a national fund to buy back land -- a move that seems to have drawn a little of the bitterness from the issue. 
The establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1910, and the provision in the schedule attached to the act for the future incorporation of Swaziland and the other high commission territories in the union, prompted Labotsibeni and Malunge to take a greater interest than they had done previously in the affairs of South Africa, where they had many subjects. Labotsibeni was reported in 1914 as saying that 'as Swaziland would no doubt enter the Union at some future date she was in sympathy with any efforts tending towards the betterment of the conditions under which Union natives live, and for this reason her son Malunge had become a member of the Native Congress' (Macmillan, 294-5). Prince Malunge attended the conference that was held by the South African Natives National Congress in Kimberley in February 1914 to discuss the response to the 'Land Act', and was treated as the most distinguished delegate. He and Labotsibeni were close to two of the prime movers in the founding of the congress, the lawyers Pixley Seme and Richard Msimang, and provided the bulk of the funds, about $3000, which were required for the establishment in 1912 of its official newspaper, 'Abantu-Batho', whose first editor, Cleopas Kunene, had been secretary and interpreter to Labotsibeni. Malunge's sudden death in January 1915 was a great blow to his mother and the Swazi nation, and was seen as a loss to the black people of South Africa as a whole. 
Labotsibeni's last major contribution as queen regent was her insistence, in spite of some opposition, that Mona, the heir to the throne, should receive the best education then available to a black person in southern Africa. After primary education at the Swazi National School at Zombodze he was sent in 1916 to Lovedale, a school run by the United Free Church of Scotland at Alice in the Cape, which he attended for three years. In 1919 she decided that he should be withdrawn from school and prepared for his installation as king. She transferred authority to him in the presence of the resident commissioner, de Symons Montagu Honey, at a ceremony on 22 December 1921. In a moving address, which was read and translated on her behalf by her secretary, Josiah Vilakazi, she said: 'This is the day that I have always longed for. It has now come at last like a dream which has come true. King Mbandzeni died in October 1889... As from that day my life has been burdened by an awful responsibility and anxiety. It has been a life full of the deepest emotions that a woman has ever had. (Kuper, 73)' Labotsibeni died after a long illness at Zombodze on 15 December 1925 and was buried there. In an obituary 'The Times' noted that she had for two generations been 'the best known native woman in South Africa'. T. D. Mweli Skota's 'African Yearly Register' noted that 'she was a wonderful woman; a good, wise and tactful ruler, and acknowledged by all the representatives of the British Throne as one of the cleverest rulers in Africa' (Skota, 77). 


@@@@@


doc= 94563


Chirwa, Orton Edgar Ching'oli (1919-1992), lawyer and politician in Nyasaland and Malawi, was born near Nkhata Bay, Nyasaland, the son of Yesaya Mafananiso Chirwa (1881-1955) and Maggie Nyamazawo Nyrenda ('fl'. 1880-1960), both of whom had been seized as children in the last period of Ngoni raiding and brought up in the village of Chief Mtwalo. As young adults they had become Christians and moved back to Nkhata Bay, where they married. Soon after Chirwa's birth the family moved to work at the Livingstonia Mission at Lubwa, Northern Rhodesia. There he went to school before returning to Nyasaland to be trained as a teacher at Bandawe in 1934. He taught for a time in the Nkhata Bay area and in 1941 married Mesinayi Mhone ('b'. 1921), a local girl. He then went to work as a clerk in Ndola in the copperbelt and saved money in order to go to St Francis College in Natal, where he gained university entrance qualifications. In 1947 he went to Fort Hare and graduated BA in 1951. By this time his marriage to Mesinayi Mhone had ended. He returned to Nyasaland and was appointed a lecturer in sociology at Domasi Teacher Training College. On 5 November 1951 he married Vera Chirwa ('b'. 1932), who shared the same clan name. In 1955 he went to study for the English bar at Lincoln's Inn, and in 1958 he returned to Nyasaland as the protectorate's first African barrister. 
Chirwa had taken an active part in the initial, very vigorous opposition to the federation of Nyasaland with the Rhodesias imposed by Britain in the form of the Central African Federation in 1953. When this campaign failed Chirwa attempted to organize an alternative party to the Nyasaland African Congress (NAC) as a channel for African political activity, but his plans came to nothing. By 1958 the NAC had been reinvigorated by a group of well-educated young men and was again challenging the legitimacy of the federation. Aware of the handicap they suffered in the eyes of village people because of their youth, they called back from the Gold Coast (where he was practising as a doctor) a veteran nationalist, Hastings Kamuzu Banda, to lead the movement. Chirwa had known Banda for some time, so, on Banda's return to Nyasaland in 1958 it was an obvious step for Chirwa to become legal adviser to the NAC. 
When in March 1959 a state of emergency was declared in Nyasaland, Chirwa was one of more than 1000 people imprisoned. Banda and a few other leaders, Chirwa among them, were held in Southern Rhodesia, the rest in Nyasaland. Chirwa was released before any of the other leaders. It appeared that the British thought that he might provide a more moderate alternative to Banda. Chirwa, however, immediately accepted leadership of the newly created Malawi Congress Party (MCP), explicitly a continuation of the banned NAC. Invited to London, he made clear that there could be no negotiations until Banda was released. When this occurred, in April 1960, the other young leaders remained in detention for six more months. Banda took over the MCP and began to make it his own. Chirwa remained in the background until after the other young leaders were released late in September. At that time he arranged for Vera to study law in London. When internal self-government was achieved for Nyasaland in 1963, secession from the federation and independence were clearly the next aim. 
In December 1963 Nyasaland left the Central African Federation, and in July 1964 it became an independent state within the Commonwealth (as Malawi). Chirwa became the independent country's first attorney-general. Nevertheless he, along with the other young members of the cabinet, was becoming increasingly uneasy over Banda's growing authoritarianism, and he played a leading part in the attempts to persuade Banda to change, which led to the so-called cabinet crisis of September 1964. All the ministers who had shared the experience of prison in Southern Rhodesia either were dismissed or resigned in sympathy with their friends. Chirwa tried to restore relations with Banda, but after twice being beaten by Banda's bodyguards he gave up and joined the many exiles in Dar es Salaam. There he became president of the Malawi Freedom Movement, a not very effective political party in exile. After Vera Chirwa was appointed a lecturer in law at the University of Zambia the family joined her in Lusaka. On Christmas eve 1981 Orton Chirwa, Vera, and their son Fumbani were abducted by Malawi police from a Zambian village close to the border with Malawi. In 1983 Chirwa and his wife were eventually brought to trial, found guilty of treason, and sentenced to death, sentences that Banda later commuted to life imprisonment. On 19 October 1992 Chirwa died in Zomba prison, where, despite his age and ill health, he had often been held in solitary confinement while manacled to an iron bar in his cell. At the time it was rumoured that he had been murdered, but the evidence is inconclusive. He was buried at Nkhata Bay on 22 October. He was survived by his wife Vera, who was not allowed leave to go to her husband's funeral, which the Livingstonia synod transformed into that of a martyr, one of the signs of the beginning of the end of the Banda regime. She was eventually released three months later, and went on to found the Malawi Centre for Advice, Research, and Education on Rights, and to contest the presidential election in 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 94564


Chipembere, Henry Blasius Masauko (1930-1975), politician in Nyasaland and Malawi, was born on 5 August 1930 at Kayoyo village, Nkhotakota district, Nyasaland, the fourth of the eight children of Habil Chipembere (1900-1976), an Anglican priest, and his wife, Drusilla Mwarabu. He was educated at Blantyre secondary school and then Goromonzi secondary school in Southern Rhodesia. In 1952 he entered Fort Hare University College in South Africa. When he returned to Nyasaland after graduation he took up an appointment as a district assistant in 1955, soon after a bitter campaign of opposition to the creation of the Central African Federation had ended in failure. 
In 1955 African representation in the Nyasaland legislative council was increased to five members who were to be elected through the provincial councils the following year. Chipembere was one of the Nyasaland African Congress (NAC) candidates, who won all five seats. They began a takeover of the leadership of the NAC and sharpened its campaign for secession and eventual self-government. In 1957 Chipembere married Catherine Mary Ambali ('b'. 1932), another staunch Anglican. 
All the new leaders of the NAC had ability but their youth militated against them in the villages, where age was deemed a necessary characteristic of leadership. Attempting to solve this problem, Chipembere took the lead in persuading the NAC to press Hastings Kamuzu Banda, a supporter of the NAC who had lived abroad for decades, to return and lead the movement. Only later in exile would Chipembere accept that his decision had been a tragic error. Initially it appeared a masterstroke. In the months after Banda's return the upsurge of enthusiasm for secession was such that the NAC congress had either to be given way to or crushed. The governor, Sir Robert Armitage, with the co-operation of the federal government, declared a state of emergency in March 1959, and around 1300 NAC activists were arrested. Banda and the small group of young leaders were detained in Southern Rhodesia, while most detainees were held at Kanjedza in Nyasaland. Meanwhile a group of teachers began the Malawi Congress Party (MCP) as a continuation of the banned NAC under a different name. The first of the leaders to be released, Orton Chirwa, became president of the MCP and then handed over the presidency to Banda after the latter's release on 1 April 1960. Chipembere and the other young leaders were brought back to Kanjedza on 1 April but were not released. They sat in Kanjedza for six months while it emptied of ordinary detainees. Banda, meanwhile, negotiated with Britain for the secession of Nyasaland from the federation with a view to gaining independence. He also took over the MCP, making it his own in a way the NAC had not been. 
In September 1960 the young leaders were at last released from Kanjedza, and Chipembere became treasurer-general of the MCP. He immediately delivered a series of fiery speeches increasing the tension in the bitter dispute with London over when the first elections for a new assembly should be held. As a result, in January 1961 he was charged with sedition and sentenced to three years in prison. When the elections were held finally in August 1961 the MCP won decisively, with Chipembere's father gaining a seat, promising to vacate it on his son's release from prison. In February 1963, when Nyasaland had gained internal self-government, Chipembere, newly released from prison, became minister of local government. The move towards full independence was now rapid but so was the increase in tension between the ever more authoritarian Banda and the other members of the cabinet. The crisis came soon after the granting of independence in July 1964. 
From very early in their relationship Banda had patronized the young men. By September 1964 he was politically emasculating them. With Chipembere (by then minister of education) absent in Canada, Banda dismissed three key ministers; two others resigned in sympathy. Chipembere returned immediately and attempted to bring about reconciliation, but to no avail, and subsequently he too resigned. The other former ministers very soon felt forced to flee the country while Chipembere returned home to the small Malawi enclave on the east shore of Lake Malawi. He was promptly 'restricted' to that district. He, however, gathered a force of dissidents there and attempted, in February 1965, to move on Zomba, then the capital, where he hoped there would be a popular uprising against Banda. His attempt failed and he was then smuggled out of the country with the help of British and American diplomats. 
After a brief stay in the United States Chipembere went to Dar es Salaam, where many exiles from Malawi had settled. There he taught at Kivukoni College from 1966 to 1969. He then returned to the United States to study for a PhD at the University of California, Los Angeles, while he worked as an assistant professor of history at California State University, Los Angeles. On 24 September 1975 he died in Los Angeles as a result of the diabetes from which he had suffered for many years. He was buried in Hollywood. 


