@@@@@


doc= 94567


Hastings, Sir Stephen Lewis Edmonstone (1921-2005), politician, was born on 4 May 1921, at 13 Washington House, Basil Street, Knightsbridge, London, the only son of Major Lewis Aloysius Macdonald Hastings (1880-1966) and his wife, Meriel Eda St John (1888-1971), daughter of Neil Edmonstone, lieutenant-colonel in the 4th hussars. His father had absconded from Stonyhurst College after being accused of homosexuality, and went to southern Africa, where he prospected for diamonds, joined the Cape Mounted Police, became a political organizer, and commanded the emergency reserves during the Johannesburg strikes of 1913. After war service he bought a tobacco farm in Southern Rhodesia in 1922, founded the Southern Rhodesian Tobacco Growers' Association, and was MP for the Lomagundi constituency in the Southern Rhodesian parliament from 1931 until his return to England in 1939 to rejoin the army. He became one of the most popular and pungent of the BBC's war correspondents, and made his first parachute jump at the age of sixty-three. Brandishing his stick, he liberated Bremen town hall in 1945, and was among the first to enter Buchenwald concentration camp. He was a remote but heroic figure in his son's boyhood; his sturdy individualism, contempt for doubters, imperial pride, intrepid war service, and mistrust of progressive beliefs were exemplary for his son. 
A bout of malaria resulted in Stephen Hastings's return from Rhodesia to live in Berkshire with his maternal grandmother, who doted on him as a surrogate son and encouraged his lifelong passion for horses. He was educated at Durnford School, Langton Matravers, Dorset (1929-34), Eton College (1934-9), and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1939). After being commissioned into the Scots Guards on the outbreak of the Second World War, he fought against the Italians and Germans in the desert until 1943, when he joined the Special Air Service and participated in daring raids in Benghazi and elsewhere. He was briefly aide-de-camp to Richard Casey, minister resident in Cairo, before training as a Special Operations Executive (SOE) agent. In 1944 he was parachuted behind enemy lines in the Apennines, and organized three divisions of about 4000 Italian partisans, who seized Piacenza and held a bridgehead over the Po for three days. He was awarded the MC. After the war he was based in Vienna as personal assistant to the head of the economic division of the control commission in Austria (1946-8). 
In 1948 Hastings was recruited by a friend of his father's into the Secret Intelligence Service (M16). Under the guise of an assistant military attache at the British legation in Helsinki (1950-53) he watched the Russian bear during a freezing phase of the cold war. He was posted to the British embassy in Paris in 1954-8, and then to Cyprus as first secretary in the political office of the Middle East forces' headquarters during the guerrilla war with EOKA. He was in post in Paris at the time of the Hungarian uprising and the Suez debacle, and, in disgust at the mood of national retreat in Britain, applied to Conservative central office to join the parliamentary candidates' list. This resulted in his election as Conservative MP for Mid-Bedfordshire at a by-election in 1960. 
Just as Lewis Hastings scorned the influence in Britain of 'the Nancy Left' and 'bottle-party intellectuals' (L. Hastings, 224, 256), so his son regarded socialism as an egregious mixture of the ideas of Karl Marx, John Knox, and Father Christmas. He was an effective Commons performer, thorny in his questioning of ministers and adept at calling for emergency debates. A forceful speaker, with an officer's authoritative tones, he was upright and gallant, but out of tune with his parliamentary leaders, though his views chimed with many party members. 
In 1961 Hastings paid the first of many political visits to Rhodesia, and he soon became a vocal opponent of official British policy in southern Africa. He opposed immediate majority black rule, and felt that the Macmillan government was surrendering to African nationalist extremism. When the Rhodesian prime minister, Ian Smith, unilaterally declared independence in 1965 Hastings rebelled against his party's line, and opposed economic sanctions. His support for the Rhodesian rebels rendered him ineligible for office under Edward Heath's leadership (1964-75). He opposed the Lancaster House agreement of 1979, which created Zimbabwe and brought Robert Mugabe to power. He was a stalwart member of the Monday Club, and deplored Whitehall defeatism, Commonwealth idealism, and American prejudice against British colonialism. Julian Amery and Ronald Bell were his diehard allies in resisting decolonization and multiculturalism. 
Hastings's connection to the security services was well known, and he monitored communist infiltration of British trade unions and institutions in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1976-8 he formed a secret advisory committee, code-named Shield, which also included Nicholas Elliott of MI6 and Brian Crozier, to brief Margaret Thatcher and her shadow cabinet colleagues on communist subversion in Britain. Shield adduced evidence that there was a plot to turn Britain into a communist state on the east European model, and in the Commons in 1977 Hastings named five trade union leaders whom Czech intelligence officers had tried to suborn on behalf of the KGB. The Shield committee's recommendation of a counter-subversion executive to act as a cold war equivalent of SOE, under MI6, was defeated by Lord Carrington, the shadow foreign secretary, at a meeting in 1978 chaired by Thatcher, and attended by, among others, Sir Keith Joseph and William Whitelaw. Hastings obtained libel damages from 'The Observer' in 1986 after that newspaper named him as part of an MI5 plot to oust Harold Wilson. 
As a backbench MP, Hastings became a non-executive director of several companies, including Anglo-European Marketing Ltd and the Handley Page aircraft factory at Cricklewood. This led him to a keen interest in the aviation sector. He deplored the cancellation in 1965 of the TSR2 tactical strike aircraft as a betrayal both of British strategic power and of aeronautical manufacturing, and published his polemic 'The Murder of TSR2' in 1966. The book was dismissed in some quarters as the result of heavy, embittered briefing by special interests. His pillorying of Lord Mountbatten and Lord Zuckerman, who had put their weight into the scales against TSR2, and of the Treasury for mishandling the project's steeply rising costs and squandering technical expertise, showed his powers of invective, but the book was thoughtful in its analysis of the difficulties when the rate of scientific development outstrips managerial organization, and in drawing lessons for the nuclear energy and electronics sectors. Hastings was also active in campaigns to stop a large airport being built in the vale of Aylesbury. 
Hastings was knighted in July 1983, a month after his retirement from parliament. A painter, sculptor, and raconteur, who drank with gusto and had a great sense of fun, he loved horses and Labradors, hunted regularly with the Quorn, and was president of the British Field Sports Society in 1982. His autobiography, 'The Drums of Memory', was published in 1994. 
Hastings married, on 29 September 1948, Harriet Mary Elizabeth Jephson ('b'. 1921), a widow, daughter of Colonel Julian Latham Tomlin, director of posts and telegraphs in the Sudan. They had a son and a daughter. This marriage was dissolved in 1971, and in September 1975 he married Elizabeth Anne Marie Gabrielle (1934-1997), formerly wife of Sir Vivyan Naylor-Leyland, third baronet, and ostensible daughter of the second and last Viscount Fitzalan of Derwent. Her mother, before her birth, had become the lover of the tenth and last Earl Fitzwilliam, and ultimately married him: Elizabeth Hastings inherited the Fitzwilliam estates at Milton, Castor, Cambridgeshire, and Malton, Yorkshire, on his death in 1979. Hastings became a director of the Fitzwilliam Estates Company (1980-97), partner and manager of the Milton Park stud, and joint master of the Fitzwilliam hunt. In 1995 he led an appeal for funds for the preservation and development of Peterborough Cathedral, and raised $7.3 million by the end of 2000. He died of cancer of the oesophagus on 10 January 2005, at his home, Stibbington House, Wansford, Cambridgeshire. He was buried in the churchyard of St Mary the Virgin, Marholm, on 18 January, following a funeral service at St Kyneburgha's Church, Castor, near Peterborough. A memorial service was held at Peterborough Cathedral on 17 April 2005. He was survived by the two children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 94577


Kinnersley, David John (1926-2004), economist and public servant, was born on 28 May 1926 at 83 Southbourne Grove, Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, the elder child and only son of Arthur Ernest Kinnersley (1885-1953), auctioneer and estate agent, and his second wife, Doris Muriel, 'nee' Angier (1902-1982), hospital almoner. He had a younger sister, Gay, and an older half-brother from his father's first marriage. He was educated at Westcliff high school and the Herbert Strutt Grammar School in Belper, Derbyshire, where he was evacuated happily during the Second World War to two spinster sisters who encouraged his academic ambitions and with whom, typically, he kept in touch for the rest of their lives. Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, followed in 1944-5. He read law for one year before his degree was interrupted by national service from 1945 until 1948. On returning to Cambridge he switched to economics, graduating with a double first in 1950. On 22 July 1950 he married, at Christ Church, Rossett, Denbighshire, Barbara Adele Fair ('b'. 1927), personnel manager, and later social worker, and daughter of William Fair, farmer. They had three children, Clare Victoria, Paul Richard, and Jane Fidelia, to whom, along with his granddaughter Anna, he dedicated his first book with the phrase 'May the rivers keep sparkling for them far into the future'. 
After graduating Kinnersley decided on a career in the public sector and joined the National Coal Board (NCB). The NCB's economic adviser, Fritz Schumacher, was an important influence, and was later to challenge orthodox economic thinking with his book 'Small is Beautiful' (1973). In 1958 Kinnersley moved to the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority as administrative manager, Risley, Derbyshire, before joining the British Waterways Board in 1964 as deputy general manager, then general manager. He was director of the Association of River Authorities in 1970-73, and following a major reorganization of the water industry of England and Wales into multifunctional regional water authorities based on river basins he became, in 1973, the first chief executive of the North West Water Authority. After a turbulent period at the helm he left to become senior economic adviser to the National Water Council (1976-83), where he advocated the adoption of economic principles, especially 'polluter pays' charging and metering of water supplies. 
Kinnersley attended the preparatory meeting for the United Nations' 'world water decade' (1981-90) in New York, and subsequently organized a conference in Britain entitled 'Thirsty third world' in 1980. This conference inspired Kinnersley's and others' commitment to contribute directly to solving the problem that 2 billion people in the world did not have access to clean water. He found a small group of six like minds who set up WaterAid by trust deed in July 1981, with himself as unpaid 'administrator for the time being' until they appointed its highly respected first director, David Collett. The charity was conceived as having a unique focus on water and sanitation for the poor. Kinnersley was patient and skilful in working behind the scenes to influence key figures to support WaterAid, and the charity was gradually embraced by the whole water industry. This base of support expanded to engage the general public, which enabled WaterAid, working with local partners, to assist nearly 8 million people with the provision of water and sanitation by the time of Kinnersley's death. Kinnersley was active as a trustee until 1997 and, with others, emphasized the philosophy that community involvement and ultimate responsibility for the adoption of appropriate intermediate technologies (as advocated by Schumacher) were essential if projects were to be sustainable in the long term. 
In 1983 Kinnersley returned to academic life as a research fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford, and then in 1985-6 as fellow and bursar of Mansfield College, Oxford. He also acted as adviser to the World Bank and governments worldwide on water management. He was in the mid- to late 1980s influential in the conception and establishment of a National Rivers Authority as a precursor to the privatization of the water and sewerage companies, and became adviser to Nicholas Ridley, secretary of state for the environment, in fleshing out these proposals. His book 'Troubled Water' (1988) explained his philosophy of the unique nature of water as a resource that cannot be owned but must be shared by communities with appropriate mechanisms to resolve conflicts of interest. 'Coming Clean' (1994) was written after the privatization of the UK's water and sewerage companies in 1989, which had led to the reversal of the decline of capital expenditure on water and sewerage infrastructure, about which he had been so critical in his first book. But he saw that there were bigger environmental issues on the horizon, and in his final paragraph wrote that: 'For all the technological skills and capital wealth of our age, the sharing of good quality water can no longer depend on yet more or better technological fixes. We have to effect a transformation in our economic and social institutions -- one that reflects the dynamics of the natural environment -- however long this may take. ('Coming Clean', 211)' Intellectually formidable, Kinnersley was nevertheless known for his sociability, sense of humour, and frequent acts of kindness. He maintained an extensive correspondence throughout his life, and had a particular rapport with children, whom he entertained with stories, jokes, and games of his own devising. Despite a stroke in 1994 he continued to inspire and encourage his WaterAid colleagues, and to take a keen interest in literature and art. He died on 2 December 2004 at his home, 111 Church Street, Chesham, Buckinghamshire, of heart failure, and was cremated at Amersham crematorium before a service at St Mary's Church, Chesham, on 13 December. He was survived by his wife, Barbara, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94580


Markova, Dame Alicia (1910-2004), ballet dancer, was born on 1 December 1910 at 23 Wilberforce Road, Finsbury Park, London, the eldest of the four daughters of Arthur Tristman Marks (died 1924), a mining engineer, and his wife, Eileen Mary Roth, 'nee' Barry (died 1949). Arthur Marks was Jewish, of Polish ancestry, and his wife, who was Irish Roman Catholic, converted to Judaism. Alicia's great uncle, Sir Albert Altman, was like her father an engineer and had designed the drawbridge mechanism for Tower Bridge. By 1914 Arthur Marks owned a factory on the Caledonian Road, London, manufacturing his invention 'rubberine', which was used by the British army to strengthen tyres. The Marks family prospered and travelled in a Rolls-Royce. Aged six, Alicia was a solemn and obedient little girl who had not yet begun to speak. She was mostly taught at home by a strict nanny and governess, Gladys Hogan, known as Guggy. 
Physically fragile, Alicia began dancing lessons on a doctor's recommendation. Her mother enrolled Alicia and her second eldest daughter, Doris, to learn 'fancy dancing' at a branch of the Thorne Academy, near Muswell Hill where they now lived. (Doris later became a performer in revues, under the name Doris Barry.) On Miss Thorne's recommendation, Alicia gave her first performance in a talent-spotting competition in 1919, at the Muswell Hill Athenaeum cinema. Her parents were astounded: their daughter, so timid in everyday life, was completely undaunted and won the five-guinea prize. Soon after she was taken to see Anna Pavlova perform at the Queen's Hall. She was so overwhelmed that she persuaded her somewhat reluctant father to ask if the ballerina would meet her. The next day, at Ivy House, Pavlova's home, Alicia performed her ballet exercises for the great ballerina who showed her how to rub herself down with cologne after dancing. 
Alicia Marks's professional debut was in December 1919 at the Kennington Theatre, London, which always used young students for its pantomimes. She was engaged as a principal dancer in 'Dick Whittington', for which she earned the considerable sum of $10 a week and was billed as 'Little Alicia, the Child Pavlova'. The 'Daily Telegraph' described her as 'a very accomplished ballerina in miniature' (quoted in Leonard, 31), and another dance student, the seventeen-year-old Patrick Healey Kay, who as Anton Dolin would be her stage partner years later, was so impressed that he left flowers at the stage door. Revising her scepticism, Eileen Marks decided to enrol Alicia in the classes of the leading Russian teacher in London, Princess Serafina Astafyeva, at the Pheasantry in the King's Road, Chelsea. Anton Dolin, who was a pupil in the same class, used to pinch Alicia and pull her hair because she was so serious. One day, a friend of Astafyeva arrived to watch the class. Serge Diaghilev was looking for promising talent for his lavish new production of 'The Sleeping Princess' (better known as 'The Sleeping Beauty'). He picked Anton Dolin and, amused by the tiny eleven-year-old Alicia, introduced a new character -- the diminutive Fairy Dewdrop -- who in the ballet's prologue would dance a variation choreographed by Bronislava Nijinska. The production opened at London's Alhambra Theatre in 1921, but diphtheria robbed Alicia of the role. As compensation, Diaghilev arranged regular tickets and sometimes sat with her, explaining the action on stage. Her solemn, intelligent concentration enchanted him and he did not forget her. Three years later he took her, aged fourteen, into the Ballets Russes and Russified her name to Markova. 
In that year Markova's father died of pneumonia shortly after a disastrous investment had also caused the family's fortunes to plummet. Accompanied by Guggy, Alicia set off from Victoria Station with the Ballets Russes for Monte Carlo. In the adult world of the company she was a lonely figure, forbidden to accept invitations and gifts, while Guggy forced her to lead a drab life of work and study. On good days, Guggy allowed Alicia two chocolates but if she was criticized in class these were withheld. Her substitute father was Diaghilev, normally an intimidating figure addressed as Sergey Pavlovich, but she called him Sergipops. Because she was so small, casting her required a judicious eye. Her first role was Little Red Riding Hood in 'Aurora's Wedding' (a compilation from the 1921 'Sleeping Princess'); her first major role was as the nightingale in 'Le chant du rossignol', choreographed for her in a new 1926 version by Georges Balanchine. Igor Stravinsky guided her through his score's intricacies and Henri Matisse designed her all-white costume. Alicia's virtuosity thrilled Balanchine. He included double 'tours en l'air', a turning jump from the male lexicon, and devised a diagonal of 'fouettes' that evoked a little bird hopping. 
Alicia toured for five years with the Ballets Russes until Diaghilev's death in 1929. In this period Balanchine also created solos for her in the world premiere of Ravel's 'L'enfant et les sortileges'. She danced child roles in 'La boutique fantasque' and 'Petrushka' and was cast as Papillon in Michel Fokine's 'Carnaval', the Bluebird 'pas de deux' in 'Aurora's Wedding', and the title role in Balanchine's 'La chatte'. She appeared in Massine's 'Cimarosiana' and was also given a single performance of the second act of 'Swan Lake'. These featured roles apart, she danced in the corps de ballet -- once she had grown taller -- because Diaghilev thought this essential for her development from child prodigy to mature artist. However, just before the summer break in 1929, he promised to promote her to principal in the autumn and to give her important roles. But on 19 August Diaghilev died and a month later the Ballets Russes folded. 
This was devastating news for Markova, who returned to London to live with her mother in Ladbroke Grove. She danced in Monte Carlo during a three-month opera season as one of a group of dancers organized by Serge Grigoriev to perform in ballet sections of operas. She then received an invitation from the young dancer Frederick Ashton, then just starting out as a choreographer, to appear in the ballet sequence he was devising for Dryden's 'Marriage a la mode' at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, in 1930. She accepted and in the same year started dancing in ballets he choreographed for two new organizations marking the beginning of regular British ballet seasons: the Camargo Society and Marie Rambert's Ballet Club (later Ballet Rambert). Markova took the Persian title role in Ashton's 'La peri' (1931), while in his first masterpiece, 'Facade' (1931), she danced the witty polka at the premiere and, later, the tango and tarantella. She was the sexy tap-dancing Creole girl in his 'Rio Grande' (1931), the proud ballerina in 'Foyer de danse' (1932), the dangerously chic girlfriend in 'Les masques' (1933), and Marguerite in 'Mephisto Valse' (1934). The tiny stage of the Ballet Club's Mercury Theatre, with the audience almost at touching distance, probably helped develop her magisterial concealment of strain, and the floating, delicate serenity with which she would later be associated. But her early roles brought out a different, sharp gift for characterization. In Ninette de Valois's 'Bar aux Folies Bergere' (1934) she was La Goulue, for which de Valois suggested she study the walk of the 'ladies of pleasure' in Soho. Markova received 10's'. 6died per performance, which was enough only to pay for her late taxi home and her ballet shoes. In 1932 she therefore agreed to supplement her income with the commercial shows -- performed between film projections -- that Ashton was staging at the Regal Cinema, Marble Arch. She danced three times a day, eighteen times a week; and came to the attention of a wide public. 
Shortly before, Markova had been invited to join Ninette de Valois's newly launched Vic-Wells Ballet and was now shuttling between theatres in taxis. She began with the Vic-Wells Ballet in several of de Valois's works and the same year (1932) staged and performed Fokine's 'Les sylphides'. Two years later she danced the premiere of Ashton's 'Les rendezvous', in a role celebrating her technique, warmth, and wit, and in 1935 she created the role of the Betrayed Girl in de Valois's 'The Rake's Progress'. With Markova in place, de Valois was able to think of mounting the old classics, starting with 'Giselle' in 1934 at the Old Vic. Partnered by Dolin, Markova was the first British Giselle and this became her signature role, her dancing moving beyond technique into a world of distilled emotion and ethereality. In the same year she danced two other classical Vic-Wells premieres, 'The Nutcracker' and 'Swan Lake', in the first complete productions staged in Britain. 
By now it was clear that Markova and Dolin could fill theatres on their own. In 1935 they left to start the Markova-Dolin Company, and from then on de Valois concentrated on developing Margot Fonteyn to fill the gap. The Markova-Dolin Company toured the country for two years, showing an enthusiastic public a mixed repertoire that included Nijinska's 'Les biches', with Markova playing the mysterious, androgynous figure in blue. Dancing eight performances a week was, though, a strain. In 1938 Markova accepted Leonide Massine's invitation to join the new company he was forming, the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo. There she created roles in large-scale Massine ballets: 'Seventh Symphony' (1938); 'Capriccio espagnole' (1939), 'Rouge et noir' (1939) -- with designs by Matisse who painted the decoration on her thighs -- and 'Vienna 1814' (1940). Her contract meant she was required to tour the USA during the first years of the Second World War, often travelling great distances in considerable discomfort. In 1941 she joined Ballet Theatre (later renamed American Ballet Theatre), where she was reunited with Dolin. She was in the premiere of Fokine's last ballet, 'Bluebeard' (1941), and in his new production of 'Les sylphides'. She created Juliet in Antony Tudor's 'Romeo and Juliet' (1943), to music by Frederick Delius, and slept in her dressing room between rehearsals to save time. While touring with Ballet Theatre she and Dolin performed 'Giselle' at the Hollywood Bowl before an audience of 35,000. They appeared in Billy Rose's new Broadway revue, 'The Seven Lively Arts' (1944-5), dancing 'Scenes de ballet' (choreographed by Dolin) to Stravinsky's commissioned score. In 1946, with the impresario Sol Hurok, they re-formed the Markova-Dolin Company, and toured the United States, the Caribbean, and the Philippines. 
Markova was now the world's highest paid dancer with a weekly income of $1000. But she missed England. In the summer of 1948 she returned to be a guest with de Valois's company (the future Royal Ballet) at the Royal Opera House, where she triumphantly danced 'Giselle' and 'Swan Lake' and made her debut in 'The Sleeping Beauty'. In 1949 she and Dolin pioneered the use of British arenas for ballets, having previously performed in a baseball stadium in Montreal, introduced by a regiment of Mounties. They appeared at the Empress Hall in London (with a nightly audience of 7000) and at Haringey. Following this, they toured with a supporting group which was the seed for Festival Ballet. Markova thought of the name, to coincide with the Festival of Britain. Festival Ballet was launched in October 1950, but injury forced her to leave in 1952. Subsequently she concentrated on guest engagements and concert performances. She made her debut in Bournonville's 'La sylphide' with the Grand Ballet du Marquis de Cuevas. She appeared with the Indian dancer Ram Gopal and Pilar Lopez's Ballet Espanol. In 1955 she danced 'Giselle' in New York with the young Erik Bruhn and four years later, in Ireland, she danced her last 'Giselle'. The same year, she was the subject of a BBC television's 'This is Your Life' programme. 
Markova's last performance took place in 1962, in 'L'apres-midi d'un faune' with Milorad Miskovitch and London Festival Ballet. That this would be her final public appearance was not known at the time, since it was later, recovering from illness, that she decided to stop. She was appointed DBE in 1963, having already become a CBE in 1958. Between 1963 and 1969 she was ballet director of the New York Metropolitan Opera House, staging dances for operas and in 1970 she was made professor of ballet and performing arts at the University of Cincinnati. From 1981 to 2004 she was president of the London Ballet Circle and from 1986 to 2004 president of English National Ballet. She was the author of 'Giselle and I' (1960) and 'Markova Remembers' (1986), a book of reminiscences which unexpectedly revealed a sharply humorous and disarmingly frank side to her personality. Her phenomenal memory made her an illuminating coach for professional dancers. She gave several televised master classes, although no substantial film record remains of her own dancing. She also involved herself enthusiastically in the activities of ballet schools and competitions. She continued staging ballets, especially 'Les sylphides', taught to her by its choreographer, Michel Fokine. 
In 2002, at the age of ninety-one, Markova featured in a documentary, 'Alicia Markova, la legende', by the French film-maker Dominique Delouche, which included footage of her coaching dancers of the Paris Opera Ballet. Though fragile in appearance, she combined extraordinary resilience with a steely perfectionism that drove her to sacrifice everything to her art. She projected a peerless image of sublime effortlessness on stage and, with her immaculate clothes and small, composed voice, soignee refinement off. She was Britain's first prima ballerina and grew into an international star. 
Dame Alicia Markova lived at Park Mansions, Knightsbridge, London, with her sister Doris before moving to a nursing home in Bath. She died following a stroke on 2 December 2004 at the Royal United Hospital, Bath. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 94583


Meadows, Bernard William (1915-2005), sculptor, was born at 354 Unthank Road, Norwich, on 19 February 1915, the son of William Arthur Frederick Meadows, a solicitor's clerk, and later insurance clerk, and his wife, Ethel Maud, 'nee' Blowers. He attended the City of Norwich School, where he remembered art as 'the only thing I could do' (Woollcombe, tape 7). When he left school at the age of sixteen in the middle of the great depression he was persuaded by his father to take a secure job in an accountants' office. Finally, in 1934, he was allowed to enrol at Norwich School of Art. 
In 1936, through a friend of his wood-engraving teacher, Meadows was introduced to the sculptor Henry Moore. As a result he was invited to become Moore's studio assistant, and worked for him during the holidays in Kent and Hertfordshire, on and off until the late 1940s, assisting with his carvings and early experiments in lead casting. They developed a strong relationship that lasted for fifty years. Through this connection, Meadows was introduced to avant-garde artistic circles, and was able to exhibit at the International Surrealist Exhibition held in London in 1936, alongside Moore and Pablo Picasso. Meadows was drawn to surrealism, a thread that underlies his entire oeuvre, but he preferred the work of Picasso, with 'its flickering nervousness', to that of Moore (Woollcombe, tape 103). 
Later in 1936 Meadows moved from Norwich to London to study painting at Chelsea School of Art (1936-7), and then at the Royal College of Art (1938-40), where his education was interrupted soon after the outbreak of the Second World War. On 11 October 1939 he had married the 23-year-old Marjorie Winifred Payne, whom he had met at Norwich School of Art. She was the daughter of Albert Carswell Payne, schoolmaster. They made their first home in Moore's former studio in Hampstead, continuing to live in the area all their married life. They had two daughters. 
Meadows had joined the Communist Party in the 1930s and, at the beginning of the war, declared himself a conscientious objector. However, he changed his mind in 1941, when Germany invaded Russia, and joined the Royal Air Force as part of the air-sea rescue squad. He saw little action, and suffered rather from boredom, though it was a formative period for his art. He was posted to India, Ceylon, and the Cocos Islands, in the Indian Ocean, where he spent his spare time painting and sketching. He became fascinated with the creatures of the Cocos Islands, particularly the giant crabs, which paraded menacingly along the beach, creating a 'sort of set up of fear', analogous in his eyes to human society (Woollcombe, tape 47). The crab, with its armoured exterior and soft interior, became a recurring theme in his work. 
Meadows returned to the Royal College of Art in 1946, joining the sculpture course for his last year. Afterwards, he taught at Chelsea College of Art (1948-60), and occasionally at the Bath Academy of Art, Corsham Court (1955-7). In the 1950s and 1960s he made a series of sculptures of 'cocks', 'crabs' and dead birds, which he described as 'human substitutes... vehicles expressing my feelings about human beings', appearing variously as 'hysterical' and 'domineering' (Robertson). Together with his Chelsea students Elizabeth Frink and Robert Clatworthy he was important in the revival of interest in animal sculpture in post-war Britain. He was an accomplished and prolific draughtsman, who developed his sculpture through his drawing. However, after his student days he never drew from life. Throughout his career he almost obsessively worked and reworked a few chosen themes, allowing the forms to emerge through the drawing process. 
Meadows rose to fame at the Venice Biennale of 1952, where he was selected to represent Britain alongside his contemporaries Eduardo Paolozzi, William Turnbull, Robert Adams, and Kenneth Armitage, as well as Moore. Though ultimately a disparate group, the younger artists were heralded as the successors to Moore and Hepworth by the art critic Herbert Read, who described their work as depicting 'excoriated flesh, frustrated sex, the geometry of fear' (Read, introduction to 'New Aspects of British Sculpture', British Council, 1952). Meadows went on to have a series of solo shows at Gimpel Fils, London, and Paul Rosenberg, New York, in the late 1950s and 1960s, and produced a massive bronze, 'The Spirit of Trade Unionism', for the entrance to the Trades Union Congress's headquarters, Congress House, in Great Russell Street, London. 
The turning point in Meadows's career came when he was appointed professor of sculpture at the Royal College of Art (1960-80). Under his direction, sculptors as diverse as Nigel Hall, Martin Naylor, William Pye, and Tony Cragg graduated from the department. Meadows became a leader of his profession, serving on public bodies such as the Arts Council's art panel and the royal fine art commission, and acting as governor for schools of art at Norwich, Chelsea, Corsham, and Bristol. Nevertheless, he remained a modest and retiring man: a sceptic and not fundamentally 'a joiner in' (Woollcombe, tape 93). The 1960s and 1970s were also a productive period for Meadows's own work, as he had studio space at the Royal College and established an in-house foundry. He preferred bronze casting to carving, though he often worked over the surfaces of his plaster models. He was closely involved in the casting of his work and almost always patinated and polished it himself, as he became increasingly interested in qualities of surface. 
In the early 1960s, following a visit to Florence, Meadows turned to the human figure in his work with a series of 'armed' figures and busts. These were images of bullies, inspired by Renaissance statues of Roman emperors and military leaders, with such titles as 'Augustus', 'Brutus', and 'Personnage tres important'. He described them as 'armoured, aggressive, protected, but inside the safety of the shell, completely soft and vulnerable' (Bowness, 15). He developed the seated 'armed' figures into pointing figures, inspired by a photograph of the film director Luchino Visconti. These became the vehicle for another change: from the dark, craggy surfaces of his earlier bronzes, to the bright, smooth finishes of his later works, like 'Help' (1966) and 'Lovers' (1980). From the mid-1960s his sculpture had a more erotic charge, with soft, bulbous forms, appearing as fruit, eyes, and other body parts, encased within or squeezed between other harder, more angular shapes. In 1967 he executed thirty-four etchings and a box for an edition of Samuel Beckett's 'Molloy' (1951), sharing the author's interest in existentialism. 
Meadows was the only British sculptor at the Venice Biennale in 1964, and in the 1970s he had solo shows in Paris, London, and Tokyo. He was selected for key group shows including 'Sculpture of the 1970s', at the Royal Academy, London, in 1972. Throughout his career he accepted relatively few commissions, preferring to concentrate on his own work. His major public sculpture of this period was for the new headquarters of Eastern Counties Newspapers in his native Norwich in 1969-70. 
After retiring from the Royal College in 1980 Meadows became closely involved with the Henry Moore Foundation, serving as acting director from 1983 to 1988. In this late period he focused mostly on drawing. He had a major retrospective at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park in 1995. He lived latterly in Belsize Grove, Hampstead, and died at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, on 12 January 2005, of an internal haemorrhage. He was survived by his wife and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94585


Pierrepont, Francis (b. after 1607-1658), politician, was the third son of Robert Pierrepont, first earl of Kingston upon Hull (1584-1643), royalist army officer, of Holme Pierrepont, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Gertrude Talbot (1587/8-1649), daughter and coheir of Henry Talbot, a younger son of George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury. He was the younger brother of Henry Pierrepont, first marquess of Dorchester, and of William Pierrepont. He was educated privately, it seems, for there is no record of his attendance at university or the inns of court. Lucy Hutchinson described him as 'a man of good naturall parts, but not of education according to his quallity' (Hutchinson, 72). She also accused him of 'a vaineglorious pride, which could not well brook any other should outstrip him in virtue and estimation' (ibid.). By a marriage licence dated 3 February 1636 Pierrepont married Elizabeth Braye, daughter and coheir of Thomas Braye of Eyam, Derbyshire; the couple had two sons and three daughters. Hutchinson conceded that Pierrepont's bride was rich, but of 'base parentage and penurious education' (ibid., 26). The family background of his second wife, Alisimon -- whom he had married by January 1651, and with whom he had one daughter -- is obscure. 
In the elections to the Short Parliament early in 1640 Pierrepont's father promoted his return for the Nottinghamshire borough of East Retford, believing him better fitted for public life than his eldest son, Henry. Pierrepont was duly elected, but made no recorded impact at Westminster. His career during the 1640s indicates that he was a man of godly convictions. His father, on the other hand, was suspected of having recusant sympathies, and became a royalist -- if a reluctant one -- during the civil war. Henry Pierrepont, too, joined the king's party. But Francis and his elder brother William sided with parliament. Lucy Hutchinson regarded the Pierreponts' divided allegiance merely as a stratagem to protect their estates whichever side won. Yet she herself acknowledged that Pierrepont 'was well affected to honest men and to righteous liberty' (Hutchinson, 72). Certainly parliament regarded him as one of its most trusted adherents in Nottinghamshire, appointing him a deputy lieutenant and a colonel of foot. In addition, he was a leading member of the parliamentarian committees for Nottingham and the county. 
In July 1644 Pierrepont was appointed a commissioner to reside with the Scottish army in northern England. This office -- probably procured for him by his brother William -- plunged him into Westminster's increasingly fraught relations with its Scottish allies. In November 1644 he joined Ferdinando, second Lord Fairfax, and Sir Thomas Fairfax in a letter to the committee of both kingdoms denouncing the Scots as a military liability. Pierrepont, like the Fairfaxes, and his brother William became closely associated with the anti-Scots, Independent faction at Westminster. From July 1645 he signed numerous letters to parliament from the committee of the northern association at York, complaining about the depredations of the Scottish army. As chairman of this committee he wielded considerable influence in the region. Hugh Potter, the northern steward of Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland, thought that 'Perpoint, for the present, carries the greatest stroak [in the northern association committee], and by his Brother [William] might p[ro]perly be moovd [on Northumberland's behalf]' (Potter to Northumberland, 21 June 1645, Alnwick Castle, Duke of Northumberland MSS, P.I.3q). In December 1645 the committee wrote to Nottingham corporation recommending Pierrepont as a recruiter MP for the town, and at some point during the winter of 1645-6 he was elected accordingly. On first taking his seat in the Commons, in September 1646, he received the thanks of the house for his 'many great Services done to the Parliament' ('JHC', 4.665). 
Despite his industry in parliament's northern affairs, Pierrepont was named to only nine committees before Pride's Purge, and spent most of the period between autumn 1647 and July 1649 away from the Commons. The strongest evidence of his alignment with the Independent interest at Westminster is his presence among those MPs who fled to the army after the presbyterian counter-revolution in London late in July 1647. He seems to have been far more active on the Nottinghamshire county committee during 1647-9 than he was at Westminster. Although not among those MPs secluded at Pride's Purge, he played no part in the trial and execution of the king -- both of which he almost certainly opposed -- and it was not until 7 May 1649 that he was admitted to the Rump. 
Pierrepont was named to twenty-six committees in the Rump -- the majority between May and August 1649 -- including the army and excise committees. A significant proportion of his appointments were to committees for improving or managing the Commonwealth's finances and the maintenance of its armed forces. According to Lucy Hutchinson, he was involved in presbyterian plotting against the Rump, and was only spared punishment by the intercession of her husband, Colonel John Hutchinson. In the absence of any corroborating evidence, this story must be treated with caution. Pierrepont certainly favoured presbyterianism, helping to establish a presbyterian ministry at St Mary's, Nottingham, in the early 1650s, and becoming a patron of the town's presbyterian congregation on High Pavement in 1656. But politically Pierrepont was closer to the Independents. It is revealing that he withdrew from public life at both national and local level not in 1649 but in 1653, following the dissolution of the Rump. When he was picked for sheriff in 1656, his brother William wrote to the lord chief justice, Oliver St John, pleading for his discharge on grounds of conscience: 'My brother and I doe very much honour my lord protector [Oliver Cromwell], and are most desirous to doe him service, but in this wee cannot' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 4.469). 
Francis Pierrepont died on 30 January 1658, and was buried at St Mary's, Nottingham, on 18 March. In his will, he charged his estate -- reckoned to be worth $5000 a year -- with portions of $6000 for each of his two surviving daughters. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, Robert, who represented Nottingham in every parliament between 1660 and 1681, and was generally identified as an opponent of the court interest. 


@@@@@


doc= 94586


Hippisley, Sir John (d. 1655), politician, was the third son of William Hippisley (died 1630), of Marston Bigot, Somerset; his mother, of whom further details are unknown, was a daughter of one Burley of the Isle of Wight. Hippisley was the scion of a junior branch of a family that had secured gentry status with the purchase by his grandfather in 1544 of former monastic lands in Ston Easton, Somerset. His uncle, John Hippesley ('b'. before 1530, died 1570), a successful lawyer, had represented both Bridport and Wells in the early Elizabethan parliaments. John Hippisley's first wife was Margaret (died in or before 1615), daughter of Thomas Antrobus of Heath House, Petersfield, Hampshire; the couple had no children. His second wife, whom he married on 16 March 1615, was Katherine Norton ('d. c'.1659), daughter of Sir Richard Norton of East Tisted, Hampshire. The couple had one daughter, who predeceased them. 
A younger son, of slender fortune, Hippisley took service with the prominent Roman Catholic sympathizer Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, and was implicated in the Gunpowder Plot and briefly imprisoned. He was knighted, on 14 April 1617, at about the time he left Northumberland's employ to become 'a principal favourite' of the royal favourite, George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham (Chamberlain, 2.152). Hippisley owed his appointment as keeper of Bushy Park, near Hampton Court, and as a royal equerry, to the duke's patronage. Between his return for Petersfield to the parliaments of 1621 and 1624 (on the interest of the Nortons), he accompanied Charles and Buckingham to Madrid to woo the infanta. Following Buckingham's appointment as lord warden of the Cinque Ports in 1624, Hippisley was made deputy warden and lieutenant-governor of Dover. He was returned for Dover to the parliaments of 1625, 1626, and 1628-9, in which he and Buckingham were repeatedly criticized for illegally detaining foreign vessels and profiteering from the sale of prizes. It was not until 1639 that he obtained a royal pardon for his 'Dover offences... the sommes laid in charge [against him] amounted to $411,000' ('Report on the Manuscripts of Lord De L'Isle and Dudley', 6.192). His final duty as one of Buckingham's 'most slavish dependents' was in August 1628, when he broke the news to Charles of the duke's assassination ('CSP Venice, 1626-8', 571). Shortly thereafter he sold his lieutenant-governorship to Sir Edward Dering. 
Having failed to secure Hippisley's return for Dover to the Short Parliament in 1640, Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland, found him a seat at the newly re-enfranchised Cumberland borough of Cockermouth in spring 1641. Hippisley's career in the Long Parliament began slowly. He was named to just fifteen committees before the outbreak of civil war, the majority of which related to securing London and Middlesex for parliament. His apparent belief in the existence of a high-level popish plot, and his support for tough measures against Catholics, served to distance him from the court interest. But if he was associated with any political grouping at Westminster it was not the puritan interest but Northumberland and his fellow estranged courtiers, the earls of Pembroke and Salisbury. He was a leading member of the same church congregation as these lords -- that of St Martin-in-the-Fields -- and was elected to the parish vestry in 1641. Hippisley may well have acted as the eyes and ears of Northumberland and his friends after the Commons gave him leave in July 1642 to attend the court for a month. He was back in the house by late August, when he declared his readiness to support parliament with life and estate. His time at court had apparently left him unconvinced that the king could be trusted to stand firm against popery. 
Hippisley's parliamentary activities during the first year of the civil war are broadly consistent with the political concerns of Northumberland and the peace party. In November 1642 he was included on the parliamentary delegation, headed by Northumberland, to present an offer of peace to the king. On 9 August 1643 he was named to a committee for thanking the women who had flocked to Westminster a few days earlier in support of the doomed attempt by Northumberland and his allies to secure a peace settlement before the Scottish covenanters entered the civil war. In general, however, Hippisley seems to have been more active at Westminster in promoting the earl's personal business than his political agenda. He evidently sided with Northumberland and his fellow political Independents in their power struggle in 1645 with the presbyterian vicar of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Daniel Cawdrey. 
Most of Hippisley's committee nominations and tellerships between 1643 and 1648 reveal little of his political allegiance. The same is also true of his appointment as a parliamentary commissioner to present the Newcastle propositions to the king in July 1646. In August 1647 he was granted leave to attend the king -- probably as Northumberland's agent in the Independents' attempts to secure Charles's acceptance of the 'Heads of Proposals'. On 2 August 1648 he and John Bulkeley were chosen to inform Charles of parliament's decision to hold an unconditional treaty with him at Newport, on the Isle of Wight. Hippisley was known to remain in good odour with the king and could speak for Northumberland, who was a prime mover behind the treaty. 
On 13 December 1648, a week after Pride's Purge, Hippisley arrived at the Commons only to be turned away by army officers -- probably because he had favoured the Newport treaty. He played no part in the king's trial and execution. But the regicide did not deter him from seeking admission to the Rump, which he secured on 12 February 1649. On 7 March he was named to a committee on a bill for abolishing kingship. Hippisley was apparently more active after Pride's Purge than he had been before it. He was named to almost fifty committees in the Rump, and served as a teller in nine divisions. Several of his tellerships suggest his alignment with MPs who wished to preserve as much of the established order as possible. Allegations that he was among a group of conservative Rumpers who were party to Christopher Love's presbyterian conspiracy in 1651 were groundless, but revealing of his perceived political sympathies. Nevertheless, he showed few qualms about purchasing crown and church lands. The majority of his committee appointments in the Rump related to diplomatic affairs, the maintenance of the armed forces, and the sale of royal estates. His involvement in nominating ministers to vacant livings, and his addition to the committees for plundered ministers and reforming the universities, imply support on his part for promoting a learned preaching ministry. 
Hippisley's public career ended with the dissolution of the Rump in April 1653. He died in 1655, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 4 September of that year. In his will he left the bulk of his estate to his widow, who died about 1659. 


@@@@@


doc= 94588


Sanders, Thomas (bap. 1610, d. 1695), parliamentarian soldier and politician, was baptized on 19 August 1610 at All Saints' Church, Caldwell, Derbyshire, the first son of Collingwood Sanders (1578-1653) of Caldwell, and his wife, Elizabeth Sleigh, daughter of Edmund Sleigh, of Little Ireton, Derbyshire. His great-grandfather -- the scion of a Surrey gentry family -- had settled in Derbyshire by the early sixteenth century, and his grandfather had acquired the manor of Caldwell in Elizabeth's reign, and Little Ireton and other nearby properties in the early seventeenth century. Sanders was educated at Derby and Repton grammar schools, before being admitted to the Inner Temple on 12 July 1633. In 1640 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Goring of Booth, Staffordshire, with whom he had five sons and two daughters. 
Early in 1642 Sanders signed a petition from the Derbyshire gentry, urging the king to return to Westminster 'for the Reformation of those great grievances which had crept both into the Church and Common Wealth' (Sitwell, 22-3). In February he and his father signed a petition from the county to the Commons, calling for the advancement of the 'blessed work of Reformation' (Parl. Arch., 26 March 1642, Main papers, fol. 65). That autumn he was commissioned as a captain of dragoons in the regiment of Derbyshire's parliamentarian commander, Sir John Gell. Among the men Sanders recruited for his troop was the godly minister Nathaniel Barton. Friction between Sanders and Gell prompted Sanders to accept a commission in April 1643 as a lieutenant-colonel in the foot regiment of the Staffordshire parliamentarian Richard Haughton. When Derby was threatened the following month by the king's forces, Sanders allegedly sent back his colours and commission to Gell and refused to come to his assistance. In autumn 1643, he raised a regiment of horse in Derbyshire of which Gell was made colonel, but on the understanding that Sanders, as major, should exercise actual command so long as he observed Gell's 'reasonable desires' (Derbys. RO, D1232/O/30). Sanders commissioned Barton as one of his captains. In October 1643 Sanders was added to the Derbyshire county committee, of which he became a leading member. Predictably, the confused command structure between Sanders and Gell soon collapsed. Sanders and his officers complained to parliament that Gell was using his influence on the county committee to favour his own troops. Sanders was also critical of the appointment of Gell's brother, Thomas, as recorder of Derby in December 1644, declaring him deficient in legal knowledge and honesty, and a favourer of 'malignants' (ibid., D1232/O/9a). Sir John Gell hit back by traducing Sanders as a 'Brownist' and a coward (ibid., D1232/O/9b). The Gells presented charges against Sanders to the earl of Essex early in 1645, and placed him, briefly, under house arrest for refusing a new commission from the earl that would have left him entirely under Gell's command. For their part, Sanders and his friends solicited the help of Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax, and his son Sir Thomas Fairfax, the commander of the New Model Army. As a result of this quarrel, Nathaniel Barton was effectively driven out of Derbyshire and joined the New Model, while Sanders himself took service under Sir William Brereton in Cheshire. Brereton tried to enlist the help of the Independent grandees Oliver St John and Sir Henry Vane junior on Sanders's behalf, praising his regiment as 'most serviceable... and worthy of encouragement, many of the officers and men being godly men and such as serve out of conscience... there is not any regiment that I know in the kingdom which might be more useful and faithful to you' (Dore, 126). Although Sanders has been labelled a religious Independent, the evidence suggests that he favoured a national presbyterian church with toleration for tender consciences. His friends in the ministry were willing to certify in 1645 that he was neither an Independent nor a separatist. 
Having failed in 1646 to take his regiment into the New Model, Sanders was serving by September 1647 as a major in Francis Thornhagh's regiment of Nottinghamshire horse. In spring and summer 1648 he assisted Cromwell in suppressing royalist uprisings along the Welsh border, and in securing the region for parliament. It is very likely that he fought at the battle of Preston on 17 August; and when Thornhagh was killed in action the next day, Sanders was appointed colonel in his place. 
Sanders, like Barton, attended the Whitehall debates on the 'Agreement of the People' in December 1648. His voting pattern indicates that while he agreed with Henry Ireton and other 'conservative' officers in allowing parliament to have the final word on moral issues, he desired 'a reserve concerning religion' (Taft, 'Voting lists', 148) -- a concession to the Levellers' demand that toleration and other key liberties were inalienable rights. Early in December, his regiment petitioned Fairfax, requesting that 'justice might take place upon all, from the highest to the lowest, from the King to the meanest Subject' ('Declarations and humble representations', 7 Dec 1648). It was reported in January 1649 that Sanders and Barton 'censure the king deeply' ('Ninth Report', 3 vols., HMC, 8, 1883-4, pt 2, 394). Sanders saw active service again in the Worcester campaign in 1651, and he and his regiment served a brief tour of duty in Scotland during the early 1650s. Sanders was evidently an admirer of Cromwell at this stage, telling him that 'God hath made you the man of his right hand, stronge and successeful for himself, [His] cause, and saints' (Nickolls, 22). 
In the elections to the first protectoral parliament in 1654, Sanders and Barton were among the four men returned for Derbyshire. In mid-September 1654, however, following the protectoral council's efforts to exclude opponents of the government, Sanders joined Colonel Matthew Alured, Colonel John Okey, Colonel Francis Hacker, the former Leveller John Wildman, and Vice-Admiral John Lawson in plotting the overthrow of the protectorate. The conspiracy was quickly broken by Secretary John Thurloe, and its only upshot was a petition, drafted by Wildman, attacking the protectoral settlement. Intended for general circulation in the army, the petition had only been signed by Alured, Okey, and Sanders when it was seized by the government. 
Addressed to the protector, 'The Petition of Several Colonels', as it came to be known, declaimed against Cromwell's king-like control over a standing army and his negative voice upon the legislature, and demanded 'constant successive Parliaments, to be equally and freely chosen by the People... And that nothing should be imposed upon or taken from the People but by their Parliaments' (Saunders, Okey, and Allured). The petition concluded by asking for a 'full and truly free Parliament' to settle the government according to the 'Fundamental Rights... proposed to the late Parliament [the Rump] by the General Councel of the Army in the 'Agreement of the People'' (ibid.) -- the version of the 'Agreement' that emerged from the Whitehall debates in the winter of 1648-9. The petition's discovery resulted in the cashiering or resignation of the three colonels who had signed it. 
Despite his opposition to the Cromwellian regime, Sanders retained his place on the Derbyshire and Staffordshire benches. In autumn 1655 he was appointed to the Derbyshire commission to assist Major-General Edward Whalley in administering the decimation tax, but he refused to serve. Whalley believed that Sanders was 'a good man, but too much over-persuaded by Col. Barton' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 4.241). Returned for one of the county seats in the elections to the second protectoral parliament in 1656, he was excluded from the house as an opponent of the protectorate. In the elections to Richard Cromwell's parliament of 1659, he was returned for Derbyshire again, but there is no evidence that he ever took his seat. He apparently approved of the army's dissolution of the protectorate in April 1659, and by the end of that month he had been restored to the command of his horse regiment. In July the restored Rump agreed to his request that Barton serve as his major. 
In August 1659 Sanders and Barton helped to suppress the Derbyshire component of Sir George Boothe's royalist-presbyterian rebellion. However, Sanders's lenient treatment of the insurgents prompted suspicion that he was complicit in their design, or at least sympathetic to their demands for a 'free' parliament. In September Sanders and Barton joined Okey, Hacker, and other officers in denouncing a petition that Lambert's forces had sent to parliament, demanding the establishment of a senate to offset the power of the legislature. This same group opposed the army's dissolution of the restored Rump in mid-October 1659. In a petition to Lieutenant-General Charles Fleetwood on 1 November, Sanders, Barton, Alured, Okey, and several other officers remonstrated that it had never been part of the good old cause 'to wrest all power and authority out of the hands of the people's representatives in parliament, and to fix it in the army' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 7.773). They insisted that the army should be subordinate to parliament, and demanded the holding of new elections on as broad a franchise 'as the safety of the cause will bear' (ibid., 7.774). The petitioners were removed from their commands, and Sanders's estate was seized pending his trial on charges of abetting Boothe's rebellion. The committee of safety evidently regarded Sanders and Barton as a security threat, for at some point in November or December they were imprisoned at Coventry. When the Rump was restored again late in December 1659, it gave order for the two men's release, whereupon Sanders took charge of disarming the opponents of parliament in Derbyshire and Staffordshire. With the approval of General George Monck, the Rump gave Sanders a new regiment of horse and restored Barton as his major. Sanders and Barton had joined Monck in London by 10 February 1660, when, 'as two Officers that very much inclined to Admission of the Secluded Members [the MPs secluded at Pride's Purge]' (Baker, 685), they were consulted by the general about whether to pressure the Rump into issuing writs for new elections. 
Sanders lost all his offices at the Restoration, but having retained only a 'few small rents' of the crown lands he had purchased with army debentures in the 1650s, he was required to relinquish very little of his estate (TNA: PRO, E 113/11, unfol.). Allegations that he and Barton were involved in fomenting rebellion in 1664 were not substantiated. In 1672 Sanders's houses at Little Ireton and Caldwell were licensed as presbyterian meeting places, and the ejected presbyterian minister Samuel Ogden was licensed to preach at Little Ireton. In the wake of the Rye House plot in 1683, Sanders was required to enter a $2000 bond for his good behaviour. He died in summer 1695, and was buried at Mugginton, Derbyshire, on 15 August 1695. In his will he charged his estate -- which included the manors of Caldwell and Little Ireton, lands in the surrounding parishes, and a messuage in the parish of All Saints, Derby -- with portions of $3300 for his younger daughters. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 94589


Meyer, Sir Anthony John Charles, third baronet (1920-2004), diplomatist and politician, was born on 27 October 1920 at 33 Connaught Square, London, the only child of Sir Frank Cecil Meyer, second baronet (1886-1935), businessman and politician, and his wife, (Marjorie Amy) Georgina, 'nee' Seeley (died 1961), second daughter of Frederick Seeley, of Hale, Cheshire. His father was London chairman of De Beers, a director of the National Bank of Egypt, and Conservative MP for Great Yarmouth from 1924 to 1929. His father (Anthony's grandfather), Sir Carl Ferdinard Meyer, first baronet (1851-1922), a Jewish immigrant from Hamburg who had made his fortune with the Rothschilds, was given the baronetcy in 1910 after a sizeable donation to the project for the building of a national theatre. 
In 1935, eight days before his fifteenth birthday, and while still a student at Eton College, Meyer inherited the baronetcy on his father's death in a riding accident. His university career at New College, Oxford, was curtailed by the outbreak of the Second World War. He joined the Scots Guards, but while serving as a first lieutenant near Caen in July 1944 he was struck by shrapnel, which lodged near his spine. Wound infection meant he had to spend the rest of the war in hospital, where he was helped back to health by his wife, Barbadee Violet, 'nee' Knight (the only child of Athro Charles Knight, solicitor), whom he had married in Eton College chapel on 30 October 1941, when she was nineteen and he twenty-one. They had three daughters, Carolyn ('b'. 1943), Tessa ('b'. 1955), and Sally ('b'. 1961), and a son, Ashley ('b'. 1944). 
Meyer's military experience convinced him both of the futility of war and of the need for political integration in Europe. After demobilization, rather than returning to Oxford he entered the civil service, via a temporary post at the Treasury, transferring to the foreign service in 1947, and serving as first secretary at the Paris embassy for five enjoyable years between 1951 and 1956. A posting to Moscow was cut short after the KGB had attempted to compromise him. On his return to London he served first in the economic relations department (1956-8) and then in the western organizations department (1958-62) of the Foreign Office. 
In 1962 Meyer resigned from the Foreign Office to pursue a political career. After a short spell as director of research for the Common Market Campaign, he sprang a surprise at the 1964 general election, gaining the marginal seat of Eton and Slough for the Conservatives from the Labour incumbent -- the left-winger Fenner Brockway -- by eleven votes. During his short spell in parliament (he was defeated by Joan Lestor at the 1966 general election) he quickly gained a reputation as a liberal, voting to abolish the death penalty and in favour of oil sanctions against Rhodesia. Such a reputation made it hard for him to gain selection for another seat, but at the sixth attempt, and with the help of the retiring MP, Nigel Birch, he returned to parliament in 1970 as MP for West Flintshire. In 1972 he was appointed parliamentary private secretary to his close friend Maurice Macmillan, first as chief secretary to the Treasury, and then (until the Conservatives' defeat in the 1974 general election) as secretary of state for employment. It would be Meyer's only post in government. 
Instead, Meyer reinforced his reputation as an independent-minded back-bencher, calling for a coalition government to be headed by Roy Jenkins after the first general election of 1974, and defying the Tory whip on devolution a few years later. In 1982 he opposed the use of force in the Falkland Islands, 'just to ensure that the Union Jack -- the Union Jack alone -- flies over what would be left of public buildings' (Meyer, 89). Such was the right-wing chagrin at Meyer's behaviour that Beata Brookes, a Thatcherite member of the European parliament, attempted to oust him from his redrawn Clwyd North West constituency in 1983. Meyer took the matter to court, and won. 
As early as 1985 Meyer was calling for Margaret Thatcher to step down as tory leader. He was everything that she despised about the old tory party: a self-confessed 'old-fashioned, sloppy wet' ('The Times', 8 Jan 2005), and a passionate advocate of closer British integration in Europe. Indeed, it was Meyer's immense frustration with Thatcher's policy on Europe, particularly in the late 1980s, that provoked him to stand against her for the Conservative leadership in November 1989, her first challenge in fifteen years. He described himself as a 'burnt offering' rather than a stalking horse, hoping that a more senior figure would mount a challenge (Meyer, 163). In the event, no one else was prepared to stand. The press derided him as 'Sir Nobody' and 'the stalking donkey' (ibid.). But Meyer, who never lacked courage, persisted. Thatcher's margin of victory -- 314 votes to 33, with 24 spoiled ballot papers (and three non-voters) -- was seen as clear-cut at the time. However, sixty MPs, one sixth of the parliamentary party, had refused to back the prime minister. In retrospect, Meyer's challenge punctured Thatcher's apparent invincibility; or, as Meyer commented later, 'It made the unthinkable thinkable' ('The Times', 8 Jan 2005). Indeed, it was the start of a process that led to a much more serious, and ultimately decisive, challenge the following year. 
Retribution against Meyer was swift. He was ostracized by many parliamentary colleagues and deselected (by 206 votes to 107) by his local constituency association. Media revelations followed of his twenty-five-year relationship with Simone Washington, a West Indian model and blues singer. After leaving parliament in 1992 he remained committed to the European cause as a patron of the European-Atlantic Movement, a policy director of the European Movement, and the author of 'A Federal Europe: Why Not' (1992). (He had published the semi-autobiographical 'Stand Up and Be Counted' two years previously.) However, his support for the Pro-European Conservative Party at the 1999 European parliamentary elections resulted in complete failure. In any event, Meyer had never relied on politics for his living, having inherited a considerable fortune on the death of his mother, and also earning an income as a Lloyd's underwriter. He died at his home, 9 Cottage Place, Chelsea, London, on 24 December 2004, of colonic cancer. He was survived by his wife, Barbadee, and their four children, and was succeeded as baronet by his son, Ashley. 


@@@@@


doc= 94596


Newell, Norman (1919-2004), record producer and songwriter, was born at 34 Liddon Road, Plaistow, London, on 25 January 1919, the son of Sydney Edward Newell, boiler stoker and later foreman road builder, and his wife, Mary Louisa, 'nee' Burke. His father, who had served as a private in the labour corps during the First World War, suffered premature blindness, and as a consequence Newell's mother was forced to support the family on a meagre income. Illness blighted Newell's early life, and a bout of scarlet fever forced him to miss the eleven-plus examination. He went on to excel at poetry and English at his secondary school in Plaistow but at fourteen he left and took a job in the offices of the local bus garage at Upton Park. 
In 1937 Newell joined the Royal Artillery. While spending much of the Second World War stationed at Yeovil, organizing shows and revues for the troops, he befriended the comedian Bill Waddington (later Percy Sugden in ITV's 'Coronation Street'), writing lyrics for Waddington's stage music. Once the war had ended, a further spell in hospital found Newell in the same ward as Waddington. When he recovered he was able to follow up Waddington's recommendation to apply for a position at the Cinephonic Music Publishers in Charing Cross Road. He was ostensibly employed to sell sheet music, but when a Cinephonic songwriter fell ill he was encouraged to try his hand at songwriting. His first song to be published was 'My Lovely World and You', and the best known of his early songs was 'Nice to Know You Care' (1949), a collaboration with the pianist Leslie Baguley, recorded by Tommy Dorsey and later by the Dallas Boys and Tony Brent. 
The British popular music industry of the immediate post-war era was heavily reliant on American songs, and the emergence of a writer with potential ensured a rapid rise. Despite never having produced a record, in 1949 Newell was poached by the recording giant EMI for the position of staff producer at Columbia Records. At this stage Columbia was a British record label in name only and nearly all of its releases were the result of licensing deals with its American namesake, which EMI had sold off in the 1930s. Early in the 1950s, however, this complex series of licences began to lapse and Newell found that he had to search for fresh British talent to keep Columbia active -- effectively placing him in the position not only of staff producer but also of head of artists and repertoire. As a consequence he assembled a formidable array of British popular music recording stars. His first recording production, 'Put your Shoes on Lucy' (1949), was for his protegee Petula Clark, who was reinventing herself as a popular singer after outgrowing a juvenile acting career. Clark only recorded four songs with Newell and by 1952 had moved away from Columbia, but her association with Newell was the foundation of her success as a popular singer. She later went on to record many hits for Pye Records, but her version of the continental hit 'Sailor' (1961, with English lyrics written by Newell under the pseudonym of David West) gave her a second lease of life in the British charts. 
Newell's first hit record as a producer came in 1950 with 'Les Trois Cloches', recorded by the French male voice choir Les Compagnons de la Chanson. He was also successful with the Irish tenor Josef Locke (notably with his 'Goodbye', 1947), the whistler Ronnie Ronalde, the Beverley Sisters (whom he discovered), Dorothy Squires, and the strict-tempo dance orchestra of Victor Sylvester. He also discovered the balladeer Steve Conway, who had a sizeable hit with Newell's composition 'My Thanks to You' in 1950. In 1953, after a somewhat frustrating period with EMI, who were allegedly paying him a meagre $11 per week, Newell tried his luck as a songwriter for MGM in the USA. It was an unsuccessful and unremarkable period for Newell, who returned home after only six months. On his return to the UK, Decca Records attempted to poach him, but to no avail. His return to Columbia in 1954 coincided with another major hit record, the comedian Norman Wisdom's straight ballad 'Don't Laugh at Me'. One of Newell's biggest signings for Columbia was the pianist Russ Conway, who recorded twenty instrumental hit singles between 1957 and 1962, including two number ones in 1959, 'Side Saddle' and 'Roulette'. While never professing an affiliation with rock and roll, Newell grasped the significance of the new music, and in the latter half of the 1950s also produced albums of music from the television shows '6.5 Special' and 'Drumbeat' for another EMI imprint, 'Parlophone', which achieved sizeable sales. He brought together Adam Faith and the arranger John Barry, and together they made the hit record of 1959, 'What Do You Want?' 
Following a licence deal struck by Philips with Columbia (CBS) Newell's residual agreements with the American giant enabled him to produce British recordings for Philips while retaining his position at EMI. It was for Philips in 1957 that he first recorded the young black British singer Shirley Bassey. That same year he recorded the thirteen-year-old Laurie London singing 'He's Got the Whole World in His Hands' for EMI, with a musical arrangement by his friend and colleague Geoff Love. It was with Newell that Love went on to record several easy-listening albums with massive sales under the titles 'Manuel' and 'Manuel and his Music of the Mountains'. 'Manuel' also enjoyed singles chart successes (with Newell again producing) with 'The Honeymoon Song' in 1959 and 'Never on a Sunday' in 1960. Newell's English lyrics to the continental hit songs of the early 1960s 'Portrait of My Love' and 'More' were undoubtedly among his most significant contributions to popular music. Indeed Matt Monro's recording of 'Portrait of My Love' (1960) was one of the most memorable British popular music records of the twentieth century -- a perfect blend of the creative, the technical, and the human. Newell used more than thirty-five different pseudonyms for his song-writing credits, later explaining that 'it might seem that I would be using undue influence if I got my artists to record my songs' (private information). 
Newell was not a major player in the musical sea changes of the 1960s but he was credited with the discovery of the duo Peter and Gordon after seeing them at the Pickwick Club in London, and although he was not responsible for any of the Beatles' recordings on EMI's 'Parlophone' label, John Lennon, Paul McCartney, and George Harrison were welcome guests at Newell's home. He did have an ear for the unexpected, however, and produced several successful Jake Thackray albums for Columbia: after seeing Thackray on the BBC television show 'That's Life' Newell moulded him into a unique and talented recording troubadour. Newell also produced the top-selling single of 1965, 'Tears', by the Liverpool comedian Ken Dodd, and followed this by helping to restore the fortunes of another Liverpool entertainer, Frankie Vaughan, in 1967 with a hit recording of the old song 'There Must Be a Way'. He also created an unlikely pop star out of the comedian Des O'Connor, providing him between 1967 and 1970 with a stream of Dean Martin-sounding hit productions. 
By this time, however, Newell's major achievement -- at least within EMI -- was centred more on his recordings of the Sadler's Wells Opera Company. When in 1958 Sadler's Wells achieved a London success with 'The Merry Widow' Newell secured the rights to record an LP of highlights. The following year he made a hugely successful recording of highlights from the Sadler's Wells production of 'Madame Butterfly'. Sales of these two LPs were so good that he continued to record Sadler's Wells over the next six years, producing twelve further recordings and capturing the Sadler's Wells Company at a sparkling moment in its long history. When EMI and Paul Hamlyn Publishing jointly launched their budget 'Music for Pleasure' label in 1965 Newell began recording cover versions of West End shows, enabling in the process a stream of original cast recording copyrights to flow into EMI. These became the mainstay of the company's light music catalogue for many years and made Newell, already well respected at EMI, something of an exemplar. 
Newell finally left EMI in the late 1960s, becoming, like George Martin before him, a freelance producer. He continued to work with Geoff Love and Shirley Bassey. Of his productions with the latter in the early 1970s -- a successful period that witnessed Bassey's return to the singles charts after a long absence -- Bassey avowed, 'Norman knows more about me than I do. Every line of 'This Is My Life' was written with me in mind' (private information). Certainly Bassey's recordings of two Newell songs from this period ('Never, Never, Never' and 'This Is My Life') were ageless. 
Despite several casual projects such as an album with Bette Davis in the 1980s, Newell's later life was markedly less demanding. Technically he 'retired' in 1990 to his home in Rustington, Sussex, but he continued working with various artists including Les Reed until three years before his death. His house was crowded with awards that included a Grammy, an Emmy, a Golden Globe, three Ivor Novello awards, and six BMI awards. (He had also received an Oscar nomination for his lyrics to the song 'More' in 1963.) Following a series of debilitating strokes in 2001 he was forced to move to a local nursing home, Rustington Hall, close to the home of his long-term friend and agent Alan Lockey. It was there that he received his insignia as OBE in February 2004 from the lord lieutenant of Sussex, and there too that he died on 1 December 2004. He had never married, and had no children. 
Newell was one of the great British popular music stalwarts of the late twentieth century. Not only did he achieve success by means of his own abilities in songwriting, but his production methods and talent spotting created long-term careers both nationally and internationally for numerous British performers. He was an important conduit in a creative industry that thrived on networks, and his honesty and integrity were exemplary in a business frequently accused of manipulation. His success demonstrated that the music industry remained a 'people' industry and that 'vertical integration' (of songwriting, talent spotting, production, and so on) was a profitable system in both economic and artistic terms. 


@@@@@


doc= 94597


Ogilvy, Sir Angus James Bruce (1928-2004), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 14 September 1928 at 47 Park Street, London, the second son of David Lyulph Gore Wolseley Ogilvy, seventh or thirteenth earl of Airlie (1893-1968), and his wife, Lady Alexandra Marie Bridget, 'nee' Coke (1895-1984), daughter of the third earl of Leicester. His family was steeped in Scottish history and royal service. The eleventh earl had been lord-in-waiting to George V and lord chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother; his older brother, who became eighth or fourteenth earl, was later lord chamberlain to Elizabeth II between 1984 and 1997. Ogilvy's boyhood was spent between London and Cortachy Castle, the family seat near Kirriemuir, Angus. He was educated at Heatherdown, near Ascot, Eton College, and Trinity College, Oxford. Between Eton and Oxford he did national service in the Scots Guards (1946-8). He graduated from Oxford in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1950. Having left Oxford he was talent-spotted by Harley Drayton, the colourful City financier. For the next twenty-five years he was a successful businessman who focused on real estate and rose rapidly to become director and subsequently chairman of several Drayton companies. He impressed those with whom he worked not only by his personal charm but also by his quick grasp of the essence of business. 
On 24 April 1963 Ogilvy married, at Westminster Abbey, Princess Alexandra of Kent ('b'. 1936), a first cousin of the queen and daughter of Prince George, first duke of Kent, and Princess Marina of Greece and of Denmark. They had two children: James and Marina. At the time of the marriage Ogilvy turned down the offer of an earldom and resolved to create by his own exertions sufficient income to enable the princess to live in the style for which her position called. As a first step he acquired a long lease of Thatched House Lodge in Richmond Park, which remained the family home throughout his life. Ogilvy and the princess entertained formally and informally both there and at their grace-and-favour apartment in St James's Palace through forty-one years of a very happy marriage. 
In the early 1960s an ugly cloud began to descend on Ogilvy's business life. In 1961 he was sent by Drayton to southern Africa with the aim of reviving the London and Rhodesian Mining and Land Company (then L and R, subsequently renamed Lonrho). On this trip he met a charismatic Anglo-German entrepreneur, R. W. (Tiny) Rowland, and became convinced of Rowland's ability to rescue and develop Lonrho. Ogilvy persuaded his Drayton colleagues and it was agreed that Lonrho would acquire Rowland's company, Shepton Estates, in return for which Rowland received 1.5 million Lonrho shares. In this deal Ogilvy also received a block of Lonrho shares. Rowland deployed his magic on Lonrho and received appropriate applause. However, his aggressive business tactics and boardroom duplicity also increasingly upset the City establishment. The last straw was an accusation of breaking sanctions which had been imposed on Rhodesia following the country's unilateral declaration of independence in 1965. The resulting malaise rumbled on for several years in the course of which Ogilvy distanced himself gradually, but perhaps not sufficiently, from Rowland and Lonrho. Though he stepped down from the boards of Lonrho's Rhodesian subsidiaries he did not resign as a director of the company -- despite private advice to do so -- until April 1973. 
Matters came to a head in July 1976 when inspectors appointed by the Department for Trade and Industry accused Ogilvy (and other directors) of negligence in the performance of his non-executive duties and of weakness and indecision in his business relationship with Rowland. Arcane rules prevented Ogilvy from defending himself although in late 1977 the director of public prosecutions explicitly cleared him of wrongdoing. Nevertheless Ogilvy's links with Rowland had been sufficiently close for him to deem it wise to offer his resignation from the Drayton organization and all other boards on which he served. That this honourable gesture -- partly inspired by his wish not to embarrass the royal family -- was turned down by several of the companies concerned (while others, notably GEC and Sothebys, lost no time in inviting him to join their boards) proved that the corporate governance issues involved were in no way cast in stone. Indeed, the way the inspectors expressed their views in their report was strongly criticized at the time by the chairman of the London stock exchange, among others. 
Following the Lonrho affair Ogilvy threw himself into philanthropic pursuits. However, rather than spread his commitment thinly over a variety of charities he chose one cause in which he believed passionately and which gradually became a full-time substitute for his previous commitment to business. The chosen charity was the Prince's Trust. This had its origins in the National Association of Youth Clubs (later known as Youth Clubs UK) which Ogilvy had chaired since 1964, and which by 1976 had amalgamated with the Prince of Wales's Youth Business Initiative and in 1988 became the Prince's Youth Business Trust. The charity's role was to create employment for tens of thousands of young unemployed people by giving them modest grants and loans with which to start their businesses, as well as guidance from volunteer businessmen and women on how to run and develop them. Under Ogilvy's leadership very large sums were raised from wealthy entrepreneurs and companies in the UK and abroad, whose interest Ogilvy encouraged with great success. In one single year (1988), that of the prince of Wales's fortieth birthday, Ogilvy raised the huge sum of $80 million. He accomplished this by persuading government ministers, who little suspected what was in store, to match pound for pound the funds he planned to raise. He then surprised Whitehall with a bill for $40 million, which was duly paid. In spite of his absorption in this task Ogilvy also found time for honorary activities with other charities such as Arthritis Care (of which he was president, 1963-9), the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (president, 1964-94), and the Leeds Castle Foundation, of which he became a trustee in 1975. He was also a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths. 
Ogilvy was a workaholic in business and philanthropy, often putting in a twelve-hour working day, lunching at his desk, and dictating letters until late at night. He placed great importance on personal interaction, handwriting innumerable letters on behalf of his causes, and infecting others with his natural enthusiasm. His down-to-earth and self-deprecating personality, coupled with more than a dash of worldliness, made him a stimulating companion -- unaffected, inquisitive, and helpful. In difficult situations his natural Scottish charm always came to the rescue. One such situation arose in 1990 when his daughter, Marina, who was then unmarried, became pregnant and gave an account of her family's reaction to a national newspaper. The happy outcome -- Marina and her partner were married and the family subsequently reconciled -- owed much to Ogilvy's calmness. Another notable occasion, illustrative of his ability to rise above events, occurred several days after the publication of the Department for Trade and Industry's report in 1976 when he and the princess made a scheduled appearance at a Youth Club event at London's Hilton Hotel. Ogilvy faced a battery of paparazzi when many people in similar circumstances would have excused themselves. 
Ogilvy had been plagued by poor health since his time at Oxford, though he never let this interfere with his work nor his activities as a royal husband. Indeed, from the day he married and more particularly after his withdrawal from business, he accompanied Princess Alexandra on numerous foreign visits. One of his charming eccentricities, caused by the need to fight constant back pain, was riding a bicycle through London with an elegant briefcase strapped to the saddle. His attitude to health was mildly influenced by his early upbringing as a Christian Scientist, a religion to which both his parents were devoted, but which he himself gave up for the Church of England in his teens. 
In 1989 the queen appointed Ogilvy KCVO and in 1997 he was sworn of the privy council, honours that drew a firm line under the events of the 1970s and demonstrated her support. Ogilvy suffered his final and very painful illness with enormous courage and continued to devote himself to menial tasks of fund-raising when others would have given up. After treatment for throat cancer he died on 26 December 2004 from pneumonia and cancer at Kingston Hospital, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, and was buried on 5 January 2005 at Frogmore burial ground, Windsor Home Park, after a funeral service in St George's Chapel, Windsor. He was survived by the princess and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94598


Pantridge, James Francis (1916-2004), cardiologist and inventor, was born on 3 October 1916 on the outskirts of the village of Hillsborough, co. Down, Northern Ireland, the son of Robert James Pantridge, a small landowner and farmer who died when Pantridge was ten years old, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' McCandless. He had one younger brother, Herbert, and a sister, Emily. He was educated at the village school and then at the Friends' school in the nearby market town of Lisburn. He entered Queen's University, Belfast, in 1934 to study medicine, qualifying in June 1939. He was a talented medical student who had the highest principles and did not suffer some of his teachers' shortcomings easily. In his final clinical examination in medicine he made a diagnosis of pleural effusion, but was told by the examiner that he was wrong -- that the patient had pneumonia. Failure in this case would have meant that he would fail the entire examination. Convinced that he was right, he persuaded the house officer on the ward to perform a pleural tap and took the resultant fluid that evening to the home of the professor of medicine. He handed the specimen to the maid at the door with a note summarizing the situation. He passed with honours. 
Pantridge started as house physician at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast on 1 August 1939. The Second World War was declared a month later on 3 September and the next day Pantridge was among eleven of the thirteen house officers who volunteered at the local military recruiting centre. They were made to wait for six months to acquire some clinical experience before being called up. In April 1940 Pantridge was posted to Singapore as medical officer to the second battalion, the Gordon Highlanders. He remained with the battalion right through the Japanese invasion of Malaya and the fall of Singapore on 15 February 1942. He was highly critical of the British politicians and military authorities and their strategy in the region. In contrast he remembered 'a remarkable 'esprit de corps' in that officers' mess. I had never seen it before and I have never come across it since. It did not exist in any RAMC fraternity or army hospital and certainly not among the staff of any National Health Service hospital I was to encounter later. ('An Unquiet Life', 17)' During the campaign he was awarded the Military Cross, an honour rarely awarded to doctors in the field. The citation to support this award read: 'During the operations in Johore and Singapore... as medical officer attached to the second Gordons, this officer worked unceasingly under the most adverse conditions of continuous bombing and shelling and was an inspiring example to all with whom he came in contact. He was absolutely cool under the heaviest fire and completely regardless of his own personal safety at all times. ('An Unquiet Life', preface by M. G. McGeown and A. H. G. Love, ix)' After being taken prisoner of war Pantridge continued as medical officer for those building the Siam-Burma railway in the 'death camp' of Tambalya in Thailand, subsequently made famous in the film 'Bridge over the River Kwai'. Conditions were unimaginable but he was a thorn in the flesh of his captors throughout his incarceration. Upon liberation in August 1945 he was described by a fellow medical officer from the Royal Victoria Hospital, Tom Millikin: 'I found Pantridge in one of the many huts... The upper half of his body was emaciated, skin and bones. The lower half was bloated with the dropsy of beri-beri. The most striking thing was the blue eyes that blazed with defiance. He was a physical wreck but his spirit was obviously unbroken. The eyes said it was indestructible. ('Unquiet Life', x-xi)' He weighed just under 80 lb (30 kg). 
After the war Pantridge returned to Northern Ireland to complete his year as a house officer at the Royal Victoria. He quickly graduated MD in 1946 and was admitted MRCP in 1947 and specialized in cardiology. He gained a scholarship to work at the University of Michigan with Frank Wilson, who was the world leader in electrocardiography at the time. He was very happy there and acquired a good knowledge of electronics which was to stand him in good stead later. He returned to Belfast in 1949 as a registrar and was appointed consultant physician and cardiologist in 1951. 
In the early 1960s Pantridge reflected on the appalling mortality after myocardial infarction, noting that most deaths occurred in the first twelve hours and the majority in the first three hours. Patients suffering from symptoms of myocardial infarction were not usually admitted to hospital until twelve hours had elapsed. It was known that the initial rhythm in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest frequently was ventricular fibrillation and that this could be treated by prompt electrical defibrillation. He decided that the way forward was to bring intensive care facilities to the patient in the community, and with John Geddes, his senior house officer at the time, he created a mobile resuscitation team of doctors and nurses from the cardiac department who would travel with resuscitation equipment including a primitive defibrillator from the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast to the patient at the request of a general practitioner. A hundred thousand people lived within one mile of the hospital. At that time, defibrillation could only be provided by a mains powered device delivering a shock of alternating current (AC). Working with his technician, Alfred Mawhinney, Pantridge developed a 'portable' defibrillator powered by two twelve-volt car batteries with a static converter to deliver 230 volts AC. This weighed 70 kg and could deliver a countershock within the ambulance but on occasions the heroic team had to manhandle it into a patient's home. During the ensuing years Pantridge and his team developed the first rechargeable miniature defibrillator, which weighed only 3.2 kg and delivered a direct current (DC) shock, which was much more effective in converting ventricular fibrillation. 
Pantridge presented his results to the Association of Physicians (and published them in 'The Lancet') in 1967. He received a cool reception which he described later: 'We were disbelieved and indeed, to some extent ridiculed. The unfavourable comments emphasised the lack of need for pre-hospital coronary care, the prohibitive costs and the danger of moving a patient who had had a recent coronary attack' ('Unquiet Life', 88). This was fairly typical of the 'can't do it' mentality among many physicians and administrators in the UK at the time. Most physicians in the UK did not offer official support for portable defibrillators until 1975 and the Department of Health dithered until the 1980s when Sir Donald Acheson, an Ulsterman by birth, became its chief medical officer and lent his official support to the concept. The reception in the outside world was in sharp contrast. Leaders in the United States were quick to introduce the concept of mobile coronary care. Pantridge received accolades and honours galore in the United States, including a citation in the records of the House of Representatives. 
Pantridge pulled no punches to achieve his mission and, while he could sometimes be difficult to work with, his achievements were always respected by his colleagues. His dedication to his patients was paramount and he would not tolerate anything that stood in the way of this, including laborious and ineffective administration, strikes by hospital staff, or the activities of paramilitary terrorist groups in Northern Ireland. He was effective in stirring the hearts and minds of the public and was able to raise funds and support for his mobile coronary care service in the community. He always acknowledged the considerable contribution of John Geddes to the development of the portable defibrillator. Two other proteges, John Kernohan and Charles Wilson, had set up similar community cardiac services in other parts of Northern Ireland and produced data to support Pantridge's results. In the late 1960s Belfast was described as the 'safest place to have a heart attack'. 
Frank Pantridge was a sociable person, always happy to share a drink (not small or single) with amiable colleagues. He had a fund of stories from his 'unquiet life' -- the title of his autobiography, published in 1989. He was great company with invariably stimulating conversation, a biting wit, and a unique and demonstrative body language. He enjoyed salmon fishing and was unmarried. He died on Boxing day, 26 December 2004, at the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, of heart failure. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered in Hillsborough, where he was born, and where he had lived latterly in Corcreeny Road. A statue of him was erected in Lisburn, the town of his schooling. By the time of his death his pioneering work had saved countless lives all over the world. The Pantridge Trust was established in his name with the goal of improving cardiac care. 


@@@@@


doc= 94599


Lee Boo (c.1764-1784), first visitor to Britain from Palau, was the second son (possibly the adoptive son) of the 'ibedul' or ruler of Palau ('fl'. 1764-1791), whose name is unknown. On 9 August 1783 on her return journey from China, the East India Company's packet 'Antelope' under Captain Henry Wilson was wrecked on a coral reef off the archipelago of Palau (in the western Caroline Islands, Micronesia). The crew landed on one of these islands, Ulong (called Oroolong by the visitors). Ulong itself was uninhabited, but the crew struck up good relations with the people of a neighbouring island, having Malay as a common tongue. The highest-ranking chief or 'rupack' of the islanders bore the title 'ibedul': he was thus understood by the Britons to be a king named Abba Thulle. The Britons were allowed to remain on Ulong and to fell trees there to build a new vessel, and were fed by the islanders. In exchange for this hospitality the Britons, with their firearms, helped Abba Thulle's forces subdue rival islanders. 
Relations between the Britons and the islanders became so cordial that, when the Britons departed in their new schooner 'Oroolong', Abba Thulle sent with them his son, Lee Boo, to learn and bring home the ways of the English. One of the crew, Madan Blanchard, chose to remain among the islanders. Lee Boo was seasick at first, but was well cared for by the ship's surgeon, John Sharp. He began to wear European clothes, at first as a practical protection against colder weather than he had ever known. He tied knots in his coconut fibre cord, a traditional aide-memoire dubbed his 'journal' by the sailors, to record events and sights he must tell his father, though the cord was eventually overwhelmed by the very many new things he witnessed. After eighteen days the 'Oroolong' reached Macau and was sold there by Wilson, who proceeded to Canton (Guangzhou), whence he sailed with Lee Boo for England aboard the company's Indiaman, 'Morse', arriving at Portsmouth on 14 July 1784. Lee Boo was taken to Wilson's home at 28 Paradise Row, Rotherhithe, London, where he lived for his entire time in England. 
Wilson's promise to Abba Thulle to treat Lee Boo as his son, combined with his desire to avoid crowded places where disease might lurk, meant that Lee Boo led a quiet, middle-class life, not reaching the higher circles to which Omai and some later visitors were introduced. He lived for all of his five months and thirteen days in England with 'Captain' and 'Mother' Wilson, as he called them, becoming fast friends with their son Henry (Harry) who had been with his father on the 'Antelope', and attending an academy in Rotherhithe (perhaps the Peter Hills school). 
In mid-December 1784 it was discovered that Lee Boo had smallpox; a range of treatments having failed, he died at 28 Paradise Row, Rotherhithe, on 27 December 1784. On 29 December he was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Rotherhithe, in Captain Wilson's family grave. The East India Company raised the present stone to his memory, with an epitaph by Brook Watson. 
Lee Boo became exceptionally well known through George Keate's 'Account of the Pelew Islands' (1788) which gave details of the islanders and of Lee Boo's experiences in England. The 'Account' was based on Keate's meeting with Lee Boo in London, and on meticulously gathered information from the 'Antelope''s officers and especially from Henry Wilson's log (BL OIOC, L/Mar/B/570A). It is complemented by the first chart of Palau, by Wilson, and by engravings after drawings by sailors on board 'Antelope', notably the portraitist Arthur William Devis who was draughtsman on the ship. It also contains the best image of Lee Boo -- a stipple engraving by Henry Kingsbury, after Georgiana Keate, daughter of George Keate. She had met Lee Boo, though the image was drawn some fifteen months after the meeting. The image portrays Lee Boo in European dress and hairstyle with a gentle, enquiring expression. Many derivative accounts contained fanciful images of him in 'native garb' (though Palauans wore only loincloths or grass skirts) and with facial features made more 'delicate' and 'sensitive'. 
Keate ended his work with a reproach to the East India Company for having failed to tell Abba Thulle his son's fate. On 23 August 1790 John McCluer was sent to Palau in 'Panther'. Reaching the islands on 21 January 1791, he broke the news to Abba Thulle of his son's death, also using the opportunity to establish what was intended to be a trading post on the islands. McCluer learnt that Madan Blanchard had also died, in uncertain circumstances. When he left he took with him three islanders, leaving two Britons behind. 
McCluer's account, published by Henry Wilson's son-in-law John Pearce Hockin, completed the facts of Lee Boo's life (though it opened up the possibility that Lee Boo was Abba Thulle's adoptive rather than natural son), but by no means brought to an end his fame. Keate had been a friend and correspondent of Voltaire and was greatly influenced by the ideal of the noble savage. His 'Account' had the aim of 'vindicating their [the Palauans' and similar islanders'] injured characters from the imputation of those savage manners which ignorance alone had ascribed to them' (p. xiii). Lee Boo and the other islanders, at once good hearted and sensitive, were proof 'that 'natural' good manners is the 'natural' result of 'natural' good sense' (349, original italics). The 'Account' emphasized Lee Boo's innate discrimination (he relieved the deserving poor, but exhorted sturdy beggars to work); his unstudied preference for useful knowledge (he disdained frivolous amusements, including Lunardi's balloon ascent which he was taken to see, in favour of gathering useful information and things such as seeds to take home); and his natural reverence for religious practices. It eulogized the islanders' society, claiming that its harmony rested on the lack of private property, as well as the benevolence of the king. Although a distinctly less rosy account of the king and the society had been published in a letter to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (54, 1784, 980-81) from one of those on board the 'Antelope', it was Keate's 'Account' that captured the imagination, going to five editions, being translated into French (1793) and German (1800), and inspiring and forming the basis for numerous subsequent retellings. The 'Account' prompted William Lisle Bowles to include in the 1794 edition of his sonnets 'Abba Thule', a dramatic monologue describing the sorrow of the father waiting for news of his son: this poem was known to have been read by Samuel Taylor Coleridge who later in the same year included the lines, 'My soul amid the pensive twilight gloom / Mourn'd with the breeze, O LEE BOO! O'er thy tomb' in 'To a Young Lady with a Poem on the French Revolution Sept 1794', which was inscribed in a presentation copy of 'The Fall of Robespierre'. Coleridge's meditation on the lost innocence of his own childhood leads to a reflection on Lee Boo, whose death epitomizes the fate of innocence when it comes into contact with a corrupt society. Two years later Joseph Cottle published a long melodramatic poem entitled 'Lee Boo' in the second edition of his 'Poems' (1796). In 1789 'The Interesting and Affecting History of Prince Lee Boo' was published, so that 'children in Great Britain, Ireland, and America' might learn from his example; it had eleven subsequent editions, the last in 1832. Children could reconstruct his life story in jigsaw puzzles by James Izzard (1818) and William Darton (1822, NL Aus.). In 1831 the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge issued a 'History of Lee Boo'. This and the children's histories and jigsaw laid particular emphasis on edifying incidents from Keate, especially Lee Boo's instinctive aversion to strong drink, his natural modesty in adopting clothes, and his role as peacemaker as he unites Captain and Harry Wilson after a quarrel, though evangelical opinion later hardened against such idealizations of the non-Christian noble savage. Lee Boo inspired two plays performed in London in 1833; and a slight essay by E. M. Forster (1931) which compared Lee Boo's and Madan Blanchard's fates. He also inspired the anonymous 'Adventures of Madiboo' (1809) and LaRoque Dubose's 'Aye, Aye, Sir!' (New York, 1958). A full-length biography by Daniel J. Peacock (1987) rests largely on Keate's account but has useful extra detail. 
Lee Boo was also remembered by Devis's Palau landscapes and portraits exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution between 1796 and 1807. An eighteenth-century ship was named after him ('Prince Lee Boo'), as was an imaginary one ('Prince Leboa') in Rudyard Kipling's 'Captains Courageous' (1897). Comparisons between Lee Boo and exotic and inspiring non-Europeans were made from an early date: the review of Keate's 'Account' in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (58, 1788, 629-31) judges him to have made better use in his short stay of his 'natural talents' than Omai did in a longer visit, and in their 'History of Lee Boo to which is added the Life of Paul Cuffee, a Man of Colour, also Some Account of John Sackouse, the Esquimaux' (1819) the Society for Promoting the United and Scriptural Education of the Poor of Ireland proclaimed him one of three non-European moral exemplars. 
In 1892 a plaque was placed in the north wall of St Mary's, Rotherhithe, by the East India Company to commemorate Lee Boo and the kindness of his father and fellow islanders to the wrecked Britons. In 1912 the part of Neptune Street closest to St Mary's Church was renamed Rupack Street, a memorial to Abba Thulle. A memorial to Lee Boo stands in Koror, the capital of Palau, which in 1983 issued commemorative postage stamps recording Lee Boo and Captain Wilson. In 1983 the London Museum of Mankind's 'Pattern of islands' exhibition displayed artefacts from Palau brought back by Wilson and told Lee Boo's story. A room for children in the Museum in Docklands (Museum of London) is named after him, continuing his role as an example to the young. 


@@@@@


doc= 94604


Taylor, Avril Coleridge- (1903-1998), composer and conductor, was born Gwendolen Coleridge-Taylor on 8 March 1903 at 10 Upper Grove, South Norwood, Croydon, the daughter of Samuel Coleridge-Taylor (1875-1912), composer and conductor, and his wife, Jessie Sarah Fleetwood, 'nee' Walmisley (1869-1962). She had one older brother, Hiawatha (1900-1980). She was only nine years old when her father died of pneumonia. 
Avril Coleridge-Taylor (she adopted the name Avril in childhood) wrote and published her first composition, 'Goodbye Butterfly', at the age of twelve. In the same year she won a scholarship in composition and pianoforte at Trinity College of Music, London. She studied the violin, orchestration, composition, and conducting, and later reflected: 'Quite early in life I began to feel a sense of music within me that was anxious to make its way out. Not only did I want to write music -- as I had seen my father do -- but to express myself through beautiful sound. (Coleridge-Taylor, 103)' During her career she wrote more than ninety compositions. These included a piano concerto in F minor, 'Sussex Landscape', 'The Hills', 'To April', 'In Memoriam R. A. F.', and 'Golden Wedding Ballet Suite' for orchestra, and 'Wyndore' and 'Historical Episode' for chorus and orchestra. Over thirty-five songs written between 1917 and 1971 included 'Who Knows?' (1922), 'The Dreaming Water Lily' (1923), 'Regret' (1939), 'O'er all the Hill-Tops' (1957), and 'I Can Face It, Lord' (1971). 
In 1933 Coleridge-Taylor made her London debut as a conductor at the Royal Albert Hall and thereafter she conducted an orchestra and singers on several occasions there in her father's most famous work, 'Hiawatha'. As a guest she conducted several major orchestras including the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the London Symphony Orchestra. She was the first woman to conduct the band of the Royal Marines. She also founded and conducted several orchestras and ensembles including the Coleridge-Taylor Symphony Orchestra. 
Coleridge-Taylor's first marriage, on 19 April 1924 to the musician Harold Christian Dashwood, ended in divorce. They had one son, Nigel Christian, born on Christmas eve 1924. Her second marriage, to another musician, Bruce Somes-Charlton, on 28 January 1946, also ended in divorce. 
Because her father was of mixed race (of African and British parentage) and her mother was white, Coleridge-Taylor could pass as white. In 1952 she visited South Africa for a concert tour, but felt guilty staying in accommodation intended for whites. When the South African authorities discovered that she was of part African descent she found herself cold-shouldered. Offers of work, including a job as a music teacher, were withdrawn, and Britain's high commissioner warned her that she was risking imprisonment for passing as white. Left penniless, destitute, and in distress, she returned to Britain. Continuing her career in music, in 1956 she arranged and conducted the spirituals performed in a BBC radio version of the American play 'The Green Pastures', and the following year she wrote the ceremonial march to celebrate Ghana's independence. However, her experiences in South Africa led to a breakdown and, though she continued to make occasional attempts at writing music, she eventually gave up. In 1979 she published an autobiography, 'The Heritage of Samuel Coleridge-Taylor'. 
Avril Coleridge-Taylor died on 21 December 1998 at Stones House, Crouch Lane, Seaford, Sussex. According to her son Nigel, who survived her: 'she considered herself an Englishwoman, not coloured. At first [she] did not take on her African ancestry, but her experience in South Africa brought it home to her. It surprised her. In the music world [she] was discriminated against more as a coloured woman than as a woman. She felt keenly that she ought to take her place among the greatest. But the people in the classical music profession disadvantaged her because of what she was. (private information)' 



@@@@@


doc= 94605


Smith, Cornelia Estelle (1875-1970), music-hall entertainer and actress, was born on 29 April 1875 in South Carolina, USA, the daughter of Matthew and Letta Johnson. While she was still young the family moved to Brooklyn, New York. In 1894 she left Brooklyn to tour Germany and Denmark in a stage production of 'The South before the War'. It was during the tour that she met Levi Augustus (Gus) Smith (1864/5-1927), a pianist and variety artist from Philadelphia. In 1895 they travelled to Britain, where they were booked to appear at the Alhambra Theatre in Hull. Billing themselves as Smith and Johnson, they found work in music halls and their piano duets claimed encore after encore. In 1902 a critic described them as 'duettists and cake-walkers who give their amusing turn to appreciative applause' at Sheffield's Grand Theatre of Varieties ('Encore', 23 Jan 1902). On 1 May the same year, at St Francis Xavier's Roman Catholic Church in Everton, Smith and Johnson married. 
In Edwardian Britain black entertainers were still looked upon as novelties, and in some parts of the country many people had never seen a black person. There was much pointing and staring, but Connie Smith later recalled, 'We never had any sort of insult or suffered any indignity from the British' ('Flamingo', April 1962, 42). In 1914, at the outbreak of the First World War, as American citizens Connie and Gus Smith were offered their fares home, but they declined. Britain became their adopted home, and Connie never saw America again. 
After the death of her husband in January 1927 Connie Smith was heartbroken but continued working. Later that year she portrayed Aunt Chloe in a special prologue staged at the London Pavilion in Piccadilly Circus before the screening of the silent film 'Uncle Tom's Cabin'. In 1928 she returned to the London Pavilion to take part in a charity concert described as 'the greatest all-star coloured show ever staged', organized to raise money for the victims of flooding caused by the swollen River Thames. The lyricist Oscar Hammerstein and the composer Jerome Kern were in the audience, taking notes for the casting of their forthcoming production of 'Show Boat' at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. Connie Smith was invited to understudy Alberta Hunter as Queenie, and sing with the Mississippi Chorus, backing Paul Robeson. 
In the 1940s, by now well known among agents, producers, and playwrights, Connie Smith made a successful transition from music-hall player to character actress. Whenever there was a part for an older black woman she was considered. Her earliest dramatic roles included Addie in the West End stage version of Lillian Hellman's 'The Little Foxes' (Piccadilly, 1942). In 1946 she became one of the first black actresses to appear on British television when she portrayed Mrs Harris in Eugene O'Neill's 'All God's Chillun' Got Wings', transmitted live by the BBC from Alexandra Palace. Also in the cast, playing her daughter, was Pauline Henriques, who later recalled: 'On stage and screen Connie had a presence, even though she was very small and very quiet. I would say Connie was the first black professional in the theatre that I ever met. She would be on time for rehearsals and she never missed a cue. However tiny the part was, she studied it meticulously. Connie was always encouraging to younger actors, especially those of us who were black. I recognised that she had something very few black actors have had -- enormous experience. (Bourne, 15)' After the Second World War Connie Smith found herself more in demand than ever. In 1956 she became a member of the distinguished English Stage Company at the Royal Court Theatre. Her roles included the sorceress Tituba in Arthur Miller's 'The Crucible' (1956) and Granny in Barry Reckord's 'Flesh to a Tiger' (1958). In 1961 she made her last stage appearance in a German production of Eugene O'Neill's 'The Emperor Jones', learning to cope with a foreign language at the age of eighty-six. She died on 11 May 1970 at St Peter's House, a Catholic nursing home in Meadow Road, Lambeth, London, and was buried in the variety artistes' section of Streatham Park cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 94608


Pereira, Sir (Herbert) Charles (1913-2004), hydrologist and agronomist, was born on 12 May 1913 at the City of London Lying-in Hospital, Holborn, London, the only child of Herbert John Pereira (died 1952), schoolteacher, and his wife, Maud Edith, 'nee' Machin. His early education took place at Prince Albert College, Saskatchewan, Canada, on a Cree Indian reservation, where his father ran a small school and a church. It was there that he first experienced living with disadvantaged communities, an experience that influenced the rest of his life and career. At the age of fifteen he returned to London. He completed his education at St Albans School -- where he enjoyed science, rugby, and boxing -- and thereafter at Imperial College, London, from where he graduated in mathematics and physics. After graduation he was attached to Rothamsted Experimental Station in Harpenden, Hertfordshire, where he studied for a London University PhD, awarded in 1941. He funded his postgraduate studies by part-time teaching and managing the estate of a new school in Chertsey, Surrey. In the school grounds he set up field experiments on the cultivation of potatoes, and diverted water from the school's ornamental lakes to control the water table in his experimental plots. This was probably his first venture into hydrology, the discipline that occupied most of his subsequent professional career. 
On 17 July 1941 Pereira married Irene Beatrice (Rene) Sloan, a 26-year-old hospital nurse and daughter of David and May Sloan from Belfast; the couple later had three sons and a daughter. Though happy with the name Charles, to his friends, family, and colleagues Pereira was affectionately known as Perry. From 1941 to 1946 he served in the Royal Engineers. The news that he had been awarded his doctorate arrived just as he was leaving for service in the Middle East. There his hydrology expertise enabled him to find water in the desert for the troops. This -- together with his skill in building bridges to enable troop movements in the Italian campaign -- earned him the rank of major, and a mention in dispatches. During this period Rene served as an army nursing sister. 
After the end of hostilities Pereira joined the colonial service, and went with his wife to Kenya with the remit of building a new coffee research station at Ruiru, near Nairobi. This was a difficult time in east Africa. The British empire was in decline and political and social changes led to Mau Mau terrorism prior to the country's independence. Pereira's scientific research was conducted against this background, but he persevered and also became involved as a leader of the local branch of the Kenya police reserve. His innovative research -- ahead of its time and well before the launch of UNESCO's international hydrological decade (1965-74) -- led to his appointment as deputy director of the new East African Agriculture and Forestry Research Organisation from 1952 to 1961, and then as director of the Agricultural Research Council of Rhodesia and Nyasaland from 1961 to 1963, a post which terminated when the federation broke up. His research into the hydrological impact of the planting of subsistence crops on hillsides in Tanganyika, of the restoration of over-grazed thorn scrub in northern Uganda, and of tea estates, rain forests, and pine plantations, required the development of new techniques of catchment research and measurement instruments. These pioneering studies of subsistence and commercial crops focused on understanding their water requirements and reflected Pereira's driving ambition to improve food production in the face of growing populations and when starvation and under-nourishment were commonplace. His work was financed with limited resources and he developed the ability to improvise, persevere, and achieve his objectives under conditions which required courage and persistence. Between 1963 and 1967 he was director of the Agricultural Research Council of Central Africa (Rhodesia, Zambia, and Malawi) and in 1966 his work was recognized with the award of the Haile Selassie prize for research in Africa. Following Rhodesia's unilateral declaration of independence in 1965 Pereira was for a short period director of the Malawi Agricultural Research Council with the responsibility of establishing it as a national entity. He then went on a six-month world tour as chairman of the United Nations Land Use Commission of the international hydrological decade. 
After twenty-three years in Africa, Pereira returned to England in 1967. During a sabbatical year at Cambridge he wrote 'Land Use and Water Resources' (published in 1973). His other major publications were 'Hydrological Effects of Land Use Changes in East Africa' (1962) and 'Policy and Practice in the Management of Tropical Watersheds' (1969), together with many papers in research journals. His methods of conducting hydrological research on the scale of whole catchment areas were still valid and in use in the early twenty-first century. In 1969 he was appointed director of the Agricultural Research Council's East Malling research station in Kent, an institution renowned throughout the world for its work on fruit crops. Pereira retired from that post in 1972 to become chief scientist and deputy secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Food, a position he held for five years. At this time a revolution in science funding was underway, and Pereira's task was to implement Lord Rothschild's 'customer-contractor relationship' to draw scientists closer to the users of research. Pereira's scientific acumen and administrative skills were in great demand in this period. He held several key appointments, becoming a member of the Natural Environment Research Council from 1971 to 1977, a member of the Agricultural Research Council (1973-7), chairman of the scientific panel of the Commonwealth Development Corporation (1978-91), president of the Tropical Agricultural Association (1990-2002), and a member of the board of trustees of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (1983-6). As president of the Tropical Agriculture Association he maintained an active network of members whose experience spanned the developing world. He retired from the ministry in 1977 and was knighted in the same year. His work had previously been recognized with election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1969 -- which, in his own words, gave him 'a feeling of incredulous euphoria' -- and as a fellow of the Institute of Biology, and of the Royal Agricultural Society of England (both in 1977); he also received an honorary doctorate from Cranfield University in the year of his departure from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Food. His other achievements and interests included learning to fly a Cessna 172 aircraft to carry out aerial surveys, learning the Kiswahili language (which he did during his first outward sea journey to Africa), and mountaineering (he was elected president of the Mountain Club of Kenya). 
On leaving his post as chief scientist at the ministry Pereira spent much of the next fifteen years undertaking a series of demanding overseas consultancies. He also enjoyed solving problems, energetic sports, ballroom dancing, and landscape sketching. He had a lifelong concern with the rapidly expanding human population and its effects on the environment and its ability to provide the food needed to feed the world. In this regard his conviction that population must be controlled encouraged him to become a trustee of the Marie Stopes Foundation from 1991 to his death. He lived latterly at Peartrees, 6 Nestor Court, Teston, Maidstone, Kent, where he died from pneumonia and prostate cancer on 19 December 2004. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94618


Robertson, (Charles) Martin (1911-2004), archaeologist and poet, was born on 11 September 1911 at Jesmond Hill, Pangbourne, Berkshire, the elder son of Donald Struan Robertson (1885-1961), later regius professor of Greek at Cambridge University, and his wife, Petica Coursolles, 'nee' Jones (1883-1941), who hosted a literary salon. At the time of his birth his parents lived at 2 Huntingdon Road, Cambridge. His younger brother Giles (1913-1987) became a distinguished historian of Renaissance art at Edinburgh University. Martin (as he was always known) attended the Leys School, Cambridge, and Trinity College, Cambridge, from which he graduated with a first-class degree in classics in 1934. Before and after Cambridge he visited the British School at Athens, to which he was always devoted; he was later a long-serving member of its governing council and its chairman from 1959 to 1968. 
In Athens from 1934 to 1936 Robertson studied under Humfry Payne, joined excavations, travelled, and developed his lasting interest in Greek pottery in the company of several other scholars who had been led by Payne in the same direction (including Robert and John Cook, Tom Dunbabin, and Arthur Lane). In 1936 he joined the staff of the department of Greek and Roman antiquities at the British Museum. During the Second World War he served in British intelligence in Egypt and Italy; after the war he returned to the British Museum to help replace the collections which had been in store for the duration of the war. In 1948 he succeeded Bernard Ashmole, his mentor in the museum, as Yates professor of classical art and archaeology at University College, London, a post he held until 1961, when he again succeeded Ashmole, as Lincoln professor of classical archaeology and art at Oxford. He held this post until his retirement in 1978. 
Robertson's major contribution to scholarship was in the field of Greek vase painting, especially Athenian, and the processes of attribution to painters' hands pioneered by Sir John Beazley at Oxford. He published on non-Athenian pottery from excavations (Ithaca, al-Mina) but without the devotion he accorded to Athenian pottery of the sixth to fourth centuries BC. This culminated much later in 'The Art of Vase Painting in Classical Athens' (1992), backed by numerous articles. His connoisseurship extended into all other aspects of the study, iconographic and aesthetic, and he integrated the subject into the general study of Greek art. A related interest was in the evidence for painting in antiquity in any medium, which resulted in a volume for the publishers Skira, 'Greek Painting' (1959), while his overall interest and experience in Greek art led to his two-volume 'A History of Greek Art' (1975; abridged edition, 1981). This was in many ways a very personal work, but comprehensive enough to serve as a handbook for many years, and it was notable for Robertson's ability to give proper place to the less well-known or well-preserved arts, such as painting on material other than vases and mosaic. His sense of responsibility to see to publication the works of former friends and colleagues led to considerable editorial labour over the publication of the second volume of the Athens School excavations at Perachora (1962) and John Beazley's 'Paralipomena' (1971). There was also a duty to collection publication: he collaborated with John Boardman over the Castle Ashby vases for a 'Corpus vasorum' volume (1978), and published a catalogue of the Greek, Etruscan, and Roman vases in the Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight (1987). He was presented with a Festschrift, 'The Eye of Greece: Studies in the Art of Athens' (1982), where there is a list of writings, supplemented in his British Academy memoir. 
Robertson was a careful, not enthusiastic lecturer, with a minor voice impediment, but well able to engage the attention of those devoted to his subject. He was attentive to the needs of his graduate students, failing, if at all, only in not being too critical of their work. A generation of classical art historians owed much to him for the inspiration of their studies, either through personal contact or from his writing, and from his sturdy and reasoned championing of traditional scholarly method. His interest in and understanding of Greek literature stood him in good stead with his literary colleagues and in dealing with mythology in art, on which he wrote several articles. His scholarship and authority were widely acknowledged. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1967 and received its Kenyon medal in 1985. Among other honours he was elected an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, Lincoln College, Oxford, and University College, London, and received an honorary doctorate from Queen's University, Belfast. He was a visiting scholar at the Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton, in 1968-9 and at the J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu, in 1980. 
Robertson was a dedicated cyclist perforce, since he never learned to drive a car, but no athlete, although lithe in physique, and he generally had no time for anything mechanical. He was happy to leave administrative matters to others but never shirked his duty as chairman of committees, in the university and for the British School at Athens. In many respects he maintained some of the manners of the aesthete scholar, but he was always approachable and never less than kindly with the faults of others. He had written poetry throughout adulthood, personal, often witty and sensitive, much admired by many, and several volumes were published, notably 'A Hot Bath at Bedtime' (1977), 'The Sleeping Beauty's Prince' (1977), and some translations from Greek. 
On 4 September 1942 Robertson married (Theodosia) Cecil, 'nee' Spring Rice the 21-year-old daughter of Edward Dominick Spring Rice, financier. Cecil lived near Aldeburgh during the war, a town to which they were always drawn, with its festival, and friendship with Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears. They had four sons and two daughters. When they moved to Oxford they lived at Sheepstead House, Marcham, from which Robertson cycled daily the ten miles to the university. Upon his retirement from the Oxford chair they moved to Cambridge, near the town centre, in Parker Street. There he continued research and writing. In 1984 Cecil died suddenly. On 19 May 1988 Robertson married Louise Berge, a 50-year-old museum curator who had been one of his graduate students. She was American, the daughter of Chester Holstein, a petty officer in the United States Navy. She was able to help his continuing work and publication, and nursed him, lightening several painful last years (when he suffered from Guillian-Barre syndrome, then myasthenia gravis), until his death in their Cambridge home on 26 December 2004, of heart disease and bronchopneumonia. He was buried in Cambridge cemetery on 5 January 2005. He was survived by his second wife, Louise, and the six children of his first marriage, one of whom was the rock musician Thomas Robertson, known as Thomas Dolby. 


@@@@@


doc= 94620


Rue, Dame (Elsie) Rosemary (1928-2004), medical practitioner and medical administrator, was born on 14 June 1928 at The Cottage, Heronway, Hutton, Essex, the daughter of Harry Laurence (died 1978), accountant, and his wife, Daisy Annie, 'nee' Sully (died 1976). Her parents moved to Sydenham, south London, where she first attended school. During the blitz she was evacuated to Totnes, Devon. At the age of eleven she contracted tuberculous peritonitis and underwent major surgery. She spent a year convalescing, mostly in bed, and at that time decided to pursue a career in medicine. Despite missing a year of schooling, in 1945, at the age of seventeen, she was accepted at the Royal Free Hospital medical school, which at the time was an all-women hospital. On 7 January 1950 she married Roger Harry Edward Rue, a 26-year-old medical student in Oxford and a returned serviceman who had been an RAF pilot instructor during the Second World War. He was the son of Harry Robert Rue, automobile engineer. When she went to see the dean at the Royal Free to tell her that her name would be changing to Rue, she was told that she couldn't possibly stay at the Royal Free as no students were allowed to be married. Infuriated by this attitude, she rang around some other medical schools, including the Oxford University medical school, which accepted her at once. She moved to Oxford and qualified in 1951, taking the London exams. 
Rue then wanted to spend a year in hospital medicine but none of the United Oxford Hospitals took married women. Eventually she did get a job at the Cowley Road Hospital, a long-stay hospital in Oxford, by not mentioning her marriage. The work was very interesting and challenging, as there was a wealth of clinical work, much of it in what later became geriatric medicine. By this time she had a baby, Randal ('b'. 1952) -- followed later by another son, Rolf ('b'. 1955) -- who presented many logistic problems of feeding and care. She managed her work and her baby efficiently, especially with the help of a Ceylonese doctor with whom she shared the resident quarters. However, when the senior doctors found out that not only was she married but had a child as well, she was sacked on the spot. In 1952, without a job, she was taken on by Dr Firth, whom she had met at a psychiatry course, in a general practice post in Temple Cowley, an industrial suburb of Oxford, where most people working at the huge Morris Motors factories lived. There she was exposed to different medical problems, especially allergies in the motor workers as a result of handling toxic paints and chemicals. In 1954 she was struck down with poliomyelitis; indeed she was the last person in Oxford to get polio. She was left virtually paralysed in one leg and could hardly manage to walk when she recovered, even with crutches and callipers and several surgical interventions. This remained a major disability for the rest of her life, but one that, at least to the outsider, she seemed to ignore completely. 
In 1955 Rue was separated from her husband (they eventually divorced in 1960) and moved to live with her parents in Hertfordshire. After a brief spell of teaching biology and chemistry at a girls' school because her disability made it difficult for her to work as a GP, she joined a general practitioner, Martin Doyle, who had had one leg amputated for sarcoma, in Sarratt, Hertfordshire. Together they ran the practice and he was delighted to tell one and all that their practice had two good legs between them. After Doyle died Rue was appointed as assistant county medical officer for Hertfordshire in 1958, which started her new career in the administrative side of public health and medicine. In 1965 she became the assistant senior medical officer for the Oxford region, a relatively small but vibrant area. In 1971 she was promoted to senior administrative medical officer for the Oxford regional health board and in 1973 became regional medical officer for the Oxford regional health authority, a post she held until her retirement in 1988 (for the last four years acting also as regional general manager). 
In the 1960s and 1970s money was becoming available for new hospitals and Rue made sure that she had access to it, especially for the new city that was being built at Milton Keynes on a greenfield site. She built a completely new hospital for Milton Keynes, new hospitals in Swindon (the Princess Margaret Hospital) and Reading, and finally the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford itself. As regional medical officer, and later also regional general manager, she was enormously proud of the National Health Service, for she had witnessed its start as a medical student. But also she was enormously supportive of the University of Oxford medical school, and provided substantial funds for a number of chairs and readerships there. Indeed during the 1970s the regius professor, Sir Richard Doll, and Rue formed a formidable pair, and her role in the creation of the modern medical school in Oxford was a significant one. In 1980-82 she was seconded for two years as professor of community health at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, a further tribute to her status in medicine in the United Kingdom. 
Another project, for which Rue was perhaps best known, was a scheme for getting married medical women back into medicine. She was, understandably, very conscious of the difficulties that women had in progressing in medicine. She had noted that in Oxford many women doctors who had moved with their husbands or taken time out to have a family could not get jobs, or felt inexperienced, although highly qualified. She provided funding for various units within the United Oxford Hospitals to take on these women doctors for part-time training, and all were subsequently absorbed into the health service as consultants and associate specialists. This scheme spread around the country and innumerable women doctors, known widely as Rosemary Rue's babies, attributed their success in their medical careers to this extraordinary woman. 
Rue was appointed CBE in 1977 and DBE in 1989, both richly deserved honours. She received many other awards, including the Jenner medal and a fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons by election, and honorary fellowships of Green College, Oxford, and the Royal College of Psychiatry. She was president of the Medical Women's Federation (1982-3), the faculty of community medicine of the Royal College of Physicians (1986-9), and of the British Medical Association (1990-91). She was not a prolific writer but wrote papers on women in medicine and on ward design, for example. She had soon realized that it was inefficient to redesign every new hospital when so much was in common, and her first contribution in this area was the development of the 'Oxford method' of providing standard fittings at the end of each bed, followed by standard corridor space and room size such that new hospitals could be put together in modules like Lego. This scheme was exported and used quite widely in the Middle East. 
Rosemary Rue always seemed extremely relaxed and was always courteous and kind, despite the enormous pressures that she must have been under in her post as regional medical officer and regional general manager. She was well known for arranging appointments with some of the professors around 6.30 p.m. in the evening to discuss budgets for the coming year over a glass or two of sherry. Most went away satisfied, although few got all that they had asked for. In retirement she kept busy, for instance serving as chairman of the Margaret Pyke Trust, and vice-president of the Alzheimer's Society. She was devoted to her two sons, a feeling that was reciprocated. One of the sons was a pilot and quite often on a Sunday they would fly to France for lunch, coming back in the evening, an outing she always loved. An extraordinarily talented and courageous woman, she was diagnosed towards the end of her life with colorectal cancer, but characteristically in the weeks leading up to her death she had many of her old friends and colleagues to dinner to say goodbye, and strangely enough they were delightful and cheerful occasions. She died on Christmas eve 2004 at her home, 2 Wheatley Road, Stanton St John, Oxfordshire, and was survived by her two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 94621


Sampson, Anthony Terrell Seward (1926-2004), journalist and author, was born at 19 Mill Lane, Billingham-on-Tees, co. Durham, on 3 August 1926, the only son of Michael Trevisky Sampson, chief scientist at the ICI ammonia works in Billingham, and his wife, Phyllis, 'nee' Seward. His mother came from the world of the Cambridge intelligentsia and, with her three sisters, was devoted to their father, Sir Albert Seward, a professor of geology. The family had friends among the Darwins, Huxleys, Barlows, and Keyneses. When Sampson was still young the family moved to Hampstead, where he went to The Hall preparatory school. From there he won a scholarship to Westminster School, then evacuated to the Herefordshire countryside in the village of Whitbourne. Like his parents he was clever, and he became a brilliant mathematician and secretary of the college political and literary societies, but he found human relations less easy. With two others -- one later the chief engineering designer of Concorde -- he formed Les Trois Cyniques, a college group intent on the downfall of law and order, which eventually languished through lack of support. After school he joined the Royal Navy and served as a sub-lieutenant at the German naval base at Cuxhaven. Ashamed of the way the British armed forces treated their former enemies, he returned to England and won a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford, where he studied the minor Elizabethan dramatists and drank heavily with others who returned to complete their tertiary education after the war. He graduated with a second-class degree in English in 1950 but failed to work out a way of life after university until one evening he found himself at the Oxford Playhouse sitting next to Jim Bailey, son of the South African diamond magnate Sir Abe Bailey, who shortly afterwards offered Sampson a job editing his newly acquired pictorial magazine for non-whites in South Africa, 'Drum'. 
Sampson's early years lived out in the ghetto slums of Johannesburg not only brought him to new life but informed all his subsequent political and socio-political convictions. They proved to be the making of him. A few weeks before his death he wrote 'I always felt pulled between two sides of the world: north and south, finite and infinite, organised and disorganised, wondering where I belonged' (memoir). 'Drum' was not overtly or primarily political but the wild, untrained black reporters employed by Sampson knew well at first hand and then detailed in jazzy prose many of the horrors, for non-whites, of life in apartheid South Africa. From them their young editor learned of the demeaning effect of segregated education, and lack of amenities and social services, on those forced to live in the squalor of the shanty town settlements. In 1955 he returned to England and wrote his first book, 'Drum, a Venture into the New Africa' (1956). In a rare moment of introspection he wrote: 'Europe was translated into Africa. Every movement, every look, had the touch and feel of Africa. As I walked across the room in my European way, I felt like a corpse striding out from the grave' ('Drum', 147). And later he wrote 'I felt more at ease in that slum that I had ever felt among white comforts, as the small room expanded with the warmth and vigour of talk, music and brandy' (memoir). 
On his return to England Sampson had joined the 'Observer' team under David Astor's editorship. Astor was particularly good at drawing out the best in his often prickly staff and he and Sampson remained lifelong friends. There he might have polished his skills as a tabloid editor -- colour supplements were by then on the horizon -- but chose instead to become Pendennis, author of a column about personalities. He found businessmen more interesting than political and literary figures: a financier like George Soros appealed to him more than heads of Oxbridge colleges and other establishment mandarins. Later he concentrated on business affairs under the 'nom de plume' Mammon. 
Sampson wrote three further books about South Africa before turning to his 'Anatomy of Britain'. He wrote later: 'I had to write my 'Anatomy' at speed, to capture the mood of the whole country at a single moment: 250,000 words in 15 months... As I wandered through the maze of power I felt disoriented and more isolated, like a ball-bearing which had become loose, tossed up and down by smooth-turning cogs. As I finished the book I was more exhilarated with adrenalin, but I felt I was preparing a bomb which could go off anywhere -- probably in my face. (memoir)' His publishers, Hodder and Stoughton, published it with equal speed in July 1962. (On its publication Sampson fled to South Africa to renew old friendships in the wake of the Sharpeville crisis.) He had intended his 'Anatomy' to be useful to school-leavers and young graduates who wanted to understand the country they had grown up in, and shoals of these used it as a crib in their exams, while young socialists saw it as a dissection of the ruling class and young conservative careerists used it as a route map to the top. But it was also taken seriously in academia. From the corridors of power to smoke-filled conference rooms, from vice-chancellors to trade union bosses and heads of the armed forces, Sampson anatomized how Britain really worked, where power really lay, 'who runs this place'. The public's imagination was caught by the diagrams of interlocking focal centres representing the civil service, insurance, industry, scientists, trade unions, diplomats, and parliament. Financiers, the Treasury, and committees were double-ringed. 
Sampson never rested. Alongside his 'Observer' columns, and often refreshed by them with new evidence and new themes, he updated his first 'Anatomy' with 'Anatomy of Britain Today' (1965), 'The New Anatomy of Britain' (1971), 'The Changing Anatomy of Britain' (1982), and 'The Essential Anatomy of Britain' (1992), following the same apparently affable but increasingly barbed concentration on the powerful in public life, fleshed out with acute personal observation, homework done, up-to-the-minute, and, given his method of conducting his own research with the help of two or three devoted assistants, surprisingly accurate. Through all the brouhaha that followed the publication of the first 'Anatomy' he found at 'The Observer' the intellectual stimulus and camaraderie that had been so lacking for him at Oxford. He remained deeply attached to 'The Observer's' outlook on life, which reflected his own. 
During his early adulthood Sampson's personal life elided without remainder into his research and writing. Increasingly this took a toll on him and not long after the publication of his first 'Anatomy' he suffered a nervous breakdown, induced by a confrontation with his 'hidden daemons'. (His subsequent treatment by a psychotherapist, including hallucinations and a 'return to the womb', fired by LSD, he described vividly but with characteristic detachment in his unpublished memoir.) Though the list of successful and valuable books he wrote extended significantly after the first 'Anatomy', it was not until he married the beautiful and clever Sally Virginia Bentlif, who worked for his literary agent A. D. Peters, on 31 May 1965 that he became even mildly domesticated. She was the daughter of Philip Graeme Bentlif, medical practitioner, and twelve years younger than Sampson. He had bought a substantial London house and a weekend cottage at Walberswick where he sailed the Suffolk coast and estuaries as he had done as a boy, and he and Sally were soon proud parents, of Katie and Paul. 
In 1968 Sampson published 'The New Europeans: a Guide to the Workings, Institutions and Character of Contemporary Western Europe', reflecting his new interest in the possibilities of closer European integration through his work with and for one of its most distinguished proponents, Jean Monnet. Eight other major projects followed: in 1973 'The Sovereign State: the Secret History of ITT' (on telephonic communication, which won the Prix Internationale de la Presse in Nice a year later); in 1975 'The Seven Sisters: the Great Oil Companies and World they Made'; in 1977 'The Arms Bazaar: the Dealers, the Bribes, from Vickers to Lockhead'; in 1981 'The Money Lenders: Bankers in a Dangerous World'; in 1984 'Empires of the Sky: the Politics, Context and Cartels of World Airlines'; in 1987 'Black and Gold: Tycoons, Revolutionaries and Apartheid' (on mining), for which he was banned from returning to South Africa until 1990; in 1989 'The Midas Touch: Money, People and Power from East to West' (on international finance); and in 1995 'Company Man: the Rise and Fall of Corporate Life' (on multinational corporations). He also co-edited with his wife 'The Oxford Book of Ages' (1985), on the seven stages of human life, and presented the widely acclaimed television series 'The Midas Touch' on the new plutocrats in 1990. He was an excellent television presenter, with a pleasant but not bland persona, and with considerable wit and a ready tongue as well as a good memory. For most of this phase of his working life he did almost all the work of research and writing himself, only latterly letting someone else type the final draft. One of his favourites among his books was 'The Scholar Gypsy: the Quest for a Family Secret' (1997), about the double life of his grandfather, the librarian of Liverpool University and a philologist, who became drawn into the world of a gypsy family in north Wales, married bigamously, and produced an illegitimate daughter whom none of his first family was supposed to talk about. His grandson unearthed the whole story and bought a flat in Edinburgh for the strong-minded Scottish teacher, his newly acquired aunt, in her old age. 
In 1988 Sampson suffered a heart attack and underwent surgery in the United States for a quadruple bypass, about which he wrote movingly and stylishly. He made a full recovery and developed a flair for writing on offbeat subjects in his column. In 1999 he published the authorized biography of Nelson Mandela, which brought him international acclaim, a permanent place in the African National Congress's hall of fame, and many prizes including, posthumously, the order of the companions of honour of O. R. Tambo in silver for his contribution to South African journalism and to the ideals of freedom and justice. He and Mandela had been friends from the time Sampson attended the treason trials and helped the future head of state write the speech he made from the dock before the sentence of life imprisonment was passed on him. After publication Sampson and his wife were frequent visitors to the ageing former president. The biography was a masterly achievement, balanced and moving, thorough yet readable, critical at times but in every way worthy of the great man who was his subject. Due to the amount of research and interviewing required, more helpers (some of whom under his guidance went on to make good careers as journalists and editors) were recruited, and Sampson's Ladbroke Grove home became a centre of the anti-apartheid movement with such figures as Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo visiting regularly. 
Sampson was associate professor at the University of Vincennes, Paris, in 1968-70, contributing editor to 'Newsweek' from 1977, editorial consultant to the Brandt commission in 1978-9 (a connection of which he was especially and rightly proud), chairman of the Society of Authors from 1992 to 1994, a trustee of the Scott Trust (owners of 'The Guardian' and 'The Observer') from 1993 to 1996, and from 1995 to his death a member of the international advisory board of Independent Newspapers (South Africa). He also contributed to one of France's leading politico-cultural periodicals, and visited that country regularly. He briefly entered the political scene as a founder member of the Social Democratic Party in 1982; he stayed aloof from the inevitable jockeying for position, though he remained a close friend of Shirley Williams. 
His achievements aside, Sampson's personality was remarkable. His capacity for friendship with the young as well as his contemporaries increased as he grew older. Indeed in later life he became affable and clubbable, joining the Beefsteak and Groucho clubs, though he retained to the end his air of amused detachment, regarding his companions as fellow-conspirators in a not entirely friendly world. His death on 18 December 2004 at Quarry Garden, Wardour, Tisbury, Wiltshire, of heart failure, though not entirely unexpected, was a shock to his many friends. He was survived by his wife, Sally, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94622


Scarman, Leslie George, Baron Scarman (1911-2004), judge, was born at 17 Beechcroft Mansions, Hopton Road, Streatham, London, on 29 July 1911, the son of George Charles Scarman (died 1954), a Lloyd's underwriter, and his Scottish wife, Ida Irene, 'nee' Schofield. His mother was in his words a 'fierce and lovely' woman to whom he later attributed the streak of conservatism with which he was sometimes reproached ('The Guardian', 29 July 1991). Certainly his early years gave little sign of the radicalism which came to be associated with him, though late in life he admitted having been a schoolboy Liberal, and added: 'Maybe I still am' ('The Independent', 10 Dec 2004). Open scholarships took him to Radley College (where he also won the James and Gibbs scholarships) and on to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he took a first in classical moderations in 1932 and another first in 'literae humaniores' in 1934. From Oxford he went as a Harmsworth scholar to the Middle Temple to read for the bar, to which he was called in 1936. 
The outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 rescued Scarman, as it did many of his generation, from the tedium of waiting for briefs which were slow to come. Having joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve and initially got stuck behind a desk in Abingdon, he eventually found himself in north Africa, Sicily, Italy, and northern Europe on the staff of Sir Arthur Tedder, the commander-in-chief of Mediterranean air forces. He was demobilized in 1945 with the rank of wing commander. Although he saw no fighting he was awarded the Order of Battle Merit of the USSR in 1945, and an OBE in 1944, the latter possibly in recognition of the skills which he had deployed earlier in the war to prevent Tedder's assignment to courts martial. Tedder, in retirement, recalled Scarman as 'the most intelligent and congenial civilian staff member I ever had' ('The Independent', 16 Dec 2004). Scarman was present when General Jodl surrendered to Tedder and Eisenhower at Rheims, and it may be that his later espousal of entrenched human rights owed something to his wartime experience. He maintained his interest in the RAF after demobilization, and was later Tedder's successor as president of the RAF servicemen's Malcolm clubs. 
In the company of hundreds of other war veterans, many of them more scarred than he was, Scarman in 1945 returned to the bar. Although he claimed that he was by nature simply a hard worker who made up in industry what he lacked in talent, he rapidly displayed both qualities. Where others were giving up and moving on, he began to assemble a varied common-law practice, becoming sought after as a particularly skilled cross-examiner. On 5 September 1947 he married Ruth Clement Page-Jenkson. Two years younger than him, she was the daughter of Clement Wright, a member of the Indian Civil Service, and the former wife of Cuthbert Gordon Stowell, from whom she had obtained a divorce; she had changed her name to Page-Jenkson by deed poll. She and Scarman adopted a son, John Clement ('b'. 1946). 
As a barrister in these early post-war years Scarman began to display some of the intellectual courage which was eventually to mark him out. Arguing a 'Rent Acts' case before a judge who was anxious to find for him, he was offered a point of law that would have won him the case but which he knew to be bad. Scarman refused to take it. Such adherence to principle did not earn universal admiration: some of his contemporaries regarded him as sanctimonious. The head of his chambers, Melford Stevenson, once remarked: 'Leslie helps solicitors on with their coats like Father D'Arcy elevating the host', a comment as astute as it was vitriolic ('The Guardian', 10 Dec 2004). It was typical of Scarman that he would not leave it to his clerk to help a solicitor on with his coat after a conference, and typical of the bar to notice such a breach of its class barriers. But it was also true that Scarman's long, gangling frame, his slight stoop, and his gravely courteous mien gave him the mildly unctuous manner that the head of his chambers had noted. 
After only four years in silk, which he had taken in 1957, Scarman was knighted and elevated to the bench of the eclectically titled Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division of the High Court in 1961. He was almost at once given the highly complex lawsuit over the multi-million pound Fuld estate to try. The writer Sybille Bedford observed him there: 'In ambles the lanky -- gracefully lanky -- figure of a youthful judge... a most unusual face: enormous eyes deep-set between high cheek-bones and a jutting skull, a pale face, a hollow face with skin stretched taut, and yet the mouth is full and there show dimples in the sunken cheeks; it is an ascetic's face lit by charm, given the lie by a cherub's smile... it is impossible to imagine him bullying anyone. Yet, he is held in respect: there is no doubt that authority flows from him. (Bedford, 105, 108)' It was as such a judge, first in the High Court, then from 1973 in the Court of Appeal, and from 1977 as a lord of appeal in ordinary, with the title of Baron Scarman, of Quatt, in the county of Salop, that Scarman stood out among his contemporaries. (It had been expected that he would succeed Lord Denning at the head of the Court of Appeal as master of the rolls, but Denning would not retire and Scarman was instead promoted to the Lords.) He was widely regarded as a model judge: courteous, learned, businesslike, humane; capable of being firm or generous as the case required in both the civil and criminal jurisdictions. He stood out, too, as a scholarly exponent of the common law. His judgments, always lean and elegant, include some seminal expositions -- of the law of contempt of court; working out a symmetry between the integrity of the legal process and the right of free speech and comment; and of the developing area of public law in which the needs of the state and the entitlements of the individual were during Scarman's lifetime being rebalanced. 
To have achieved even this much distinction in an era dominated by two other great judicial figures, Lord Diplock and Lord Denning, was no mean feat; but Scarman, who yielded nothing to either of them in learning, had as much acuity as Diplock without his acerbity, and as sharp a sense of policy as Denning without his partiality. During one of Scarman's contempt of court cases counsel at the bar of the house cited a passage from Lord Shaw's speech in 'Scott v. Scott' (1913) on the importance of open justice. As the barrister closed the volume, Scarman said: 'You've just closed the book on one of the finest pieces of prose in the whole of the law reports. You should go on.' The passage, which Scarman must have known by heart, runs: 'To remit the maintenance of constitutional right to the region of judicial discretion is to shift the foundations of freedom from the rock to the sand' ('The Guardian', 10 Dec 2004). It was to be a keynote of Scarman's own work. 
In 1965 Lord Gardiner, lord chancellor in the Labour government, set up Britain's first permanent law commission, introducing a novel depth of research and breadth of policy into the process of law reform in England and Wales. Scarman, still in judicial office, accepted the chairmanship, and for seven years led a team of able and opinionated commissioners, listening to every point of view, taking great care not to impose his own, and showing a gift not only for strategic thinking but for detailed management. His ambition, no less real for being unrealizable, was to slim down the overweight statute book and to replace its bulk with simplified and, where possible, codified measures. The commission's work could have only as much effect as ministers and parliament were prepared to accord to it. But, thanks to Gardiner's support, the Law Commission in Scarman's years of office produced twenty-seven reports containing draft bills, every one of which reached the statute book -- a record looked back upon by his successors with envy. Among the fruits were the radical reforms contained in the 'Divorce Reform Act' (1969) and the 'Matrimonial Proceedings and Property Act' (1970). 
In these years the first chairman of the Australian Law Reform Commission, Michael Kirby, found Scarman, as well as being a good listener, to be 'sharp in analysis, brimming over with ideas, sweet in disposition, egalitarian in relationships, persuasive in advocacy and resolute in action. He became the example and beacon for institutional law reformers everywhere' (Kirby). These, too, were the qualities that earned Scarman accolades as the chairman of a series of public inquiries instituted by government between 1969, when he was given the sensitive task of reporting on the recent disturbances in Northern Ireland, and 1981, when he was asked to report on the riots in Brixton. In these, and in his intervening inquiries -- into the Red Lion Square disturbances (1975) and the Grunwick trade dispute (1977) -- Scarman displayed what were by now his trademark qualities of approachability, open-mindedness, and procedural firmness. He initiated the inquiry into the Red Lion Square disorders with a statement that became a classic source of tone and content for later inquiries: 'This is an inquiry, not a piece of litigation... It is I and I alone who will decide what witnesses are to be called... I propose within limits to allow cross-examination of witnesses to the extent that I think it helpful to the forwarding of the inquiry, but no further. (Sedley, 470)' Scarman was clear, and made it clear to government, that in these extra-judicial roles he remained a judge, adaptable to the requirements of the job but not amenable to any political directions or pressure. He sharply and successfully opposed, as an invasion of judicial independence, a proposal to give the Law Commission a statutory duty to 'assist' government. In this way, repeatedly stationed on the boundaries between the divided functions of the state, Scarman was able to come to the aid of both the legislature and the executive without forfeiting his judicial credentials. Indeed what made him attractive to government and the public were the judicial qualities he brought to his stewardship of the Law Commission and to his public inquiries. They eventually earned him the liking and respect of many members of the black community who had initially seen the setting up of the Brixton inquiry as a whitewash, and both there and in Northern Ireland his unconcern for personal security and willingness to talk to anyone who approached him made him many friends. He later described as 'traumatic' the realization that many of the people of the six counties were effectively without rights. 
Scarman's conduct of the Brixton inquiry was particularly influential. While praising the police for their conduct on the night of the riots, he acknowledged that 'racial disadvantage' was 'a fact of current British life' ('The Times', 26 Nov 1981), and called both for government action to tackle the disproportionately high level of unemployment among young black men and for a new emphasis on community policing to restore trust between the black community and the police. Even so, Scarman never rocked the political boat. His rejection of the notion of institutional racism, and his conclusion that racists in the Metropolitan Police represented only a few 'bad apples' in the barrel, fell a long way short of what Sir William Macpherson's inquiry into the death of Stephen Lawrence was later to conclude. 
Although as a judge Scarman's decisions were by no means always socially liberal or politically left of centre, neither those who knew Scarman nor Scarman himself would have expected them to be. But the reputation that came to surround him, and for which he himself was in large part consciously responsible, was such that his admirers were shocked when in 1979 he cast his vote with the other law lords in favour of upholding the conviction of the editor of 'Gay News', Denis Lemon, for the much-criticized common-law offence of blasphemy. Although in the case about trade-union recognition at GCHQ, Cheltenham, in 1985 he set out a seminal statement of the modern amenability of the royal prerogative to judicial review, he accepted the government's last-minute argument that once national security was raised the courts were shut out. In fact Scarman very rarely dissented. He made up the bare majority in 1986 that rejected Victoria Gillick's attempt to prevent doctors prescribing contraceptives for girls under the age of sixteen, closing the door on the notion that children were without rights. But he joined the rest of the Lords' appellate committee in striking down the Greater London council's 'fares fair' policy in 1981. It was the last of these cases that did most to spoil Scarman's liberal credentials. Although it ostensibly turned upon a dry issue of statutory construction, everybody knew that the case was a political battle between Conservative-controlled outlying boroughs with already high rates and an addiction to private transport and a Labour-dominated regional administration that wanted the ratepayers to subsidize cheap public transport that would clear the roads of unneeded traffic. The leader of the Greater London council, Ken Livingstone, later called Scarman 'a two-faced old hypocrite' for his role in the decision. 'I'm not interested', he said, 'in people who get wonderfully progressive after they retire. He had his chance when he had power; he didn't take it' ('The Guardian', 29 July 1991). 
Scarman would not have recognized any judicial decision that sacrificed legality to politics, or even to policy; but he did become, in Livingstone's phrase, wonderfully progressive after he retired. Indeed he had moved markedly in that direction while still in judicial office. While chairing the Law Commission he had defied the Kilmuir rules, which, until abandoned by a later lord chancellor, Lord Mackay, discouraged judges from speaking in public on matters of policy. Beginning with a series of factual broadcasts on the work of the Law Commission, he went on to take part in Michael Zander's Third Programme discussion series, 'What's Wrong with the Law?' Later he followed his 1974 Hamlyn lectures with a four-part discussion on Radio 3 with Lord Denning (the latter's first but far from last broadcast); and in 1986 he debated Lord McCluskey's Reith lectures on radio with another lord chancellor, Lord Hailsham. 
Although explicitly rejecting the concept of institutional racism in his Brixton report, Scarman had nevertheless recognized the toxic effects of racial discrimination and disadvantage in modern Britain, and he used his seat in the House of Lords to introduce the amendment to the 'Police and Criminal Evidence Bill' (1984), which made racial discrimination by police officers a disciplinary offence. Then in 1985, just before he retired from the bench, he introduced into the Lords a bill to incorporate the European convention on human rights into the United Kingdom's domestic law. His fellow peers passed it, but it was denied parliamentary time in the Commons and fell. It was another thirteen years before a newly elected Labour government put the European convention on the statute book. Scarman's bill, however, was no flash in the pan. In his 1974 Hamlyn lectures, published as 'English Law: the New Dimension' (1975), he had presented a full and cogent case, all the more arresting as time went by for the prescience of its arguments, for giving the powerless direct access to rights which the United Kingdom was anxious for other peoples to have but less keen to incorporate into legislation at home. The lectures were a landmark in strategic thinking about the law. 
Scarman was made an honorary fellow of his old college, Brasenose, in 1966, and later received five other honorary fellowships and fourteen honorary degrees. From 1970 to 1986 he was chairman of the court of the University of London, and from 1977 to 1989 chancellor of Warwick University. From 1973 to 1976 he chaired the Council of Legal Education and then from 1976 to 1979 the senate of the inns of court and the bar. He was a member of the Arts Council from 1968 to 1970 and 1972 to 1973, and vice-chairman of English National Opera from 1976 to 1981. 
In retirement Scarman kept busy as president of the British Institute of Human Rights, the Constitutional Reform Centre, and the Citizen Action Compensation Campaign, and patron of such bodies as the constitutional reform group Charter 88 and the Public Law Project. A trust set up by Charter 88 and chaired by him for a number of years was renamed the Scarman Trust in recognition of his pioneering inquiry reports on Northern Ireland and Brixton. The trust survived him and grew, making monetary awards backed by professional advice and support to stimulate social enterprise in local communities. 
Such largely -- though by no means wholly -- honorific positions were perhaps no more than was to be expected of such a distinguished figure; but what was unexpected was Scarman's championship, in retirement, of a series of unpopular causes. He took up the cases of the Birmingham six and the Guildford four (Irishmen gaoled on questionable evidence for alleged terrorist activities), and the Tottenham Three (young black men convicted of the murder of a policeman during the Broadwater Farm riots in 1985), calling for an overhaul of the mechanism, then entirely a matter for the home secretary's discretion, for re-examining possible miscarriages of justice. As a judge Scarman had been responsible for quashing the three convictions in the 'Confait case', a historic miscarriage of justice that lay behind the eventual introduction of tape-recording of police interviews. Scarman had satisfied himself in each case that something had gone seriously wrong, and the campaigns were all ultimately successful. In the same spirit he campaigned for a statutory right of access to official information and the repeal of the widely disliked section 2 of the 'Official Secrets Act'. The creation, within his lifetime, of the Criminal Cases Review Commission and the passing of a 'Freedom of Information Act' illustrated yet again Scarman's capacity for wisdom before the event. 
A tireless worker who often rose to work before dawn, a near-recluse who would not attend dinners except in his own inn of court, an admitted friend of change but an avowed enemy of disjunction, Scarman was someone whose private asceticism seemed incompatible with his outgoing public persona and readiness to take on challenge and controversy. But if one adds the fact that as a young man he played the trombone, and that in later years he became passionate about opera, one starts to see the cultured man who on one occasion gently interrupted a young barrister appearing before him who had casually attributed to Candide the view that all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds, and said: 'I think you'll find it was Dr Pangloss' (private information). Having lived latterly in Alpha Road, Birchington, Kent, he died on 8 December 2004 at Eaton Lodge nursing home, 62 Westgate Bay Avenue, Westgate-on-Sea, Kent, of cancer of the bladder and bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his wife, Ruth, and their adopted son. A memorial service was held at the Temple Church on 16 February 2005. 
One of the long-term processes which the twentieth century witnessed in the legal system of England and Wales was the transition from the common-law-dominated system of the nineteenth century to the statute-dominated system of the twenty-first. Leslie Scarman's life and work both spanned and helped to shape this historic shift. A learned and principled exponent of the common law, he presided over the endeavours of the first law commission to systematize the process of statute-law reform and became the first major legal figure to call, many years before its time, for the enactment of a bill of rights. A serving judge, he was used by government to defuse major discontents by conducting a succession of public inquiries. Scarman's life was both the orthodox legal career of his generation and a surprising breaking of the judicial mould. 


@@@@@


doc= 94623


Scott, Sir Nicholas Paul (1933-2005), politician and businessman, was born at the North Middlesex County Hospital, Edmonton, London, on 5 August 1933, the eldest son of Percival John Scott, a Metropolitan Police officer, and his Irish Catholic wife, Teresa Mary, 'nee' Murphy. At the time of his birth his father was a police constable, but he later rose to be a chief inspector. Scott was educated modestly, first at St Andrew's primary school in Streatham, and then at Clapham College. Later he studied part-time at the City of London College and the City Literary Institute, which allowed him to acquire a variety of executive posts and consultancies, principally in print, design, and publishing. After college he joined the RAF as a trainee navigator, but bad eyesight curtailed his career. On 7 August 1964, by then the personal assistant to the managing director of an advertising firm, he married Elizabeth Rosemary Merriell, a thirty-year-old divorcee, general secretary of an educational organization, and daughter of Robert Bissett Robinson, director of government contracts at the General Post Office. They had a daughter, and adopted a son and a daughter. 
Scott was involved in Conservative politics from an early age, serving as a Conservative councillor on Holborn borough council in 1956-9 and 1962-5, and as national chairman of the Young Conservatives in 1963. He unsuccessfully contested Islington South-West in the general elections of 1959 and 1964 before being chosen as candidate for the safe Conservative seat of Paddington South, which he duly won in the general election of 1966. As a backbencher he spoke out against Enoch Powell's attack on Commonwealth immigrants in 1968, and in the same year repeatedly voted against James Callaghan's legislation to limit the entry into Britain of east African Asians. When the Conservatives returned to government in 1970, he was named parliamentary private secretary to Iain Macleod, the chancellor of the exchequer, just a month before Macleod died. Returning to the back benches, he stuck to his liberal views, opposing the sale of arms to apartheid South Africa. In 1972 he re-entered the government, this time as parliamentary private secretary to another liberal Conservative, Robert Carr, the home secretary. In January 1974, at the very end of Edward Heath's government, he became parliamentary under-secretary of state at the Department of Employment, under William Whitelaw. 
Despite having been lauded by 'Time' magazine as one of the 'future leaders of the world' ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Jan 2005), Scott's political career suddenly stalled. First, he lost his Paddington seat at the election of February 1974. Second, although he made a swift return to the Commons in October 1974 via the safe seat of Chelsea, Margaret Thatcher, the new Conservative leader, removed him from his post as shadow housing minister when he refused a more junior post. Nor was he included in Thatcher's first government following the Conservatives' return to power in May 1979. Instead he was elected to the chairmanship of the Conservative back-bench employment committee, as well as serving on the executive of the back-bench 1922 committee. Once described by Richard Crossman as 'the most liberal Tory of them all' ('The Independent', 10 Jan 2005), Scott had founded Nick's Diner, an informal club where like-minded tory 'wets', who had originally gathered, according to Kenneth Clarke, 'to prevent Ted Heath becoming too left-wing' (ibid.), now met up to criticize Margaret Thatcher's monetarist policies. Scott briefly flirted with the idea of joining the Social Democratic Party (SDP), but ultimately stayed loyal. 
Scott's luck turned in September 1981, when James Prior, exiled to Northern Ireland, handpicked his own ministerial team. As parliamentary under-secretary of state, given responsibility for prisons, Scott was heavily criticized after a mass breakout from the Maze prison in September 1983, but Prior threatened to resign if Scott was dismissed. In the event, in September 1986, Scott was promoted to minister of state, returning in June 1987 to the mainland as minister of state at the Department of Health and Social Security, following the longest period in office in Northern Ireland by any post-war minister. In this new post his liberal tory instincts for higher public spending repeatedly jarred with Margaret Thatcher's constant desire for cutbacks. He continued at the trimmed-down Department of Social Security under John Major, taking on the additional title of minister for the disabled in 1990. His political career hit the buffers in May 1994, when he was found to have misled the House of Commons over government wrecking tactics that killed off a back-bench 'Civil Rights (Disabled Persons) Bill'. His cause was not helped when his daughter, Victoria, herself a disabled rights campaigner, led the political attack against him. Two months later, he lost his post in a ministerial reshuffle. 
In 1995 John Major recommended Scott for a knighthood -- he had already been appointed MBE in 1964 and sworn of the privy council in 1989. Thereafter Scott suffered a series of personal misfortunes. Having survived a tough reselection battle for the redrawn seat of Kensington and Chelsea, his car shunted into another, trapping a three-year-old in a pushchair. Scott departed the scene, leaving his secretary to cope. He was later found guilty of drink-driving. Then, in 1996, he was photographed face down in a Bournemouth gutter, following an Irish embassy party at the Conservative Party conference. Few believed his story -- that he had only had two glasses of wine, but that these had interacted with prescribed painkillers -- and especially disbelieving were many of the Eurosceptic members of his Kensington and Chelsea constituency association. They called a vote of confidence: Scott lost, making way for Alan Clark. 
It is said that Scott only joined the Conservative Party because 'I was told the prettiest girls were in the Young Conservatives' ('Daily Telegraph', 8 Jan 2005). His first marriage ended in 1976. There followed several high-profile alliances, including one with the black model Mynah Bird. On 18 April 1979 Scott married the Hon. Cecilia Anne Tapsell ('b'. 1943), dress designer, former wife of the Conservative MP Sir Peter Tapsell, and daughter of Bladen Wilmer Hawke, ninth Baron Hawke of Towton. They had one son and one daughter. Scott died on 6 January 2005, at Nazareth House, Hammersmith Road, Hammersmith, London, after suffering for a long period with Alzheimer's disease. He was survived by his second wife and four children, the adopted daughter from his first marriage having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 94624


Campbell, John Lorne, of Canna (1906-1996), scholar of Scottish Gaelic folklore, was born in Edinburgh on 1 October 1906, the eldest son of Colonel Duncan Campbell, laird of Inverneill, Argyll, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Harriet, from New Jersey, USA. He was educated at Cargilfield School (near Edinburgh), Rugby School, and St John's College, Oxford. At Oxford he studied rural economy, graduating in 1929 and receiving a diploma in rural economy in 1930, but he also took up Gaelic studies under the guidance of John Fraser, then professor of Celtic at Jesus College. He had first become attracted to Gaelic on hearing young islanders speaking it in Oban, when he was in his teens. Rural economy and Gaelic studies were to be the twin interests of his working life. 
Campbell's interests were quickly translated into action and publication. His 'Highland Songs of the Forty-Five' was published in 1933, with full translations of thirty-two songs and poems by twelve eighteenth-century authors. In his preface he expressed his great indebtedness to John Fraser. A reprint, including corrections and additions, was published by the Scottish Gaelic Texts Society in 1984. In 1933 he went to Barra, in the southern Hebrides, where he met Compton Mackenzie. They set up the Sea League the same year, campaigning for strict fishing limits to protect local fishermen and fish stocks, and issuing 'The Sea Leaguer', a news-sheet for fishermen which included some Gaelic articles. 
In 1934, while working on another book, 'The Book of Barra', with Compton Mackenzie, Campbell met Margaret Fay Shaw ['see below']. They were married in Glasgow on 15 June 1935, with the service in Gaelic. There were no children. They both visited Nova Scotia soon after their marriage, and this began a long association with the Gaelic colonies in Canada, and collection of Gaelic songs from these communities. After three years together in Barra they bought the island of Canna, off the Inverness-shire coast, in 1938 (for $9000), and lived there thereafter, developing farming and cattle rearing, and encouraging and protecting the native community. Campbell became known as Fear Chanaidh (the laird of Canna), but his was a benevolent lairdship. At Canna House he and Margaret built up a formidable library and collection of Gaelic recordings and highland photographs. In 1981 they gave the island of Canna to the National Trust for Scotland, and subsequently arranged for their archive to be retained and protected at Canna House. 
Campbell continued to take a close interest in environmental and community issues, and in conservation. In 1939 he collaborated with Sir Alexander MacEwen to produce 'Act Now for the Highlands and Islands', which included the suggestion of a highland development board. Another special interest was in collecting butterflies, and he pursued this both in Canna and in Italy, where he and his wife went for holidays over many years. They also visited Canada and the USA regularly. Over the years he was a voluminous correspondent: a passing remark in a letter could often trigger a two-page response. 
Campbell's range of publications was wide, including 'Gaelic in Scottish Education and Life' (1950), 'Father Allan McDonald of Eriskay, 1859-1905' (1954), the Barra stories of John Macpherson, postmaster at Northbay, in 'Tales from Barra Told by the Coddy' (1960), 'The Furrow Behind Me', the translated autobiography of the Hebridean crofter Angus MacLellan (1962), 'Bardachd Mhgr Ailein air a deasachadh', Father Allan's Gaelic verse (1965), 'A Collection of Highland Rites and Customs' (1975), and some joint publications, including, with Derick Thomson, 'Edward Lhuyd in the Scottish Highlands, 1699-1700' (1963), and, with Trevor H. Hall, 'Strange Things: the Enquiry by the Society for Psychical Research into Second Sight in the Scottish Highlands' (1968). In 1984 he published 'Canna: the Story of a Hebridean Island', with revised editions in 1986 and 1994. There was also a continuous flow of articles in periodicals, on historical and literary topics, including several on the poetry of Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair. 
This wide range of publications contributed greatly to the understanding of highland life and history, but there can be little doubt that Campbell's most enduring life work was on Gaelic song as preserved in the oral tradition. He became deeply involved in this study in his Barra years, with the added stimulus of his wife's collecting work in South Uist, and this interest extended to the Gaelic colonies in Nova Scotia. Campbell converted to Catholicism at some point in the late 1930s, and had a tendency to concentrate on songs collected in Catholic areas, especially South Uist and Barra. With Francis Collinson he edited the three-volume 'Hebridean Folksongs: a Collection of Waulking Songs made by Donald MacCormick in Kilphedir in South Uist in the Year 1893' (1969, 1977, 1981), and in 1990 he published 'Songs Remembered in Exile'. The latter was a collection of traditional Gaelic songs from Nova Scotia, recorded in Cape Breton and Antigonish county in 1937; the tunes had mostly been transcribed by Seamus Ennis, a noted Irish collector of folk-song. Campbell's work on folk-song helped greatly to define the body of surviving work, particularly from the Catholic Hebrides and Nova Scotia, and especially in oral versions recorded in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 
Campbell died on 25 April 1996 while he and his wife were on holiday near Fiesole, Florence, Italy, and staying in a nunnery in which there were Gaelic-speaking nuns. He was buried in woodland near Canna House on the island of Canna. He had been awarded honorary degrees by the universities of Glasgow, Oxford, and St Francis Xavier in Antigonish, and had been made an OBE in 1990. 
Campbell's wife, Margaret Fay Shaw (1903-2004), folklorist and musicologist, was born on 9 November 1903 at Glenshaw, near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, the fifth and youngest daughter of Henry Clay Shaw (died 1918), a civil engineer whose family owned a steel foundry, and his wife Maria Frances (Fanny), 'nee' Patchin (died 1911), from Old Bennington, Vermont. The Shaws were descended from John Shaw, who had emigrated from Scotland to Philadelphia in 1782 and had been granted land in the west of the state, on which Glenshaw was built. After her parents' deaths she was brought up by her elder sisters and educated at a boarding school in Bryn Mawr, near Philadelphia, where she cultivated a talent for the piano. In 1921 she was for a year sent to Scotland, where she attended St Bride's School, Helensburgh, near Glasgow, and where she first heard Hebridean folksongs performed in English by the collector Marjory Kennedy-Fraser. Five years later she returned to Scotland to trace the songs' Gaelic origins in a tour that saw her and a sister bicycle the length of the Hebrides from Castlebay to Port of Ness. Between 1929 and 1935 she lived at North Glendale, near Lochboisdale on South Uist, an island to which she formed a deep and lifelong attachment. There she lived with two sisters from whom she learned Scottish Gaelic, which was essential for the transcription of the island's songs and the stories that led to their composition. Part of this research was published in 1955 as 'Folksongs and Folklore of South Uist', her principal work, which provided a rich blend of different song types, stories, proverbs, and recipes, as well as photographs taken by her. New editions appeared in 1977 and 1986, and in 1993 she published an autobiography, 'From the Alleghenies to the Hebrides', which recalled her experience of the Aran Islands and St Kilda (during the government enforced evacuation of 1930), as well as of life on South Uist. Following her marriage to John Lorne Campbell she lived first in Barra and from 1938 on the island of Canna, where at Canna House she continued her research, provided a home to numerous cats, and played her Steinway grand piano for the couple's many visitors. In 1981 the couple gave the island to the National Trust for Scotland. She continued to live on Canna until after her hundredth birthday, which was marked by a BBC television programme, 'Among Friends'. In recognition of her work she received honorary degrees from the universities of Aberdeen and Edinburgh, St Francis Xavier, and the National University of Ireland, and in November 2004 she became an honorary fellow of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society. She died at Belford Hospital, Fort William, on 11 December 2004, of kidney failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 94626


Smith, Richard Malden Heckstall- (1934-2004), jazz and rock saxophonist, was born on 26 September 1934 at Dinham Hall, Ludlow, Shropshire, the only child of Hugh William Heckstall-Smith (1896-1973), schoolmaster and author of scientific textbooks, and his wife, Eileen Violet Mary, 'nee' Anderson (1891-1971). One term in a York boarding school was enough for Heckstall-Smith, so in 1947 he went to Gordonstoun, where his father taught. This time it was his father who curtailed his education, as he fell out with the headmaster, Kurt Hahn, and both father and son departed. Dick Heckstall-Smith then found himself a pupil at the liberal Foxhole School in Dartington, Devon. This was more to his liking -- effectively, pupils did what they wanted -- and he cultivated a passion for clarinet and saxophone, influenced in particular by the New Orleans jazz musician Sidney Bechet. Between 1953 and 1956 he studied agronomy at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and led the university jazz band. Judging an inter-university jazz contest in 1955, the noted clarinettist Sandy Brown recognized his talent and was to ease his entry into the professional world. 
As a conscientious objector Heckstall-Smith declined national service and was instructed to work as a hospital orderly for eighteen months, but because of a back injury did only nine. In 1957 he played in London jazz clubs, working with Brown, and releasing an EP recording, 'Very Old Special Jazz'. In the summer of 1958 he joined a rock'n'roll band at Butlin's, Filey. This easy work made him appreciate the importance of crossing genres. His credo was, 'When you're freelance, you say yes to everything' (personal knowledge). He joined Jerome Robbins's touring 'Ballet USA' in 1959, participated in jazz and poetry evenings organized by Michael Horowitz and Pete Brown, and played with the commercial 'trad' bands of Kenny Ball and Bob Wallis. At this time he became addicted first to alcohol and then to various illegal substances. On 15 September 1958 he married Gertrude Christine (Gary) Dobringer, a twenty-year-old Austrian au pair, and daughter of Josef Dobringer, electrician. They had a son, Arthur, but divorced in 1973. 
In March 1962 Alexis Korner and Cyril Davies formed Blues Inc. for dates in and around London, notably at the Marquee. The line-up was fluid but Heckstall-Smith was with them for over a year. Several musicians, including Mick Jagger, Long John Baldry, and Paul Jones, established their own bands, and one splinter unit was the Graham Bond ORGANization with Graham Bond (organ), Jack Bruce (bass), and Ginger Baker (drums). Heckstall-Smith joined in September 1963, and played on their albums 'The Sound of '65' and 'There's a Bond Between Us'. However, Bond's drug dependence, obsession with black magic, and chaotic organization destroyed the group. 
John Mayall's Bluesbreakers also specialized in personnel changes, and Heckstall-Smith was recruited in September 1967. He contributed to 'Bare Wires' (1968). Unfortunately for Mayall the arrival of Jon Hiseman on drums led to the formation of the progressive rock group Colosseum with Hiseman and Heckstall-Smith in September 1968. Colosseum included the guitarist James Litherland (and later Clem Clempson), the organist Dave Greenslade, and the bassist Tony Reeves (later Mick Clarke), with vocals from Chris Farlowe. They broke with the tradition of having twelve songs on an album in favour of long and sometimes rambling suites. Their best-selling albums 'Those Who are about to Die Salute You' (1969), 'Valentyne Suite' (1969), and 'Daughter of Time' (1970) influenced such groups as Led Zeppelin and Chicago. Heckstall-Smith, an imposing figure with his dark beard and balding head, also played on Jack Bruce's solo album 'Things We Like' (1970), and on albums by Davey Graham, Neil Ardley, Chicken Shack, and Pete Brown's Battered Ornaments. 
Colosseum disbanded in 1971 after a disastrous show in Italy where everybody blamed everybody else. Working with the lyricist Pete Brown, Heckstall-Smith made a solo album, 'A Story Ended' (1972), and then formed Manchild, which supported Deep Purple on an American tour. He abandoned touring after suffering a spinal injury, which took several years to heal. In its place he studied social sciences at South Bank Polytechnic and graduated in 1979. He returned to music with his bands Big Chief, Mainsqueeze, and DHS$. The eclecticism became more marked, Heckstall-Smith playing African-influenced jazz one day and funk the next. In 1989 he published his autobiography, 'The Safest Place in the World', later expanded into 'Blowing the Blues' (2004). In 1992 he suffered a stroke during a bypass operation, but he regained his speech and movement. He recorded with Jack Bruce ('This That', 1995), played 'world' music with Celtic Steppes, and joined the re-formed Colosseum for a European tour. He worked with the Hamburg Blues Band and, in 1998, made an album with John Etheridge, 'Obsessiveness'. In 2000 he recorded an album, 'Blues and Beyond', produced by Pete Brown and featuring Jack Bruce, Paul Jones, Mick Taylor, John Mayall, Peter Green, and members of Colosseum. He called it 'the record I had always wanted to make' (personal knowledge), and it resembled a musical autobiography. 
Heckstall-Smith worked in jazz, rock, and blues and its many fusions, and did accomplished work in all the areas he touched. Many, however, remembered him primarily for his party piece where he played two saxophones at once, thus emulating another hero, Roland Kirk. He died on 17 December 2004 at Queen Mary's Hospital, Camden, London, of cirrhosis of the liver, and was survived by his son, Arthur. 


@@@@@


doc= 94631


Johanneson, Albert Louis (1940-1995), footballer, was born in Germiston, South Africa, on 12 March 1940, the son of Louis Johanneson, mechanic, and his wife, Caroline. After playing for his hometown club of Germiston Colliers he was recommended to Leeds United by a local schoolteacher. Within days of signing professional forms in April 1961, he made his second division debut at outside left against Swansea Town. His ability was in excess of the passion he had had for the game as a child and adolescent. In apartheid South Africa football was seen by him as 'a white man's game. When we did go to watch, the stadium was segregated, not home and away supporters, but black and white supporters... It was cheaper to go in to watch football as a white person' (Harrison, 57). 
Recently relegated, Leeds United in 1961 was going through a difficult time. Discipline among the players was lax. The recent arrivals Johanneson, Eric Smith, and Bobby Collins, together with the new manager, Don Revie, helped revive and build Leeds into a successful first division side. On 27 February 1963, during Britain's coldest winter of the century, Johanneson married Norma Elaine Comrie, a hospital dispenser of Jamaican origin, at Blenheim Baptist Chapel, Woodhouse, Leeds. His new-found contentment helped his football. He finished as top scorer with fifteen goals in forty-one games at the end of the 1963-4 season -- then a post-war club record for a winger -- helping the club win promotion to the first division. Over the next two seasons he continued to find the net frequently, scoring twelve goals in thirty-six games in 1964-5, and twelve goals in twenty-eight games in 1965-6. His team-mate Johnny Giles felt that Johanneson could have become 'one of the game's outstanding personalities' (Thomas, 33), on a par even with the brilliant George Best of Manchester United. 
Small and wiry, Johanneson was remembered by Mark Rivlin as 'an exciting and intelligent player... darting in from the wing, leaving a defender gasping for air' (Rivlin, 10). Alan Roberts, the Leeds general manager, described him as 'very quick and very skilful but... a timid sort of man. Quiet, meek, unassuming' ('The Guardian', 3 Oct 1995). He was known by supporters as 'Hurry, Hurry Johanneson', or 'the black flash'. 
Johanneson was the first black African to play in an FA cup final, against Liverpool in May 1965. He didn't have a good game. It marked the beginning of the end of his golden period, though he did feature in Leeds' first European competition, the Fairs cup, the following season. His form made a brief resurgence in the 1966-7 season when he made twenty-eight first team appearances, but competition for places was increasing, with Eddie Gray, a future Scottish international, and Mike O'Grady vying for the outside left position. In 1970, after playing 172 games and scoring forty-eight league goals, Johanneson was transferred to York City. He made just twenty-six appearances for the club, scoring three goals, nonetheless helping York to promotion to the third division. 
Johanneson once complained to Revie that the opposing full-back was calling him a 'Black bastard'. 'Well', said the methodical manager, 'call him a White bastard' (Thomas, 52). With Johanneson usually the only black man on the field, such battles were often faced and felt alone. Fortunately, on the field, Jack Charlton and Billy Bremner took it upon themselves to become his minders. Off the pitch -- in the changing room, front room, or high street -- there were few or no support structures available to galvanize a battered confidence. To play well steeled the soul against such abuse; to play badly weakened that protection. To escape those contradictory pressures of limelight and isolation Johanneson eventually turned to drink and drugs. He had a lot to lose: a wife, and two daughters, Yvonne and Alicia. But his method of escape was one familiar to many black South Africans of the townships. His premature death on 28 September 1995 at his flat in Gledhow Towers, Leeds, from bronchopneumonia, meningitis, and heart disease -- alone, and in relative anonymity and poverty -- was the end of a long, slow, and tragic decline. Yet he was remembered by many spectators for the joy he brought as a footballer of unique talent. 


@@@@@


doc= 94632


Weir, Mary (1910-2004), actor, was born on 17 March 1910 at 134 Adamswell Street, Springburn, Glasgow, the eldest of the four children of Thomas Weir (1888-1916), a journeyman engine fitter, and his wife, Jeanie, 'nee' Davidson. One of her siblings was Tom Weir (1914-2006), the well-known broadcaster and writer on country life. After their father was killed in action during the early stages of the First World War, she and her siblings were brought up by their mother and grandmother in a typical east-end Glasgow tenement building. Despite the poverty of the surroundings -- Springburn was then one of the most deprived areas in Britain -- Weir was inculcated with the strict values and work ethic that remained with her throughout her life. On leaving school she trained as a shorthand typist, and for her phenomenal speed she was affectionately nicknamed the Flying Scotswoman. By now she had joined a local amateur dramatic society, the Pantheon Club. At the outset of the Second World War she was employed as a typist in a munitions factory where she entertained workmates with a variety show of her own devising. She also enjoyed success on the 'Carroll Levis Discoveries' radio talent show and gained second place as a mimic. Encouraged by this she turned professional and found regular employment on Scottish radio, with frequent appearances on 'Children's Hour', winning a reputation as a budding comedian. On 13 October 1938 she married her childhood sweetheart, Alexander (Sandy) Hamilton (died 1997), a shipping clerk, and son of James Hamilton, engine fitter, then aged twenty-eight. The couple, who had no children, lived first in Glasgow and then moved to London in 1945. 
Weir's first breakthrough occurred two years later when she was cast as Tattie McIntosh in Tommy Handley's popular radio show 'ITMA ('It's that Man Again')' which ran until 1949. During the 1950s her popularity increased with her role as Ivy McTweed in the radio adaptation of 'The McFlannels', and she enhanced her national profile as Aggie MacDonald, the cook in the radio sitcom 'Life with the Lyons' (1951-61), which later transferred to television (1955-60). 
The move to television made by many actors in the 1950s was a particularly fortuitous one for Weir as her diminutive figure -- she was 4 feet 11 inches tall -- and her Scots accent made her instantly recognizable. Among her many roles were characters in 'Dr Finlay's Casebook', 'Hugh and I', 'The High Life', 'Oh Brother', 'Bless this House', and 'Visiting Day'. The most notable was Hazel the McWitch in the BBC's children's series 'Rentaghost' (1976-84) that over fifty-eight episodes regularly drew an audience of two million. By the early 1970s she was also well-known for extolling the quality of Flash liquid -- a floor and bathroom cleaner -- on television adverts. In 1977 she was the guest on 'This is your Life' with Eamonn Andrews. She made one of her last appearances in Scottish Television's 1996 production of the children's play 'The Flowers of the Forest'. 
In comparison to her radio and television work, Weir's film roles were relatively minor. She first appeared on screen in 'Birth-Day' (1945), a Ministry of Information film on maternity services. This was followed by, among others, 'Floodtide' (1949), 'Carry on Regardless' (1961), 'The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie' (1969), Hammer Horror's 'Hands of the Ripper' (1971), and 'One of our Dinosaurs is Missing' (1976). Her stage performances were even fewer in number. She made her West End debut with Alfred Matthews at the Globe Theatre and followed this with a 1948 production of 'The Happiest Days of Your Life' with Margaret Rutherford at the Apollo. In Edinburgh she appeared in 'Beneath the Wee Red Lums' (Royal Lyceum, 1956). 
Weir's talents were not confined to acting. She enjoyed a considerable reputation as a public speaker and was a prolific and accomplished writer from the age of fifteen when she had an article accepted by the Glasgow 'Evening Times'. In addition to radio scripts for programmes such as 'Woman's Hour' and 'Home This Afternoon', she was a regular newspaper columnist, and published a cookery book, 'Molly Weir's Recipes' (1980). Between 1970 ('Shoes were for Sunday') and 1983 ('Spinning like a Peerie') she also published seven volumes of memoirs. 
Weir's many roles reflected her dynamic personality; she was often cast as a forceful, witty, acerbic character who displayed a refreshing disregard for authority and the proprieties of social convention. She once arrived for an interview at a fashionable Mayfair patisserie, hair in curlers, covered by a headscarf. She was opposed to what she referred to as 'middle-class militancy' and became an outspoken critic of the political campaigning of actors like Vanessa Redgrave. Her life and career could be summed up by her own claim that she had taken careful note of the ten talents in the 'Bible' and that she was determined that not a single talent of hers should wither and die. Voted Scotswoman of the year in 2000, she spent her later years in Pinner, Middlesex. She died following a stroke on 28 November 2004 at Denham Manor nursing home, Halings Lane, Denham, Buckinghamshire. According to her wishes she was cremated and her ashes buried on the banks of Loch Lomond. Her estate of $1.8 million was left mainly to charities. 


@@@@@


doc= 94633


Wheeler, David John (1927-2004), computer scientist, was born at 172 Charles Road, Sparkbrook, Birmingham, on 9 February 1927, the second of three children of Arthur William Wheeler and his wife, (Agnes) Marjorie, 'nee' Gudgeon. Arthur Wheeler was a press tool maker and engineer, and the proprietor of a small shopfitting and repair firm. The family lived in Small Heath, Birmingham, where Wheeler attended the local primary school. In 1938 he won a scholarship to the King Edward VI Grammar School, Camp Hill, Birmingham. In 1940 the school was evacuated first to Warwick and then to Lichfield. In 1942 the family moved for the duration of the war to Tunstall, Stoke-on-Trent, where Wheeler's father made tools for aircraft production. Wheeler completed his sixth-form education at Hanley high school without further interruption. He shone at mathematics and physics, and in 1945 won a minor entrance scholarship and a state scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied mathematics and graduated BA in 1948 as a wrangler. 
In November 1946, while still an undergraduate, Wheeler attended the inaugural lecture of Douglas Hartree, the newly appointed Plummer professor of mathematical physics. Hartree had recently returned from the United States where he had seen the latest electronic computing developments, and he was convinced that computers would revolutionize the way science was done. Fascinated by these developments, Wheeler found his way to the university mathematical laboratory, where one of the new computing machines, EDSAC (electronic delay storage automatic calculator), was being built under the direction of Maurice Wilkes. An enthusiastic Wheeler was put to use as a wireman for the new machine. In October 1948 he became a research student in the mathematical laboratory under the supervision of Wilkes and joined the team that was building EDSAC. Wheeler's research topic was computer programming methods and their application. His first major contribution was a simple programming system -- known as the 'initial orders' -- that translated the symbolic programs written by mathematicians into the binary codes that the machine understood. 
EDSAC sprang into life on 6 May 1949. The machine was soon pressed into regular operation, providing the world's first electronic computing service. As operational experience built up, it became clear that programmers would be much more productive if they were provided with a library of subroutines -- small, prewritten programs for mathematical functions and the tabulation of printed results. Subroutines saved programmers from having to write code and also reduced the incidence of errors in their programs. During the summer of 1949 Wheeler tinkered with the initial orders to allow the use of subroutines. Using just forty-one instructions he was able not only to support subroutines, but also to add many additional features. His most important innovation was a technique for implementing the 'closed' subroutine, by which a single copy of a subroutine was placed in an arbitrary position in the computer memory, and could be invoked many times from other places in the program. The closed subroutine was one of the most significant inventions in computer science, for which Wheeler was inducted into the hall of fellows of the Computer History Museum, Mountain View, California, in 2003. In 1951 Wheeler, together with Wilkes and Stanley Gill, wrote the first textbook on programming, 'The Preparation of Programs for an Electronic Digital Computer'. The book arrived on the scene just as the first American computers were coming into service, and the Cambridge programming techniques were widely adopted. Wheeler's programming brilliance was widely recognized, and the programming techniques he described in 'The Preparation of Programs' were studied worldwide. 
In 1951 Wheeler secured a research fellowship at Cambridge, and during 1951-3 spent two years as a visiting assistant professor at Illinois University, where he contributed to the design of the ILLIAC computer. In 1956 he was appointed an assistant director of research in the mathematical laboratory at Cambridge. A successor machine, EDSAC 2, was under construction, and Wheeler again designed the programming system. Working with EDSAC brought him into contact with users, including an astrophysics research student, Joyce Margaret Blackler, who arrived at the mathematical laboratory in 1956. The daughter of Edward George Blackler, garage proprietor, she and Wheeler married on 24 August 1957, when she was twenty-six; they had one son and two daughters. 
In 1966 Wheeler was appointed reader in computer science; he was elected a fellow of Darwin College the following year. The mathematical laboratory was at the centre of his whole professional life as teacher, scholar, and research supervisor. A gentle manner and humility belied his formidable analytical powers and problem-solving ability. His many research students, eventually scattered around the globe, often became lifelong friends. His academic career consisted of a string of further important contributions to computer science and practice, mostly conducted in the mathematical laboratory (renamed the computer laboratory in 1970). He played a major role in the operating system for the laboratory's TITAN computer, Britain's leading time-sharing computer project of the 1960s. In the 1970s he worked on the laboratory's CAP computer, an important experimental design, and on the Cambridge Ring, an early networked computer system. 
Wheeler was appointed professor of computer science at Cambridge in 1978, and in 1981 was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Beyond the laboratory, he was a consultant for Bell Laboratories and the Digital Equipment Corporation in the United States. At the latter he worked with Mike Burrows -- a former research student -- to devise the Burrows-Wheeler compression algorithm, a technique for reducing the size of computer files that became widely used in computer programming. Close to retirement in 1994 he invented with Roger Needham -- another former research student and at that time head of the laboratory -- an elegant and widely used cryptography technique later called TEA (tiny encryption algorithm). 
Wheeler retired in 1994, becoming professor emeritus. His later years were blighted by failing eyesight, but he still spent most days in the laboratory, often making the journey by cycle. On 13 December 2004, while cycling from his home to the laboratory on a cold day, he succumbed to a fatal heart attack. He was survived by his wife, Joyce, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94641


Fletcher, Cyril Trevellian (1913-2005), comedian and impresario, was born on 25 June 1913 at Dunoon, Hagden Lane, Watford, Hertfordshire, the only son and younger child of George Trevellian Fletcher, deputy town clerk of Watford, and his wife, Maude Mary, 'nee' Ginger. Both parents were keen on amateur dramatics. He attended a preparatory school in Trowbridge, Wiltshire, where his father had become town clerk, then Woodhouse School in Finchley, where he persuaded the headmaster to allow him to produce a concert in aid of library funds and cast himself as leading performer: 'How did I know, I wonder, that I could do this, never having even been in an amateur concert of any kind?' Nevertheless, after its success, 'the school magazine proclaimed the advent of a new comedian' ('Nice One Cyril', 41-2). 
Having disappointed his father by failing his French matriculation three times, Fletcher could not bring himself to announce the fact that his real ambition was to make the stage his profession. He decided to work in London, first for a timber firm, then for the Scottish Union and National Insurance Company, where he produced an unofficial office magazine in which he published the first 'Odd Odes' that were later to bring him lasting fame. Just as significantly he enrolled at the Guildhall School of Music as an evening drama student. One of his tutors was Kate Rourke, who had been Henry Irving's leading lady. To help pay for his lessons he performed as a comedian at club socials and dinners. Through this he first made contact with the Concert Artistes Association, which enabled him to obtain more contacts for after-dinner engagements. He became a member and was proud of being elected president several times in the 1950s and 1960s; he later became one of their patrons. 
After appearing at a Sunday night concert at the Prince of Wales Theatre in 1936, when his droll act had received an enthusiastic response, Fletcher was approached by Greatrex Newman, whose seaside show the Fol-de-Rols was one of the most popular of the day. Newman offered him a season at the White Rock Pavilion, Hastings, for $7 a week. The same week his manager at Scottish Union and National asked if he would like to be their junior representative in Rangoon: ''Thank you for your confidence in me', I said, 'but I was coming to see you at the end of the week to resign'. 'Oh,' he said, rather deprecatingly, 'and what sort of job had you in mind?'... 'I am going to be a comedian', I said. To say he was considerably disconcerted by my answer is a grave under-statement. ('Nice One Cyril', 54-5)' Fletcher enjoyed two successful seasons at Hastings with the Fol-de-Rols and was one of the first comedians to appear on the newly opened BBC television service from Alexandra Palace. He also started to become a popular voice on radio via broadcasts for Radio Luxembourg and the BBC. 
In 1938 Fletcher was booked at Llandudno and, short of material for a broadcast from the show, decided to recite Edgar Wallace's 'Dreaming of Thee: a Lovesick Tommy's Dream of Home', a sub-Kipling piece delivered in a nasal cockney accent. Within days Fletcher realized what an impact he'd made when he heard a bus conductor distributing tickets and impersonating his comic voice: 'I became a household name like Guinness or Harpic' ('Nice One Cyril', 64). Fletcher started recording his 'Odd Odes' in 1938 for Columbia and Decca which, together with such radio series as 'Thanking Yew' (named after his catchphrase), consolidated his popularity. 
In 1940, when booked for a programme to be broadcast from Bristol, where the BBC's variety department had been relocated during the London blitz, Fletcher met the actress, singer, and scriptwriter 
In parallel with his broadcasting work Fletcher was in demand for variety, and appeared on the bill with several music hall veterans, including Harry Tate, George Robey, Nellie Wallace, Billy Bennett, and Harry Champion. He was flattered when Max Miller took an interest in his act and advised him how to improve it: 'For the placing of a gag and for the timing of a joke he had and has no equal' ('Nice One Cyril', 80). After taking part in some Pathe Pictorials, Fletcher's first major film appearance was in the wartime thriller 'The Yellow Canary' (1943), with Anna Neagle. He most notably played a flamboyant Alfred Mantalini in Alberto Cavalcanti's Ealing production of 'Nicholas Nickleby' (1947). He appeared in the wartime show 'Keep Going', the first of many with words and music by Betty Astell in which they were to appear together. For twenty-five years he played fruity-voiced and, at over six feet, strikingly tall pantomime dames in stylish productions written and directed by his wife (who frequently co-starred in them). These often incorporated a harlequinade reflecting the early pantomime tradition. For a memorable production of 'Mother Goose' at the Cambridge Arts Theatre (1950) their friend the artist Edward Seago painted sixteen watercolours as scenery for his first professional stage commission. They also collaborated on summer shows throughout the 1950s and 1960s which were shrewdly presented under their own management, giving early encouragement to such fresh talents as Harry Secombe, Sheila Hancock, and Anna Quayle. As the 1950s progressed Fletcher's broadcasting career continued with appearances on BBC television's popular 'What's My Line?' and the long-running radio comedy panel game 'Does the Team Think?'

Fletcher was discovered by a new generation when he was invited to contribute 'Odd Odes' to reflect situations brought to the attention of Esther Rantzen's BBC1 consumer programme 'That's Life!' (1974-81). His resurgence in the public eye led to a series of witty books including 'Odd Odes' (1974), an autobiography, 'Nice One Cyril' (1978), and several devoted to gardening, including 'Cyril Fletcher's Gardening Book' (1974). 
After he left 'That's Life!' Fletcher continued his television career by presenting gardening programmes for a few years. In the mid-1980s he and Betty Astell moved to Guernsey. He presented several series about his showbusiness life and friends for BBC Radio 2. On at least one occasion during his final years BBC radio referred to him as 'the late Cyril Fletcher', which amused him greatly. He died at his home in St Peter Port, Guernsey, on 2 January 2005. Betty Astell died in Guernsey on 27 July 2005. Their daughter, Jill, survived them. 


@@@@@


doc= 94647


Dyer, Alfred Stace (1849-1926), moral reformer, was born Alfred Dyer at Kingsthorpe, Northampton, on 14 August 1849, the son of John Dyer, gardener, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Jones. His mother was widowed early in his childhood, and he left school at twelve to begin work in a printing firm. Brought up a Congregationalist, he became a committed evangelical Quaker in his early twenties. By 1871 he was employed as a lecturer for a peace organization, the International Arbitration Society, of which he became secretary. On 28 May 1872 he married Helen, the 21-year-old daughter of Robert Stace, printer, with whom he had a daughter. He incorporated his wife's surname in his own name. During the late 1870s he supported his family by writing a sequence of 'Penny Popular Biographies' of prominent evangelicals, including Charles Spurgeon. 
Dyer attended one of Josephine Butler's public speeches for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' (which enforced the periodic gynaecological inspection of women deemed 'known prostitutes' in garrison towns) and responded in 1877 to Butler's public call for working-class men to help her campaign against state-regulated prostitution. As well as joining her Working Men's National League for the Abolition of the State Regulation of Vice, he founded in 1879 a new monthly journal, 'The Sentinel: the Organ of the Social Purity Movement'. He went on to play a part in changing the direction of Butler's moral crusade, by exposing the evils of the state-regulated brothels in mainland Europe. A fellow Quaker told him that an acquaintance had found an English girl in a state-licensed brothel in Brussels who claimed to be held against her will. After consulting Butler, Dyer travelled to Brussels where, with the help of the Belgian reformer Pastor Leonard Anet, he rescued three young British women who had been lured to Brussels under false promises of marriage, and forced to work as prostitutes. Butler recognized the propaganda value of their shocking individual narratives, but few newspapers would print Dyer's findings. In response, he set up a purity publishing firm, Dyer Brothers, with his brother George, at Amen Corner, Paternoster Row, London. 
Early in 1880 Dyer published 'The European Slave Trade in English Girls: a Narrative of Facts', detailing the stories of all three women and alleging Brussels police collusion and British diplomatic inertia. He described how 'the wealthy Continental debauchee, reared under the influence of the moral blight of licensed debauchery', was willing to pay 'an amount equal to a poor man's annual income for the opportunity of violating a betrayed, terrified, and helpless virgin' (pp. 5-6). The pamphlet was an overnight sensation, running to six editions in as many months. In its wake, the London Committee for the Suppression of the Foreign Traffic in British Girls for Purposes of Continental Prostitution, founded by Dyer, lobbied a reluctant home secretary, Sir William Harcourt, to send an official investigation to Brussels. Thomas Snagge, a London barrister sent by Harcourt, found enough evidence of the systematic entrapment of British women to precipitate, in May 1881, an inquiry by a House of Lords select committee. Dyer gave evidence (26 July 1881) on his own rescue activities in Brussels. Although the committee found that many of the thirty-three women whom Snagge discovered had worked as prostitutes before leaving England, it none the less recommended that the taking of women abroad for the purposes of prostitution be made a criminal offence. 
The success of 'The European Slave Trade in English Girls' encouraged Dyer's mission to reform public morals through a publishing crusade. In 1883 he joined Ellice Hopkins's White Cross League, an organization dedicated to persuading men and boys to resist sexual temptation. A series of public lectures across the United Kingdom was soon published as 'Facts for Men on Moral Purity and Health' (1884), 'Safeguards Against Immorality' (1885), and the best-selling 'Plain Words to Young Men on an Avoided Subject' (1885), which reached sales of 150,000 in the 1890s. The 'avoided subject' was masturbation: Dyer gave pungent warnings that 'the habits you indulge in today will fasten themselves upon you with a firmer grip as the years go on' ('Plain Words', 11) and recommended an ascetic regime of cold baths, fresh air, simple food, teetotalism, exercise, and prayer. By 1885 15,000 men had taken the White Cross League's purity pledge, binding them to abstain from 'impure thoughts', pornography, masturbation, and premarital sex. 
Dyer was vigorous in affiliated attempts to curtail male sexual licence. In 1884 he became involved in a White Cross League 'moral moonlighting' campaign in Glasgow, which involved the attempted intimidation of would-be clients by picketing brothels: he later exported the tactic to Bombay and Peking, where he once more became the victim of assaults. In May 1885 Dyer's London committee initiated the prosecution of Mary Jeffries, the madam of a string of Chelsea brothels catering for wealthy or aristocratic clients. When the committee was prevented from giving its evidence by her unexpected guilty plea, her $200 fine being paid by an anonymous friend, Dyer's outrage took on predictable connotations: 'The inferences from the evidence point to a state of moral corruption, heartless cruelty and prostitution of authority almost sufficient to goad the industrial classes into revolution' ('The Sentinel', quoted in Bristow, 107). 
Dyer's campaigns helped to animate W. T. Stead's expose of 'moral corruption' in July 1885, through the 'Maiden tribute of modern Babylon' articles published in the 'Pall Mall Gazette', which in turn precipitated the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act', raising the age of consent for girls to sixteen. Together with William Coote, an old ally from the Working Men's League, Dyer helped Stead to set up the National Vigilance Association, dedicated to the enforcement of the new act. On 22 August Dyer spoke at the Hyde Park rally for 'social purity' in legislation and public life. In November he stood as a parliamentary candidate in Derby against Sir William Harcourt, whom he denounced as 'a great block in the way of purity of legislation' ('The Times', 17 November 1885, 7). Harcourt retained his seat; Dyer gained only 1231 votes, and was stoned and beaten during the campaign. 
In 1886 Dyer's attention shifted from Britain to India, where versions of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' were still in force, and the 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' did not apply. His 'Slavery under the British Flag: the Iniquities of British rule in India and in our crown colonies and dependencies, to the friends of social purity' appeared in 1887, the year he emigrated with his wife to Bombay, where their only child Heria was born. Dyer took over the editorship of the evangelical 'Bombay Guardian', later the 'Indian Church Quarterly Review'. His campaign against British colonialists' sexual exploitation of Indian women publicized the state-regulated brothels provided for British armed forces stationed in India, and exposed the complicity of the authorities in sanctioning and even encouraging those facilities. His exposures were accumulated in the polemical 'British Soldiers in India in Regard to their Morals and Health' (1897). While instigating a Bombay midnight mission, he became increasingly preoccupied by the connections between prostitution and drug addiction, travelling between Bombay and Peking to expose incidents of the international trafficking of women and publishing tracts entitled 'Chinese Christians and the Ravages of the Opium Plague' (1890), 'The Great Plague of Asia' (1891), and 'Britain's Crimes in China: a Short History of the Opium Traffic' (1892), simultaneously published in Bombay and through Dyer Brothers in London. 
By the turn of the century Dyer's influence was on the wane. Although he continued to give lectures to the Bombay Young Men's Christian Association on sexual continence (published as 'The Knight of the White Cross' in 1899), his evangelizing approach to matters of sexuality was being gradually displaced by a more 'scientific' programme of 'social hygiene'. In 1900 he returned to England, settling with his wife and daughter in Aldington, Kent. A religious study of China appeared in 1905. In 1911 he broke away from the Quakers, rejecting their understanding of the role of the 'Bible' in Christian faith. 'The Book Triumphant and Infallible' (1919) was his fundamentalist retort, followed shortly by the still more polemical 'A Prodigal Sect (the Society of Friends)' (1919). He died at Mount Pleasant, Aldington, Kent, on 20 October 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 94648


Moluag (d. 592), missionary and holy man, was reportedly Irish in origin -- his name is a hypocoristic form of the Irish name Lugaid, meaning 'my Lugaid'. The principal source for the traditions surrounding his life is an office for him in the Aberdeen breviary, with proper antiphons and responsories and six lessons, but no proper hymns. The antiphons and responsories add little information to what is given in the lessons, but they may allude to an incident from his 'vita' that the latter do not mention: a thief stole books from the saint's church, and was struck down, blinded, and wounded, but was then healed by Moluag, whose devoted servant he became. The lessons in the breviary associate Moluag with St Brendan, presumably of Clonfert, with Lismore in Argyll, with the monastery of Melrose, and with the church of Rosemarkie in Ross. They also claim that he visited 'Thule'. This may derive from a tradition that Gaelic monks had been active in the northern isles, but on the other hand may simply refer to the outer isles -- Teampull Mholuaigh is at Eoropie near the Butt of Lewis. The twelfth-century life of St Flannan alludes to Moluag's visit to the Hebrides and Orkneys. 
Moluag has a number of place names and dedications throughout Scotland, primarily in the west and north. As well as at Lismore and Rosemarkie, he is found in Raasay, Tiree, Trotternish in Skye, Treshnish in Mull, Kilberry in Knapdale, Ballagan on Loch Ness, Strathpeffer, Tarlan in Aberdeenshire, several places in Strathspey, Alyth, and near Renfrew. Most of his dedications are in the Western Isles, Easter Ross, and between Dee and Spey. Later stories of his rivalry with Columba of Iona are without historical foundation. 
The chief centre of Moluag's cult was the church on the isle of Lismore in the Firth of Lorn, which became the cathedral church of the diocese of Argyll during the 1180s. Its choir has been restored and remains in use as the island's parish kirk, though the heights of the roof and floor have been altered and the pulpit and communion table are now at the west end. Medieval doorways and buttresses are still visible externally, and inside there are two medieval doorways and the original sedilia and piscina. To the west of the church are the foundations of a substantial aisle-less nave and small western tower. 
According to the office in the Aberdeen breviary Moluag had journeyed across the sea from the north of Ireland to Lismore on a stone, 'quite unlike the rest of the rocks of that island', which was presumably visible at 'the port of the church of Lismore' -- probably Ardnacroish ('Breviarium Aberdonense', fol. vi'v'). The same office mentions several relics of the saint, most notably his square iron bell, which had been miraculously forged while he was a pupil of St Brendan. It has been identified in some quarters with a bell found at Kilmichael Glassary, Argyll, in the nineteenth century. Another relic is the wooden 'bachall mor', allegedly the saint's pastoral staff, which remains in the keeping of the chief of the Livingstone family, but which is not mentioned in medieval sources. 
According to the Irish martyrologies Moluag died on 25 June, in a year identified by the annals as 592. Lismore did not claim to have his body, for he is said to have gone to Ross, where he died and was buried at Rosemarkie. His connection with Rosemarkie is problematic, however, for its reputed founder was alive in 697. Equally uncertain are his associations with Melrose, which was founded after 632. His office refers to Moluag as dealing with its abbot, described as a very famous man of strict religion, but does not name him. The local secular ruler, presumably of Lorn, is likewise mentioned but not named. The evidence suggests a complex set of associations linking Lismore with the churches of Clonfert, Melrose, and Rosemarkie, but the factors behind them cannot now be determined. In a similar way, later writings and legends make large claims for Moluag's importance in the spread of Christianity in northern Scotland, but substantive evidence in support of them remains tantalizingly scarce. 


@@@@@


doc= 94649


Francis William Tetley (1817-1883), who was born in Leeds on 24 October 1817 and who, on 6 October 1847, married Isabella Maxwell ('b'. 1826/7), daughter of Arthur Ryder. Handsome tribute was later paid to his vision and drive, which produced a remarkable growth in the brewery's sales. He achieved this in three ways. First, like its pioneers the big firms of Bass and Allsopps in Burton upon Trent, he grasped the advantages of delivery by rail and setting up an agency system. Figures show that in 1854, of sales of 35,590 barrels (a large turnover for a country brewery) 56 per cent was transported by rail. Four years later almost a third of these were made from its four biggest agencies, in London, Liverpool, Manchester, and York. Second, to keep pace with this growth, he built a greatly extended brewery in 1852 and again in 1864-6 to the designs of the architect George Corson. Third, he took a highly competent new partner, his brother-in-law Charles Ryder (1821-1902), into the firm. A Londoner who had represented a large tea importing concern in Canton for several years, Ryder was meticulous both in his management and in his accountancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 94650


Smith, John (1824-1879), brewer, was baptized on 14 April 1824 at St Peter's Church, Leeds, Yorkshire, the eldest of the five children of Samuel Smith, variously described as butcher and tanner, and his wife, Sarah Naylor, who had married at St Peter's seven years earlier. Samuel's business clearly did well. The 1851 census records him living at Brunswick House, Brunswick Place, Leeds, with two servants. Certainly his success had allowed John, the eldest of his three sons, to buy at the age of twenty-three, in 1847, the old-established (1758) brewery of Backhouse and Hartley attached to a coaching inn in nearby Tadcaster. To most observers its prospects must have seemed confined: the days of coaching inns in the railway age were numbered; the brewery, like those of the thousands of other publican brewers, was small. In 1861 John Smith still employed only eight men in his brewing and malting enterprise. But the prosperity of the 1850s and 1860s associated with the coming of the railways opened up new vistas for forward-looking young brewers like John Smith. 
Nationally the consumption of beer enjoyed a rapid spurt in the two decades after the mid-1850s; agriculture enjoyed a celebrated 'golden age' in the same years. Tadcaster's abundant supplies of hard water, not dissimilar to the celebrated ones of Burton upon Trent, were well suited to the production of those sharper, lighter beers the Victorian drinker increasingly demanded. Moreover, John Smith was fortunate that he could exploit the free-trade beer market in Leeds, one of the great burgeoning cities of Victorian England, no more than a dozen miles away. He also farmed extensively: the 1861 census records him employing eight men and three boys on his 301 acres. And in addition he had an interest in the limestone quarries on the edge of Tadcaster. John Smith was a typical country brewer of the early Victorian period: from a modest start he laid the foundations of the firm's later success, and with growing wealth, he was able to farm on an extensive scale during the prosperous years of 'high farming'. He died at Tadcaster on 9 September 1879 leaving an estate valued at under $45,000. 
John Smith was unmarried, and his brewing and farming interests were jointly inherited for their lives by his two brothers, Samuel Smith ('b'. 1831) and 
William Smith bought Samuel's share of his brother's personal estate, but since the brewery was destined to pass to Samuel's sons (who continued to brew at the old brewery) he took the bold step of building a state-of-the-art new brewery for his nephews in 1883-4. Erected on a greenfield site in fine local limestone from the Smith quarries for the enormous cost of $130,000, it was immediately lauded as the finest brewery in the north of England. It demonstrated, much more than the value of John Smith's estate, the distance the Smiths had come (William was now farming 1500 acres and employing 300 men), the profitability of brewing, and Tadcaster's growing reputation as a brewing centre of repute -- the Burton of the north, in the journalese of the industry's press. William Smith died at The Grange, Tadcaster, on 12 September 1886, leaving an estate valued at $53,470. 
The firm continued the headlong expansion that William Smith had initiated under the direction of his two young Riley nephews, henceforth known as Riley-Smith under the terms of his will. Growth in the 1880s was achieved by generous discounts of 20 per cent plus to the free trade, the establishment of twenty-two agencies and sixteen offices across the north of England, and the firm's reputation for good beer. When the Riley-Smiths floated their brewery as a public company in 1892 the details of the prospectus -- not overblown, unlike those of some other brewing companies, famously Allsopps -- revealed the happiest state of affairs, a condition Alfred Barnard had already enthusiastically outlined in his 'Noted Breweries' two years earlier. The Riley-Smiths retained entire ownership of the $300,000 ordinary shares and raised $750,000 in four debenture issues in the next decade to fund the purchase of one of the largest tied-house estates of any English brewing company. Profits surged. In the four years 1899-1902 they averaged $81,728. Dividends of 27 per cent were paid on the ordinary shares. With a healthy $25,000 allotted to reserves each year, the brewery was one of the best-run in Britain, a byword for first-class management. 
The Riley-Smiths enjoyed their success to the full. 
Henry Herbert Riley-Smith's younger brother, 
These great half-million pound estates of the Riley-Smiths revealed the fortunes that could be made by first-rank country brewers in the high feather days of public house acquisition between 1885 and 1902. And for well-managed companies like John Smiths the prosperous times continued. Within a generation the Riley-Smiths were enjoying incomes and lifestyles that only the very wealthiest members of the traditional landed class could match. 


@@@@@


doc= 94651


Boxall, Nellie (1890-1965), cook and servant, was born on 2 November 1890 at 353 Somers Road, Farncombe, a small town in rural Surrey. She was the youngest of the ten children (six daughters and four sons) of Henry Boxall (1846-1891), an agricultural labourer and later a railway worker, originally from Hambledon, Hampshire, and Sarah, 'nee' Marsden (1848-1902), from Bramley, Surrey. Her father died in April 1891 from a heart attack and Nellie was left an orphan at twelve years old when her mother died in September 1902 following a stroke. At Farncombe's national school, which she attended from 1895, she was among the first generation to receive a free elementary education but was expected, like millions of other poor girls, to go straight into domestic service. In 1912 she was lucky to find a post living in as a cook at Durbins, near Guildford, the Surrey home of the art critic and painter, Roger Fry. Fry had designed Durbins himself and the house's many modern conveniences -- including central heating, flush toilets, and a dumb waiter or lift to convey meals between the kitchen and dining room -- made the servants' life easier. Nellie worked alongside the parlour maid, Lottie Hope (1891-1973), who became a lifelong friend. 
In 1916, unable to maintain Durbins, Fry recommended Nellie and Lottie to the writers Leonard and Virginia Woolf (whose sister, the painter Vanessa Bell, had been Fry's lover). So began the eighteen-year employment for which Boxall is now best known, during which time Virginia Woolf wrote obsessively, and sometimes viciously, in her diaries and letters about their stormy relationship. At Hogarth House, Richmond, Nellie first encountered her new mistress recuperating after a severe mental breakdown. Nellie, who was shy and quietly spoken, thought Virginia a friendly, sympathetic person, and she enjoyed coaxing her poor appetite with treats -- home-made ice cream and lemonade -- and helping to establish the peaceful routine that made it possible for her mistress to write. Like Fry's, the Woolfs' household was remarkably informal: there was no uniform, no churchgoing, no waiting at table; nor was Nellie called Boxall, as was customary. The Woolfs paid modestly but were generous with luxuries, buying bicycles, a gramophone, and a wireless for their servants: Nellie and Lottie took dancing lessons and practised the foxtrot. Relations were more strained at Monk's House, the Woolfs' country cottage in Rodmell, Sussex. There was no heating or electricity; fuel had to be collected for the cooking range and water pumped from the well; there were rats and the kitchen frequently flooded; provisioning meant cycling several miles to the nearest shops. None the less Nellie remained, not least because the Bloomsbury circle was sociable and fun -- there was much visiting between Rodmell and Charleston, Vanessa Bell's home -- and, like the other servants, Nellie took a snobbish pride in her artistic, unorthodox employers. 
When the Woolfs moved to 52 Tavistock Square in central London in 1924 they dismissed Lottie Hope and Nellie became their 'cook-general'. She took on all the cleaning and extra chores such as polishing Leonard's boots, in addition to supplying regular substantial meals, baking for tea, and improvising impromptu dinner parties. She complained as much of her loneliness as of her workload and began giving notice (and then rescinding it) at frequent intervals. The next ten years were punctuated by rows and recriminations. Virginia hated having to give orders, resented her dependence on Nellie, and yet still expected deference and obedience; Nellie, as she became older and more vulnerable, resorted to tearful scenes and emotional blackmail. Both women were trapped in an outmoded relationship by their long intimacy: there was fury, shame, and mutual incomprehension on both sides. Virginia could be vitriolic in her diaries, denouncing Nellie as a 'mongrel' with a 'timid spiteful servant mind' and finding her physical presence 'loathsome'. Yet elsewhere she is 'poor dear Nelly' of whom Virginia is very fond. (In an interview with the BBC in 1956 Nellie recalled that when she was hospitalized with kidney trouble, Virginia arrived on the ward and, like a child, immediately cuddled her.) Once the Woolfs began employing local women in Sussex as their 'dailies', Nellie became effectively part-time. Finally, in spring 1934, after another showdown, Nellie was sacked (she refused a cheque for $25 from the Woolfs). 'I feel executioner & the executed in one', wrote Virginia (26 March 1934, 'Diary', 4.206). After July of that year Nellie Boxall was never mentioned again in Woolf's diaries but the figure of the servant haunts her novels. 
In many ways Nellie Boxall's next thirty years were far happier. 'The poor drudge' whom Woolf imagined doomed after her dismissal, immediately landed a more glamorous job cooking for the stage and screen stars of the day, Charles Laughton and Elsa Lanchester, at 34 Gordon Square, London, not far from the Woolfs. Nellie flourished in their streamlined ultra-modern flat with her breezy and bohemian young mistress, the daughter of Irish Marxists, and their maid, Happy Powley, who was a communist. Nellie's cordon bleu cookery delighted Laughton (the Woolfs had sent her for lessons with Marcel Boulestin, the chef who brought French cooking to the British) and she took the culinary demands of an actor's life in her stride, rustling up late suppers for the likes of Marlene Dietrich and Douglas Fairbanks junior. Celebrity of a sort arrived when her recipe for perfect roast beef appeared in the national press in 1936, promoting the Laughtons' new gas cooker. 
When the Laughtons went to the USA in 1939 Nellie Boxall returned home to Farncombe. She joined forces again with Lottie Hope, and they shared a two-up, two-down terraced house with her brother Arthur at 30 North Street. Now in her fifties, Nellie worked in the canteen of St Thomas's Hospital, evacuated to Surrey during the war from central London. She spoke very little, apparently, about her past; interviewed by the BBC for 'Portrait of Virginia Woolf' (1956), she loyally remembered how good-natured Mrs Woolf had been. Though Lottie liked a drink and had her boyfriends, neither of the women married or had children; they made rag rugs, cultivated their garden, and visited Nellie's family. By all accounts Miss Boxall, as the neighbours called her, ruled the roost. In the late 1950s Nellie, who had never had a room of her own, was the first in her street to buy her own house. She lived there with Lottie Hope until her death there from bronchopneumonia on 19 November 1965; her body was cremated at Guildford crematorium. 
Woolf scholars have mainly interested themselves in her servants as a way of examining Woolf's contradictory relation to working women; her championing of women in her polemical writing -- 'A Room of One's Own', for example -- and the mythicizing, even sentimentalizing representations of the poor in her fiction. Less has been said about Woolf's private expressions of visceral disgust in her dealings with her servants, arguably of a piece with her inhibited relation to the body and to female sexuality. For social historians Woolf's diaries vividly reveal the emotional landscape of domestic life in Britain between the wars and the central part played by domestic service in the history of class feeling and consciousness. In literature and film Nellie Boxall has recently gained an afterlife. Alicia Gimenez Bartlett's 'Una habitacion ajena' (1997) invents her diaries and lambasts the snobbish goings-on in Bloomsbury, while in Daniele Roth's 'Bloomsbury, Cote Cuisine' (2001) she looks back wistfully over her career. Rather than a figure of pathos, she is typecast as a comic character in Stephen Daldry's film version of Michael Cunningham's novel 'The Hours', where Nellie is a cockney battleaxe in cap and apron, brutishly chopping meat and nagging her nervous mistress. 
In her feminist essay 'Three Guineas' Virginia Woolf wrote that 'It is much to be regretted that no lives of maids... are to be found in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'', her father, Leslie Stephen, being the dictionary's first editor ('Three Guineas', 1938, ed. N. Black, 2001, 150). Recent acknowledgment of historically noteworthy servants, both male and female, reflects a wider interest in histories of the poor and the working class. Yet even when it is a labour of love, domestic service is never the full story of a human existence. Working for Virginia Woolf was only a chapter in the life of Nellie Boxall. 


@@@@@


doc= 94657


Dosunmu, Samson Olabowale (1914-1991?), gambler and nightclub proprietor, was born on 6 October 1914 in the Ijebu region of south-western Nigeria, the son of Dosunmu Adenowa, a farmer. His parents were Ijebu-Yoruba. He was related to a hereditary chieftancy in the Delo-Dosunmu family of Shagamu and to a prominent dynasty established by Ajayi Jegede, a wealthy Ijebu trader. He spent his early years in Ijebu-Ode then moved to Lagos, where he lived under the supervision of an older half-brother, Chief Gilbert Idowu Delo-Dosunmu ('b'. 'c'.1897), the aro of Shagamu. Although the chief would become a significant figure in Ijebu affairs, in Lagos he was a petty trader and moneylender until he amassed the capital to buy a hotel. From the start Dosunmu was made aware that life was a struggle. As a youngster he was seldom away from the waterside, where he learned to swim out to the cargo boats at their moorings to see what might be 'liberated' at night. He joined other Raleigh boys (as they were known, after the brand of bicycle to which they aspired) in the nightly crowd around the shops of the palm-wine sellers in Williams Street; there he met the singer and percussionist Ambrose Campbell and the guitarist Brewster Hughes as they listened to older seamen tell tales and play music. He became a popular figure and by the start of the 1930s he had learned the art of the street magician: 'He take stick, he can throw it up in the air and turn it into a snake. People, they come and surround them. They have the secret, those people' (private information, A. Lemoshe). 
Despite limited formal education, Dosunmu acquired status from the extended Dosunmu-Ajayi family in which several of the Ajayis achieved academic distinction. He chose to reject this connection with the Lagosian elite, however, and left home instead to explore the world. Working his way along the coast of west Africa as a seaman, he survived by putting his trickster skills into practice. In Freetown, Sierra Leone, he practised 'native medicine' before travelling to Britain, arriving on the eve of the Second World War. He did wartime service as a fireman and donkeyman on merchant ships, and, between gruelling spells in the stokehold, he established himself in London's West End. There he honed his card-playing skills and rolled dice in illegal gambling 'spielers'. By 1944 he was living in Fitzrovia, a cosmopolitan quarter where people of colour had lodged since the inter-war years. With the onset of the bombing many residents departed, but what was tragedy for some was beneficial for others, and properties left vacant were ripe for exploitation by individuals with the entrepreneurial spirit. Dosunmu was one of these. 
While working as a croupier for the Sierra Leonean gambler Ernest Marke, Dosunmu was involved in a notorious incident in the immediate aftermath of the war. When white American soldiers attacked black men in the street outside Marke's Soho club the two gamblers struggled to barricade the doors and keep the ruffians at bay. Eventually the club was closed by the police, but it was through working for Marke that Dosunmu acquired the money to start an enterprise of his own. He was encouraged by an adventurous young woman from Leeds who was serving in the Auxiliary Territorial Service when they met. This was Irene (Rene) Stevens ('c'.1925-1972), the daughter of John Peter Louis Stevens, steel erector; she became Marke's barmaid on returning to civilian life, and married Dosunmu on 1 December 1947, at St Pancras register office. Known by the Yoruba name of Abeni, she embraced Yoruba culture and learned to speak the language. She cooked Nigerian food and dressed in the Yoruba woman's costume of 'buba', 'lappa', and 'gele'; so effective were her dress and demeanour that one English visitor remarked 'I always thought of her as Nigerian' (private information, J. Sikuade). 
In Soho Dosunmu ran gambling clubs where African food was on offer alongside illegal card-playing and dice. The impact of music was not considered until he opened the Abalabi in Berwick Street. It was there that he made his name by featuring Ambrose Campbell's band playing dreamy Nigerian highlife on guitars and drums. As diplomats, students, debutantes, writers, and artists danced and mingled with gamblers and Soho riff-raff, it was there, too, that many white English people encountered African culture, two decades before the sights, sounds, and tastes of Africa became more widely available in British cities. Colin MacInnes immortalized the Abalabi ('the Beni Bronze') in 'City of Spades', his tale of a young Nigerian adventurer in London. Jazz musicians were frequenters, too, notably the rhythmically intelligent Phil Seamen who passed on what he learned to the next generation of drummers. 
In 1957 Dosunmu moved upmarket with the well-appointed Club Afrique in Wardour Street, and adopted the name Chief Delo-Dosunmu. He hired Ghanaian and Caribbean musicians as well as Nigerians, and the trumpeter Fela Ransome-Kuti, founder of Afro-beat, who was taking a break from his formal music studies to play jazz. Despite the club's popularity and distinguished supporters -- among them members of the Moroccan royal family and Lord Listowel, governor-general of Ghana -- the Dosunmus were pursued relentlessly for breaches of the arcane licensing laws and fined. It was a situation all black entrepreneurs faced -- which makes Dosunmu's longevity all the more remarkable. 
Short and broadly built, Dosunmu faced the world with a quizzical expression and, as befits a successful gambler, kept his own counsel. Dealing with police corruption and organized crime was a necessity, but through his ingenuity and staying power, and with Abeni's support, he elevated the status of the black club owner. He kept in touch with events in Africa, acknowledging major landmarks at the club, and raised contributions towards the defence of Nelson Mandela and others in the South African treason trials of 1956-61. 
Dosunmu was the father of Olatokunboh (Tokunboh), a son born in London in 1959 to Simone Bashorun, 'nee' Fallet, the wife of Anjos Adetola Bashorun. Olatokunboh was brought up by Ola and Abeni Dosunmu, and when they returned to Nigeria in 1960 he accompanied them as their adopted son. In Lagos Dosunmu assumed management of his late brother's hotel, and opened another two clubs. With Abeni's death in 1972 Dosunmu lost his helpmeet of a quarter of a century; he continued to run his enterprises but was unable to equal her spirit and verve. When his business declined, he surprised those who knew him by devoting time to his local Methodist church and organizing its social events. He remarried in Nigeria following Abeni's death and was the father of Adewale, a son born in Lagos. He died in Lagos, probably in 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 94663


Otolorin, John Adetayo (c.1886-1963), landlord, theatrical agent, and community leader, was born in Ilesha, Nigeria. His parents were Yoruba. He left Nigeria in 1919 as a seaman, came to Britain, and settled in Cardiff, where he worked as a motor mechanic and labourer while going to sea intermittently. He formed a relationship with a woman named Ada and found work as a film extra while establishing connections with the London film industry. Based in Wales, he became an important source for recruiting people of colour for films with an African background, a popular theme in the 1930s. In Cardiff and Newport he found extras for films including 'Sanders of the River' (1935), Paul Robeson's first screen appearance in Britain; the film was criticized (among others by Robeson himself, who felt he was misled) for reinforcing racial stereotypes, but Otolorin's bonus was a named role as one of Robeson's chiefs, filmed wearing a feathered headdress and necklace of leopard's teeth. He travelled from Cardiff to the film set, where he acted alongside Jomo Kenyatta, future president of Kenya, and this connection, and his acquaintance with Robeson, were among his oft repeated claims to fame. He supplied extras for, and acted in, other films, working eventually as an agent in his own right. 
An impressive figure standing 6 feet tall, with a long tribal scar on one cheek, Otolorin exploited his 'fierce' appearance to provide protection for others less robust. One such was Macfold Howard, a cook with whom he, and other Nigerians, opened a Soho nightclub when Otolorin moved to London (while retaining a base in Cardiff) at the end of the 1930s. The venture was short-lived but Otolorin later helped finance Howard to open a cafe in Stepney, and remained available to help fight his friend's battles. He is believed to have been the father of a son, Francis, born in Stepney during this period. He acquired a house in Arlington Road in Camden Town, north London, where other west Africans had settled in the inter-war years. He let rooms, assisted in this enterprise by Elsie (1911-2003), from Sheffield, the daughter of Frank Kay, stonemason, who lived with him there after he finally left Cardiff at the start of the Second World War. He served in the merchant navy (1940-43), graduating from fireman to donkeyman before his ship was torpedoed. Rescued with only a handful of survivors, he was hospitalized on his return to England. With the war freeing up housing stock once beyond the reach of poor landlords, he rented additional properties. He purchased leaseholds, too, thereby providing homes for students, seamen, and 'arrivants' from Africa and the Caribbean. His business expanded after the war and by 1955 he had seven houses, several flats, and shop facilities at his disposal. 
With Elsie as his housekeeper, Otolorin cooked and kept open house. He ensured that the pot was always on the stove, and when students, musicians, and gamblers came to eat at his fireside they engaged in debate with politicians and activists including Chief Obafemi Awolowo, leader of the Nigerian Yorubas, Kwame Nkrumah, Ghana's future president, and Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, the first prime minister of independent Nigeria. To the guitarist Ambrose Campbell he was Pa Oto, 'the daddy of us all', his house 'like a restaurant with no pay' (private information, A. Campbell). American visitors included the singer Nat 'King' Cole, who met the Nigerian traditional ruler the oni of Ife -- a jazz enthusiast -- and drank champagne with his 'fufu' and pepper soup. 
Otolorin was a familiar sight in Camden Town, never seen without his trademark black Homburg hat. His day began with a beer as soon as the pubs opened, and whenever he spotted friends -- African, West Indian, or Irish -- they would be invited for a drink. He enjoyed his pleasures but was generous with his surplus, too, and worked long shifts as a boilerman at the Ministry of Works in order to keep all comers fed. He continued finding film opportunities for himself and others in the post-war period and, in collaboration with the Nigerian drummer Samadu Jackson and the Sierra Leonean Charles Alleney, organized drum-and-dance troupes for broadcasts, stage shows, and the circus. 
In 1951 Otolorin travelled to Nigeria to see his aged mother. He was feted by those he had helped in their student days, among them Nnamdi Azikiwe, later governor-general and then president of Nigeria, and received two honorary chieftaincies from the oba of Lagos. In 1952 he was installed as an officer in the London chapter of the Oshugbo Iwashe (the Ijebu name for the Ogboni, a prominent Nigerian fraternal society). With his long involvement in informal social work, it was a logical step to join a body offering mutual support to its members. Proud of his status -- his Oshugbo title was Oluwo Chief J. A. Otolorin -- he celebrated his chieftaincies by wearing a gold crown on his watch-chain. 
Otolorin was an important facilitator who helped build London's Nigerian community. He created social cohesion among Nigerians and others during inhospitable times by providing food, warmth, and reminders of 'home', and took responsibility for the funerals of some who died penniless. To Ose Davies he was 'a legend in his own way. A lot of Nigerian political life, social life, revolved around Oto in Arlington Road. He knew all those leaders... he entertained them all' (private information, O. Davies). In 1991 he was celebrated by Yemi Ajibade, who based the character of Pa Different on Otolorin in his play 'A Long Way from Home'. He died at 11 Lyndhurst Gardens, West Hampstead, London, on 3 July 1963, from malignant cachexia and carcinoma of the oesophagus. His funeral, on 12 July, at St Matthew's Church, Oakley Square, London, was an impressive affair, conducted by the rural dean of St Pancras, with a motorcade accompanied by a police escort, and guests including the prime minister to the oba of Lagos. He was buried at Fulham cemetery, Lower Richmond Road, North Sheen. He was survived by his partner Elsie; his presumed son, Francis, predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 94667


Vandyk, Carl (1851-1931), photographer, was born at Bunde, East Friesland, Hanover, Germany, on 17 January 1851 into a Jewish family. His father was Dutch and his mother was Portuguese. He emigrated to England and became a naturalized British subject, as did other members of his family, including his elder brother Aaron Vandyk (1842/3-1892), who by 1871 was an artist and photographer in Liverpool, and who operated a photographic business in Liverpool's fashionable Lord Street. By 1871 Carl was also a photographer, in London, where from 1882 he had a studio at 125 Gloucester Road, and became a successful portrait photographer. His most important images, registered for copyright at Stationers' Hall, were a series of portraits of the king of Siam and his family (1902), the shah of Persia and members of his entourage (1902), and William Frederick Cody (Buffalo Bill), the American frontier scout and showman (1903), as well as the opera singers Alice Nielson (1904) and Enrico Caruso (1905). The portrait of the gaikwar of Baroda, which was much published as part of the campaign to emphasize the gaikwar's loyalty to the crown, is perhaps the best-known image credited to Carl Vandyk. 
As well as being a successful commercial photographer Carl Vandyk had business interests in the catering trade and owned the Rembrandt, Rubens, and Vandyk hotels in London. He was an observant Jew who visited Bunde from time to time and played a role in supporting philanthropic institutions. With his wife, Henriette (Henny), 'nee' Meyerhof (1854-1931), he had five sons, including the photographer Herbert Vandyk ['see below'], and one daughter. He died at his home, 8J Bickenhall Mansions, Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London, on 18 November 1931, his wife having died earlier in the same year. 
Carl and Henriette Vandyk's eldest son 
Herbert Vandyk's approach to photography was that of a seasoned businessman with faith in his own powers. This was put into practice in his new 'walk-in' premises that boasted two studios, one of which measured 56 feet in length by 36 feet wide with six mercury vapour lamps, a lounge, four dressing rooms, offices, and several darkrooms. He thereby brought to an end the era of often stuffy, cramped photographic studios on the top floors of buildings, which had made life particularly difficult for official portraits by their varying light quality and staircases generally unmanageable by ladies in huge swathes of court dress. The studio succeeded in convincing most sitters that the 12 inch by 10 inch plate, which was not the most reasonably priced, was in fact the most perfect size for the half- or three-quarter-length portrait. 
By 1916 the studio employed more than fifty members of staff and sitters were welcome to glimpse the behind-the-scenes workings of the studio, as Herbert stated in a publicity article: 'I do not believe in the old idea that photographers benefited by the public looking upon our business as a mystery' ('Professional Photographer', October 1916). Herbert Vandyk's success in receiving commissions from the British royal family was attributed by him to the fact that he always took 'a complete lighting outfit' with him to Buckingham Palace, so that exposure times were reduced to a minimum -- a convenience much appreciated by his royal sitters ('Amateur Photographer', 1 May 1935). His method of eliminating harsh shadows was achieved by an extensive battery of mercury vapour tubes and half-watt lamps that reduced the glare to the sitter's eyes from the extra spotlights. With an exposure time of less than one tenth of a second, he claimed to achieve 'spontaneity of expression'. 
During his working life Herbert Vandyk accumulated twenty-two royal warrants, a result of his having photographed possibly more visiting royalties than any other London photographer. A particularly important series of the crown prince of Serbia (later King Alexander II of Yugoslavia) was made shortly after the prince's epic flight at the head of his defeated army across the mountains into Albania. At the time of the sitting the prince had no country and Vandyk's portraits, published on 8 April 1916 in 'The Illustrated London News' under the title 'Welcomed to London: a royal ally from the Near East', contributed greatly to the propaganda campaign that led to the creation of the new state of the south Slavs -- Yugoslavia. 
Herbert Vandyk also appears to have been the most favoured photographer of the highly bejewelled Sir Bhupinder Singh, maharaja of Patiala (1891-1938), who in 1926 invited Vandyk to go to India 'for the purpose of supervising the erection in the State Palace of a portrait studio built on the same plans as his own studio in Buckingham Palace Road' ('British Journal of Photography', February 1943). Herbert's familiarity with the maharaja resulted in a series of singular portraits, as well as some extremely unusual domestic group portraits of the maharaja's wives, children, and dog in casual and intimate domestic poses not seen in any other Indian princely setting. 
Other important series of images made by Herbert Vandyk include a number of portraits made in 1932 to memorialize the marriage of Azam Jah, prince of Berar (1907-1970), to Khadija Hayriya Aisha Dur-i-Shahvar Sultana ('b'. 1914), which represented an abortive attempt by the prince's father, Asaf Jah VII, nizam of Hyderabad, to reposition his state at the centre of the Islamic world by marrying his son to the daughter of the last Ottoman caliph, Abdul Medjid II. This series includes the only known images of the caliph's wife Atiya Mihisti (1892-1964). 
After a brief illness, Herbert Vandyk died on 24 January 1943 at 11 Marais Mansions, Marais Road, Sea Point, Cape Town, South Africa, where his doctor had suggested he reside for the sake of his health. In 1964 the Vandyk company merged with the Bassano Studio and one year later it incorporated Elliott and Fry. The archive of Vandyk negatives as well as many original prints was acquired by the National Portrait Gallery, London, in 1974. Images from the collection have been shown at exhibitions at the National Portrait Gallery (2001) and the Bucharest History Museum (2004), while studies of his maharaja series were published in 2001 and 2003. 


@@@@@


doc= 94668


Herbert Vandyk (1879-1943), photographer, was born at 13 Artesian Road, Kensington, London, on 12 September 1879. He studied photography under his father and then, in his teens, spent several years in Paris working for the firm of Reutlinger, among others, before returning in 1900 to London, where he continued to work with his father. When Carl retired Herbert took over the business and in 1913 he rebuilt the studio at 37 Buckingham Palace Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 94669


Rance, Sir Hubert Elvin (1898-1974), army officer and colonial governor, was born at 8 Langham Terrace, Plymouth, on 17 July 1898, the only son of Frederick Hubert Rance, then serving as a warrant officer in the Royal Engineers, and his wife, Minnie Florence, 'nee' Shaw. He was educated at Wimbledon College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. Commissioned into the Worcestershire regiment in 1916, he served for six months on the western front during the First World War and was wounded three times. He remained with his regiment following the conclusion of hostilities but in 1926 transferred to the Royal Signals. On 25 January 1927 he married Mary Noel Guy ('b'. 1904/5), daughter of Charles Alfred Guy; they had a son and a daughter. On the outbreak of the Second World War he was an instructor at the Staff College in Camberley. He served in France with the British expeditionary force as officer commanding 4 division signals. Evacuated from Dunkirk, he was mentioned in dispatches and made OBE. Promotion to brigadier followed and he was director of technical training at the War Office in 1942-3, then on the general staff of western command from 1943 to 1945. 
In April 1945, after his name had been recommended to Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, supreme allied commander, south-east Asia, Rance was appointed director of civil affairs in Burma. He arrived in Rangoon at the beginning of June. His tasks were to administer the civilian population and begin Burma's rehabilitation after three years of Japanese occupation. He also became politically involved through his support for Mountbatten's policy of working with the rising tide of Burmese nationalism. Not all of his staff agreed with him. He wrote to Mountbatten in September 1945: 'The majority of my officers are Burma officials and they could not or would not see that the present political set-up is quite different to anything that existed in pre-war days' (Tinker, 1.471). Rance had reservations when Mountbatten's military administration of Burma ended in October 1945 and Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith returned as governor. He thought it too early for civilian government because Burma's police force was not properly trained. 
In February 1946 Rance left Burma, never expecting to return. Nevertheless he was back at the end of August 1946 (following a brief spell as deputy commander, south-western district, based at Taunton), this time as governor with a knighthood (as GBE; he had been appointed CB earlier in the year) and the military rank of major-general. He took over from Sir Henry Knight, who had led a caretaker administration since June, Dorman-Smith having left Burma ostensibly on health grounds but in reality because he had been recalled. Relations with the nationalist Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (AFPFL) and its leader, Aung San, had deteriorated during Dorman-Smith's governorship. Dorman-Smith was hostile to the AFPFL and wanted Aung San tried as a war criminal. In turn the AFPFL was not prepared to co-operate with an extended British timetable for independence. They were behind a police strike which started the day after Rance was sworn in as governor. 
Rance played a significant role in Burma's independence. He persuaded a reluctant Labour cabinet in London to negotiate with the AFPFL. Rance insisted they had popular support and warned of an uprising if talks were not held. British ministers believed the AFPFL had no mandate, but Aung San led a delegation to London and concluded an independence agreement with the prime minister, Clement Attlee, in January 1947. Equally important, when Aung San was assassinated in July 1947 Rance acted immediately by inviting Nu to head the government. Hesitation on the part of the governor might have been fatal, especially when it became known that British army officers were implicated in the theft of weapons used in the killings. Much to Rance's own regret, Burma had chosen to become independent as a republic outside the British Commonwealth before Aung San was killed. Faced by local communist opposition, the AFPFL could not accept allegiance to a foreign monarch. Rance lent his voice to others arguing for a change in the basis of membership to enable Burma to remain in the Commonwealth, but it was not until April 1949, fifteen months after Burma's independence, that a formula was agreed allowing India to become a republic within the Commonwealth. 
Rance left Burma on independence day, 4 January 1948. He did not enjoy good health during his Burma career and was in hospital more than once with amoebic dysentery. A less taxing assignment awaited him in May 1948 when (having been made GCMG) he was appointed chairman of a Standing Closer Association committee in the West Indies. The committee reported in March 1950, recommending federation as the shortest path to independence within the Commonwealth for the territories of the British Caribbean. Rance was further involved in the federal project as governor of Trinidad and Tobago between 1950 and 1955, but the West Indies Federation, created in 1958, survived only four years. Just before it left office in 1951 the Labour government invited Rance to take charge in Malaya, where the high commissioner, Sir Henry Gurney, had been assassinated by communist guerillas. Pressed by his wife, Rance eventually declined on medical grounds and General Sir Gerald Templer was later appointed by Churchill. 
Burma continued to occupy Rance into retirement. He was feted by the Burmese government in 1956 when he returned on the eighth anniversary of independence. The Burmese wanted to bestow on him an honour of their own but this was not possible because of British regulations. Nu, to whom Rance had turned in Burma's hour of need in 1947, now seemed to the former governor a weak and indecisive leader who wanted to retire to religious life. Rance left Burma apprehensive about the country's future. In 1957 he became the first president of the Britain-Burma Society. In 1967, responding to comments by the Burmese ambassador about Burma's departure from the Commonwealth, Mountbatten asked Rance to write his own account of Burma's independence. Rance's offer to write an official history was declined. Instead, surviving British participants in Burma's independence were invited to write personal recollections. Extracts from these, together with a selection of documents from the official British records, were later published in 'Burma, the Struggle for Independence, 1944-48' (2 vols, 1983-4). In retirement Rance lived at the Old Farm, Frensham, Surrey. His last years were clouded by ill health, and he died on 24 January 1974 at the Cambridge Military Hospital, Aldershot, of heart failure. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94670


Aung San (1915-1947), politician in Burma, was born on 13 February 1915 at Natmauk, a small town in the Magwe district of central Burma, the youngest of nine children of U Pha, lawyer, and his wife, Daw Su. A sickly child but a gifted student, he was educated as a novice in a Buddhist monastic school and then at a high school to which he won a government scholarship. He was already interested in politics and adept at public speaking when he went to Rangoon University in 1932. 
Beginning with the capture of Lower Burma in 1824-6, Britain had completed the conquest of Burma in 1885-6 when Thibaw, the last Burmese king, was deposed and exiled. Aung San's family was active in the resistance which followed in Upper Burma. By the 1930s students were to the forefront of Burmese nationalism. At university Aung San edited the student magazine and led a students' strike in 1936. In 1938 he joined other student activists in a fringe political group, 'Dohbama Asi-ayone' (the 'We Burmans Association'), of which he was general secretary until 1940. Leaders of the group adopted the prefix 'Thakin' (Master). They organized political strikes in Burma's labour movement. Aung San was arrested in January 1939 on a charge of conspiring to overthrow the government but was released soon after. 
Japan's rise to power was welcomed by Aung San as a means to defeat the British empire in Asia. In turn, Japanese military intelligence regarded Aung San and other activists as potential collaborators. In August 1940 Aung San and a companion were smuggled in disguise by ship to Amoy in China. By November 1940 he was in Japan. Agreement was reached that Japan would raise and train a Burma Independence Army (BIA) to assist in the invasion of Burma. A number of 'thakins' formed a group known as the Thirty Comrades to spearhead an anti-British uprising. A blood oath was taken, and group members assumed titles signifying their bond. Aung San, now with the rank of major-general, was the leader of the group. He was known as Bo Teza (Fire General). 
The BIA accompanied Japanese forces in the invasion of Burma in 1942. Japan declared Burma independent in 1943, Aung San becoming defence minister in a new government headed by Ba Maw. But friction soon developed. The BIA was replaced by a smaller Burma National Army (BNA) under Japanese control, and it became apparent that Burma was independent in name only. In March 1945 Aung San switched his BNA to the allied side, contact having been made through force 136, set up by the Special Operations Executive in the war against Japan. On 16 May he had a crucial meeting with General Sir William Slim, who decided: 'I could do business with Aung San' (Slim, 'Defeat into Victory', 1956, 512). To avoid facing potentially hostile forces in Burma after Japan's defeat, Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, supreme allied commander in south-east Asia, recognized the BNA and its political wing, the Anti-Fascist Organization. This was controversial. For many on the allied side Aung San's forces were a 'traitor army' and Aung San a war criminal guilty of executing a village headman in 1942. 
After the war the BNA was disbanded and a new army raised on British lines. Led by Aung San, the Anti-Fascist Organization became the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (AFPFL). It had a paramilitary wing, the People's Volunteer Organization, more heavily armed than the returning British realized. The AFPFL flexed its muscles during 1946 by means of mass rallies in Rangoon. Rejecting Britain's extended timetable for Burma's independence, the AFPFL orchestrated a police strike in September 1946. The AFPFL was brought into government, Aung San becoming defence minister and deputy chairman on Burma's executive council, and in effect chief minister of Burma. At the end of 1946 he led the main Burmese delegation for talks in London. Agreement was reached with the prime minister, Clement Attlee, in January 1947 that Burma would become independent within a year. In February 1947 Aung San negotiated at Panglong in the Shan States to bring most of Burma's ethnic minorities within a new Union of Burma, though the main Karen grouping stayed away. (The majority of Karens distrusted the AFPFL, having fought with the allies throughout the war.) In April Aung San's AFPFL won 196 of 202 seats in the election for a constituent assembly. 
On 19 July 1947 Aung San and five of his ministerial colleagues (including his elder brother, Ba Win) were assassinated at a council meeting in Rangoon. U Saw, a rival politician, was arrested, accused of plotting to seize power, and later executed. Mystery still surrounds Aung San's death and there is no shortage of conspiracy theories. British officers were involved in the theft of weapons used in the assassinations. British commercial interests have been implicated. Other theories suggest that the Karens, Burma's communists, and even the Burmese military might have been involved. 
After a state funeral in April 1948 Aung San and those who died with him were buried on 11 April at Arzaneekon ('Heroes' Mound') at the foot of the Shewdagon pagoda in Rangoon. The anniversary of his death was commemorated for many years afterwards. A market, park, and stadium were named after him in the capital, and his picture was hung in many homes and offices. Some viewed his death as a tragedy, depriving Burma of charismatic leadership when it was needed most. Others believed he was too idealistic to provide effective government. Always austere in private life, Aung San was uncomfortable with his image as Burma's national hero. Many simply referred to him as 'Bogyoke' (General). In a speech in September 1946 he emphasized that he was a man, not a god or a magician. He married Daw Khin Kyi (died 1988), a nurse, in Rangoon on 6 September 1942. They had three children, including a daughter, Aung San Suu Kyi ('b'. 1945), who never knew her father. She later became a pro-democracy activist, opposed to the military regime in Myanmar (as Burma was renamed in 1989), and in 1991 was awarded the Nobel peace prize. 


@@@@@


doc= 94671


Ba Maw (1893-1977), chief minister of Burma and wartime head of the Burmese administration, was born on 8 February 1893 at Maubin in the Irrawaddy Delta, Lower Burma, then a province of British India, the son of Maung Maung Kye, an official in the court of the last Burmese king, and his wife, Thein Tin. Educated at the universities of Rangoon and Calcutta, he served as a teacher at the Government High School, Rangoon, and a lecturer in English at University College, Rangoon, from 1916 to 1920. After departing to study at the University of Cambridge he was called to the bar at Gray's Inn, London, in 1924, and in the same year earned a doctorate from the University of Bordeaux, where he wrote a psychological study of Buddhist mysticism. After he returned to Burma he established a legal practice. During this period he married Khin Ma Ma, with whom he had three sons and four daughters. 
Urbane and sophisticated, Dr Ba Maw, as he was known, came to prominence as a Burmese nationalist when, in 1932, he defended the leader of an abortive peasant revolt, Hsaya San, in a highly publicized trial, appearing as a supporter of rebellion but remaining within the law. Entering the legislative assembly as a member of the Anti-Separation League, he supported Burma's remaining part of India in order to speed its self-government, but when it became inevitable that the province would be separated he switched sides. While serving as minister of education in the governor's cabinet between 1934 and 1937 he formed the Hsinyeitha ('Poor Man's') Party to fight in new elections in 1936. Though his party was relatively unsuccessful, Ba Maw's political skills allowed him to form a coalition cabinet in 1937 and he thus became separated Burma's first premier. His government was brought down in 1939 by student demonstrations led by Aung San, Nu, and others, together with his major legislative opponent, Saw. Radical nationalists accused him of being pro-imperialist and aiding foreign capitalists. Resigning as leader of the opposition and a member of the legislature in 1940, he joined his former student opponents in forming the Freedom Bloc, which opposed Burma's assisting Britain in the war against Nazi Germany. Arrested under the defence of Burma rules and detained in Mogok prison until his escape in 1942 during the Japanese invasion, he emerged as the most senior nationalist leader not seen as a collaborator with the British colonial authorities. 
In August 1942 Ba Maw was chosen as the head of the Japanese-sponsored 'Burmese executive administration'. When in 1943 the Japanese sought to grant Burma partial independence within the Greater East Asia Co-prosperity Sphere, Ba Maw was again chosen to head the new regime. The government he formed in August of that year, with Aung San serving as minister of defence and Nu as foreign minister, had limited powers, since he had been obliged to enter into a secret treaty with the Japanese which gave the occupying military forces dominant authority. Taking the titles 'nainggandaw adipadi' and, assuming royal pretensions, 'adipati ashin minkyi', as head of state and premier Ba Maw advocated a policy of 'one voice, one blood, one nation'. The war years were a period of extreme poverty and distress for most of the people of the country as Burma was fought over twice, with the near collapse of civil administration in much of the country. Ba Maw's ability to govern was greatly constrained, but his period of office was noteworthy for the importance he placed on gaining the support of the avowedly apolitical Buddhist monkhood. 
During the British reconquest of Burma in 1945 Ba Maw protected some of his colleagues from reprisals as they turned their attention to assisting the allies against the Japanese. Nevertheless, when, in March, Aung San led the Burma National Army off to fight the Japanese in conjunction with the British Fourteenth Army, Ba Maw remained behind in the capital until the inevitability of the British victory became apparent, when he joined the retreating Japanese army, eventually reaching Japan. There he surrendered to the British embassy in January 1946. He was detained in Sugamo prison until it was decided not to prosecute him as a war criminal. Returning to Burma, he attempted to re-enter politics and organized the Maha Bama ('Greater Burma') Party, but by then his popularity had been superseded by such younger nationalist leaders as Aung San and Than Tun of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League. 
Detained briefly in Tharrawaddy prison for his political activities and outspoken criticism of the first post-independence government in 1948, on his release Ba Maw returned to the Rangoon bar and re-established his legal practice. Writing occasional newspaper articles, by the early 1960s he had established a role for himself as an elder statesman. His memoirs of the war years were written during that time and eventually published in the United States as 'Breakthrough in Burma' (1968). He died on 29 May 1977 in Rangoon. 


@@@@@


doc= 94672


Ne Win (1911-2002), military ruler of Burma, was born Shu Maung on 14 May 1911 in Paungdale, central Burma, the son of Po Kha, a revenue surveyor, and his wife, Mi Le. His father's home was said to be a frequent stop for touring nationalist politicians despite his employment by the British colonial government. Having attended Prome Government High School he read biology at University College, Rangoon (1929-32), but left before taking a degree or undertaking medical training as intended. Joining the conservative faction of the nationalist Do Bama Asiayone ('We Burmese Association'), he worked in the post office in Rangoon during the 1930s. 
In 1941 Shu Maung, together with twenty-nine other young nationalists led by Aung San, after military training in Hainan, joined forces with the Japanese to remove the British from Burma. It was during this time that he adopted the name Ne Win ('Brilliant Sun'). Known as the Thirty Comrades, they provided the initial officer corps of the Burma Independence Army. The Burma Independence Army, reorganized as the Burma National Army, turned against the Japanese in March 1945, and together with General William Slim's Fourteenth Army joined in harrying the retreating Japanese until August of that year. Ne Win then joined the British Burma army as a major in December 1945, the Burma National Army having been recognized as the 'patriotic Burmese forces' by Admiral Lord Mountbatten. Before Burma regained independence on 4 January 1948, Ne Win led troops against Thakin Soe's faction of the Communist Party of Burma in the oilfields. Soe had previously been Ne Win's political leader during anti-Japanese resistance in the Irrawaddy delta. 
Soon after independence the government of Nu faced a multi-pronged civil war fighting both communist and ethnic minority insurgents, mainly Karen and Kachin, as well as former members of the Burma National and British armies. The 4th Burma rifles (which Ne Win commanded) and half of the 5th Burma rifles remained loyal to the government and Ne Win was soon in overall command of this force of 10,000 men. At the height of the civil war, he was not only military commander but also deputy prime minister as well as home minister and defence minister. As it fought against the domestic insurgents, the army had also to contain American-backed Chinese nationalist troops who had entered northern Burma in their flight from the Chinese communist Red Army. 
Meanwhile the government of Nu came under increasing pressure and in October 1958, after it lost its anti-communist majority, Nu asked Ne Win to form a non-political caretaker government. During Ne Win's eighteen months as prime minister a border treaty was agreed with communist China, and the hereditary powers of the 'feudal' rulers in the Shan States were ended. His government, however, became unpopular among civilian politicians for undermining the power of various warlords who had supported Nu's governments. Ne Win returned power to Nu following elections in 1960 and was hailed as a champion of constitutional democracy. 
However, in March 1962 Ne Win ousted Nu and took sole executive, judicial, and legislative powers as chairman of a revolutionary council government. He set out to centralize power and introduced radical, autarkic, socialist economic policies. His military government transmogrified itself into a civilian one-party state led by the Burma Socialist Programme Party under a new constitution in 1974. Ne Win retained his dominant position as chairman of the party even after he stepped down as president in 1981. Though he presided over a strict socialist regime, he was more ideologically driven as a nationalist than as a Marxist. His government was never able to defeat the myriad ethnic insurgent groups which had sprung up in the border areas of the country, and as the economy deteriorated after almost all foreign investments were nationalized and management of the economy fell to his untrained military associates the country stagnated in isolation from global developments. Though he managed to keep his country out of the cold war conflicts which affected other parts of south-east Asia, he presided over a regime which fell badly behind its neighbours in growth and prosperity. By 1987 the economic situation of the country was dire, and following several months of increasingly violent demonstrations against the Burma Socialist Programme Party regime, Ne Win resigned in July 1988, calling for a referendum to return to multi-party democracy. A few months later the army he had shaped seized power again and his influence waned. 
Ne Win was married at least four times (some sources suggest five or even seven): first, in the 1930s, to Tin Tin; second, in the 1940s, to Khin May (Kitty) Than (died 1972), who had a strong influence on him; third, in 1976, to June Rose Bellamy (Yadana Natmai), an Anglo-Burmese; and fourth, to Ni Ni Myint, a professor of history. He had a reputation as a playboy, and enjoyed the Rangoon Turf Club and various golf clubs. His last months were spent effectively under house arrest following a bizarre plot by a son-in-law and three grandsons to install a 'Ne Win dynasty'. His death in Yangon (Rangoon) on 5 December 2002 was little marked, though the belief that he was all-powerful and solely responsible for his country's plight survived his passing. He was buried in Ye Way cemetery, Yangon, on 5 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 94673


Onn bin Jaafar, Dato Sir (1895-1962), administrator and politician in Malaya, was born in Johor Bahru, the son of Dato Jaafar bin Haji Muhammad and his Circassian wife. His father and several other members of his family served as 'mentri besar' (chief minister) of Johor, which was then a British protected state. Treated as an adopted son by Sultan Ibrahim of Johor, Onn was sent with the royal princes to Aldeburgh Lodge School in Suffolk. After his return he completed his education at Malay College, Kuala Kangsar, which groomed aristocrats for administration. He became a clerk in the Johor secretariat and also served in the Johor Volunteer Force but, falling out with Sultan Ibrahim, he left government employment. He married his third wife, Halimah binte Hussein, in May 1921; their eldest son Tun Hussein Onn (prime minister of Malaysia, 1976-81) was born in 1922. 
During the 1920s Onn drifted from job to job and dabbled in journalism. In the English-language press he criticized Ibrahim's authoritarianism and British colonialism. As editor of three Malay-language newspapers ('Warta Malaya' in 1930-33, 'Lembaga Malaya' in 1934-6, and 'Lembaga' in 1935-6), he was drawn into the Malay campaign for a larger share in government. Reconciled with Sultan Ibrahim, he joined the Johor state council in 1936, was appointed private secretary to the crown prince in 1938, and represented Johor at the San Francisco Exhibition in 1938-9. In December 1940 he attended the congress of Malay associations held in Kuala Lumpur, but gave little indication of his future as a nationalist leader. 
When Japan invaded Johor in December 1941 Onn was in charge of information and publicity, and he remained in state administration during the occupation. He worked as food controller and later as district officer of Batu Pahat, where he won renown for pacifying communal conflict. In the confusion surrounding Emperor Hirohito's surrender, the Japanese invited Onn and other Malay leaders to Singapore in an abortive attempt to establish a national government, but the British returned unopposed. They brought with them a radical plan for the rehabilitation of the country and the creation of a multiracial nation. The principal features of their Malayan Union scheme were strong central government and a common citizenship for all (Chinese and Indians as well as Malays) who regarded Malaya as home. The Malays protested against the loss of their birthright and attacked the manner in which the British had foisted new treaties on their rulers. Political associations, which had lain dormant for three and a half years, revived and new ones were formed, such as Pergerakan Melayu Semenanjong Johor, launched by Onn. 
From his base in Johor, where he served as chief minister from 1946 to 1950, Onn (who had been given the title dato by the sultan of Johor, and was thereafter known as Dato Onn) seized the leadership of a mass, peninsula-wide yet inchoate nationalist movement. In March 1946 he convened in Kuala Lumpur a pan-Malayan Malay congress which, two months later, became the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), with Onn as its president. He organized a non-co-operation campaign and persuaded the Malay rulers to boycott the installation of Sir Edward Gent as governor of the Malayan Union. Gent and Malcolm MacDonald (the regional governor-general) soon recognized the need to regain Malay confidence and on 1 February 1948, after months of negotiations, the Malayan Union was replaced by the Federation of Malaya. The federation secured strong central government for the British and salvaged for non-Malays a common, though weaker, citizenship scheme. On the other hand, the sovereignty of the Malay rulers was restored, and Malay political pre-eminence was assured. 
The defeat of the Malayan Union was the high point in Onn's career. While he had been a charismatic and strong-willed campaigner, his mercurial temperament was less suited to managing the Malay differences that resurfaced once the Malayan Union crisis ended. He now concentrated on his longer-term objective of preparing Malays for self-government, but refrained from demanding early independence, particularly after the outbreak of the communist insurgency in 1948. Arguing that the predominantly rural Malays were not ready to hold their own against Malaya's Chinese, he continued to press the British for guarantees of Malay rights and for assistance in economic and social development. The British treated him as a national statesman in the making; in 1950 Sir Henry Gurney, high commissioner from 1948 to 1951, appointed Onn the member for home affairs in a quasi-ministerial government, and chairman of the rural and industrial development authority. At the same time, because he realized that the British would not transfer power to the Malays alone, Onn worked to improve inter-ethnic relations through the communities liaison committee (from late 1948 to 1951). As he pursued his ambitious though somewhat erratic course, however, he fell foul of the sultans and clashed with members of his own party. His espousal of non-communalism obliged him to resign as president of UMNO in August 1951 and a few weeks later he was expelled from the party altogether, on account of joining non-Malays in the new Independence of Malaya Party (IMP). 
The IMP fell into decline as soon as it was trounced in the Kuala Lumpur municipal elections in February 1952. Left with neither a Malay power-base nor the trust of non-Malays, Onn was gradually eclipsed by Tunku Abdul Rahman, his successor as UMNO president. While Onn remained on the federal legislative and executive councils and was knighted KBE in the coronation honours list of 1953, the Tunku subtly negotiated an inter-communal alliance with the Malayan Chinese Association and the Malayan Indian Congress. Combining with Malay chief ministers in a national conference, Onn tried to slow down the alliance's advance towards independence. In February 1954 he reformed the IMP as Party Negara, but this soon lost its non-communal appeal without attracting significant Malay support. It failed to win a seat in the federal elections of 1955, while Onn himself was its single successful candidate in 1959, being returned by a constituency in Trengganu. 
Onn died in Johor Bahru on 19 January 1962 and was buried beside his father and elder brother. Many of his followers left politics after Malayan independence in 1957 and Party Negara did not long survive his death. Nevertheless, Onn would be remembered as the champion of Malays in the Malayan Union crisis and the father of UMNO. 


@@@@@


doc= 94674


Abdul Razak bin Hussein, Tun (1922-1976), prime minister of Malaysia, was born in Pulau Keladi in the state of Pahang (a Malay state then under British 'protection'), on 11 March 1922. Descended from a line of Bugis chieftains who had emigrated from Sulawesi, he was the only child of Hussein bin Mohamed Taib, a Pahang chieftain and district officer, and his wife, Fatima binte Daud. He was educated at the Langgar Malay school in Pekan, Pahang; the Malay College, Kuala Kangsar, Perak; and (after joining the Malay administrative service in 1939) Raffles College, Singapore. While he continued in state administration during the Japanese occupation (1942-5), early in 1945 he embarked on clandestine collaboration with Wataniah, Pahang's Malay resistance force. After the Second World War he studied law at Lincoln's Inn in London, where he was called to the bar in 1950. It was during his student days in London that he became interested in politics, especially socialism; he joined the Fabian Society and the Labour Party as well as the Malay Society and the interracial Malayan Forum. 
On his return to Malaya in 1950 Razak entered the Malayan civil service. He was appointed Pahang's state secretary in 1952 and three years later 'mentri besar' (chief minister) of Pahang. While holding these administrative positions he was elected leader of the youth wing of the leading Malay political party, the United Malays National Organization. When the founder of the party, Dato Onn bin Jaafar, was forced out of it for proposing that its membership be opened to non-Malays, Razak was elected deputy president after persuading Tunku Abdul Rahman (known as the Tunku) to be elected president. In 1952 he married Toh Puan Rahah; they had five sons and adopted three daughters. 
In August 1955, after the multiracial Alliance led by the Tunku had won fifty-one of the fifty-two federal seats contested in national elections, Razak was appointed the country's first minister of education. He was the architect of the controversial education report of 1955, which recommended a national curriculum for the country's primary and secondary schools in which Malay was made a compulsory subject of study alongside English. This created among non-Malay citizens an image of him as an ardent Malay nationalist, although later he continued to uphold the Tunku's policy of multilingualism. In 1956 he was a key figure in the Alliance's delegation to London for talks with the British government, which led to Malaya's independence the following year. After independence he became the Tunku's deputy as well as his minister of defence. Two years later he was given an additional portfolio, as minister for national and rural development. During his ten years in this latter post more than 80,000 acres of virgin jungle were opened up for Malay agricultural settlement and farming, and a massive infrastructure of roads and other developments in the rural areas was built. For his outstanding contribution to rural development in Malaysia, the Philippines awarded him the Magsaysay award in 1967. He had already, in 1959, been awarded the Seri Maharaja Mangku Negara, one of Malaya's highest honours, carrying the foretitle Tun. 
Following general elections, communal tensions erupted into nationwide violence in May 1969. The liberal-minded Tunku initially carried on for a while as head of an emergency cabinet, but then virtually handed over the administration to Razak as director of the national operations council, whose powers superseded the cabinet. This took place after the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (paramount ruler) had proclaimed a national emergency and suspended the Malaysian parliament and all state legislatures. Razak's loyalty to the Tunku despite the latter's weakening position in government led him to remove Mahathir Mohamed from the United Malays National Organization for attempting to oust the premier, though Mahathir, who retired temporarily into the political wilderness, emerged some years later to serve Razak as minister of education. After the national operations council had re-established law and order throughout the nation, Razak pursued a Malay nationalist agenda of political reform, the council issuing decrees to reaffirm Malay sovereignty and prohibit further challenges to Malay privilege. He began introducing Malay as a medium of instruction in schools in stages, and to use it widely as the official language in place of English. 
On 22 September 1970 the Tunku left office and Razak succeeded him as prime minister. In February 1971 parliament and the state legislative assemblies were reconvened. Razak began to change the Tunku's anti-communist, pro-West foreign policy to non-alignment, in pursuit of which he recognized communist China in 1974. Parliament approved his new economic policy, aimed at restructuring the economy to overcome the social and economic disparity between Malays and non-Malays and to redistribute 30 per cent of the country's wealth to Malays through affirmative action in the public and private sectors within the next twenty years. This became the basis of the second Malaysia five-year development plan that was implemented in 1971, under which the state intervened to offer Malays thousands of jobs, credit, business licences, and government contracts within the framework of largely non-Malay economic growth and increased activity by foreign-owned companies. Razak next formed the National Front or Barisan Nasional to replace the ruling Alliance by including several opposition parties. With this virtual removal of opposition to the government, student bodies on campuses began to articulate dissent and hold demonstrations to protest against a variety of issues throughout 1974. They were forcibly put down, and the 'Universities and University College Acts' were introduced to curb political activities at institutions of higher learning. Meeting little opposition, the National Front won the 1974 general elections. 
Having suffered from leukaemia for several years, Razak died on 14 January 1976 at a clinic in London, where he had gone for treatment. His body was flown back to Malaysia and buried at the Heroes' Mausoleum in the National Mosque, Kuala Lumpur. His deputy, Tun Hussein Onn, who was also his brother-in-law, succeeded him as prime minister. Razak's achievements led him to be called Malaysia's 'bapa pembangunan', or 'father of development'. When he died, his affirmative action policies had begun to succeed in producing dramatic social changes and in boosting Malay confidence. Although an ardent Malay nationalist, he succeeded in forming a national unity government including opposition politicians of the left, right, and centre. He was a firm believer in the integrity of government, and cracked down hard on corruption. His son Tun Najib Razak became deputy prime minister of Malaysia in 2004. 


@@@@@


doc= 94675


Hussein Onn, Tun (1922-1990), prime minister of Malaysia, was born in Johor Bahru, Johor (then under British protection), on 12 February 1922, the eldest son of Dato Onn bin Jaafar (1895-1962), politician, and his wife, Halimah binte Hussein. He received his early education in Singapore and at the English College in Johor Bahru. He joined the Johor military forces as a cadet in 1940 and was sent a year later to the military academy in Dehra Dun, India. On completion of his training he joined the Indian army and served in the Middle East. When the Japanese occupation of Malaya ended in August 1945, he returned with the British military forces and was appointed commandant of the Johor Bahru police depot. The following year he joined the Malayan administrative service as an assistant administrative officer in Segamat, Johor. He was later posted to Selangor, serving as a district officer in Kelang and Kuala Selangor. 
In 1949 Hussein resigned from the administrative service to join his father in forming the United Malays National Organization (UMNO) to further Malay interests in the struggle for independence. He became the first youth chief of UMNO and a year later was elected its secretary general, but left when the party rejected his father's multi-racial policies and joined the latter in forming the Independence of Malaya Party. He served briefly as a member of the Federal Legislative Council, the Johor Council of State, and the Johor State Executive Council, but left for London to study law at Lincoln's Inn. After he was called to the bar in 1960, he returned to Malaya to practise law. 
Hussein rejoined UMNO in 1968 at the persuasion of his brother-in-law, Tun Abdul Razak, who was then Malaysia's deputy prime minister. A year later he was elected to parliament and shortly after was appointed education minister in the cabinet of Tun Abdul Razak, who had become prime minister. His meteoric rise continued when in 1972 he was elected one of the three vice-presidents of UMNO and in 1973 was chosen as deputy prime minister. He also served as minister of trade and industry in 1973-4, and minister of finance and simultaneously minister of co-ordination and public corporations in 1974-6. On the death of Tun Abdul Razak on 15 January 1976 he assumed the office of prime minister. 
Despite his swift rise to power Hussein had emerged from a weak position in UMNO politics. His own poor health and inability to control UMNO to the same extent as Razak generated serious internal dissent. The ongoing communist insurgency still served as a convenient excuse for suppressing civil liberties, including the detention of six prominent politicians (two of them former assistant ministers) without trial under the 'Internal Security Act' on charges of communist activities. At its thirty-second meeting the Malaysian bar council adopted a resolution accusing Hussein's government of 'the clear and wholly unworthy intention of muzzling the Bar' and also of 'showing itself to be unwilling to accept valid and constructive criticism'. 
Hussein's tenure saw a greater bureaucratization of the economy, in which government officials were given powers to run business corporations. The 'Industrial Co-ordination Act', introduced in 1975 to extend the new economic policy's affirmative action in favour of Malays, met with strong opposition from foreign and Chinese businesses. His government initially gave in to the demands of Malay groups and Malay bureaucrats, who wanted the state to intervene in favour of Malay interests under a scheme introduced to transfer millions of dollars worth of government-owned shares to a National Unit Trust (Amanah Saham Nasional) controlled by the National Equity Corporation (PNB), which allowed Malays and 'bumiputra' (the indigenous peoples) to invest in the shares. Flushed with funds, the corporation became the means by which the government sought to purchase a controlling interest in foreign companies. In 1977 amendments were introduced to the 'Industrial Co-ordination Act' to make it less onerous to foreign and Chinese business firms. Fortunately for Hussein, Malaysia's sustained economic growth, in which GDP averaged 7.6 per cent for the period from 1970 to 1980, made resources available to finance the Malay investments and corporations. 
Despite his weakened position Hussein continued Razak's policy of cracking down on corruption. He completed the latter's unfinished task of removing Harun Idris, UMNO's chief minister of Selangor, and brought him to court on corruption charges, for which he was eventually convicted. He also removed Tun Mustapha bin Harun, the recalcitrant chief minister of Sabah, who had used his position to become one of the richest men in the world. Hussein failed to stem the tide of 'dakwah', the world-wide Islamic fundamentalist movement, but he did check the further flow of Vietnamese refugees into Malaysia after some 30,000 of them had been accepted in transit camps before being transferred to third countries. When he imposed emergency rule to solve a crisis in the state of Kelantan, which was ruled by the Parti Islam (PAS), that party left his coalition government and took to the path of Islamic fundamentalism. His administration was not notable for any marked innovation or policy change, but reflected a continuation of the policies of his predecessor, Tun Abdul Razak. He, however, contributed a great deal to the betterment of the Malay community and generally continued to run a peaceful coalition with Chinese and Indian parties, despite ongoing racial tensions and trouble with communist insurgents. 
When heart problems forced him to resign on 17 July 1981, Hussein named Mahathir Mohamed as his successor. However, in 1988, when internal rivalries caused UMNO to be dissolved, he supported a rival group's challenge to Mahathir. He died on 29 May 1990 at the Seton Medical Center, Daly City, San Francisco, six weeks after he had undergone a heart by-pass operation. His remains were brought back to Malaysia and buried at the Heroes' Mausoleum in the National Mosque, Kuala Lumpur. He was survived by his wife, Suhailah Noah, and their two sons and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 94676


Tan Cheng Lock, Tun Sir (1883-1960), businessman and politician in Malaya, was born at 111 Heeren Street, Malacca, then part of the British crown colony of the Straits Settlements, on 5 April 1883, the third son of Tan Keong Ann and his wife, Lee Seck Bin. He was descended from a line of Malacca 'baba' -- Straits-born Chinese who had absorbed local cultural characteristics. His great-great-grandfather Tan Hay Kwan (died 1801) had migrated to Malacca from Fukien in the late eighteenth century, and Tan Cheng Lock neither spoke nor read Chinese. He was educated at Malacca high school and the Raffles Institution in Singapore, becoming a teacher at Raffles in 1902. 
Tan Cheng Lock's grandfather Tan Choon Bock had been a successful entrepreneur, and apparently inheriting this commercial acumen, as opposed to his father's heavy drinking, Tan Cheng Lock found his calling in the booming rubber plantations of Malacca. He became an estate assistant in 1908 and floated his own companies between 1910 and 1912. Diversifying later into banking, he was a founding director of the Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation in 1932. Fortuitously he had also inherited a large fortune through his marriage to Yeo Yeok Neo, daughter of Yeo Tin Hye, in 1913, with whom he had four daughters and one son. 
This combination of inherited and self-made wealth underwrote Tan's emergence in the inter-war years as leader of the Straits Chinese. After holding public office in Malacca from 1912 Tan became an unofficial member of the Straits Settlements legislative council in 1923, and progressed to the executive council ten years later. His loyalty to the British empire proved not incompatible with demands for a modicum of self-government and the development of a common Malayan identity and citizenship. With his wife's ill health, however, and disillusionment with the 'pro-Malay' tendency in British colonial policy, Tan resigned from public office in 1935. He spent the next four years in Europe. During the Japanese occupation of Malaya he and his family took refuge in India. In a memorandum to the Colonial Office in the closing months of the Pacific war he set forth a political vision for the reoccupation, calling for a united self-governing Malaya within the empire-Commonwealth, in which there would be equal rights and responsibilities for all communities to foster a common Malayan patriotism across the former Straits Settlements and Malay States. He again set out this vision in his only book, 'Malayan Problems from a Chinese Point of View' (1947). 
Tan's demands seemed to have been finally met in the new Malayan Union constitution of 1946 (notwithstanding Singapore's exclusion). Yet when he returned to Malacca in June of that year the British were already backpedalling, faced by the mass Malay protests orchestrated by the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO). The new federation after February 1948 did retain a centralized administration in Kuala Lumpur. But sovereignty was returned to the Malay sultans and citizenship for non-Malays was severely curtailed. Tan came to lead the All Malayan Council of Joint Action campaign from the end of 1946 for a more democratic, racially inclusive Malaya (including Singapore). In this he found himself allied with some odd bedfellows, including Malay dissidents and communist front organizations. Yet by the end of 1947 he had distanced himself from the non-co-operation campaign and managed to avoid the round-up of radicals that followed the beginning of the Malayan Communist Party's armed insurrection in June 1948. In the context of winning 'hearts and minds' for a non-communist Malaya, Tan made his return to respectable politics. He joined the Communities Liaison Committee in late 1948, out of which came official encouragement for the creation of the Malayan Chinese Association (MCA) as a means of luring the Chinese masses from the Malayan Communist Party. Tan became the MCA's founding president in February 1949, and narrowly avoided a communist assassination attempt two months later. But he was no British stooge, consistently arguing that the Chinese would only come to regard Malaya as the prime focus of their loyalty if they were afforded the same citizenship rights as the Malays. 
Through the Communities Liaison Committee Tan developed close ties with the Malay leader, Onn bin Jaafar. When Onn resigned his UMNO presidency to form the Independence of Malaya Party in August 1951 Tan campaigned for the new multiracial party. However, other MCA leaders, notably H. S. Lee, rejected Tan's attempts to integrate with the Independence of Malaya Party and instead brokered electoral pacts with UMNO between 1952 and 1953. Lacking influence outside Malacca, and increasingly weary with age, Tan was reluctantly forced to disengage from Onn. Under the leadership of Tunku Abdul Rahman, the UMNO-MCA Alliance (joined by the Malayan Indian Congress after 1954) won a landslide victory in the 1955 elections for internal self-government, and led Malaya to full independence in 1957. 
In the early 1950s Tan, who was knighted in 1952, was no mere MCA figurehead. Contrary to his characterization as a 'dodderer' (Stockwell, 2.455) by Sir Gerald Templer (high commissioner and director of operations, 1952-4), British officials continued to regard him as the one Chinese leader who was widely known and respected throughout the country. Indeed he had succeeded in reorganizing the MCA by 1952 from a welfare organization into a fully functioning political party. Nevertheless, although retaining his MCA presidency, Tan played less of a role in party decision-making from 1954. Thereafter his son, Tan Siew Sin (1916-1988), was 'de facto' leader of the MCA, becoming minister of commerce and industry and minister of finance in independent Malaya/Malaysia. Increasingly frail, Tan Cheng Lock (who received the title of dato from the sultan of Johor in 1949 and that of tun from the paramount ruler of Malaysia in 1958) died of a heart attack at the General Hospital, Malacca, on 13 December 1960. He was buried in the Chinese cemetery, Malacca. 


@@@@@


doc= 94683


Stuart, James (1868-1942), magistrate and historian in South Africa, was born in Pietermaritzburg, Natal, on 30 January 1868, the eldest of the six children (four sons and two daughters, one of whom died in infancy) of Martinus Stuart (1841-1881), Natal magistrate, and his wife, Mary (1846-1918), daughter of David Taylor, trader, of George, Cape Colony, and his wife, Sophia, 'nee' Moodie. Stuart's great-great-grandfather had fled from Scotland to Holland in 1688 to escape religious persecution. His grandfather, Jacobus Stuart, was a civil servant and merchant who left Amsterdam in 1851 to look for business opportunities in Natal and the Transvaal, and eventually settled in Natal. Stuart grew up in the villages of Greytown and Ixopo, and attended Hilton College near Pietermaritzburg, the capital of the colony. After the death of his father in the Anglo-Transvaal War of 1880-81 his mother arranged for him to be educated at St John's College in Hurstpierpoint, Sussex. 
Stuart returned to Natal in 1886. In February 1888 he was appointed a clerk in the post office in Pietermaritzburg. On 26 May 1888 he took up a position as clerk and interpreter in Zulu to the resident magistrate at Eshowe, the administrative centre of the recently annexed colony of Zululand, and on 1 February 1889 was appointed clerk and interpreter to the resident commissioner and chief magistrate of Zululand. 
In March 1894 Stuart was sent to act as interpreter to the British representative on the provisional government committee in the Swazi kingdom, and in October 1894 he travelled to London as interpreter with a deputation of Swazi leaders. From March to August 1895 he was acting British consul in Swaziland. On 1 September 1895 he was appointed as resident magistrate in Ingwavuma in recently annexed Tongaland. Towards the end of 1897 he suffered a nervous breakdown, and was given leave to return to Natal. From October 1898 to April 1899 he once again acted as British consul in Swaziland. For the next two years he held brief appointments as acting magistrate in a number of centres in Natal before taking up a position as assistant magistrate in Durban, the colony's largest town, in March 1901. 
By this time Stuart had become deeply involved in developing a long-term project, which he called his 'Idea', to conduct detailed research into the history and customs of the African population of Natal, and to make his findings public. Over the next twenty years he spent much of his spare time seeking out knowledgeable African informants, most of them elderly men closely connected to chiefly families, and making detailed notes of his conversations with them. He was a fluent Zulu linguist, and became well known in colonial circles through his lectures and publications on Zulu history. 
As an acknowledged expert on native affairs, Stuart was seconded to do intelligence work for the colonial forces in the Natal rebellion of 1906 and its aftermath. From September 1906 to June 1907 he was secretary to the Natal native affairs commission, which was set up to investigate the causes of the rebellion and make recommendations for reform of native administration in the colony. On 1 July 1909 he was appointed assistant secretary for native affairs in Natal. After Natal was incorporated into the Union of South Africa in 1910 he was transferred to the Pretoria office of the new native affairs department, but found he had little useful work to do and decided to retire on the pension which became due to him in June 1912. 
Stuart returned to Pietermaritzburg and resumed work on the history of the rebellion of 1906 which he had been commissioned to write by the Natal colonial government but which he had made his private project when the union government withdrew support for it. At the end of 1912 he travelled to London to finish work on the book, and the following year it was published by Macmillan & Co. under the title 'A History of the Zulu Rebellion, 1906'. It remained the standard work on its subject until the 1960s. 
In April 1914 Stuart accompanied Sir Henry Rider Haggard on a tour of Zululand, and later in the year, after the outbreak of the First World War, went to London as cultural adviser for the play 'Mameena'. This was based on Haggard's novel 'Child of Storm' (1913), which he had dedicated to Stuart. Stuart seems to have remained in London during the early stages of the war, but by early 1916 he was back in Natal. Later that year he assisted in an official drive in Zululand to recruit men for the South African Native Labour Contingent, and in February 1917 he sailed for France with a detachment of the contingent. He held the rank of captain, but virtually nothing is known of his service record. He returned to South Africa in December 1917 and the following year settled in Hilton outside Pietermaritzburg with his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Smith, a missionary worker whom he had married in Ladysmith in 1916. For the next four years he was actively engaged in interviewing African informants to collect historical and cultural information for a series of Zulu readers that he was planning. In 1922 he left Natal with his family and settled in London. 
Between 1923 and 1927 Longmans, Green & Co. published seven Zulu readers written by Stuart for use as textbooks in black schools in Natal. He lectured widely on topics in Zulu history, assisted in the Zulu section of the Empire Exhibition held in Wembley in 1924, and in 1927 and 1930 made recordings of praises of the Zulu kings for the Zonophone company. Very little is known of the last dozen years of his life. He died at his home, 142 Croydon Road, Anerley, London, on 8 March 1942 from bronchitis contracted while he was engaged in duties as an air raid warden. He had two sons, Robert Coltness and Walter Francis, who was killed in Italy in the Second World War. 
In 1949 Stuart's widow sold his collection of papers to Killie Campbell, owner of a large private library in Durban. From the 1970s the value of his research work became widely known in academic circles through the publication by the University of Natal Press of selections of his notes in a series of volumes entitled 'The James Stuart Archive'. 


@@@@@


doc= 94684


Fynn, Henry Francis (1803-1861), mariner and settler in Natal, was born in London on 29 March 1803, the son of (Henry) Francis Fynn (died 1831), a shipowner originally from Donegal in Ireland who traded between the Dutch East Indies and Cape Colony, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Copestick. From 1806 his family lived in Cape Colony, leaving him in England for his education. He attended Christ's Hospital from 1809 to 1816 and worked as a surgeon's assistant in a London hospital from 1816 to 1818. In 1818 he joined his family at the Cape, where he made several attempts to obtain employment, eventually taking a post on the government farm which had been founded by Robert Hart in Somerset, Cape Colony, in 1814. This venture was forced to close in 1823, after which he took a job as supercargo aboard the vessel 'Jane', owned by the trader Henry Nourse, whose voyages up the east coast as far as Delagoa Bay were motivated by reports of ivory supplies. 
Having gained some knowledge of the region, Fynn became a member of Francis Farewell's trading party which left Cape Town for Port Natal aboard the 'Julia' in May 1824. Of the five men aboard the 'Julia' only Fynn and Henry Ogle have been identified, the other participants being possibly mixed race or 'free black' people from Cape Colony. Fynn's party was joined by Farewell's in July 1824, and Fynn followed Farewell's lead in recognizing Shaka ka Senzangakhoma (1787-1828) as paramount chief and obtaining a supposed land grant for the area around Port Natal in August 1824. Fynn and other writers later claimed that Fynn had given Shaka medical assistance, but it is more likely that Shaka saw Fynn as simply a client with permission to collect some ivory for trading purposes. From 1825 Fynn made an attempt to establish an overland trade route via the Mpondo territory to Cape Colony and, together with two Cape coloured retainers, travelled as far as the Mzimbuvu River, in the process making contact with the Mpondo leader Faku. Fynn's Zulu name Mbuyazi has been interpreted as the 'long-tailed finch of the ridge', suggesting that Fynn, like the finch, moved quickly from place to place obtaining news. 
Fynn, together with Farewell's employee John Cane, were later identified as individuals who had engaged in mercenary activity in the interior, against Shaka's rivals the Ndwandwe in 1826 and in the clash between colonial, Xhosa, Thembu, and Mpondo forces and a 'Zulu' force at Mbolompo in 1828. Fynn and Henry Ogle were also later recorded as being European men who took indigenous wives. Fynn fathered twelve mixed-race children with four indigenous women. He attempted to retain some independence from the other settlers at Port Natal and by 1827 had established homesteads at Umzimkhulu. His 'ensimbini' homestead consisted of himself, his first wife, Vundhlase of the Zelemu, several other women, their mixed race children, and some Cape 'coloured' retainers who had accompanied Fynn and Farewell to Port Natal from Cape Colony. That his post lay to the south of Port Natal meant that Fynn was able to act as host to the earliest overland white travellers from Cape Colony. This he did in 1829 when Alexander Cowie and Benjamin Green visited him and in 1830 when John Burnet Biddulph and James Collis travelled to Port Natal. In 1829 Fynn was joined by his father and his brothers William (1806-1853) and Frank (1808-1840), who both hoped to profit from the ivory trade between Port Natal and Cape Colony. William returned to the Cape in 1831 following the death of his father, but Frank remained with his brother at 'ensimbini', eventually taking over the extended family of indigenous women and mixed-race children whom he cared for until his death in 1840. 
Fynn left Natal in 1832 to pursue a conventional colonial career in Cape Colony and re-entered white society by marrying a white woman, Ann Brown, in 1837. She died in June 1839 and in 1841 Fynn married Christiana Brown (1821-1870) -- unrelated to Ann -- with whom he had one child, Henry Francis Fynn ['see below']. 
Fynn was diplomatic agent to the Mpondo leader Faku from March 1835 to March 1836, and resident agent with Maphasa of the Thembu from 1836 to 1846. Following the outbreak of war between Cape Colony and the Rharhabe under Sandile in alliance with Maphasa in 1846, Fynn's post was suspended and he was unemployed until April 1848. In May 1848 he was reappointed as diplomatic agent to Faku and moved to Buntingville. In February 1852, for reasons which remain obscure, he was suspended and was not paid until March 1854. 
During 1852 Fynn returned to Natal as assistant resident magistrate for Pietermaritzburg. He was also unofficially recruited as an interpreter for Sir Benjamin Pine's land commission, which aimed to determine the number of African communities that could claim location land in Natal. In 1857 Fynn was also recruited by Theophilus Shepstone to go to Zululand to help form the policy of Cetshwayo ka Mpande, who had succeeded as ruler of the Zulu kingdom. Fynn retired from the Natal government service in 1859 to pursue his efforts to obtain a land grant which he claimed had been given to him by Shaka in the 1820s. By the time of his death at Durban on 20 September 1861 he had been unable to secure his claim, though his widow and their son Henry Francis were eventually awarded two plots of land in the Illovo district. Fynn was buried in West Pioneer Street cemetery, Durban. 
On his arrival in Natal Bay, Fynn had begun to record his impressions of the settlement and the indigenous peoples with whom the settlers came into contact, with a view to producing a history, which was never published. His original notes were buried with his brother Frank in 1840, but he reconstructed them and expanded them. They came to represent the principal written source for the history of Natal and of Zululand between 1824 and 1834. His evidence to the Natal native affairs commission in 1852 contained important information on the peoples who occupied that territory. An edition of his fragmentary notes was eventually published in 1950. 
His son 
In 1873 Fynn was recruited by Theophilus Shepstone to accompany him to Zululand for the 'coronation' of Cetshwayo. In 1876 Fynn was promoted to the post of resident magistrate at Msinga. He was perceived by colonial writers as having extensive knowledge of the Zulu language, customs, and institutions and his Zulu name Gwalagwala is taken from the Zulu name for the loerie bird, a feather of which he was accustomed to wear in his hat. He acted as interpreter for Sir Bartle Frere's ultimatum to the Zulu in December 1878 and then tried to secure the surrender of Gamdana ka Xongo, a half-brother of Sihayo. However, before he could do this Msinga became colonial defensive district no. 1 and Fynn became involved in the invasion preparations and was given an unofficial post as interpreter and political adviser to Lord Chelmsford. Fynn accompanied Chelmsford into Zululand but escaped the battle of Isandlwana on 22 January 1879 by accompanying Major Glynn's column to the relief of Major Dartnell. 
Fynn returned to Msinga as resident magistrate until January 1883, when he was given the post of British resident to the restored Zulu monarch Cetshwayo over a portion of the former Zulu kingdom. In this position Fynn witnessed the events of the civil war in Zululand including the important battles of Msebe in March 1883 and Ondini in July 1883. In October 1883 he was responsible for taking the defeated Cetshwayo into British custody. In February 1884 Fynn returned to his post as resident magistrate at Msinga, a position he then held until his retirement in 1896. Fynn was interviewed as someone with authoritative knowledge of Zululand by James Stuart in 1906. Fynn died at Foxhill, Pietermaritzburg, Natal, on 30 April 1915, having given the manuscript of his diary, which covered the events of 1883, to his youngest daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 94685


Henry Francis Fynn (1846-1915),, sometimes known as Fynn junior, was born at Colesberg, Cape Colony, on 14 November 1846. He accompanied his parents to Natal in 1852 and his formal education ended with the death of his father in 1861. By 1864 he had acquired sufficient informal knowledge of the Zulu language to enter the Natal government service as clerk and interpreter to the resident magistrate in Newcastle. In 1865 he was transferred to the Upper Mkhomazi district where he was upgraded to the post of clerk of the court for Richmond. In 1870 he married a Yorkshire immigrant, Hannah Maria Payne; they had ten children, of whom seven survived infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 94686


Armorer, Sir Nicholas (c.1620-1686), royalist army officer, conspirator, and courtier, was born at Belford, Northumberland, a younger son of Thomas Armorer (died 1642), of Belford, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Robert Clavering of Callaly in the same county. Like his brother William he early broke free from the confines of life as the younger son of a minor country gentleman. As a young man he joined the English forces sent to support the attempts of the lord lieutenant, James Butler, marquess of Ormond, to suppress the Irish rising which erupted in October 1641, but he returned to England after the outbreak of the civil war in 1642. 
Armorer served in the Welsh border counties and Staffordshire in a war of skirmishes and sieges. By 1645 he was a captain, commanding the garrison of Sir Richard Newport's fortified house High Ercall in Shropshire. Parliament's capture of Shrewsbury in February, followed by the decisive royalist defeat at Naseby in June, left Armorer's garrison dangerously exposed. In April and July High Ercall withstood sieges, but surrendered on terms after a third assault in March 1646. Armorer withdrew to Worcester which surrendered in its turn in July, by which time the English civil war was effectively over. 
Armorer's subsequent movements are obscure but he possibly withdrew for a time to Ireland, where the Stuart cause was not yet seen as lost. By 1652 he was in exile in Holland. On 3 June Sir Edward Nicholas, secretary of state to the exiled Charles II, wrote from The Hague to Lord Hatton in Paris to report a duel between Major Armorer and another exiled cavalier, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir William Leighton. 
Notwithstanding this duel, it is clear that Armorer was not prepared to be just another bitter and quarrelsome exiled royalist, living in shabby obscurity and hiding from his creditors. On 15 September 1653 Nicholas reported to Sir Edward Hyde, Charles II's chief counsellor in Paris, that Armorer, a servant of the princess royal, Mary of Orange, was about to go to England 'upon some particulars of his own, [and] would be glad to receive his Majesty's commands, being well known to, and well beloved by, all the King's party, not only in the North where he was born, but in Shropshire, Staffordshire and those parts' (BL, Add. MS 4180, fol. 104). 
This journey was the beginning of a career that made Armorer one of the most resourceful and enterprising of the agents employed in the murky and dangerous world of royalist conspiracy. On 24 November Armorer wrote to Nicholas to recommend that Charles 'fix on one or two of the most prudent' of his supporters to receive the king's authority 'to attend his affairs, and put them in a form that there may be no clashing' (BL, Add. MS 4180, fol. 108). By February 1654 the secret council of the Sealed Knot was in existence, authorized to plan and carry out a full-scale rising to overthrow the protectorate and restore the Stuarts. 
Throughout the 1650s Armorer made a series of dangerous missions to England to advance plots to overthrow the protectorate. He travelled widely, making contact with numerous royalist activists, for example, with Sir Vincent Corbet in Shropshire, with Colonel Edward Grey in Yorkshire, and with Francis Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham, in Lincolnshire. He showed his resourcefulness in several narrow escapes. Imprisoned in Dover Castle in February 1655, when he landed in England to take part in the royalist rising planned to break out in March, he was released as a result of the intervention of the sympathetic clerk of the passage. The discomfited governor of the castle, in an exculpatory letter of 11 February to the protectorate's secretary of state John Thurloe, described Armorer as 'a pretty full and somewhat ruddy faced man, of a middle stature, of about thirty-five or thirty-six years of age, having a deep brown hair, short beard, his hair on his beard and face much of a colour' (Bodl. Oxf., Rawlinson MS A 23, fol. 207). Undeterred by this narrow escape, Armorer travelled north with Henry Wilmot, earl of Rochester, who had been appointed to command the royalist rising in Yorkshire. Reduced to the condition of fugitives by the ignominious collapse of the rising in March, Armorer and Rochester were arrested in Aylesbury, but judicious bribery by Rochester enabled them to escape. 
Despite the protectorate government's efforts, and the information on the movements of royalist agents provided by Henry Manning, Thurloe's spy at the exiled court, Armorer and most of the other conspirators involved in the rising escaped back to the continent during 1655. Manning's treachery was discovered in December, and after a secret trial he was executed, not, as some historians have claimed, by Nicholas Armorer but by his brother William Armorer, an equerry at the exiled court, and Sir James Hamilton. At the time of Manning's interrogation and execution Armorer was in the Netherlands, in attendance on Mary of Orange. 
A feature of Armorer's career is his use of exile, an experience usually represented in totally negative terms, as a means of advancing his fortunes. Having begun as an obscure middle-ranking officer and client of Secretary Nicholas, on his return to the continent in August 1654 he reported not to Nicholas at The Hague but to Hyde and Ormond at the exiled court then in the Rhineland. Nicholas was irritated by this switch of allegiance but was reassured by his friend Thomas Ross on 11 April 1656 that Armorer had explained 'it was the King's command, or he would not have relinquished you, to whom he is bound by great obligation and affection' ('CSP dom.', '1655-6', 263). 
As royalist conspiracy slowly revived after the suppression of Penruddock's rising, Armorer made several more missions to England. He was in London early in 1658 when Ormond made his brief personal visit to the capital to sound out the possibilites of a rising, and he was one of the agents who withdrew hurriedly to the continent when the plans collapsed in a welter of arrests, followed by show trials and executions. A fortunate survivor of arrest and trial was John Mordaunt, who rapidly emerged as a new and energetic director of royalist conspiracy, far more enterprising than the cautious 'wary gentlemen' of the Sealed Knot. With the approval of Hyde and Ormond, Armorer soon included Mordaunt among his patrons. During the first half of 1659 Armorer was almost constantly on the move between the exiled court at Brussels and Mordaunt and other conspirators in England, carrying letters, intelligence reports, royal commissions, and instructions. 
Once again the hopes of the royalists were shattered when Sir George Booth's rising was crushed in August 1659. Armorer and Mordaunt, with other conspirators and insurgents, fled back into exile. They were in Calais when General John Lambert carried out a military coup in London and forcibly expelled the recently restored Rump Parliament. Armorer carried the news of the dramatic change in the political situation to Charles II, in attendance on the Franco-Spanish peace conference at Fuentarrabia in the Pyrenees. Mordaunt wrote to Charles on 16 October that 'Armorer will inform your Majesty of all particulars I have not time to write' ('Letter-Book', 42). 
Within days of his arrival at Fuentarrabia Armorer's years of dangerous and arduous service to the Stuart cause were rewarded by Charles II with his appointment as equerry in ordinary to the hunting stable. Armorer acknowledged the role of his patrons in this, writing to Hyde on 3 November and to Lady Mordaunt on 7 November of his gratitude and his hope of continued patronage. 
Further rewards followed when the monarchy was restored seven months later. Armorer was knighted in 1662, and received several grants of confiscated land and the monopoly on the import of horses for the king's use. As he moved steadily more deeply into Ormond's extensive patronage network he spent more time in Ireland, where he was appointed both to a captaincy in the Irish Guards and to the post of lieutenant-governor of Duncannon fort, which guarded the sea approach to Waterford. Armorer moved easily between the court of Charles II and Ormond's viceregal world in Ireland. Clearly a cheerful and convivial fellow, his traditionally cynical view, expressed to Sir Joseph Williamson in August 1668 of 'the crowd, hurry and business' of the court, 'one week making private friendships, and before the month ends, breaking them like glass, never to be patched up again', is contradicted by his own wide circle of friends and companions and by the frequent references in his correspondence to his enjoyment of the pleasures of life ('CSP dom., 1667-8', 543). Armorer died on 15 February 1686 in Dublin, where he was buried. He seems not to have married. 
Armorer's career belies the traditional view that royalist exile was a uniformly bitter and melancholy experience, characterized by grinding poverty, frustrating idleness, widespread immorality, and sterile personal and factional feuds. Having arrived in Holland as an unknown officer who had not held regimental command, Armorer transformed his fortunes through involvement in royalist conspiracy. His energy and courage, his resourcefulness and reliability made him one of the most valued of the agents who risked their lives to maintain communication between the exiled court and the king's supporters in England. Although the plots and risings all failed dismally, their continued occurrence helped to keep alive what Mordaunt called 'the habit of loyalty'. The preservation of the Stuart cause in England during the 1650s was materially assisted by Armorer's activities. His eventual rewards illustrate his skill in attaching himself to those patrons best placed to assist their clients. His career is marked by a series of changes of patrons that progressively moved him closer to the leaders of the royalist party. 


@@@@@


doc= 94697


Margrie, William (1877-1960), philosopher and eccentric, was born at 202 St George's Road, Camberwell, south London, on 7 April 1877, the youngest of five children of William Leslie Margrie, a carpenter and joiner who later had a builder's and house decorator's firm in Camberwell, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Partridge, a cook. Between the ages of five and ten he attended Gloucester Road board school, Peckham, of which, along with four other schools, he was later to become a manager. Brought up as a Baptist from a mixed Huguenot and Irish background, he regularly attended the Maze Road Baptist Chapel, Old Kent Road, where he joined the Sunday school, the Band of Hope, the Mutual Improvement Society, and the cricket club. At fourteen he was apprenticed to a mathematical rule and scale maker located at a workshop in Alder Street, Peckham, but by 1901 he had joined his father's business as a house painter. These years he recalled as frustrating as he longed for knowledge and understanding of the world; he even contemplated suicide. Later, however, his work as a house painter and a rent collector gave him the opportunity to escape many of the constraints of supervision and repetitive work, and gave him opportunities to go exploring London. 
For twelve years from the age of thirty Margrie was a member of the Bermondsey Independent Labour Party, but he left on account of its 'sentimentality, its fanaticism, and its anti-British outlook'. He also came to believe that Marxism was a mental disease. He then joined the South London Ethical Society. But it was as an adult student at Morley College that he experienced an awakening: he became an avowed Darwinian and it was Darwinian theory that he was to popularize for the rest of his life. He also had deeply held views on eugenics -- he thought modern England was increasingly feeble-minded, that the Isle of Wight should be exclusively peopled by the physically and mentally fit and renamed the Eugenics Isle, and that ministers of state should be chosen by a demonstration of their sporting prowess (though he had himself failed three or four times to be pronounced fit for military service during the First World War). His call for political leadership -- 'England is a big ship without a captain' (W. Margrie, 'A Cockney Pilgrimage: in Search of Truth', 1927, 6) -- reflected his belief that modern society was short of variety, spontaneity, and flair. Citizenship through knowledge of place would help, as he put it, give England 'an electric shock' (W. Margrie, 'The Prophets of Peckham', 1946, 5). 
Believing he was an example of a new evolutionary stage in human development -- Peckham Man -- Margrie entered into profound civic engagement and social activity. He was an inveterate inaugurator and joiner of clubs and societies: from the Young England League, the Radio Freedom League, the London Shakespearean League, and the Incorporated Society of Authors, to the Lambeth Field Club, the Morley College Scientific Society, the South London Immortals, and the League of Nations Union -- although internationalism gave way to an intense local patriotism and finally to an emphatically non-fascist nationalism. In 1955 he started the 'New Race Bulletin' -- the organ of Creative Evolution (which followed an earlier essay on John Bull which had appeared in 'New Age') and proposed the Knights of St George as a new forum for adult education that would be 'exciting, romantic, dramatic and glamorous' (Margrie, 'My Struggle', 11). 
Most notably, perhaps, Margrie founded the London Explorers' Club (LEC) in September 1930. The LEC rambled, held 'topographical races', and awarded prizes for those displaying extensive knowledge of London. It argued for a citizens' parliament and a free metropolitan state with Margrie to be the first 'Mr London'. 'Know Your London' was the slogan of the LEC and for an annual subscription of just 2's'. 6died members received a badge inscribed with 'London Pride'. Yet the LEC expressed little nostalgia. As aggressive modernists, members were as likely to visit the Shreaded Wheat factory, the headquarters of the Post Office telephone exchange, or Croydon airport as sites of historical interest. Margrie said more than once that those who glorified the past were traitors to the present and members of the LEC, like Margrie, lived what he called 'a twentieth century life'. 
Largely self-taught, Margrie was a prolific author of books, pamphlets, and letters to newspapers. He devised a concise form of prose writing which he called Tersid, derived from the words 'terse' and 'lucid', and invented the concept of a silent orchestra that produced 'music without noise'. Widely known as the Sage of Peckham, he lived at 65 Trafalgar Avenue, Peckham, until he was bombed out on Valentine's day 1945 and removed to 24 Nigel Road which he named, in good humoured self-homage, Sage Cottage. In appearance 'scruffy' and 'Victorian', he sported a large grey walrus moustache. Claiming never to have slept outside England, and stating -- probably self-consciously -- that his favourite dish was boiled beef and carrots, he was above all a Londoner. By the time of his death he was said to be the owner of several houses. He died in his sleep, on 9 January 1960 at 24 Nigel Road, Peckham. His contribution to London life across the first part of the twentieth century was substantial and his death was widely reported in the national and local press. He believed that his 'genius' was never recognized by the nation but as a true prophet predicted that he would be rediscovered within a hundred years. 


@@@@@


doc= 94721


Weld, Mary, Lady Weld (bap. 1560?, d. 1623), benefactor and patron of ministers, was one of at least four surviving children of Sir Stephen Slaney (1524-1608), merchant of London and lord mayor, and his wife, Margaret (died 1618), daughter of Jasper Fesant or Phesaunt of Tottenham, Middlesex. She was probably the Mary Slaney, daughter of Stephen, baptized at St Mary Colechurch on 20 November 1560. Mary's first husband was Richard Bradgate, a member of her father's livery company, the Skinners, and a resident of Ironmonger Lane, off Cheapside. On his death in 1589 Mary received an annuity of $60 and the residue of his estate. She remarried shortly afterwards, probably the following year, her second husband being Sir Humphrey Weld (1547-1610), widower of Anne Stapers and a prosperous member of the Grocers' Company, and moved to his house in Allhallows Honey Lane, by the Standard in Cheapside. Surprisingly little is known of Humphrey Weld's business activities. Although he invested in the Virginia Company in the last year of his life, he was never active in overseas trade, and he may have made his fortune in retailing silk (he left money for loans to members of the Grocers' Company trading as silkmen). Weld achieved high civic honours, elected alderman in 1598, serving as sheriff in 1599-1600, and lord mayor in 1608-9; he was knighted on 26 July 1603. On his death on 29 November 1610 he left Mary her jewellery, the plate she had brought to the marriage, and all his household goods in London not otherwise bequeathed, but, more significantly, also the residue of his estate and (so long as she remained unmarried) the handsome mansion house in St Olave Jewry to which they had moved in 1608 in anticipation of his mayoralty. 
Like most women, even of this class, Mary's role in the marriage remains shadowy, but, being childless, she probably concentrated her efforts on raising Humphrey's young children from his first marriage, on support for the godly causes her husband also espoused, and on the consolidation of her formidable network of kin, many of them also counted among the godly. Her sister Elizabeth (died 1632) married Samuel Lennard (died 1618) of West Wickham, Kent, and her sister Anne (died 1602) was the wife of another gentleman, Thomas Colepeper (died 1613), and mother of John Colepeper, first Baron Colepeper. Her stepson, Sir John Weld (1582-1623) was married to Frances Whitmore (died 1657), daughter of William Whitmore, haberdasher, and sister to the future lord mayor, Sir George Whitmore ('b'. after 1572, died 1654). Her stepdaughters married into the gentry, Joanne ('bap'. 1579, died 1618) to Sir Robert Brooke (died 1646) of Cockfield, Suffolk, and Anne ('bap'. 1584) successively to Richard Corbet of Stoke upon Tern, Shropshire, and (in 1617) to Sir James Stonehouse (died 1638) of Islington. In a striking godly match, in 1620 Brooke married as his second wife Dame Mary's niece Elizabeth ['see 'Brooke, Elizabeth (1602?-1683)] and the couple lodged with Dame Mary for the first two years of their marriage. Brooke had been educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and was a leading patron of godly clergy, while his wife displayed exemplary piety. Brooke was to act as executor to Dame Mary, alongside her cousin, the rising city lawyer Peter Phesant, and William Litton (married to another niece, Anne Slaney, daughter of her brother Stephen). The Lennards likewise made a formidable godly couple. Samuel's will displays a hatred of popery verging on the pathological, and his wife was to be closely associated with Mary in the establishment of her charities. Mary and Elizabeth shared the dedication of an improving spiritual tract by the radical puritan Paul Baynes, seen through the press by Ezekiel Charke: 'As you are sisters in nature, so you are nearer sisters in grace' (Baynes, 'Christian Letters', sig. C4). 
Mary Weld is usually remembered as the benefactor behind an endowment of $2000 to buy up impropriations, guaranteeing ministers better support with a view to improving standards of clerical provision. Less well appreciated is the fact that the charity had been anticipated a few years previously by a similar bequest by her mother, Dame Margaret Slaney. Mary Weld and Elizabeth Lennard may well have been the moving force behind their mother's charity, acting as her executors, but they in turn were doubtless influenced by Dame Mary's 'loving friend', Alderman Rowland Heylyn, a leading force among the feoffees for impropriations, and by others in the godly network with whom the sisters were closely associated. The establishment of the charity was not straightforward, however: the Grocers (preferred as trustee over the Skinners), accepting it 'soe farre as the lawes of this land will permitt and learned counsell can devyse' (GL, MS 11588/3, fol. 124), took legal advice from the solicitor-general, Sir Thomas Coventry, and the apparently indispensable Peter Phesant. Difficulties had been anticipated, for Lady Slaney herself had requested that the bequest be confirmed by act of parliament (which never happened, though the Grocers made enquiries about the prospects of doing this in 1621), but there were also tensions between the Grocers and the formidable widows who themselves chose the first impropriation (Norhill in Buckinghamshire) to be purchased, without anticipating the difficulties that would almost immediately arise because of the lack of a farmer to collect the tithes. Perhaps this explains why Dame Mary's own bequest for the same purpose was vested with the Merchant Taylors' Company. Mary's gift was more carefully crafted than her mother's. But the doubts were such that the Merchant Taylors declined (on a ballot after several months' deliberation in July 1624) to accept it, and in the event the charity was taken on by the Haberdashers (assisted by her kinsmen Sir George Whitmore and Humphrey Slaney) the following year. Further difficulties with the executors delayed their receipt of the bequest until 1630. 
The benefaction for impropriations was the most substantial legacy in a will which left a total of $5470 for charitable purposes. Lady Weld supported scholars 'applicable to learninge and addicted to the studdy of divinyty' at Trinity College, Cambridge, with $500 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/141, fol. 130'v'); another $500 went to Christ's Hospital, $200 to the release of poor debtors, and $300 in loan stocks to the Merchant Taylors and Skinners (the Grocers significantly got nothing beyond $20 for a funeral dinner); she left $300 for the support of a divinity lecture in St Olave Jewry, $120 for the St Antholin's lectures, and $200 for the support of the minister in the Lennards' parish of West Wickham to ensure that the population were catechized ('whereby they may learne to knowe God and their dutyes towardes him and their superiors'; ibid.), and $100 to the chapel erected by her husband at Arnold's Southgate. No less than $1000 was made available to support 'godly painfull and poor zealous preachers in want' (ibid.): among those she wished to see supported was Daniel Rogers, the lecturer at Weathersfield. Such charitable largess did not imply the neglect of her kin, to whom cash bequests amounting to about $5000 were left. The main beneficiaries were her nephews and nieces, particularly John Colepeper, Elizabeth Brooke, Anne Litton (her brother Stephen's daughter) and her daughters, and the children of Samuel and Elizabeth Lennard. It is noteworthy that the bequests to Anne Litton and Elizabeth Brooke were made conditional on their husbands making more favourable arrangements for their jointures. The will also makes it clear that Dame Mary lived in some comfort: one of its most extraordinary features is the itemization of the contents of each of the St Olave Jewry house's main rooms -- the great chamber, the best lodging chamber, the great parlour, and late Mr Corbet's chamber -- the beds and their accoutrements, the tapestries, carpets, and table linen, and her plate and jewellery are carefully listed. Her coach was destined for her sister, Elizabeth Lennard. Her godly sensibilities were evidently not incompatible with the conventions of social display, also evident in the provision for a funeral costing $1200, rivalling aristocratic funerals in its magnificence. Mary Weld died on 26 April 1623 and was buried on 27 May at St Olave Jewry in the vault alongside her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 94722


Munster, Ernst Friedrich Herbert von, Count Munster-Ledenburg in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1766-1839), politician and courtier, was born on 1 March 1766 in Osnabruck, Germany, the only son of Georg Ludwig Dietrich von Monster (1721-1773), courtier ('Hofmarschall') in the ecclesiastical state of Osnabruck, and his second wife, Eleonore von Grothaus zu Ledenburg (1734-1794). His father married Eleonore after the death of his first wife, who left him two sons and two daughters, with whom the young Monster grew up. 
The most important influence on Monster's education was his mother, an educated woman with a scholarly reputation whose position at the court of Brunswick as supervisor and tutor to Caroline of Brunswick, the future wife of George IV, played an important role in Monster's career. His education started at the age of twelve when he joined the Philantrophin in Dessau. Three years at the Ritterakademie in Luneburg followed before he entered the University of Gottingen, where he read law from 1784 to 1787. During his time at the university Monster first made contact with members of the British royal family, meeting the princes Ernest, Augustus, and Adolphus, whom George III had sent to study in Gottingen. 
After taking his degree at Gottingen Munster (as he spelled his name from 1792, when he was made a count) joined the administration of the electorate of Hanover. His career as a civil servant was interrupted in the summer of 1793 when George III ordered Munster to go on a private mission to Rome, whence he was to accompany Prince Augustus back to Britain. Augustus had married Lady Augusta Murray against the will of his father and without the sanction necessary since the 'Royal Marriage Act' of 1772. It is not clear why Munster was chosen, but his mother's position at the court of Brunswick, where George III's sister Augusta lived as the wife of the reigning Duke Charles, and Munster's acquaintance with the prince in Gottingen, seem to have recommended him for the mission. Munster arrived with Augustus in Britain in September 1794. He stayed at Windsor for four months where he met both George III and Queen Charlotte, embarking afterwards on a further journey to Italy, again as companion to Augustus. Munster used this time in Rome and Naples for the intensive study of ancient art and architecture. He returned to Hanover in 1798. 
Throughout his career Munster benefited from his good understanding and a close connection with the British royal family. In 1797 he was considered a likely candidate for a special mission to the court of the margrave of Baden at Rastatt. However, Munster's breakthrough in the Hanoverian government dates to 1801 when George III sent him to St Petersburg to ensure that the Russian government considered Hanoverian interests in the new territorial arrangements for Germany. Munster's diplomatic star rose and he gained popularity within the political circles of Europe despite his failure to achieve a substantial territorial indemnification for Hanover. 
The French occupation of Hanover in 1803 caused George III to consider a new appointment for the position of the Hanoverian minister in London, and in the following year the king ordered that Munster return from St Petersburg and proceed to the British capital. Munster became 'head of the German chancery', the office of the Hanoverian minister, in 1805. The first two years in London can be seen as Munster's most successful time in office. He played an important part in the negotiation for a European coalition against Napoleon's France in 1805, succeeded in promoting the Hanoverian cause in parliament and in public throughout the crises of 1806, and established himself within metropolitan social and political circles, making the acquaintance of both whig and tory politicians. 
How much Munster's position depended on the support of the king became clear in 1807 when George III's physical incapacitation prevented him from active engagement in foreign policy. Without royal support Munster's suggestions and demands did not meet with approval from the British Foreign Office. Munster himself described the time from 1807 to 1811 as a disappointing struggle against British lack of interest in Hanover. His plan for a military expedition to Hanover in 1809 was stopped by Viscount Castlereagh, secretary of state for war. The creation of the kingdom of Westphalia, which included parts of the electorate of Hanover, and the subsequent incorporation of the remaining Hanoverian territories into the French empire up to 1810 also passed without British protest. 
There is much to suggest Munster's disillusionment with British foreign policy. However, this period also saw Munster's emergence as an important figure within the network of European emigres in London. He gained the role of mediator between British and continental politicians, particularly for the missions of the Prussian general Neidhard von Gneisenau and the former Hanoverian officer Ludwig Georg von Wallmoden. It was also during the period from 1807 to 1812 that Munster actively engaged in the discussion about a future constitution for Germany, most notably in his correspondence with the Prussian minister in Russian service, Karl, Baron vom Stein. Munster's position in this debate has been seen as both pragmatic and ambitious. He certainly aimed for a restoration of Hanover, including a territorial aggrandizement of the electorate. He also expressed anti-Prussian considerations, though these have been exaggerated. Munster's plan for a future Germany was based on the restitution of the Holy Roman empire, with a naturally evolved constitution, while accepting the need for partial reform. 
The defeat of Napoleon in Russia offered Munster the chance to realize his political agenda. Without delay he prompted the Hanoverian ministers in Berlin and Vienna to engage in negotiations, a task of particular importance since diplomatic relations between the great European powers and Britain had been suspended for some years. Munster's renewed diplomatic activity coincided with the start of the regency of George, prince of Wales, from whom he once more found royal support for his policies. Munster's relationship with the future George IV was not as close as that he had enjoyed with the prince's father, but the strong support Hanover gained in the diplomatic negotiations between British politicians and European powers during the period 1813 to 1815 cannot be explained without acknowledging the regent's interest in his German electorate. 
The congress of Vienna has been described as the climax of Munster's career. Now closely associated with Lord Castlereagh, the British foreign secretary, who Munster subsequently claimed had changed his mind about him and Hanover, he played an active part in the negotiations for the restoration of Europe. That this influence was not unlimited became apparent during the crisis over Saxony and Poland. Munster's stay in Vienna appears to have been the most eventful time in his life. He mediated between the interests of the German power in the creation of the so-called federal act, the constitution of the German confederation, and convinced the prince regent after initial hesitation to accept Hanover's elevation from electorate to kingdom. On 7 November 1814 he married Countess Wilhelmine zu Schaumburg-Lippe (1783-1858), with whom he had eight children, seven daughters and one son, George, Count Munster, the future German ambassador to Paris and London. The regent rewarded him for his work at Vienna with the estate of Derneburg in the former episcopal state of Hildesheim, united with Hanover after the congress. 
After 1815 Munster's involvement in European diplomacy declined. He remained in his position in London but his political interests focused much more on internal Hanoverian affairs than they had done during the turbulent years of the Napoleonic wars. While Munster embraced Austrian attempts to secure a reactionary policy in Germany during the years immediately after the congress of Vienna, not least at the notorious conference in Karlsbad (1819) and the second Vienna conference (1820), he subsequently pursued a political strategy that put him in opposition to the reactionary efforts of Austria and its powerful chancellor, Metternich. At the same time Munster's approach brought him into conflict with the British government in its own struggle for power with the new king, George IV. German historians have accused Munster of supporting the foreign secretary, George Canning, in favouring independence for Greece and for Spanish America, during the crisis over whether Metternich and other European ministers could continue to work with Canning in 1825. In contrast most British scholars have seen Munster as an agent of George IV in opposing Canning and pursuing an absolutist line. Though there is evidence that Munster and Canning kept in close contact, dining together on various occasions, there is equally strong evidence that the dynastic element played a crucial role in Munster's understanding of politics at the time. Indeed the key aspect of Munster's policy may be identified as his loyalty to the Hanoverian dynasty. This had already become evident during the Queen Caroline affair in 1820-21, when Munster gathered evidence for George IV's case against his wife. Munster's close association with George IV was demonstrated again during the crisis over the regency in Hanover of Charles, duke of Brunswick, from 1826 to 1830, when only the king's intervention avoided a stand-off between the duke and Munster. 
The death of George IV in 1830 was the final turning point in Munster's career. Since the congress of Vienna, and particularly after Munster's interference in Hanoverian legislation in 1819, opposition had increased in Hanover to the 'minister on the moon', as Munster was nicknamed due to his absence from the continent. In 1831 a pamphlet personified Munster as the ultimate representation of absolutist tyranny. Though this was in many respects unjustified the new British monarch, William IV, bowed to pressure from Hanover, particularly from his brother Adolphus Frederick, and asked Munster to resign. The Hanoverian minister left London in 1831 after twenty-six years in office. Though decorated with the newly created Hanoverian honorary office of 'Erblandmarschall' and the British Order of the Bath, Munster resented his forced departure. His time as an active participant in politics had passed and he lived at his country seat in Derneburg during the following years, only occasionally visiting the capital of Hanover. When Ernest Augustus, duke of Cumberland, succeeded William IV as king of Hanover in 1837, Munster was once more expected to return to politics but the 71-year-old refrained from active engagement. He died at Derneburg on 20 May 1839 and was buried in the chapel there. 


@@@@@


doc= 94724


Morgan, Godfrey Charles, Viscount Tredegar (1831-1913), soldier and landowner, was born at Ruperra Castle, Glamorgan, on 28 April 1831, the second son of Sir Charles Morgan Robinson Morgan (1792-1875), MP for Brecon Borough for three periods between 1812 and 1847 and heir to the Tredegar estate, who inherited in 1846 and in 1859 became first Baron Tredegar, and his wife, Rosamund Mundy (died 1883). Educated at Eton College until 1848, he was commissioned in 1849 into the 17th lancers, rising to lieutenant in 1850 and captain in 1853. By the time he set sail for the war with Russia in the Crimea his elder brother, Charles Rodney (1828-1854), had died, leaving him heir. As the third son, Frederick (1834-1909), also saw action in the Crimean campaign as a captain in the rifle brigade, the Morgan family faced the possibility of losing their three eldest sons within a year. 
As a troop leader Morgan took part in the charge of the light brigade at the battle of Balaklava on 25 October 1854, and was one of two officers from the regiment to return unscathed. Falling ill and 'heartily sick of... fearful scenes of carnage and bloodshed' (letter to his mother, 7 Nov 1854, NL Wales, Tredegar Park muniments), he was removed to Scutari before being gazetted out of the army in January 1855 and returning home. He brought with him his charger, Sir Briggs, who lived until 1874 and is buried in Tredegar Park. He enjoyed lifelong fame as a Balaklava survivor, commemorating the battle at anniversary dinners, and served as major in the Royal Gloucestershire yeomanry (1856-75), honorary colonel of the Royal Monmouthshire Royal Engineers, and president of the Monmouth Territorial Force Association. 
In December 1858 Morgan was elected unopposed as Conservative MP for the county of Brecon, and remained in the Commons until the death of his father in 1875, whereupon he ascended to the House of Lords. Returned unopposed in 1859, 1865, and 1868, he defeated his Liberal opponent William Fuller-Maitland comfortably in the general election of 1874, although Fuller-Maitland took the seat in the ensuing by-election. As Lord Tredegar he remained 'naturally Conservative' ('Wit and Wisdom', 84), if favourable to women's suffrage, and served as president of the south Monmouthshire and the Newport Conservative associations but rarely attended parliament. Public service was instead focused locally: as lord lieutenant of Monmouthshire and of Brecknockshire, as a magistrate for Brecknockshire and Glamorgan, and as a county councillor, alderman, and chairman (1902-3) of Monmouthshire county council. 
On the death of his father Morgan had inherited a substantial landed estate with significant industrial and commercial interests. Most of the estate was in Monmouthshire, with lesser holdings in adjacent Brecknockshire and Glamorgan. As a landlord he enjoyed a reputation for generosity and solicitude towards his tenants. At times of agricultural depression he issued rent rebates of between 10 and 20 per cent and drew praise from witnesses to the 1894 royal commission on the land in Wales and Monmouthshire. He took a strong interest in the promotion of new agricultural methods, continuing the Tredegar agricultural show and breeding livestock and shire horses at Tredegar Park, and was president of the Smithfield Club, the Bath and West Society, the Royal Agricultural Society, the Shire Horse Society, and the Hackney Horse Society. 
Tredegar was chairman of Newport's Alexandra Docks Company and of the town's chamber of commerce, hailing the port's potential as 'a second Liverpool' ('Wit and Wisdom', 148). He also played a part in the development of the city of Cardiff. He frequently made gifts of land for the building of churches (both Anglican and nonconformist), schools, libraries, hospitals, and parks. Major benefactions include the sites of the university college in Cardiff, the Royal Gwent Hospital in Newport, and the Newport athletic grounds. All told, his public benefactions were estimated to amount to $40,000 annually ('Western Mail', 12 March 1913). 
A keen sportsman, in his younger days Morgan was an accomplished steeplechaser and cricketer. For forty years he was master of the Tredegar hunt, and he also took a strong interest in bowls, fishing, grouse shooting, hockey, 'and any and every manly sport' (Hughes, 142). In later life he developed an interest in archaeology and antiquarianism, serving as president of the Cambrian Archaeological Association. He perpetuated his family's commitment to Welsh cultural activities through sponsoring eisteddfodau, dressing as Owain Glyn Dwr for the National Pageant of Wales in 1909, and stressing Monmouthshire's essentially Welsh character. 
Raised to the viscountcy in December 1905, Tredegar was the subject of further local tributes in his closing years. Almost 7000 subscribed to a Monmouthshire testimonial to him prompted by 'the treatment of your tenants during agricultural depression' ('Viscount Tredegar: his Life and Work', 8), and in 1909 he was given the freedom of the boroughs of Newport and Cardiff. Through his philanthropy and patronage of local societies Tredegar was in demand as an after-dinner speaker and 'inveterate bazaar opener' ('Western Mail', 12 March 1913). He calculated that, in laying foundation stones, he had amassed a collection of trowels and mallets sufficient to equip every parish church in England ('Wit and Wisdom', 15-16), and developed a reputation for amusing and enlightening speeches, which often drew on his passion for poetry (favourites being Wordsworth, Kipling, and, of course, Tennyson). He was labelled the 'Mark Twain of Wales' (Harries, 42). In 1911 the 'Western Mail' published a collection, 'Wit and Wisdom of Lord Tredegar', with illustrations by J. M. Staniforth. 
Tredegar had been engaged to be married when he left for the Crimea, but his fiancee married another man during his absence. He remained a lifelong bachelor, living alone and unostentatiously in the very ostentatious Tredegar House, where he resisted such innovations as gas and electric lighting, the telephone, and motor cars. He died there of influenza on 11 March 1913, and was buried in the family mausoleum at St Basil's Church, Bassaleg, on 14 March. His death prompted extensive public appreciation of 'the Grand Old Man of the Principality' ('South Wales Daily News', 12 March 1913), although the subtitle of another volume dedicated to him, 'Soldier, Peer, Public Benefactor and Humorist', is equally apt. The viscountcy became extinct, and the barony and baronetcy passed to his nephew, Courtenay Charles Evan Morgan (1867-1934). The house of Tredegar would never again enjoy such prosperity and renown, nor exert such influence in the affairs of south Wales. 


@@@@@


doc= 94725


Katilungu, Lawrence Chola (1914-1961), trade unionist and politician in Northern Rhodesia, was born in the northern province of Northern Rhodesia in January 1914. A member of the royal clan of the Bemba people, he was the grandson of Chief Chipalo and was a kinsman of the Chitimukulu, the paramount chief of the Bemba. He was educated at Catholic mission schools, and was employed as a teacher before going to work in 1936 as an underground miner and 'boss boy' (foreman) at the Nkana mine in the recently opened copperbelt. He took part in the African mineworkers' strike there in 1940 (which resulted in a heavy death toll) and worked for a while as a clerk in a fish business in the Belgian Congo before returning to Nkana in 1944 to work as a senior interpreter. He did not work particularly closely with William Comrie, the British trade unionist who was sent out to Northern Rhodesia by the Labour government to promote the establishment of African trade unions in 1947, but he was elected chairman of the Nkana mine union on its establishment the following year. Although he was clearly a talented individual, his election was attributed to his rarity value as a well-educated clerk from the Bemba-speaking northern province, the home of many mineworkers but of very few clerks. He played a major role in the setting-up of the African Mineworkers' Union (AMU), becoming its first general president in 1949. In 1950 he was elected first president of the Northern Rhodesia Trades Union Congress. Although he was an active member of the Northern Rhodesian African National Congress (ANC) from its foundation, he believed that it was desirable to keep unions and political parties separate, and undesirable to use strikes for political purposes. 
There was no doubt about Katilungu's own opposition to the establishment of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland -- he travelled to London in 1952 and played a part, together with Harry Nkumbula, president of the ANC, Hastings Banda of Nyasaland, and others, in the unsuccessful campaign to stop it. But in the same year he lobbied against a strike in protest against the deportation of Simon Zukas, a radical white opponent of the federation and member of the supreme action council of the ANC. In the following year he ensured that the AMU did not support the call of Nkumbula and ANC for a two-day general strike against the federation. His failure to support the butchery boycotts launched by the ANC in 1954 was also the cause of lasting tension between the union and congress. 
The first great achievement of the AMU was the successful organization of a month-long strike in October-November 1952. This came as a surprise to the big mining companies, the Anglo-American Corporation and the Rhodesian Selection Trust, which had been making huge profits in the wake of the boom in copper prices consequent on the Korean War. The mining companies had offered only a derisory sixpence a shift in response to the union's demand for an increase of 2's'. 8died a shift. When the matter went to arbitration the award was less than had been demanded but much more than the companies had offered. This was a great boost to the prestige of Katilungu and the union, and in the following year they also succeeded in securing the abolition of the unpopular system of worker representation by so-called 'tribal elders'. A two-month strike for higher wages in 1955 achieved less significant gains, but was an impressive demonstration of the union's organization and the discipline of its 25,000 members. The government saw the 'rolling strikes' of July-August 1956 as political: the union's objectives included the removal of racially discriminatory working practices. The government declared a state of emergency and detained many of the union's leaders. Katilungu had not played much part in the organization of these strikes and was out of the country when the state of emergency was declared. He was not detained, but the union's organization was crippled by the removal of many of its most experienced officials, and it was further weakened by the collapse of copper prices, retrenchments, and the subsequent loss of members. 
The government now saw Katilungu as a moderate leader with whom it could do business. More radical members of the union, and members of the ANC who broke away from Nkumbula to form the Zambia African National Congress (ZANC) late in 1958, under the leadership of Kenneth Kaunda, saw him as a conservative. Katilungu, who was influenced by Moral Re-Armament and had dabbled in liberal politics, supported Nkumbula and the ANC in their opposition to the Zambia African National Congress, which was banned in March 1959 but re-emerged as the United National Independence Party in 1960. Indeed, Katilungu welcomed the governor's banning of the Zambia African National Congress and the detention of its leaders in March 1959. His status as a moderate was confirmed by his acceptance in August 1959 of an invitation from the British government to become a member of the Monckton commission, which was set up to consider the future of the federation. Radical nationalists boycotted its hearings, as its terms of reference did not include consideration of the break-up of the federation. The perception of many trade unionists that he had become a part of the colonial establishment led to Katilungu's loss of the presidency of the AMU in December 1960 and of the Trades Union Congress soon afterwards. He was, however, now free to devote his energies to nationalist politics and was elected deputy president of the ANC. 
When Nkumbula was temporarily removed from the leadership of the ANC in 1961, as a result of his imprisonment following conviction for causing death by dangerous driving, Katilungu acted for him, and was also elected to occupy his seat in the legislative council. During his period in office Katilungu raised substantial funding from Moise Tshombe, leader of the secessionist government of Katanga, and laid the basis for a secret alliance between the ANC, Tshombe, and Roy Welensky, the federal prime minister, which was to play a significant part in the elections of 1962. 
Many people thought that Katilungu was more effective as a leader of the ANC than Nkumbula. He was still acting as leader of the ANC when, on 9 November 1961, he was killed in a car accident on the Congo Pedicle road five miles from Makambo, on his way to Luapula province. He was buried three days later, survived by his wife, with whom he had six children. Katilungu's friends and family were reluctant to believe that his death was an accident. With his Bemba royal associations and his ability to mobilize support among Bemba-speakers in the copperbelt and in the northern and Luapula provinces, he was a significant political asset for the ANC, and a threat to the United National Independence Party. Many white political and business leaders also viewed him favourably. It remains an open question whether, if he had lived, the ANC would have performed better than it did in the elections of 1962 and had more influence in the final stages of the decolonization process. The union that he had done more than anyone else to create remained a powerful force, and an independent voice, in Zambian politics for several decades after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 94727


Moir, John William (1851-1940), trader in Africa, was born in Edinburgh on 26 January 1851 and baptized there on 16 March 1851, the son of John Moir, a prominent Edinburgh physician, and his wife, Margaret Louisa, 'nee' Maitland. His brother 
In the early years the Moir brothers struggled against numerous obstacles to get the business up and running. These included shortages of capital and staff, endemic malaria and other diseases, Portuguese obstruction, the difficulty of access from the ocean to the Zambezi, and an underpowered river steamer, the 'Lady Nyassa'. They succeeded, nevertheless, in establishing a base for themselves at Mandala (John Moir's African name and the name by which the company was commonly known) near the Blantyre mission in the Shire highlands, and in developing a viable route into the interior of east-central Africa. In spite of initial difficulties they succeeded in founding a business that made a distinctly Scottish contribution to the 'scramble for Africa' and that survived into the twenty-first century. 
As explorers the Moir brothers undertook some of the first expeditions into parts of what later became northern Malawi and eastern Zambia. Among their achievements was the transport of the parts of the steamer, the 'Good News', over 1000 miles to Lake Tanganyika on behalf of the London Missionary Society. This was facilitated by the development in the mid-1880s of the Stevenson Road (named after James Stevenson, a chemical manufacturer and the company's chairman) from the north end of Lake Nyasa to the south end of Lake Tanganyika -- though this was in reality more of a trail than a road. After more than a decade of struggle they had by the early 1890s established a transport system, using both the 'Ilala' and the 'Good News', which was, until the building of railways in the early decades of the twentieth century, the main route for missionaries, traders, and officials, into the African lakes region. 
The economics of trade and transport made it almost impossible for the Moir brothers to put into practice Livingstone's theory that legitimate commerce -- the buying of crops from peasant producers -- would stop the slave trade, though they did buy oil seeds on the lower Shire and began the cultivation of coffee in the Shire highlands. They found that ivory was still the only commodity that would bear the cost of freight to the coast and to Europe. They were soon drawn into elephant hunting and ivory trading at the north end of Lake Nyasa. An apparently amicable ivory-trading relationship with an Arab or Swahili trader, Mlozi, at Karonga, turned sour in 1887 when he and his allies sought to drive out the local Ngonde people, who had been encouraged to seek, and had been promised, protection by the company. This was the cause of the 'Arab War', which dragged on until 1889 and ended in stalemate. It attracted an immense amount of publicity and was a major contributor to the popular demand for British intervention in the region. Among those who participated in the war was the young Captain Frederick Lugard, later to become Britain's most famous African proconsul. The Moirs were both wounded in this conflict, and Frederick Moir's right arm was permanently damaged. 
While Frederick Moir participated in the Berlin conference of 1884-5 John Moir organized petitions to Queen Victoria from African chiefs. These were intended to demonstrate 'effective occupation' and to provide backing for British claims to areas that were also claimed by Portugal and Germany. The line of the Stevenson Road became in 1890 the boundary between the British and German spheres of influence (and later marked the boundary between Malawi, Zambia, and Tanzania). John Moir was also actively involved, with Vice-Consul John Buchanan, in seeking to stop Portuguese expansion into the Shire highlands in 1889-90, resulting in Lord Salisbury's ultimatum to Portugal of January 1890. 
Between 1889 and 1893 there were negotiations for the amalgamation of the then relatively well-known African Lakes Company with the initially unknown British South Africa Company, and discussion of the extension of the joint company's charter to cover Nyasaland. There was, however, a fundamental incompatibility between the ethical bases of the two companies. Harry Johnston, then an ally of Cecil Rhodes, and the first commissioner in British Central Africa, blamed John Moir for driving a wedge between the two sides and launched vitriolic attacks on him, his brother, and their company. The difficult relationship between the two companies culminated in 1892-3 in litigation and separation, but the 'the reign of the Moirs' was already over. There is no doubt that they deserved some of the brickbats that came their way. The explorer Joseph Thomson, for example, provided this assessment of their strengths and weaknesses in a letter to Rhodes in 1891. 'Two more interesting or remarkable men it would be difficult to find. The very beau-ideal of commercial and philanthropic pioneers in wild country they have slaved and suffered with an unselfish enthusiastic devotion. But it is only as pioneers that they have shone; as managers of a going concern requiring unusual business capacities and breadth of view they have signally failed. They could lay splendid foundations but they could not build upon them and however hard it may seem it was necessary for them to leave that to other hands and brains. (Macmillan, 348)' John Moir married, in Edinburgh on 2 May 1882, (Helen) Elizabeth Tod ('b'. 1851/2), daughter of Henry Tod, writer to the signet; they had one son and one daughter. Frederick Moir married, in Partick, on 10 April 1885, Jane Fordyce Beith ('b'. 1857), daughter of Gilbert Beith, merchant and later Liberal MP for Glasgow Central and for Inverness Burghs. John Moir left Africa in March 1890, expecting to return as a manager of the amalgamated company, and Frederick Moir left in June 1891 with similar expectations. Frederick Moir did not return to Africa, but became secretary of the company in Glasgow, remaining involved with it as a director, or chairman, until his death. In spite of Joseph Thomson's strictures, he succeeded in overseeing the company's emergence as a successful, and more or less conventional, transport, trading, and planting business with an extensive network of stores in Nyasaland and Northern Rhodesia, as well as rubber, tea, and tobacco plantations. He revisited Africa only once, in 1921, and was the author of a successful memoir, 'After Livingstone' (1923). John Moir returned to Nyasaland (then British Central Africa) in 1893 and became a pioneer tea planter, founding the Lauderdale estate in the Mlanje district. A stern critic of Harry Johnston's aggressive and militaristic approach to the occupation of the country, he retired to Edinburgh in 1900 and devoted much of his time to beekeeping; he claimed in his 'Who's Who' entry to have built up the best collection of books on bees in the British empire. He never lost his interest in Africa -- indeed, not long before his death he entertained to tea a medical student from Nyasaland, Hastings Kamuzu Banda. He had by then received belated recognition for his pioneering work through an invitation to attend the coronation of George VI as a representative of Nyasaland, and appointment as CMG in 1937. Frederick Moir died of heart failure at 16 Kensington Gate, Glasgow, on 2 November 1939, having been predeceased by his wife. John Moir died, also of heart failure, at 15 Polwarth Grove, Edinburgh, on 13 March 1940; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 94732


Marwick, Sir Brian Allan (1908-1992), colonial administrator, was born in Natal on 18 June 1908, the son of James Walter Marwick and his wife, (Elizabeth) Jane, 'nee' Flett. On his father's side his family was of Orcadian descent and had produced a number of outstanding civil servants, linguists, and anthropologists. His uncle, John Sydney Marwick, was a Natal colonial civil servant who led the exodus of Zulu mineworkers from the Witwatersrand on the outbreak of the South African War in 1899, and went on to make a career as a labour recruiter and South African Party politician. Another uncle, Allan Graham Marwick, was an outstanding Swazi linguist and colonial civil servant who served in Swaziland for more than thirty years, ending as resident commissioner in 1935-7, retiring to Swaziland, and dying there in 1966. Allan Marwick had accompanied Prince Malunge and the Swazi deputation to London in 1907 as interpreter, and believed that the Colonial Office broke promises made then by Lord Elgin on land distribution in the protectorate. He was the author of 'The Attitude of the Swazi towards Government and its Causes' (1955), which must be the most remarkable indictment of a colonial administration ever written by one of its long-serving members. He was highly respected by the Swazi not only as a mentor and trusted adviser to Sobhuza II, but also as one of the founding ideologists of Swazi 'traditionalism'. 
Brian Marwick joined the Swaziland administrative service as a cadet in 1925. During his first decade in Swaziland he did an external degree by correspondence with the University of South Africa and a master's degree in social anthropology at the University of Cape Town under Isaac Schapera. Cambridge University Press published his dissertation as a substantial book, 'The Swazi', in 1940. This was an ethnographic study and was for a time the standard monograph on the Swazi. A good linguist, he had published another book on the Swazi in Zulu, 'Abantu Bakwa Ngwane', in the previous year. Meanwhile, he had in 1934 married Riva Lee Cooper (died 1988), daughter of Major H. C. Cooper. They had two daughters (one of whom became a lecturer at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art). 
Wishing to escape from the limited career prospects offered by Swaziland and the high commission territories, Marwick transferred to the colonial service in 1936, did a training course at Cambridge, and was then posted to northern Nigeria where he served from 1937 to 1940. He greatly enjoyed his time in Nigeria, mastered a number of local languages, and regretted his recall to Swaziland. After his return to the protectorate he served as a district commissioner until 1946, and then as first assistant secretary. He was transferred to Basutoland in 1949 and was deputy resident commissioner and government secretary there from 1952 to 1955. After a short period as administrative secretary for the protectorates in the office of the British high commissioner in Pretoria, he was appointed resident commissioner for Swaziland in 1957, from January 1964 becoming commissioner for Swaziland with somewhat enhanced powers. He was made OBE in 1946, CBE in 1954, and CMG in 1958, and was knighted KBE in 1963. 
Between 1957 and 1964 Marwick presided over one of the most turbulent periods in Swaziland's history. Economic developments included the establishment of an iron ore mine, the building of a railway to Lourenco Marques, and the tarring of the main road through the territory. Political developments began with the demand for a legislative council, and included the formation of political parties, the Swaziland Progressive Party, the Swaziland Democratic Party, and the Ngwane National Liberatory Congress (NNLC), and two years of negotiations over a new constitution, which ended in abortive talks in London in January 1963. The turbulence was also the consequence of the 'winds of change' blowing through the sub-continent, the Sharpeville crisis in South Africa in 1960, the subsequent influx into Swaziland of South African political refugees, and the movement towards independence in the rest of Africa. 
Although he had had a long-standing and cordial relationship with Sobhuza (he had the siSwati name 'Musawendvodza', son of a trusted man) Marwick placed himself on a collision course with him and the Swazi National Council -- a council of chiefs and elders with powers over Swazi nation land, law, and custom -- through his attempt to insist from 1960 onwards that Sobhuza should prepare himself for the role of constitutional monarch and that he and the council should remain above politics. He opposed Sobhuza's attempt to make a power-sharing deal with the European Advisory Council, which was dominated by big business interests. Sobhuza and the settlers, represented by the sugar baron Carl Todd, found common cause in opposition to universal suffrage and sought a constitution that would neutralize the threat of radical nationalism. While Sobhuza also sought to ensure that control over land and minerals was entrusted to the 'traditional' authorities, Todd sought to protect the interests of employers against the threat of progressive labour legislation, trade unions, and industrial action. Marwick, by contrast, was determined that there should be movement towards elections with universal suffrage on a common roll. He also pressed for improvements in wages and working conditions. Nevertheless in June 1963 he was compelled by simultaneous strikes at the Havelock asbestos mine and the Ubombo Ranches, a 'general strike' in the capital, Mbabane, and the fear of South African intervention, to request the airlift of British troops from Nairobi to augment the over-stretched police force. He also ordered the arrest of leaders of the Ngwane National Liberatory Congress who had been involved in the organization of these strikes. 
In January 1964 the British government imposed an interim constitution under which the members of the new legislative council were to be chosen by voters on a common electoral roll, by voters on a 'white' roll, and by 'traditional' means. Sobhuza was not happy with this compromise, which also failed to give him control over minerals, and organized an unofficial referendum on the constitution. This was widely seen as a contest between himself and Marwick. The voting symbol for those who opposed the constitution was a lion, while the symbol for supporters of the constitution was an alien creature, the reindeer. Not surprisingly it was claimed that the lion obtained an overwhelming majority of the votes cast. Sobhuza, prompted by the decision of the Ngwane National Liberatory Congress to participate in the forthcoming elections, had meanwhile decided to do the same through the establishment of a king's party, the Imbokodvo ('grinding stone') National Movement. Marwick, who had been due to retire in 1963, and had stayed on for an extra year, left the country in April 1964 before the elections under the new constitution took place. He was, however, determined to make his disapproval of Sobhuza and the Swazi National Council's formal entry into the political arena known. He prepared a critical speech, which he intended to deliver at his farewell meeting with Sobhuza. He was presuaded by Sobhuza not to deliver the speech as written, but its text was published in the 'Times of Swaziland'. Marwick warned that if the king's party was to win the elections 'the King is in a powerful and safe position -- for the time being -- but if at a later date that group is replaced by a rival the king is likely to find himself cast aside as well' (Halpern, 361). He also warned that 'by misusing your staff and machinery for electioneering purposes as I have no doubt you intend to do, you will do more to put Swazi against Swazi and to bring the kingship into disrepute than by any other act' (ibid.). 
After his retirement from Swaziland Marwick worked on contract for six years in the Bahamas, as permanent secretary at the Ministry of Works and Town Planning from 1965 to 1968 and then at the Ministry of Education from 1968 to 1971. He then retired to the Isle of Man, where he died on 1 April 1992. He was survived by his two daughters. 
Marwick was an imposing man who did not suffer fools gladly. He had a greater knowledge and better understanding of Swaziland than any other colonial official and clearly foresaw the dangers which would almost inevitably arise from the concentration of power, including the control of mineral wealth, in the hands of the king and the chiefs. He and his wife returned for the independence celebrations in 1968, but the Westminster-model constitution did not survive for long. In 1973 Sobhuza banned all political parties, including his own, and parliament dissolved itself. Sobhuza and the Swazi National Council believed that Marwick had, through his apparent support for political modernization, betrayed their trust and the ideals of his uncle, A. G. Marwick. But supporters of the banned nationalist parties continued to acknowledge his prescience through more than thirty years of royal autocracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 94733


Zwane, Ambrose Phesheya (1924-1998), politician in Swaziland, was born near Bremersdorp, Swaziland, on 30 April 1924, the son of Amos Mdolomba Zwane, a traditional physician who had accompanied the young paramount chief Sobhuza II on a deputation to London in 1923. He was educated at Roman Catholic schools in Swaziland -- he was a lifelong Catholic -- and at Inkamana high school in Natal. He then studied medicine at the University of the Witwatersrand, where he was a contemporary of many South African nationalists, including Nelson Mandela, and became in 1951 the first Swazi to qualify as a medical doctor. After working as a houseman in Natal he returned to Swaziland and worked at the Mbabane government hospital. Frustrated by the lack of prospects for promotion, he resigned in April 1960 and became secretary-general of the newly formed Swaziland Progressive Party in July of that year. This party emerged out of the Swaziland Progressive Association, which had been set up in 1929 with official backing to give a voice to the emerging educated elite. It became a political party in preparation for constitutional talks on the future governance of Swaziland that were initiated by the resident commissioner, Brian Marwick, in October 1960. 
Zwane and the leader of the party's youth league, Prince Clement Dumisa Dlamini, a nephew of the king and a fiery orator, soon fell out with the leader of the Swaziland Progressive Party, John June Nquku, a Zulu who had come to Swaziland in 1930 as a school inspector and had had a varied career in education and journalism. The split was confirmed when Zwane was elected president of the party at a meeting at Kwaluseni in February 1962. A new manifesto proclaimed that the party sought 'a nationalist, democratic, socialist and pan-Africanist state within the fraternity of African states and the British Commonwealth' (Rake, 352). Nquku refused to recognize the election and two factions of the Swaziland Progressive Party co-existed for some time. Zwane's faction was excluded from the abortive constitutional talks that were held in London in January 1963 and became the Ngwane National Liberatory Congress (NNLC) in April of that year. The NNLC established its radical credentials through its involvement in strikes in June 1963 at the Havelock asbestos mine and the Ubombo ranches, and among workers in the capital, Mbabane, in May-June 1963. Zwane was out of the country, attending the inaugural conference of the Organization of African Unity, when they reached their crisis. He was charged with fomenting public violence but was acquitted in January 1964. His colleagues Prince Dumisa and MacDonald Maseko, a South African refugee of Swazi descent, received short prison sentences. 
Following the breakdown of the constitutional talks the British government imposed its own constitution, which came into force in January 1964. This provided for elections to a legislative council by voters on a common roll, a 'white' roll, and by 'traditional' means. At first Zwane and the NNLC threatened to boycott the elections, but they changed their minds and decided to take part. This prompted Sobhuza and the Swazi national council -- a council of chiefs and elders with power over Swazi nation land, law, and custom -- to enter the political arena by establishing a king's party, the Imbokodvo National Movement. The NNLC failed to win any common roll seats when the first elections were held in June 1964, the Swazi national council having made it impossible for the NNLC and the smaller nationalist parties to campaign in Swazi nation areas where the majority of the population lived. After the election the British government continued to exclude the NNLC from any part in the negotiations over decolonization, which resulted in the restoration of self-government in Swaziland in April 1967. In the elections of that month, the first to be held with a universal franchise, the NNLC again failed to win seats, though it gained 20 per cent of the vote. The division of the country into eight three-member constituencies had ensured that there was no urban seat. When Zwane and the NNLC were excluded from the final pre-independence talks in London in February 1968 he sought to draw attention to their exclusion by a sit-down protest outside Marlborough House. 
In the first post-independence elections, held in 1972, the NNLC won the Mphumalanga constituency. Zwane was, with one of his colleagues, allowed to take his seat, but the third colleague, Thomas Bhekindlela Ngwenya, was deported to South Africa on the grounds that he was not a Swazi. The government then lost a series of legal actions over the immigration status of Ngwenya. When its attempt to circumvent the appeal court by removing immigration cases from its purview was declared illegal in April 1973, Sobhuza declared a state of emergency, and had parliament vote itself out of existence. He also banned all political parties, including his own. Zwane was detained under the sixty-days' detention law on 2 May 1973 and was frequently re-detained in that and subsequent years. After he had been detained three times in 1978 he fled to Mozambique, but he was compelled to move on to Tanzania. 
Zwane returned to Swaziland in 1979 with a letter from Sobhuza, countersigned by President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, assuring him that he would not be harassed on his return, provided that he did not take part in public political activity. He worked quietly as a doctor through the 1980s, avoiding involvement in the political crisis that followed the death of Sobhuza in 1982, but he was charged in April 1989 with possession of pamphlets issued by the People's United Democratic Party, an underground party that had been launched in 1983. One of his last political acts was his participation in a committee formed to celebrate the release of Nelson Mandela in February 1990; even that was seen as a threat by the regime of Sobhuza's son and successor, Mswati III. Zwane died in March 1998 after a long illness. His funeral on 28 March was the occasion for a demonstration of support for the NNLC, which was more or less openly revived at that time. 
A shy and diffident intellectual, and a poor platform speaker, Zwane was a most unlikely politician, but he was a man of undoubted intelligence, charm, and integrity. Even if he had been a more gifted orator, it is unlikely that he and his party would have made much headway against Sobhuza II, and his successful mobilization of Swazi 'traditionalism'. After the departure from Swaziland of Sir Brian Marwick, who had sought to pave the way for a constitutional monarchy, the British authorities offered little resistance to Sobhuza's demand for a less than democratic electoral dispensation, and to his insistence that control of land and minerals should be kept out of the hands of parliament. There was, no doubt, pressure from South Africa on Britain to ensure that even moderate nationalists, such as Zwane, were kept out of power. Zwane's political career was a failure, but he was widely respected for his lonely stand against royal autocracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 94735


Marechera, Dambudzo (1952-1987), novelist and poet, was born on 4 June 1952 in Vengere township, Rusape, in the eastern part of Southern Rhodesia, the third child of Isaac Marechera (died 1966), truck driver and later mortuary attendant, and his wife, Masvotwa Venezia, 'nee' Nyamaropa, a housemaid and nanny for white children. His name, Dambudzo, meaning 'sorrow' or 'trouble' in his mother tongue, Shona, expressed the poverty and distress into which he was born; at the same time it anticipated his fame as a troublemaker. Baptized Charles William by the Anglican church, he readopted his Shona name when he started writing. After his father was killed in a road accident the family had to move to a slum. For the hypersensitive and intelligent child the experience of destitution and violence -- his mother allegedly resorted to prostitution to feed and educate her nine children -- became an early impulse to escape into the world of books. He found his first reading treasures, such as Arthur Mee's 'Children's Encyclopedia', in the nearby rubbish dump serving the white community. 
From 1958 to 1965 Marechera attended primary school in Vengere. His excellent performance was not diminished by his strong stammer, which people considered a symptom of his intelligence. From 1966 to 1971 he attended one of the first and most prestigious schools for black Rhodesians, the Anglican St Augustine's School at Penhalonga, not far from Rusape. Recognizing his brilliance, his teachers gave him free access to their personal libraries. While devouring literature from all over the world, he started to write his own poems and stories. His decision to become a writer was made when he read his first novel by an African writer, Ngugi wa Thiongo's 'Weep Not Child'. During his years at St Augustine's his behaviour became increasingly eccentric, provoking clashes with fellow pupils and staff. Shortly before his A-levels he started to 'hear voices' harassing him, for which he received medication from a nearby hospital. 
In 1972 Marechera enrolled as an English honours student at the University of Rhodesia in Salisbury. At lectures and writing clubs he stunned others with his learning and extraordinary poetic imagination. T. S. Eliot, Samuel Beckett, William Blake, and D. H. Lawrence were his major literary inspirations. During massive student protests in July 1973 against the white settler regime under Ian Smith, Marechera was among the more than 150 students expelled from the university. 
In October 1974 Marechera obtained a scholarship to study English literature at New College, Oxford. He felt utterly estranged in British academia and began drinking heavily; his violently destructive behaviour led to his expulsion in March 1976. Insisting that he was not insane, he declined psychiatric treatment offered to him by the college and henceforth chose the lonesome life of a writer without fixed abode. Out of the deep crisis after his expulsion he wrote his first book, 'The House of Hunger' (1978), a novella and eight short stories, which was enthusiastically accepted for publication by James Currey at Heinemann. 'The book is an explosion', wrote Doris Lessing in her review ('A cultural tug-of-war', 'Books and Bookmen', 24/9, 1979, 62), and Angela Carter found 'a terrible beauty... born out of the urgency of his vision' ('A witness, a prophet', 'The Guardian', 21 June 1979). Together with the Irish writer Neil Jordan Marechera won the Guardian fiction award of 1979. During the prestigious award ceremony in the Theatre Royal, he threw china and chairs at chandeliers and London's literati, thus setting his mark as an 'enfant terrible'. 
After the success of 'The House of Hunger' Heinemann urged Marechera to write a 'proper' novel. Living in London squatter communities he spent 1979 writing several versions of what was eventually published as 'Black Sunlight' (1980). Apart from a short stint as a writer in residence at the University of Sheffield and a glorious appearance at the Horizonte festival in West Berlin in 1979 Marechera led an unstable life as a writer-tramp. A notorious drinker and heckler at London's Africa Centre, from where he was also eventually evicted, he wrote articles for 'West Africa' magazine. 
In February 1982 Marechera returned to independent Zimbabwe in order to participate in a television film directed by Chris Austin based on 'The House of Hunger'. After a quarrel with Austin the film was completed without Marechera as the protagonist. He soon became known as a relentless and outspoken critic of post-colonial politics and society. His third book, 'Mindblast, or, The Definitive Buddy' (1984), a collection of plays, prose, poetry, and a diary, became the manifesto of his satiric indictment. After two years of homelessness he found a small flat near the centre of Harare, largely depending on friends for his survival. On 18 August 1987 he died of an AIDS-related pneumonia and was buried in Warren Hill cemetery near Harare. He left behind several unpublished manuscripts, some of which were subsequently published by the Dambudzo Marechera Trust, founded in 1988: 'The Black Insider' (1990), 'Cemetery of Mind: Collected Poems' (1992), and 'Scrapiron Blues' (1994). While many of his nationalist contemporaries dismissed him as elitist and 'un-African', Marechera's outspoken spirit and ground-breaking literary style became an inspiration for later generations of African writers. 


@@@@@


doc= 94740


Herwarth, Philibert, Baron von Huningen (1644-1721), diplomat and benefactor, was born in Lyon, France, on 10 September 1644 NS, the third surviving son of Jean Henri d'Hervart (Herwarth) (1609-1675), banker, and his first wife, Marie Rosine (1616-1646), daughter of Marc Conrad de Rehlingen, who like d'Hervart had been an adviser of Duke Bernard of Saxe-Weimar. His paternal ancestors were Lutherans from Augsburg, and his family, although established in France and associated with the Calvinist Huguenot minority there, maintained ties through marriage and business with Germany and Switzerland. Jean Henri and his elder brother, Barthelemy, controller-general of finance under Cardinal Mazarin and Louis XIV, were instrumental in the transfer of Alsace to French sovereignty, and were rewarded with lands and honours in the region, including the barony of Huningen, a frontier town on the Rhine just north of Basel. From about 1650 Jean Henri settled at Arles in Provence, where he established a marsh drainage project, but as a younger son Philibert entered military service as a captain in the regiment of Henri de la Tour d'Auvergne, vicomte de Turenne (1611-1675), commander of the French army in Germany. Roger Brulart, marquis de Puisieux, Herwarth's regimental superior and future antagonist, recalled later that he had been an impulsive pleasure-seeker, but a strong character, opinionated and persuasive. 
Considered to have a greater aptitude for business than his older brother Bernard (1639- 'c'.1700), on their father's death in 1675 Philibert was named the principal heir, inheriting the drainage enterprise and the accompanying title of sieur des Marais. Bernard retained the title of Baron von Huningen, although following the death without sons of their uncle Barthelemy in 1676 it appears that partible inheritance accorded the barony to Philibert also; in the records he appears variously as M. Herwarth, M. d'Hervart, M. des Marais (especially in Geneva), and Baron von Huningen or baron d'Huningue. In the next decade Philibert may have put his energies into managing the family business, but there are also indications that he travelled abroad. It has been claimed that in the later 1670s he entered English service and took his beliefs into Charles II's parliaments, voting for the exclusion of the Catholic duke of York from the succession to the throne. This assertion appears to arise from confusion of Herwarth with William Harbord, and the former was certainly never an MP, but there is evidence that he visited England, although perhaps not with a religious agenda. Writing to him in 1697, his sister, from whom he had become estranged, claimed that 'vous estes sorti du Royaume [de France] quelque temps avant que l'Edit de Nantes fut casse', adding immediately, 'la religion a eu peu de part a vostre voyage en Angleterre' ('you left the kingdom some time before the edict of Nantes was broken. Religion had little part in your journey to England'; letter of Regine Sabine Baudan-Hervart, 16 Oct 1697, Walloon Library, Leiden, quoted by Kolmeschate). Herwarth is also said to have fought for the duke of Lorraine in Hungary. 
By late 1685 all surviving members of the Herwarth family appear to have left France, like other Huguenots scattering to different destinations. Philibert's brother Jean Henri Herwarth, seigneur du Fort (1646-1717x20), who had been deputy controller-general of finance in Paris, and his sister Regine Sabine settled in Delft in Holland, where both soon married; their aunt Anne Marie, Madame Crassel, went to Geneva, her mother's city; their cousin Esther d'Hervart, marquise de Gouvernet, took advantage of ties in England. Philibert probably took service with William of Orange, and by early 1689 he was certainly in London. Reportedly on the recommendation of Madame de Gouvernet's friend the marquess of Halifax, in March Herwarth was named English resident in the Genevan republic and extraordinary envoy to the Swiss confederation. At a time of acute international tension during the War of the League of Augsburg, the nomination provoked anger and consternation. In France the choice of a rebellious subject of King Louis to represent England caused offence in itself, but perceptions that he was a dangerously spirited and generous man made it all too likely that he would succeed in his mission of persuading the Swiss out of neutrality to join France's enemies. The tradition of mercenary employment in French as well as Dutch service complicated the confederation's position, while Geneva, always strategically and economically vulnerable to its powerful neighbours, feared retaliatory action from France. 
As Herwarth was delayed first in London (a pass for his household was finally issued on 6 August) and then in The Hague, rumours abounded: he had sustained a headwound falling downstairs; William was prevaricating. In Geneva the French resident, Charles d'Iberville, conferred worriedly with his superior Colbert de Croissy, advising against a plot to kidnap Herwarth 'en route', while the council, desperate to deflect him, sought support from their Swiss allies and their old friend Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury. However, on 22 December NS Herwarth and his brother du Fort slipped into Geneva from the lake, having travelled incognito through the territories of Zurich and Bern. They lodged 'privately' at the home of a leader of the anti-French faction until Herwarth finally presented his official credentials on 1 January. Ten days later, amid continuing diplomatic posturing on all sides, he was escorted back on to a boat. His offers of much needed grain had been popular, and the secretary of state, Chouet, who wrote a memoir of the affair, paid tribute to his ready tongue, but the visit was completely abortive: however much admiration and even support there was for the new English king, Genevan councillors felt unable to defy Louis. By early February 1690 Herwarth was back in The Hague, but the mission reverberates through English, French and Swiss sources for some months. 
Early in 1692 Herwarth's embassy was resurrected, on this occasion in order to replace Thomas Coxe as English resident in Bern, the most powerful Swiss canton and the most sympathetic to the interests of the anti-French alliance. Arriving in April, this time he stayed ten years and seems to have accomplished as much as was possible in a context where Swiss confessional divisions and cantonal rivalries played out against a background of European instability. An immediate problem confronting all in the region was the continuing transit of Huguenot refugees, whose permanent presence in the confederation was neither politically nor economically sustainable in any great numbers. In addition to individual acts of charity to refugees and applying pressure for a softer official policy, with Henri Massue de Ruvigny, Viscount Galway, Herwarth was a central figure in the 1693 plan to transfer Huguenots in Switzerland to a settlement in Ireland. He also played a critical role in giving sustenance to deserters from French service of all nationalities, in encouraging Bernese military assistance to Geneva, and in persuading the Swiss into allied rather than French service, thereby contributing to William's war effort. Like other English ambassadors before him, he was, also with Galway, engaged by the fate of protestant minorities in Piedmont and the Grisons, again at crisis point. In 1699 and 1701 he was entrusted by the archbishop of Canterbury and others with the administration of funds raised in Ireland and England for the relief and the resettlement in Germany of displaced Vaudois, exploiting his longstanding banking contacts in Frankfurt; he continued to be active in this cause after his embassy ended. 
By 1696 Herwarth was sufficiently established in Bern to marry into one of its leading patrician families. His young bride, Jedide Azube von Graffenried ('bap'. 1674, died 1737), a relative of the secretary of state, brought a dowry of 45,000 livres tournois. This, and perhaps some command of German, put him, and by extension the English interest, at an advantage when in the same year the marquis de Puisieux was appointed French ambassador to Switzerland, having spent two decades sidelined as governor of Huningen. Deprived of his lands there at the revocation, Herwarth doubtless had an axe to grind when he told his superiors in London that Puisieux was unequal to the task, but many French observers agreed. Although obliged to co-operate when it came to curbing Spanish and Savoyard ambitions in the region, the two represented opposed interests in the major issue of the next few years, the disputed succession to the protestant territory of Neuchatel following the death of its ruler from the French Catholic Longueville family, the duchesse de Nemours. 
The death of William III, greeted with dismay in protestant Switzerland, ended Herwarth's embassy. Despite having been naturalized in England in 1698, he moved to Vevey in the French-speaking Bernese territory of Vaud, where he was admitted to the bourgeoisie in 1702 and where there was a tightly knit immigrant community with many English links. He continued to seek English employment after moving about 1706 to The Hague. Hopes of patronage from the duke of Marlborough and the secretary of state, Henry St John, came to nothing, but in 1716 he finally returned to England. He settled at the house of a Mr Winter in Southampton, where his brother du Fort, now largely based at The Hague, had established a second home some years before. Both appear to have been keen to maintain a foothold in more than one country; both contributed to their adopted community in England. In 1717 du Fort altered his will to give 500 Dutch livres to poor refugees in Southampton, a provision honoured after Anglo-Dutch legal process in 1729. The year of the codicil du Fort's elder daughter married a Dutchman at Rijswijk, but soon afterwards his younger daughter Marianne (Anne Mary) ('bap'. 1688, died after 1762) married N(icolas?) de Vatas, a London doctor. 
In 1720 Philibert Herwarth succeeded Galway as governor of the French hospital in London. He died in Southampton on 30 April 1721 and was buried alongside his youngest son, Frederick ('c'.1716- 'c'.1720), in the parish church of Holyrood; his funeral was attended by a large crowd of French and English mourners. His will, drawn up in July 1720, instructed his wife and executors to invest much of her substantial dowry in Bank of India, South Sea, or other bonds for their children, as well as remembering the French conforming and dissenting churches in Southampton, their ministers, and the poor in their community; he had given $4000 to the French hospital in memory of Frederick a few months earlier. Other legatees included his friend Jacques Robethon (probably the cousin of his fellow diplomat John Robethon, who succeeded Herwarth as governor of the hospital). His younger surviving son, Jacques Philippe ('bap'. 1706, died 1764), who received a gold medal and miniature of King William, and a sword inlaid with gold, was to be sent to the cousins in the Netherlands, 'there to learn the Art of Warr the only profession of a Gentleman who in these unfortunate times can scarce apply himselfe to any thing else'; 'born a Swiss', he could be advanced in their regiments (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/579). Having served as a captain of dragoons he eventually joined his mother and sister Sabine Francoise in Vevey. Meanwhile the eldest children stayed in England, where both were married in 1723, Jean Francois Maximilien 
(Maximilian; 'c'.1697-1762)
to Marguerite Angelique de Vignolles, and Marianne Ursule 
(Mary Ann; 1699-1749)
to the army officer and art collector John Guise. Through the eighteenth century business, marriage, and complex testamentary provision ensured that traffic between different branches of the family in Switzerland, the Netherlands, and England did not cease. 


@@@@@


doc= 94741


Darwin, William Erasmus (1839-1914), subject of a study in child psychology, was born on 27 December 1839 at 12 Upper Gower Street, London, and baptized at St Peter's Church, Maer, Staffordshire, on 23 June 1840. He was the first of the ten children of Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882), naturalist, geologist, and originator of the theory of natural selection, and Emma (1808-1896), daughter of Josiah Wedgwood of Maer, Staffordshire. William's siblings included Anne Elizabeth (Annie) Darwin (1841-1851), Henrietta Emma 
(later Henrietta Litchfield; 1843-1927)
, George Howard Darwin (1845-1912), Francis Darwin (1848-1925), Leonard Darwin (1850-1943), and Horace Darwin (1851-1928). During the first three years of William's life, Charles Darwin kept a daily record of his son's actions, gestures, and expressions, in order to identify the stages by which the human infant develops its human capacities alongside innate animal abilities. Darwin had recognized the importance of the link between animals and humans at an early stage in his thinking about evolution. He had studied the behaviour of a young orang-utan at London Zoo in 1838 and had made private notes for a 'natural history of babies' to test his emerging ideas ('Charles Darwin's Notebooks', 560). 
Darwin started his observations as soon as William was born: 'During first week. Yawned, stretched himself just like old person -- chiefly upper extremities -- hiccuped -- sneezes sucked.' On the ninth day William appeared to follow a candle with his eyes. When he was a month and a day old, he recognized his mother's bosom from three or four inches away, and at six weeks and three days he smiled at his mother, 'not only with his lips, but eyes'. Darwin had a particular interest in his son's expressions and gestures of emotion and the feelings that might lie behind them, noting in the eleventh week that William's cries had become 'various'; 'the hunger cry is different from that of pain'. Darwin compared William's behaviour to the orang-utan, as well as to puppies, nestling birds, a new-born crocodile, young mice, and colts in South America. He observed William's first signs of anger and affection, fear and pleasure. In the seventeenth week Darwin detected hints of possible reasoning, and noticed William's first 'association of ideas': 'He understands when his cloak is on, he is to go out & is cross if not taken immediately.' Darwin was fascinated to see how quickly the child appeared to grasp the difference between a real person and his picture or reflection in a mirror, between real actions and play, and between natural objects and human imitations of them. Darwin watched carefully for any signs of the emergence of a moral sense and observed William's first display of a 'kind of conscience' at two-and-a-half years, in a piece of 'natural acting and deceit' to hide a pickle he had stolen from a jar in the dining room. 
The study confirmed Darwin's belief in the close continuity between animal and human nature, and was almost certainly in his mind when he made his single comment in the 'Origin of Species' (1859) about the implications of his theory for humans: 'Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation. Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.' Darwin included many of his observations of William's infant anger and pleasure in 'The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals' (1872), and published his findings on William's psychological development in the journal 'Mind' under the title 'A biographical sketch of an infant' (no. 7, July 1877). The account also included observations on William's younger sister, Annie, whom Darwin had observed alongside her elder brother. 
William was later educated at Rugby School, and at Christ's College, Cambridge; he became a partner in Grant and Maddison's Union Banking Company of Southampton. On 29 November 1877 he married Sara Price Ashburner Sedgwick (1839-1902), daughter of Theodore Sedgwick of New York, at Trinity Church, Paddington, London. They lived in Bassett, Southampton. William's one action of public consequence in an otherwise uneventful adult life was to champion the cause of university education for all, and to play a leading role in the initiatives which led to the foundation of a university college in Southampton in 1902. After his wife's death he spent much time with his nieces Gwen Raverat, Frances Cornford, and Margaret Keynes, and his modest eccentricities as an old man were celebrated by Raverat in her memoir of her childhood, 'Period Piece' (1952). William Darwin died on 8 September 1914 at Baliol School, Sedbergh, Cumbria, and was buried in St Nicolas's Church, North Stoneham. 
Charles Darwin's 'Biographical sketch of an infant' was the first fully scientific study of psychological development from birth to early childhood. It showed the value of a strictly observational and chronological approach and prompted the German psychologist William Preyer to study his own son in the same way and to publish his findings in 'Die Seele des Kindes' (1882; translated as 'The Mind of the Child', 1888). Child psychology developed rapidly on these naturalistic and empirical foundations. The American psychologist James Mark Baldwin based his 'Mental Development in the Child and the Race' (1895) on a similar study of his two daughters, and acknowledged Darwin's and Preyer's example in his 'History of Psychology' (1913). 


@@@@@


doc= 94747


Bolton, John Eveleigh (1920-2003), industrialist and promoter of management education, was born on 17 October 1920 at 108 Dartmouth Street, West Bromwich, the second of three children of Ernest Bolton (1883-1933), a railway district goods manager's clerk, later a railway manager, and his wife, Edith Mary, 'nee' Duckhouse (1882-1968). He was educated at Ilkley and Wolverhampton grammar schools and at the age of seventeen became an articled clerk to a chartered accountant. In 1940 he was called up and he served for the remainder of the Second World War as a lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, operating in destroyers and being awarded the DSC. 
Bolton was demobilized in 1946 and, rather than returning to accountancy, went to Trinity College, Cambridge, to study economics; he graduated in 1948 and won a Cassel travelling scholarship to Harvard business school. This was an unusual move in those days, and even the scholarship was won only because he persuaded the assessors that management was a foreign language in Britain. At Harvard he became a Baker scholar in 1949 and graduated MBA with distinction in 1950, finishing top of his class. After graduating he carried out research for Harvard on British industry and indeed retained strong links with Harvard for most of his life. Meanwhile, on 21 August 1948, at the parish church of Penn, Staffordshire, he married Gabrielle Healey (Gay) Hall (1926-1989), with whom he had a son and a daughter, and a devoted marriage. 
In 1951 Bolton became finance director of Solartron Laboratory Instruments in Kingston upon Thames, moving on to become chairman and managing director of the Solartron Electronic Group in 1954, a post he retained until 1963, when he became deputy chairman for a further two years. The growth of the group during his stewardship was explosive: when he arrived there were only fifteen employees but six years later there were 1500, and it became one of the most dynamic electronic companies of its era. Eventually, however, the business needed more new capital than could be generated internally and so was sold at a very considerable profit, enabling Bolton to start a new career based on public duties and part-time directorships. 
Long before Solartron was sold Bolton was exercised by the relatively low national standard of management education, and pressed for a system similar to that of the United States. He wrote a paper in 1956 proposing a British Commonwealth college of administration that would provide a wide range of courses for 1000 students and would, he hoped, be affiliated to Cambridge University. Moreover he offered $250,000 in Solartron shares to start a fund to finance the idea. The timing for this was not quite right, but the following year he was approached by the Conservative MP Sir Keith Joseph, who had been to the USA and had been told at Harvard that Bolton was an enthusiast for management education. Thus the two came together to initiate the Foundation for Management Education (FME), which Bolton pump-primed with his own money and which played a key role in the development and funding of the first British business schools. 
Bolton saw the value of working with the grain of the establishment and the FME's approach was based on bringing the University Grants Committee and especially its chairman, Sir Keith Murray, on board. At the same time he was the main procurer of support from industry for the FME and management education more generally. He soon became a pillar of the management education committee world, sitting on the sub-committee on business management studies of the University Grants Committee, the advisory committee on industry of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, the Business Education Forum, the Council of Industry for Management Education, and not least, from 1962 to 1975, the visiting committee for the Harvard business school. This latter role gave him a unique perspective from which to appreciate evolving trends in the American system. He was also a key figure in the formation of the Business Graduates Association in 1968, becoming chairman of its advisory council. 
Bolton began a two-year term as chairman of the council of the British Institute of Management in 1964 at the exceptionally young age of forty-four; unusually he had not been a member of the council until he became vice-chairman, and three months later he was made chairman. He presided over a period of considerable growth of both individual and organizational membership of the institute and a general improvement in its fortunes after the divisive problems of the 1950s. He also played a considerable part in replacing a loss-making internal journal with the much more commercially and publicly oriented 'Management Today', taking on a young and progressive editor, Robert Heller. The outcome was very satisfactory in both circulation and advertising revenues. Among the many other posts Bolton held were vice-chairman of the royal commission on local government in England (1966-9), chairman of the Economic Development Committee for the Rubber Industry (1965-8), chairman of council and then honorary treasurer of the University of Surrey, a member of the queen's award for industry panel, a general commissioner of income tax, and high sheriff of Surrey, to name only a few. 
The issue for which Bolton became best known was the role of small firms in the British economy, through his chairmanship of the committee of inquiry on small firms (1969-71), set up by the Labour government of Harold Wilson. Bolton may indeed have had something to do with the committee's creation, since it was recommended by the British Institute of Management soon after Bolton had given up the chair of the institute's council. The committee carried out considerable research to show the hitherto unrecognized significance of the small firms sector. The report, published in November 1971 (as 'Cmnd 4811'), was one of the most important and influential of its kind; almost all of its more than sixty recommendations were quickly implemented by the new Conservative government, and had repercussions many years later. Indeed the name of Bolton and small business policy were for a considerable time virtually synonymous as he pursued the cause of small business well into the 1980s, both on the policy front and by spearheading funding. For his work on the committee of inquiry he was appointed CBE in 1972. 
Bolton was chairman and managing director of Growth Capital Ltd from 1968, and was chairman of Hall Bolton Estates Ltd and Riverview Investments Ltd. He was also a non-executive director of numerous public companies, including Black and Decker, Hoskyns, Johnson Wax, Dawson International, NCR, and Redland. In his non-executive role he was known for his straight talking and his little black book, which contained a wealth of stories from which he drew a moral from his own experience. He was also supportive of charities, schools, churches, and hospitals, mainly in his adopted county of Surrey. Inevitably, too, he became known to a wide range of people, many of whom turned to him for help and advice, which he was almost invariably only too pleased to provide. He was also associated with and a benefactor of many other management-related activities besides the Foundation for Management Education, including the Advanced Management Programmes International Trust, which brought Harvard business school courses to Britain, the Small Business Research Trust, and the Management History Research Group. He was a gentle, generous, and courteous man who was greatly respected by all who knew him. He never entirely recovered from the relatively early death of his wife, Gay, in 1989. He lived for many years at Brook Place, Chobham, and latterly at Sunnymead, Tite Hill, Englefield Green, Surrey, where he died on 15 February 2003, of prostate cancer. He was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94759


Crawford, Sir William Godfrey (1907-2003), naval officer, was born on 14 September 1907 at Wyld Court, Hawkchurch, near Axminster, Devon, the son of Henry Edward Venner Crawford, farmer, and his wife, Marion Ellinor, 'nee' Pharazyn. His father, the son of a sea captain who had been one of the first British settlers in New Zealand, had returned to inherit and farm the Devon property. Bill Crawford entered the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, in 1921, one of the first cadets to go straight to the newly enlarged college rather than begin their naval training at Osborne. Crawford did well, becoming chief cadet captain and being awarded the king's dirk; he also obtained colours for rugby and sailing, a lifelong passion. Promoted lieutenant in 1929, he qualified as a gunnery officer in 1932. While serving in the Mediterranean Fleet flagship 'Queen Elizabeth' in 1934 he was put in charge of a guard of Royal Marines and seamen for the funeral of the assassinated King Alexander of Yugoslavia. 1937 saw both promotion to lieutenant-commander and a visit to King Boris of Bulgaria when HMS 'Delhi', the light cruiser in which Crawford was now serving, visited Varna. On 29 April 1939 he married Mary Felicity Rosa Williams (1911-1995), second daughter of Sir Philip Francis Cunningham Williams, second baronet, of Little Bredy, Dorset. They had three sons and one daughter. 
In 1940 Crawford was appointed gunnery officer of the battleship 'Rodney', commanded by his uncle, Captain Frederick Dalrymple-Hamilton. The climax of this appointment was the engagement with the German battleship 'Bismarck' (which had just sunk HMS 'Hood') in May 1941. Crawford hit the enemy at long range with 'Rodney''s third 16 inch salvo and his guns, together with the 14 inch of 'King George V', then remorselessly pounded 'Bismarck' to a wreck. Crawford received the Distinguished Service Cross for his part in the battle and was promoted commander at the end of the year. 1942 saw more difficult circumstances as staff officer to the second in command of the Eastern Fleet. The Japanese onslaught forced the fleet back to east Africa but by the time Crawford left in 1944 it was beginning to return to the offensive. Crawford had been selected as executive officer of the light fleet carrier 'Venerable', fitting out at Cammell Lairds. He helped commission her in January 1945 and work her up into a fighting unit before she was deployed with three sisters to join the British Pacific Fleet. The light fleet carriers missed the major action but covered the reoccupation of British territory. Crawford, using mounted sailors, was put in charge of maintaining law and order in Hong Kong. He left 'Venerable' in 1946 and was promoted captain the following year. In 1948 he was appointed to command HMS 'Pelican' as captain (F) of the second frigate flotilla, based at Malta. 
Crawford's career now began to emphasize training at its various levels, a calling that suited his gunnery officer's rigour and high standards. He was deputy director of the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich, in 1950-52 and was then appointed in 1952-3 to command the cruiser 'Devonshire', used for the sea training of officer cadets. This was followed by appointment in 1954 as captain of what had just been renamed the Britannia Royal Naval College, Dartmouth. His main task was to introduce the new scheme for entry at age eighteen designed by the committee on officer structure and training at the beginning of that year. Crawford had the daunting task of managing the institution's fundamental transformation from a school to a naval academy, the single most important change in Dartmouth's history. 
Promotion to rear-admiral in 1956 was a just reward for these endeavours and, after two years at the Imperial Defence College, Crawford was selected in 1958 for another important task as the first flag officer sea training at Portland. Under Crawford's leadership his organization, in charge of the regular, exacting monitoring of the expertise and efficiency of ships' officers and men as a fighting team, became the single most important factor in maintaining the fleet's operational capability. Over two years Crawford personally inspected more than fifty ships at sea. He left this gruelling post in 1960 having been promoted vice admiral the previous year. He had by now developed a reputation for diplomacy as well as force of character, and he was sent to Washington as commander of the British naval staff and naval attache. He was in post during the Cuba crisis and he had an excellent relationship with the US chief of naval operations, Admiral George Anderson. Anderson was with Crawford when President Kennedy called to order the naval 'quarantine' of Cuba. Crawford had been appointed CB in 1958 and in 1961 he was knighted KBE. 
Crawford retired in 1963, becoming the following year director of the overseas offices of the British Travel Association, a post he held until 1972. He also remained a prominent member of the Royal Cruising Club. His continued enthusiasm for yachting was reflected in a series of transatlantic crossings begun with old friends in 1980. When over ninety he was still crossing the channel to Guernsey. His other interest, like that of many of his fellow officers, was fishing. He and his wife lived in retirement at Whitchurch Canonicorum, near Bridport, Dorset. Following her death in 1995 and a deterioration in his health, he moved to Broadwindsor House nursing home, Beaminster. He died there on 16 June 2003, after a stroke, and was survived by his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94805


Watkins, Winifred May (1924-2003), biochemist, was born on 6 August 1924 at 116 Coningham Road, Hammersmith, London, the second daughter of Albert Edward Watkins, a process engraver for a firm that worked for newspapers, and his wife, Annie Bertha, 'nee' Delia. Her family had no apparent scientific connections. She was educated at St Stephen's parish elementary school in Shepherd's Bush, whence at the age of eleven she gained a London county scholarship to the Godolphin and Latymer Girls' School in Hammersmith. At the outbreak of the Second World War the school was evacuated to Newbury but with some other pupils she returned a year later and gained her higher school certificate in 1942. Following a government decree she now had two choices: service in the forces or a job approved by the Ministry of Labour which included working as a laboratory assistant. She chose the latter and was taken on by the biochemistry department of the Lister Institute. This turned out to be a wonderful move for her. It brought her into contact with Walter Morgan, who soon realized her great potential and became her lifelong mentor and friend. 
The biochemistry department was the only one in the Lister Institute which remained in Chelsea throughout the war. Watkins described this time as particularly happy, despite the fact that physical conditions were adverse, some laboratories, for example, having few intact windows. Aerial bombardment tended to break down social barriers and she gained greatly from her contacts with eminent scientists. During this period, she enrolled for evening classes at Chelsea Polytechnic, while continuing to be fully employed at the Lister. In 1947 she was awarded a BSc honours degree in chemistry by London University. 
Watkins appears to have started work with Walter Morgan almost from the time of joining the institute and her name appeared with his on two papers published in 1944. In 1940 Morgan had begun work on the red cell antigens of the most important human blood group system, ABO, and soon embarked on the quest of unravelling their chemical structure. Watkins eventually became a full-time partner in this enterprise but, before that, she spent three years doing a PhD, on the action of nitrogen mustards (cytotoxic agents then used to treat myeloid leukaemia) on the immunological properties of body proteins, at St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school with the immunochemist Arthur Wormall. After the award of her doctorate, she returned to the Lister to work with Morgan in the biochemistry department. 
An early and highly important step in Watkins's work with Morgan was the realization that A and B antigenic determinants are carbohydrates and are therefore not themselves gene products. The 'A' and 'B' genes code for the formation of enzymes (transferases) which convert precursor substances into antigens. The nature of the determinant sugars which confer antigenic specificity was discovered by inhibition experiments, for example by showing that galactose specifically inhibits the reaction between B and anti-B. There is no 'O' gene but the gene 'H' codes for H substance, the precursor of A and B, which is more abundant on O cells than others. Other closely related genes are 'Lewis' and 'Secretor'. One of Watkins's most brilliant achievements was to propose genetical pathways in which the genes of these various systems acted sequentially. Virtually every one of Watkins's predictions was eventually shown to be correct, in many cases by her own work. The insights she achieved were doubtless due partly to the knowledge about glycosyltransferases which she acquired at the University of California at Berkeley during a sabbatical in 1960-61. The work of Watkins and Morgan is the more remarkable when one considers that it was done at the very dawn of molecular biology, without any of the tools which were soon to become available. 
When the Lister Institute closed in 1975 Watkins (who had been made a reader in biochemistry at the University of London in 1965, and professor in 1968) moved to Northwick Park, where the Medical Research Council established a division of immunochemical genetics with her as its head. During this period she made many important discoveries: for example, that 'A' and 'B' transferases have overlapping specificities, and that unexpected antigenic determinants appear on malignant cells due to the lack of normal transferases. After the closure of the division at Northwick Park in 1989 she continued her work in the haematology department at Hammersmith Hospital until her retirement in 2000. 
Watkins received many honours: she was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1969, became a member of council of the Royal Society from 1984 to 1986, and received its royal medal in 1988. Other awards included the Landsteiner memorial award (jointly) in 1967, the Ehrlich-Ludwig Darmstadter prize (jointly) in 1969, and an honorary DSc from Utrecht in 1990. 
Watkins had a most engaging personality; she exuded an almost serene air. Although she was shy, she made friends easily and was always cheerful. She never married, but had three nieces of whom she was very fond, and a wide circle of acquaintances. Nevertheless, the scientific life meant most to her. When she had her first stroke in her late seventies she was still taking an intense interest in her field and one of her chief concerns was that she would be unable to take the chair at a scientific symposium, due a week or two later. She died of pneumonia following another stroke, on 3 October 2003, at Ashford Hospital, Stanwell, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 94807


Boyd, Sir Robert Lewis Fullarton (1922-2004), physicist and engineer, was born on 19 October 1922 at 5 Melbourne Terrace, Saltcoats, Ayrshire, the elder of twin sons of William John Boyd, a works chemist, and his wife, Dorothy Jane, 'nee' Sibthorpe. Two years after his birth the family moved to Croydon, where his father became head of science at Croydon Polytechnic and two sisters were born. Young Robert's interest in science and technical gadgetry was in early evidence, and he gained local fame by building a petrol engine, using the lathe in the school workshop. He won a state bursary (as did his brother) to study engineering at Imperial College from 1941. After graduating in 1943 he was recruited by the Admiralty to work on the effects of shock and vibration on naval stores, especially mines and their delicate components. As was often the case in those wartime science 'hot houses', several long-lasting scientific links were formed. Among Boyd's scientific colleagues were David Bates, Francis Crick, and Harrie Massey. The contact with Massey was to prove the most durable and important in Boyd's subsequent career, and had a strong influence on the emergence of space research in the UK. 
After the Second World War, Massey returned to his position as Goldsmid professor of mathematics at University College, London (UCL). As he began to rebuild the mathematics department Boyd was an early recruit, hired on a Department of Scientific and Industrial Research grant to study the properties of ionized gases, research which led to the award of a doctorate in 1949. On 6 September the same year, at the Rebecca Street Meeting Room, Bradford, he married Mary Higgins (died 1996), a 29-year-old schoolteacher from Bradford, and daughter of John Higgins. They enjoyed a long and happy marriage, and had a daughter, Hazel, and two sons, Robert and Stephen. In 1951 Massey was appointed Quain professor and head of physics at UCL, taking Boyd, now an ICI research fellow, to the physics department with him. In 1952 Boyd was appointed to a lectureship. Over the next quarter of a century Massey was to lead one of the strongest university physics departments in the country. 
A central research theme in the department was the study of atomic and ionic collisions; that led naturally to a keen interest in the prospects offered by the development of high altitude rockets to study directly the chemistry and physics of the earth's upper atmosphere. The critical opportunity arrived in 1953 when Massey, then chairman of the Royal Society Gassiot committee on atmospheric research, was called by the Ministry of Supply to ask if any scientific use could be made of the solid fuel rockets they had been developing (for military purposes). Massey immediately invited Boyd to take a lead role in exploring that option, which Boyd's scientific and technological expertise made him well equipped to do. Vacation work at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, followed for Boyd, while Massey enlarged the potential academic research base to include groups led by David Bates at Queen's University, Belfast, Granville Beynon in Aberystwyth, Jim Sayers at Birmingham, and Peter Sheppard at Imperial College. Things moved quickly, with the forthcoming International Geophysical Year (1957/8) as a focus for scientists worldwide. In 1955 the UK Treasury agreed to a Royal Society bid for $100,000, part for the Royal Aircraft Establishment to develop a new high altitude rocket, and part to fund university groups to develop suitable experiments. A rocket research group was set up by Boyd at UCL. The first Skylark launches took place from Woomera in South Australia in 1957. Seven further Skylarks were flown in 1958 and the UK space research programme was up and running. Boyd's increasing national and international stature was rewarded at UCL with promotion to reader in 1959 and then to professor of physics in 1962. 
The launch of the Russian Sputnik 1, the world's first artificial satellite, on 4 October 1957 thrust space research into the headlines around the world, and science was a substantial beneficiary. Besides the superpowers (the USA and the Soviet Union) the UK was perhaps the most significant early participant in space science, with Boyd and other university group leaders playing leading roles in collaborations with NASA and building the basis for a European programme through the new European Space Research Organisation (ESRO). Milestones were the first UK-US scientific satellite, Ariel 1 (launched in April 1962), and the first ESRO satellite, ESRO-2 (launched in May 1968). Both satellites were designed to study the interaction between the sun and the upper atmosphere, and Boyd's group at UCL played a key role. Typical of the technical ingenuity and scientific insight of Boyd's team was a modified Langmuir probe which measured the concentration of both electrons and positive ions, and the electron temperature, along the satellite orbit. Comparison with simultaneous measurements of solar X-radiation provided some of the first detailed information on the effects of 'solar weather' on the terrestrial atmosphere. 
Nationally the academic base of space science was growing, with research groups at more than a dozen universities. UCL had the largest programme, but its success brought with it a severe problem of accommodation on the Gower Street site. Fortunately the scientific and technological reputation of Boyd's team persuaded the Mullard Company to donate a sufficient sum to enable UCL to purchase a country mansion at Holmbury St Mary in Surrey; in 1967 the Mullard Space Science Laboratory was opened, with Boyd as its first director. As a research group leader Boyd had high standards, and was demanding but fair. He was very loyal to his staff and students, many of whom went on to occupy senior positions in space research across the world. His students were given freedom to initiate and to make mistakes, but always within the constraints of a well-managed programme. He was generous in sharing credit with his team, as can be seen in his extensive scientific bibliography, with first authorship spread among senior and more junior colleagues. Along with many scientific papers he wrote a number of books, notably 'The Upper Atmosphere' (with Massey, 1958), 'Space Research by Rockets and Satellites' (1960), and 'Space Physics' (1975). 
Boyd's expertise and wise counsel meant that he was often in demand, and he gave his time generously, being a member of the council of the Royal Astronomical Society (1962-6), serving on Ministry of Defence committees on astronautics (1974-7) and serving on its committee on meteorology (1972-5), acting as adviser to the BBC on science programmes (1973-8), and -- most importantly -- arguing the case for space science as a member of the Science Research Council (1977-81) and of its various advisory bodies over a lengthy period. Later on he served as a trustee of the National Maritime Museum (1980-89). Elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1969, he was appointed CBE in 1972 and knighted on his retirement in 1983. 
While an outstanding scientist Boyd was at heart an engineer. Throughout his professional career it was possible to discern his passion and gift for technical solutions. The enthusiasm of the schoolboy in his home workshop evidently continued into adulthood; it was, for instance, widely alleged that he had developed a new design of electric washing machine. His major interest in retirement again reflected his lifelong passion for technology and design, buying and refurbishing classical cars and accumulating a small fleet of Bentley and Rolls-Royce vehicles. 
Robert Boyd was a key figure in establishing space science as a strong scientific discipline in the UK. An outstanding physicist and gifted engineer, he gained the respect of peers across the world. Throughout his life he remained a devout Christian, having been brought up in the Brethren and eventually being confirmed in the Church of England in 1995; his faith and commitment to scientific study co-existed without conflict. Following the death of his first wife in 1996, on 24 April 1998 he married Betty Robinson, a seventy-year-old retired educational social worker and widow, daughter of Herbert Frank Chelmsford, caterer. He died at the Royal Hampshire County Hospital, Winchester, on 5 February 2004, from heart failure after a fall. 


@@@@@


doc= 94808


Bray, (William) John (1911-2004), telecommunications engineer, was born on 10 September 1911 at 198 Walmer Road, Kingston, Portsmouth, one of the two sons of William James Bray, an engine room artificer on HMS 'Achilles', and his wife, Emily Eliza, 'nee' Clothier. The family moved to Yeovil during the First World War but afterwards returned to Portsmouth where John attended Milton primary school and Portsmouth southern grammar school. There he specialized in science and developed a strong interest in the novel field of wireless communication -- building a crystal receiver on which he listened through headphones to the output of the BBC's first regional transmitter, 6BM, at Bournemouth. In 1927 he became an apprentice in the naval dockyards, where he received a thorough theoretical and practical engineering training and won the Admiral Donaldson cup as 'top apprentice of all the yards'. In his spare time he built a spark radio transmitter (with which he successfully, but illegally, transmitted Morse code messages over several miles) and, within a few years of the original invention, made a copy of John Logie Baird's 'spinning disc' television receiver to pick up the flickering, stamp-sized image of a human head from the BBC's 2LO transmitter 100 miles or more away. 
By the early 1930s Bray knew that he wanted to become a professional electrical engineer. Aware that this required a more rigorous academic training, he applied for and won a Royal and Whitworth scholarship to the City and Guilds Engineering College (part of Imperial College, London), where he enrolled in 1932, and where he became secretary of the college's radio society. He became an ACGI (associate of the City and Guilds of London Institute, the equivalent of a BSc) with first-class honours in 1934 and, a year later, MSc (Eng). During the vacations he completed his naval apprenticeship -- helping maintain the telephone exchange at the HMS Vernon naval establishment and lay submarine telephone cables between the forts at Spithead. 
In 1935, persuaded by a friend in the engineering department of the Post Office (and rejecting an offer to join the Admiralty), Bray joined the organization to which he would devote the next fifty years. His main interest was radio, a technology that then played a big part in the Post Office's network (its long-wave transmitter at Rugby was among the most powerful in the world and it supervised all radio communications and broadcasting in the United Kingdom, collecting licence-fee income for the BBC as well as managing the allocation of frequencies). After initial training in the Post Office's research station at Dollis Hill, Middlesex, and practical experience at the headquarters of the Northern Ireland region, he returned to Dollis Hill as an assistant engineer with the radio experimental branch. There he undertook important experimental work on radio transmission, helping convert the Post Office's transatlantic and other short-wave radio links to single sideband operation and to build the multi-unit steerable antenna. Devised by Harald Friis of Bell Labs, this was the most complex short wave receiving system ever used for commercial purposes, and during the Second World War provided a channel for secure communication between the British and American governments. Bray took part in a number of top-secret wartime projects, such as radio direction finding and 'meaconing' (disrupting enemy beam navigation devices). 
On 11 April 1936 Bray had married Margaret Earp (died 1998), whose father, Fred, had been an engine-room artificer at the same time as Bray's father, with whom he remained a close friend. Their first daughter, Frances, was born in 1941. Their second, Elizabeth, arrived in 1945 but suffered from a spinal deformity and died at the age of eleven in 1956. 
After the war Bray worked on the design and development of microwave (very high frequency) radio systems and chaired a group within the International Radio Committee that set key world standards in the field. In 1954 he became head of the Post Office's inland radio branch, moving from Dollis Hill to a headquarters building near St Paul's Cathedral. Though this meant doing less hands-on research, he welcomed the chance to collaborate with other parts of the Post Office and to enhance his range of interests. One of the branch's key achievements during this time was the design of London's Post Office Tower, which became the centrepiece of the Post Office's high frequency telecommunications and broadcasting network after it was opened by the prime minister, Harold Wilson, in 1965. In 1955 he was awarded a Commonwealth Fund fellowship that enabled him to spend a sabbatical year in the USA studying telecommunications developments -- an experience that gave him an international outlook and a range of useful contacts. 
Two topics in particular then came to dominate Bray's working life: television and satellites. The United Kingdom's nascent television service had been shut down at the outbreak of the Second World War lest it prove a target for enemy bombing and because the supply industry had to make cathode ray tubes for radar. But it started afresh after the war and the Post Office provided links between transmitters, studios, sites for outside broadcasts, and the like. One of Bray's early tasks was to develop what became the ubiquitous licence detector van. Attention was also now turning to the use of satellites for communications purposes. The idea had been predicted as early as 1945 by the science-fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, and Bray himself had anticipated it during the war by exploring the possibility of bouncing radio waves off the surface of the moon (something later achieved by Bell Labs). Satellites could, at least in theory, carry huge volumes of telecommunications and television traffic and also had immense military potential, but many practical obstacles had to be overcome. In 1960 Bray participated in a joint civil-military mission sponsored by the cabinet office to study satellite and space developments in the USA. Its most important outcome was an agreement that the USA and the UK would hold a series of satellite communications tests and that, for this purpose, the Post Office would build one of three satellite-earth stations, at its own expense. To implement this bold vision Bray was invited in 1961 to head the Post Office's newly established space communications systems branch. As he later wrote, so began 'the most exciting and rewarding phase of my professional career' ('Then, Now and Tomorrow', 70). As the Telstar satellite was due for launch in July 1962, he had barely a year and a half to oversee the construction of the new earth station at Goonhilly, on the Lizard peninsula; and though its potential as a carrier of telecommunications signals was hugely important to the Post Office, Bray realized it was the television element that would capture the public imagination. He and his colleagues' furious -- and sometimes fraught -- activity met with total success when, on 11 July 1962, Raymond Baxter (for the BBC) and Ian Trethowan (for ITV) relayed to British viewers the first live television images to cross the Atlantic. Bray and his team were rightly proud of their achievement and were especially pleased that Goonhilly's open dish aerial (based in part on the design of the Jodrell Bank radio telescope) performed better than the more expensive covered radome built in the USA. Goonhilly became the largest operational satellite station in the world, handling television, telecommunications, and later internet traffic between Europe, the USA, and beyond. Bray was delighted when in 2003 Goonhilly's original dish aerial and the BT Tower (as the Post Office Tower had been renamed) were both listed -- regarding them as monuments to his life's work. 
Bray now returned to Dollis Hill, where he was soon promoted to become the Post Office's deputy director of research; he was appointed director in 1966. Though he was initially disappointed by the move back to research -- he felt it lacked the glamour of big 'operational' projects like Goonhilly -- his last decade at the helm of the Post Office's research activity saw immense progress across a number of fields. Reliable semiconductor-based repeaters replaced the valve technology previously used for submarine telephone cables; pulse-code modulation underpinned a switch to digital technology throughout the system; optical fibre began to replace copper cable; and the Post Office's Viewdata service -- later called Prestel -- was an early version of the internet. Bray's final achievement was to mastermind the design and construction of the Post Office's huge new research centre at Martlesham Heath in Suffolk -- opened by the queen in November 1975, a few months after his retirement in July of that year. The building's main auditorium was named the John Bray lecture theatre in his honour. 
Bray was active in many professional bodies, including the Institution of Electrical Engineers, whose J. J. Thomson medal he received in 1977 for his 'distinguished contribution to electronic engineering'. In 1967 he was made a fellow of the City and Guilds of London Institute; he was appointed CBE in 1975; and in 1978 he became a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering. He lectured widely in the UK and overseas. During his long retirement, he acted as a consultant to the National Council for Educational Technology and was a visiting professor at University College, London. He wrote two books on the history of telecommunications, 'The Communications Miracle' (1995), and 'Innovation and the Communications Revolution' (2002), as well as two autobiographies, 'Memoirs of a Telecommunications Engineer' (1983) and 'Then, Now and Tomorrow' (1999). He participated widely in the work of such international bodies as the International Telecommunications Union and was an associate member of the World Innovation Foundation. He was an active sailor whose largest boat was the 32 foot sloop-rigged 'Sjohest'. He wrote poetry and participated actively in the affairs of his East Anglian village. He died of prostate cancer at the St Elizabeth Hospice, Ipswich, on 6 September 2004, and was survived by his daughter Frances. 


@@@@@


doc= 94810


Bullock, Alan Louis Charles, Baron Bullock (1914-2004), historian and college head, was born at 14 Rock Road, Trowbridge, Wiltshire, on 13 December 1914, the only child of Frank Allen Bullock (1887-1964) and his wife, Edith Annie, 'nee' Brand ('b'. 1888). Frank Bullock had left school at the age of thirteen having been schooled in the three Rs (reading, writing and arithmetic) but little else, and then trained as a gardener. He was an insatiable reader and his powerful intellect embraced a wide range of history, philosophy, and religion. The names Louis and Charles given to his son were testimony to his regard for Robert Louis Stevenson and Charles Dickens. He taught himself and, forsaking his family's Baptist allegiance, passed the necessary examinations to become a minister in the Unitarian church and was appointed to Leigh in Lancashire. From there he moved to Bradford, becoming minister at Chapel Lane in 1926, where he remained until his death. He immediately secured a place for his son at Bradford grammar school. 
When he joined the school Alan Bullock quickly showed his inheritance of his father's intelligence. In 1933 he won a state scholarship and went to Wadham College, Oxford, to read 'literae humaniores' (Greats). It is scarcely surprising that from this time he was thought to be a Yorkshireman and in appropriate company would lapse into a Yorkshire brogue. His initial reaction to Oxford was so negative that he did not think it was a place where he could stay and he never lost his sympathy with young men and women who, on first joining the university, had the same feeling of being uprooted. Maurice Bowra, as dean, was no help, although later they enjoyed a close and fruitful relationship. He was inspired neither by philosophy nor by his tutor, but the study of history was already in his blood as he worked with H. T. Wade-Gery and the economic historian Reginald Lennard. He took first-class honours in Greats in 1936 and another first, in modern history, in 1938 and was elected to a Bryce research studentship. The next year he won a Harmsworth scholarship at Merton College. However, the Second World War intervened and he abandoned work for a doctorate on sixteenth-century Anglo-French diplomatic relations. 
In 1939 Bullock was recruited by Winston Churchill to join F. W. (Bill) Deakin in undertaking research for the 'History of the English Speaking Peoples'. Deakin had been elected to a history fellowship at Wadham in 1936 and this was the first of their collaborations. Off his usual track (for his interests were essentially European) Bullock prepared an outline for a 10,000-word study of the English in Australia and New Zealand. War intervened and the project was stillborn. But war was no deterrent in his personal life: on 1 June 1940, in the week of Dunkirk, he married Hilda Yates Handy (1915-2009), a secondary school teacher, daughter of Edwin Handy, stuff merchant and manufacturer. She was always known as Nibby and it was a happy lifelong union, which produced three sons and two daughters. 
Suffering from asthma, Bullock was declared unfit for military service and instead joined the European service of the BBC, as 'talks' editor. The budding historian thus became a journalist, an experience that was of seminal importance. He contributed to the reputation of the BBC for honest, factually accurate, and reliable reporting. Emigre statesmen from the countries occupied by Germany gravitated towards the BBC and became personal acquaintances. Broadcasting and journalism impose their own discipline which served well when he became a well-known and respected member of the Brains Trust team in the early post-war years. (Recognizing him, a lady on a bus expressed her pleasure: 'I like you so much better than all those clever people'.) 
In 1945 Bullock was elected to a tutorial fellowship in modern history at New College, Oxford. The static water tank was still in the front quad, food was still rationed, the harsh and long winter straitened the British economy, and Bullock conducted tutorials with snowflakes drifting through the leaded windows. Nevertheless these were halcyon days. Bullock's colleagues in the senior common room included Isaiah Berlin, Herbert Hart, E. H. Phelps Brown, and James Joll -- but only one science fellow, Kenneth Staveley, fellow in chemistry. There was an unprecedented (and unrepeatable) camaraderie among men, dons and students alike, who had returned from the war, which made possible a broad interpretation of the stern regulations, unchanged since pre-war days. In this environment Bullock, when appointed dean, discharged his office with unusual creativity. 
The external environment was threatening as the cold war intensified. In June 1950 North Korea invaded South Korea, creating a crisis unsurpassed until the Cuban missile crisis of 1962. Believing that, however threatening the environment, it is better to understand than to hide from it, Bullock brought together a group of senior and junior members into an ephemeral Oxford Radical Association. Together they produced a pamphlet entitled 'Britain and the Cold War' (1952). It described the United States as the best dominant power since Rome and counselled against the rearmament of Germany. 
More important for his own future was that Odhams press invited Bullock to write a biography of Adolf Hitler. From this emerged the outstanding 'Hitler: a Study in Tyranny' (1952). Written by a man who had spent the war broadcasting to Germany and the countries it occupied, and published seven years after that war ended, it was a masterpiece of detached scholarship. The thrust of his historical study was established. He later paid tribute to those who wrote economic and social history -- 'history from below' that gave historical explanation in terms of impersonal factors such as demography, technology, or industrialization. But in war, revolution, and other violent upheavals it is possible for an individual to exert a powerful and even decisive influence on the way events develop; this was the subject of history as Bullock studied and interpreted it. His biography of Hitler provided the dominant interpretation of the Third Reich and its leader for a generation. Although subsequent historical research has altered the understanding of Hitler's 'tyranny', emphasizing the Fuhrer's abstraction from day-to-day events, his dependence on propaganda rather than physical control of the German people, and the general weakness of the Nazi regime, the book nevertheless encapsulated and shaped the post-war understanding of recent German history and the course of the Second World War. 

'Hitler' was also a milestone in Bullock's career. Because of the unique circumstance of the availability of documents from the Nuremberg trials it was a work of contemporary history based on primary sources. Bullock's credentials as a historian were thus firmly established -- a fact of great importance as he called on other historians to participate in major works of modern and contemporary history that his fertile mind conceived. 
As work on the book was finishing Bullock applied for a new post -- the headship of St Catherine's Society, Oxford, curiously named 'censor'. The society, which had been constituted in 1931, had its origins in the establishment in 1868 of a non-collegiate and non-residential scheme to provide access to the university for poor young men who could not afford the costs of the established colleges. By the mid-twentieth century the society was responsible for as many students as a small college, but the university in 1951 rejected the alternatives of disbanding the society or changing it into a college, and decided to advertise for a successor to the retiring censor, V. J. K. (Victor) Brook. Bullock entered the competition. It was not an obvious career move. But he reasoned that, as a contemporary historian, he would not be appointed to a chair at Oxford. He was restless and perhaps looked for his own show as his father had his own chapel. He was elected on 16 February 1952 and received the news with some trepidation. His appointment dated from the following October. There was at this time no expectation (unless it was in the recesses of Bullock's mind) that the society would be transformed into a college. 
The first steps forward were quickly taken. The governing body of St Catherine's Society appointed by the university -- the delegates for non-collegiate students -- approved an increase in the number of stipendiary tutors (of whom there were at that time only three). They were given office space in newly acquired accommodation; the high table was enhanced, and an entrance examination for undergraduate admission established. But within three years it became clear that the non-residential society would never provide its members with the 'parity of esteem' (Bullock's phrase) nor the material and spiritual reassurance of a college. It would never therefore attract the most talented schoolboys, and in any case was an anachronism, given the financial support from government funds automatically available to students. With the encouragement of the vice-chancellor, Bullock therefore submitted proposals to the council of the university for the creation of a new undergraduate college. 
The foundation of a new college in the University of Oxford required goodwill, land, buildings, money to build, and an endowment. The fundamentals were favourable. Both industry and the government saw the need to educate more scientists. None the less goodwill was crucial since the project was a university venture, governed by university committees and the university council. It was also indispensable if funds were to be raised. Bullock's personal qualities were therefore of prime importance. He was a skilled diplomatist whose integrity and academic excellence could not be challenged. (Never was there greater self-deprecation than in his phrase 'Bullock by name, Bullock by nature'.) He readily presented different aspects of the new proposal to suit his audience, but the core was constant. This was especially true of the importance he attached to the sciences and his proposal to give them parity with the arts in the new college. The facts of the paucity of scientists at Oxford (as he had experienced at New College) were compelling. Bullock had inherited his father's wide-ranging intellectual curiosity, and he gave short shrift to those who thought that science dons would not make 'good college men'. His pleasure in walking with his wife had enabled him to identify a possible site, which was purchased from Merton College. Skilled negotiation (and Merton's generosity) made it possible to meet the sale price with the money provided by the University Grants Committee. 
The choice of architect was of central importance. It was made, necessarily, by the university, which appointed a committee of four, one of them Bullock. The appointment of Arne Jacobsen ultimately resulted in the construction of one of only four buildings built in the 1960s to be listed grade one by English Heritage. It was also of personal significance for Bullock. He and Jacobsen, of similar age, formed a close bond of friendship and mutual respect. Jacobsen had much experience in negotiating a path through government bodies in Denmark, and understood financial limitations; some ingenuity in his design made it possible to build within the maxima set by the University Grants Committee. But Jacobsen was no more ready to sacrifice architectural quality than Bullock was to lower academic standards. Jacobsen also played a large part in enhancing Bullock's appreciation of design and the visual arts, adding to his already deep sensitivity to music and opera (especially the works of Mozart and Wagner). 
Meanwhile Bullock's energies were devoted to the systematic task of attracting funds to build and endow the new college. In this the support of eminent men in industry and banking was indispensable; their support would not have been forthcoming had they not recognized that Bullock's personal qualities justified it. Outstanding in this regard were Sir Alan Wilson and Sir Hugh Beaver. Both were able to urge leaders of industry to support Bullock's efforts and both provided detailed guidance as to who to approach, and how. Their advice was buttressed by that of Sir John Thomson, lord lieutenant of Oxfordshire and chairman of Barclays Bank. But the unremitting hard work, the application to detail, and what was later called 'the ask' fell, properly, to the head of the college that was being created. St Catherine's College matriculated its first students in Michaelmas 1962, and all the students of the society became members of the college. The ethos and the identity of the college grew under Bullock's leadership. 
Meanwhile Bullock was invited by Odhams to write a new biography -- that of Ernest Bevin. As a subject it was not an obvious successor to Hitler but it was one for which he had great sympathy, which only grew with the writing. The first volume, on Bevin as a trade-union leader, was published in 1960, and the second, covering the war years when Bevin was minister of labour, in 1967. The third, 'Foreign Secretary, 1945-1951', waited for the opening of the British archives and appeared in 1983. 
With abundant energy Bullock combined college, university, and public life. In 1969 he became the first vice-chancellor of Oxford University to be elected to the office, full-time, for four years. It was a successful period of reform in university government, but Bullock's ambition to initiate university fund-raising was undermined by student disturbances that soured the political environment. He was chairman of the National Advisory Council on the Training and Supply of Teachers (1963-5) and of the Schools Council (1966-9). He received a knighthood in 1972 and was invited by Margaret Thatcher, the education secretary, to head a committee of inquiry into the teaching of English. The committee's report, 'A Language for Life', was published in 1975. It was not followed by legislation but remained a seminal document. In the same year Bullock was invited to head a committee of inquiry into industrial democracy. The differences between the employers and the trade-union members of the committee strained not only his skill as chairman but his robust health. The majority report (1977), which recommended worker (that is trade union) participation on company boards, was still-born and the trio of employers on the committee signed a minority report. 
In December 1971 Bullock was elected a trustee of the Aspen Institute and then made a scholar in residence. It gave a new dimension to his life, providing (in the company of his wife) a wide scope for imagination and intellectual exploration. It was appropriate that, with Aspen's president Joe Slater, he should set up Aspen Berlin in 1974. 
Bullock had clear, but not ideological, political opinions. He was recruited to 'The Observer' in 1957, in agreement with its opposition to the Suez expedition. (He remained a member of the Observer Trust until 1969 and was a director from 1977 to 1981.) He was a member of the Labour Party until the party adopted a strong left-wing position, committed to withdrawal from the EEC and unilateral disarmament. He then encouraged the split in the party in 1981 that led to the creation of the Social Democratic Party, of which he was a founder member. He was awarded a life peerage in 1976, becoming Baron Bullock, of Leafield, but was never an active member of the House of Lords. 
Much as Bullock enjoyed the exhilaration and the theatre of lecturing (as his father had enjoyed preaching) he was not attracted by political rhetoric. Democracy, he believed, worked in committees, and his consummate skill as a chairman was enhanced by his enjoyment of the task. He was a creative chairman, taking pleasure in drawing out a consensus among committee members and, with his own vision, in pointing a way forward. He was chairman of the research committee of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (1954-78), chairman of the Friends of the Ashmolean Museum, and also of the trustees of the Tate Gallery (1973-80). He was a member of the Arts Council of Great Britain (1961-4), of the Advisory Council on Public Records (1965-77), and the organizing committee of the British Library (1971-2), and was a trustee of the Wolfson Foundation. 
Bullock was creative, too, as an organizing editor, starting with a four-volume collection, 'British Political Tradition', and four slim volumes on English history, written for use in secondary modern schools. He persuaded the university that it should write its own history; the eight volumes of 'The History of the University of Oxford' were published between 1984 and 2000. Working at first with F. W. Deakin he created the 'Oxford History of Europe', showing skill and discernment in the choice of authors. He conceived, and co-wrote, the 'Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought' (1977) and its sequel, the 'Fontana Biographical Companion to Modern Thought' (1983). Whether as editor or author he continued to publish -- and he liked pictures. 'Term in Oxford' with Cas Oorthuys appeared in 1963, 'The Twentieth Century' was published in 1971, 'The Faces of Europe' in 1980. He wrote (the idea had been conceived at Aspen) 'The Humanist Tradition in the West', published in 1985 with 148 illustrations. 
Bullock retired from the mastership of St Catherine's in 1980. Two major works occupied the later part of his life. In 1991 he published 'Hitler and Stalin, Parallel Lives', a study of two leaders, each of whom, as Bullock showed, believed himself called on to play a great historic role, had the psychological drive to do so, and so shaped the twentieth century. The authoritative account of Stalin was (for Bullock) a new departure; the portrayal of Hitler gave an importance to ideology, and the holocaust as part of it, which had not been present in 'Hitler'. In 2000 he published 'Building Jerusalem: a Portrait of My Father'. It was more than a work of filial piety as he brought to life the mass of lectures and sermons that Frank Bullock had left. It was also a historian's account of a distinctive social environment in which men (and women) met and spontaneously engaged in intellectual discussion and enquiry, Frank Bullock taking the lead in always questioning orthodoxy. 
Bullock was elected to a fellowship of the British Academy in 1967 and was made a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1970. An honorary fellow of seven Oxford colleges, he was awarded honorary degrees by ten universities. He died at the Guidepost Nursing Home, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, on 2 February 2004. His funeral service was held at Harris Manchester College, Oxford, and his body was cremated on 11 February at Oxford crematorium. He was survived by his wife and three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 94832


Mackenzie, Colin (1697/8-1775), physician and man-midwife, was probably born at Muirton, Ross-shire, the second son of Kenneth Alexander Mackenzie of Muirton and his wife, Mary Mackenzie, daughter of Charles Mackenzie of Cullen; his parents were second cousins. His paternal grandfather, Colin Mackenzie of Muirton (died 1724), was a writer to the signet in Edinburgh. The Mackenzies of Muirton were cadets of the Mackenzies of Kintail, who were headed by the earl of Seaforth. Details of his early education are unknown. The first record of Mackenzie is his attendance, as Calenus Makenje, Scotus (Morris, 769) at the medical courses of Herman Boerhaave at the University of Leiden, which commenced on 10 November 1722; Mackenzie's stated age at that time was twenty-four. The second reference to him is his name on the class lists of Alexander Monro primus in Edinburgh in 1740 and 1742. William Wadd's suggestion that Mackenzie served in the British navy about this time cannot be confirmed from naval records. Despite the involvement of his Mackenzie kinsman George Mackenzie, third earl of Cromarty, in the Jacobite rising of 1745, there is no evidence to suggest that Mackenzie was anything other than loyal to the Hanoverian succession. He came to London and became part of the group of Scottish medical practitioners who exploited the lucrative opportunity of developing the speciality of obstetrics that had been left aside by English physicians. 
The first comment on Mackenzie's accomplishments as an obstetrician is the citing of him in the third volume of William Smellie's 'Treatise on Midwifery' (1764). Mackenzie is cited in collection 35, case 8 (case 387 in McClintock's 1878 edition), where he is described as Smellie's senior pupil. There is no detail on how Mackenzie became so skilled in obstetrics that he was employed in such a significant position. A rift between Smellie and Mackenzie is said to have arisen in May 1754 because Mackenzie dissected, without Smellie's knowledge, the body of a woman who had died undelivered in the last stages of pregnancy. This dissection was performed at Mackenzie's address in St Saviour's Churchyard, Southwark, after he had injected the veins and arteries with different coloured wax. In the first part of the dissection Mackenzie identified for the first time the precise relationship between the maternal and foetal blood supplies. He asked his friend John Hunter to assist in the second part of the dissection to confirm his findings. Hunter, realizing that this was significant new obstetric knowledge, brought his brother William to observe the findings of the dissection. William Hunter later assumed the credit for this discovery, although a pupil of Mackenzie, William Shippen, wrote an Edinburgh MD thesis in 1761 on this subject, extensively quoting Mackenzie's findings. Mackenzie was not publicly credited with this discovery until January 1780 when John Hunter wrote a letter to the Royal Society stating the exact details of Mackenzie's part in the dissection. Hunter said that he had intended to publish the details earlier and had discussed the possibility with George Fordyce. John Hunter's letter, which was not published by the Royal Society, drew a vehement response from his brother William and was said to have been the cause of the irresolvable rift between the Hunter brothers. 
From 1754 onwards Mackenzie began to teach obstetrics from his address in St Saviour's Churchyard, and he also maintained a private lying-in establishment in Crucifix Lane, Southwark. Both addresses were close to the hospitals of St Thomas's and Guy's. He advertised his midwifery courses continuously until his death in 1775. On 6 April 1759 Mackenzie was granted the degree of MD by the University of St Andrews on testimonials by John Rutherford and John Alves. On 19 April 1765 Mackenzie was one of eight medical practitioners summoned to appear at the next meeting of the censor board of the Royal College of Physicians accused of practising physic. Of the eight practitioners so summoned only Mackenzie and John Harvie, Smellie's successor, were excused on the grounds that they confined themselves entirely to the practice of midwifery. Mackenzie never sought either a licentiate or a fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians, nor did he hold an institutional appointment. 
Four sets of Mackenzie's midwifery lecture notes survive. These reveal that he developed a comprehensive syllabus, with extensive use of the 'phantom' or 'machine' to demonstrate the use of forceps and praeternatural deliveries. The midwifery archives of William Hey of Leeds, a pupil from January to April 1759, reveal that Mackenzie redesigned a set of forceps, which was in general use by his pupils. His 'touching lectures', an early form of antenatal care, were taught together with the recognition of natural gestational disturbances and evaluations on the midwifery publications of the period. Other obstetric pupils of Mackenzie included the American William Shippen, who took Mackenzie's courses from August to October 1759, and on Shippen's recommendation Thomas Parke, who attended Mackenzie's courses in 1771. William Perfect, another pupil, continued to correspond on obstetric complications with Mackenzie after he completed his course, and published Mackenzie's replies. 
Mackenzie was invited to observe several Caesarean operations and subsequent dissections by other leading medical practitioners. His own eminence was recognized in the published accounts of these operations. Wadd described Mackenzie's personal life as generous and hospitable. He remained close friends with John Hunter and appears to have had an uncontroversial nature that endeared him to colleagues and pupils alike. His death on 31 January 1775 at his premises in St Saviour's Churchyard, Southwark, seemed unexpected because his courses of lectures were still being advertised when he died. His brother Alexander Mackenzie of Muirton obtained letters of administration and inherited his estate of $12,000. David Orme purchased Mackenzie's collection of obstetric specimens, teaching equipment, and books for 1000 guineas and is known to have taught at St Saviour's Churchyard after Mackenzie's death. Mackenzie's teaching had spanned the period between the era of Smellie and that of Thomas Denman. During these two decades Mackenzie had little competition from other teachers outside the hospitals. He had no publications, and no archives or likenesses survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 94837


Callaghan, Leonard James, Baron Callaghan of Cardiff (1912-2005), prime minister, was born at 38 Funtington Road, Copnor, Portsmouth, on 27 March 1912, the only son and younger child of James Callaghan, formerly Garoghan (1877-1921), a sailor who rose to the rank of chief petty officer in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Charlotte Gertrude, widow of Daniel Speare, seaman, and daughter of William Henry Cundy, naval shipwright, of Tavistock, Devon. His sister, Dorothy, was born in 1904. 
Petty Officer James Callaghan was of Irish descent (his grandfather had left Ireland at the time of the potato famine). He had changed his name from Garoghan, without recourse to deed polls, when he joined the fleet. He was by birth and upbringing a Roman Catholic. But when he met and fell in love with Charlotte Speare, a Baptist, he left the church after being refused permission to marry her and became a member of a Baptist chapel. His decision was to prove crucial to the life of his son. Although there is much doubt about how much belief Callaghan retained into adult life, the nonconformist ethic was a profound influence on all of his public and private life. By telling his son stories of ships and the sea Callaghan's father also encouraged in the young boy a romantic attachment to all things naval that, although uncharacteristic of his essentially down-to-earth character, remained with him for all his life. 
After the First World War Callaghan's father left the Royal Navy and became a coastguard at Brixham (where Callaghan attended Furzeham School). Three years later, at the early age of forty-four, he died suddenly of a heart attack. Callaghan was nine. From then on his mother was the dominant influence in his life. But his attachment to his father's memory never faded. In 1975 he had decided that his duties as foreign secretary -- particularly the renegotiation of the United Kingdom's membership of the European Community -- would make it impossible for him to accompany the queen on a visit which took the royal yacht down the Kiel Canal. It was not a decision that he took lightly or with any great pleasure, for he was an ardent admirer of the queen. However, on the day before 'HMS Britannia' was due to set sail he sent for his minister of state -- the reluctant substitute -- and said that he had changed his mind. Affairs of state would have to wait. He had discovered that on the only previous occasion when the royal yacht had sailed that way his father had been on board. Callaghan was determined to make a devotional repetition of the journey. 
After her husband's unexpected death, and the consequent loss of the coastguard's house in Brixham, Charlotte Callaghan returned with her children to Portsmouth, where they lived in a variety of rented properties and varying degrees of poverty. Leonard, as he was then called, attended Portsmouth northern secondary school -- and found it generally unsatisfactory. One of the landladies, of whom the Callaghans were subtenants, encouraged them to rejoice at the election of Ramsay MacDonald's Labour Government in 1924. The family's allegiance was cemented by the award, after a long battle, of a naval widow's pension -- 16's'. a week with an additional 10's'. for her son. 
Callaghan borrowed books from the Carnegie Library in Portsmouth, but the real influence on his adolescence was the Baptist church. At the age of fourteen, a year before his formal baptism, he became a Sunday school teacher. A year later he took the Oxford senior certificate. He passed with second-class honours. This qualified him for employment by the Inland Revenue. At the age of seventeen he became a clerk in the Maidstone office on a salary of one pound a week plus cost of living allowances. The Portsmouth Baptists made sure that their Kent co-religionists found him comfortable, and respectable, lodgings. 
In 1934, four years after he joined the Inland Revenue, Callaghan became a trade unionist. His membership of the Association of the Officers of Taxes was, initially, prompted more by the attraction of the correspondence courses they offered than by a feeling of class solidarity or the hope of becoming part of an irresistible movement for improved wages and conditions. Nevertheless he became impatient with what he regarded as the incompetence of the local branch and the inefficiency of the national organization and successfully contested the election for branch secretary, defeating the long-serving incumbent. He was regarded, for the first and perhaps only time in his life, as a young revolutionary -- particularly by Douglas Houghton, the effective head of the union (who was later to serve as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster in the 1964 Labour government). Promoted to the London office, he became an official of the union's City East branch and was reconciled with Houghton, who recognized that the man who became his protege was ambitious not anarchic. 
Perhaps Callaghan had been tamed by a seismic change in his personal life. At the Maidstone Baptist church he met Audrey Elizabeth Moulton (1913-2005), then only sixteen but, like Callaghan, a Sunday school teacher. It was something approaching love at first sight, and it lasted for a lifetime. Callaghan's feelings were illustrated by an uncharacteristic willingness to embrace energetic physical activity. He joined the local tennis club, though he did not excel. The relationship was cemented by his almost instant acceptance by the Moulton family. Frank Moulton, Audrey's father, was the managing director of a Maidstone machine-tool company and deacon of the Baptist church. On Callaghan's promotion to the London office he was neither surprised by, nor opposed to, his daughter following. Audrey Moulton registered at the Battersea College of Domestic Science. She qualified as a teacher and began work in a school in Eltham. Many of her evenings were spent -- in a combination of conviction and companionship -- at Fabian Society meetings. She and Callaghan married on 28 July 1938 at the Baptist chapel in Maidstone, with Audrey's parents as witnesses. They had two daughters, Margaret ('b'. 1939), later Baroness Jay of Paddington, and Julia ('b'. 1942), and a son, Michael ('b'. 1945). 
In August 1936 Callaghan had stood for election as full-time assistant general secretary of the union. He won against a selection of more experienced candidates, and also Cyril Plant, who became both president of the union and chairman of the Trades Union Congress (and was an invaluable ally of his old opponent during the Labour government's fractious negotiations with the unions in the turbulent 1970s). Callaghan's salary was spectacularly improved. The basic pound a week of his apprenticeship had increased to $2 16's'. a week with an allowance of $30 a year. Both Callaghan and the union prospered. The assistant general secretary, happy in suburban Norwood, began to meet the great names of the trade union and labour movement and always treated them -- as throughout his life he treated everyone -- with a mixture of courtesy, genuine interest, and cautious suspicion. Later in 1936 the association joined with the National Association of Assessors and Collectors of Taxes and the Valuation Office Clerical Association to form the Inland Revenue Staff Federation -- a union of which Callaghan initially aspired one day to become general secretary. But by 1940 his ambition had grown and, much to Douglas Houghton's distress, he applied first to be general secretary of the Ministry of Labour Staff Association then general secretary of the Federation of Post Office Supervising Officers. Neither application was successful. 
Technically a civil servant, Callaghan was in a 'reserved occupation' following the outbreak of the Second World War. But in June 1940 -- perhaps the low point of the allies' fortunes, for the war in France had just ended with the evacuation of Dunkirk -- he applied to join the Royal Navy and was told he could enlist as an ordinary seaman. His release from the Inland Revenue Staff Association required Douglas Houghton's approval. It was not given until the autumn of 1942, so Callaghan did not get to sea until the summer of 1943. In April 1944 he was promoted sub-lieutenant and was about to see active service when he was diagnosed as suffering from a mild form of tuberculosis. After his discharge from hospital he was employed writing a manual on Japan, its people and customs, in preparation for victory in the Far East. But, eventually, he saw action of a sort. On VE-day he was on board 'HMS Queen Elizabeth' on its way to cover the allies' landing at Rangoon. 
The months ashore, although regretted and resented, had in reality been a stroke of good fortune. At some point -- possibly before his naval service, for his latter-day detractors claimed that it was the reason why he volunteered -- Callaghan had decided to aim for a seat in parliament. Once again there were objections from the union and once again Callaghan dismissed them out of hand. Hopes in co. Durham, Birmingham, and Reading were not realized. But he was selected for Cardiff South -- beating, in the final ballot, George Thomas, who was later to become speaker of the House of Commons. According to Thomas's biography -- which Callaghan greeted with the comment 'Until I read it, I thought that we were friends' -- he introduced himself by saying 'My family call me Leonard, but for politics I'm going to use my second name James' (Thomas, 49). Whatever the truth of the story, James (or, more often, Jim) is what he became. 
Callaghan was a personable candidate, appearing at meetings in his naval uniform and then, as always, careful that his shoes were polished and his trousers creased. But his success in the selection process for Cardiff South, by a single vote, might well have been the result of his reputation as a 'genuine socialist' preceding him to Wales. At the Labour Party conference, in December 1944, Ian Mikardo (the successful aspirant to the Reading candidature) had moved a resolution that committed a future Labour government to the public ownership of the basic industries. Jim Callaghan had supported it with a call for a 'restatement of our fundamental principles' ('Report of the Labour Party Conference, 1944', 169). When the resolution was carried -- against the wishes of the leadership -- Herbert Morrison, deputy leader and once the philosopher of public ownership, told its supporters 'You've lost us the general election' (I. Mikardo, 'Back-bencher', 1988, 77). In fact Labour won 393 seats to the Conservatives' 213 in the election of July 1945. Callaghan defeated his tory opponent with a majority of 5944. 
Callaghan's maiden speech on 20 August 1945 dealt -- with an absence of party polemic appropriate to such occasions -- with the difficulty of establishing a stable government in defeated Japan. He received the usual formal congratulations and spent the next few weeks working, assiduously, on questions related to taxes, the subject he knew best, and Wales, the topic which he was expected to air. He was invited to join the XYZ Club -- a Labour group that was usually confined to professional economists. To less surprise at the time than the memory of the event caused thirty years later, he exhibited both his independence of mind and radical inclinations by voting (alongside more durable left-wingers) against the $3.75 billion American loan that John Maynard Keynes had negotiated with the American treasury. He was not called during the debate that endorsed the decision. But later that day, during a discussion on the civil war in China, he referred (gratuitously, his critics thought) to 'economic aggression by the United States' and declared that 'as a socialist' he demanded international control of industrial investment ('Hansard 5C', 417.750 13 Dec 1945). As a result of his rebellion he was forced to step down from the first rung of the promotion ladder. He had, briefly, been parliamentary private secretary to the under-secretary for the colonies. 
The trivial set-back did not dampen Callaghan's radical ardour. In October 1946 he was one of twenty-two back-benchers -- most of whom were involved in the Keep Left group -- who signed a letter calling for a more sympathetic attitude towards the Soviet Union and was open in his criticism of, perhaps even hostile towards, Ernest Bevin as foreign secretary. But he was increasingly regarded as a 'coming man'. Hugh Dalton, who usually only cultivated young Oxbridge 'intellectuals', added Callaghan to his proteges. And in October 1946 he was invited to join a parliamentary delegation to Russia. It was led by A. V. Alexander, the first lord of the Admiralty, who insisted that Sub-Lieutenant Callaghan, still not formally demobilized, should travel in his naval uniform. Although Callaghan continued to express reservations about some government policies he managed, with remarkable facility, to avoid being labelled as a pathological rebel. Nevertheless, when in October 1947 he joined the government as parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Transport it was not clear whether his promotion owed most to a recognition of his undoubted ability or the wish to stifle his criticism. 
Largely thanks to Dalton's patronage, in the summer of 1950 Callaghan was asked to act as deputy leader of the British delegation to the Council of Europe -- an unusual appointment for a serving minister. It was his first experience of the conflicting claims of national interest and European unity, and he gladly articulated the government's belief that no international institution should diminish the sovereign powers of national governments. It was a view that he was to hold until, in 1976, he attended a meeting of foreign ministers in Schloss Gymnich and became convinced that, in some particulars, co-operation was better than competition. 
The general election of 1950 (which, after boundary redistribution, Callaghan fought and won as candidate for Cardiff South-East) marked the effective end of what had been one of the great radical administrations of the twentieth century. In the reshuffle that followed Labour's victory Callaghan became parliamentary and financial secretary to the Admiralty -- not technically a promotion, but a clear sign of growing importance as the first lord, Viscount Hall, was in the upper house and his junior minister had, therefore, to answer for all naval matters in the Commons. 
After the Conservative victory in November 1951 Callaghan was ideally placed to represent a new generation of MPs in the Labour leadership. Only two MPs from the 1945 intake were elected to the post-election shadow cabinet. The parliamentary party shrewdly chose two future prime ministers: Jim Callaghan and Harold Wilson. Callaghan became spokesman on transport, often the graveyard of ambition, and then on fuel and power, but found more excitement (as well as important additions to his income) in journalism and broadcasting. His weekly column for the 'Women's Sunday Mirror' had the dated title of 'The intelligent women's guide to world affairs', and the 'Free speech' debates on BBC television often ended in a verbal brawl. But the young shadow minister was becoming known to the general public. Together with his appointment as parliamentary adviser to the Police Federation (on an annual retainer of $500 a year, with $300 expenses) his freelance employment removed all financial worries. His family was secure in their modern flat overlooking Blackheath. It was at this time that Audrey Callaghan began to play her own part in public life. It culminated -- after some years on the London county council -- in her becoming chairman of Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital. Her work there was so distinguished that Margaret Thatcher, when prime minister, wanted her to become a dame of the British empire. Audrey Callaghan declined with thanks. 
There is little doubt that Jim Callaghan agreed to advise the Police Federation (effectively the trade union of junior officers) for no better reason than that he wanted the money. But once on the pay roll he became emotionally committed to their cause. That was always his way. The trade unions, the Royal Navy, the police: once an association was established, his loyalty was unwavering, and his pride in the various partnerships was never hidden. As chancellor of the exchequer he described his economic policy 'in the old naval term, steady as she goes' ('The Times', 12 April 1967), and he told Rear-Admiral Morgan Giles MP, 'I have never slept in the captain's cabin, but I have slung my hammock on the quarterdeck'. His abiding, and obvious, affection for the police and the trade unions was to prove a source of both strength and pain. In his years in Downing Street he was more loyal to them than they were to him. 
After a brief period as spokesman on education (a subject that, over the years, he continually claimed to be his primary interest) Callaghan succeeded Aneurin Bevan as shadow colonial secretary in 1956. It was a period of colonial transition. Iain Macleod became colonial secretary in 1959 with a clear mandate to dissolve the empire -- a view that Alan Lennox-Boyd, his predecessor, had not shared. But the dissolution of empire proved barely less painful than its acquisition. The idea of federation, in the Caribbean and in Central Africa, although fashionable in Britain was unpopular in the colonies themselves. Callaghan was deputy leader of a parliamentary delegation to the Central African Federation that, in a unanimous report, predicted that the union of Nyasaland and the two Rhodesias would only succeed if the African population within them was given a stronger voice in the eventual government. The predictions proved depressingly correct and unrest turned into open revolt. After a state of emergency was declared and nationalist leaders arrested in 1959, Macleod asked Lord Monckton of Brenchley -- sometime adviser to Edward VIII, tory cabinet minister, and friend of Sir Stafford Cripps -- to chair a royal commission to inquire into the federation's future. Callaghan was asked to become a member, an appointment that required him to be a member of the privy council. Membership was offered him but, according to his autobiography and an account he gave to the cabinet during a discussion on the 'Lib-Lab pact', he replied that to accept the distinction from a Conservative prime minister would be like 'a Welsh rugby forward accepting an English cap' ('Time and Chance', 142). In fact he disagreed with the commission's terms of referral. It should, in his opinion, have been empowered to consider the desirability of any one of the constituent states seceding from the federation. 
In 1960 -- Harold Macmillan's 'never had it so good' election having secured the third consecutive Conservative victory a year before -- Aneurin Bevan died, leaving vacant the post of shadow foreign secretary. Harold Wilson was chosen to succeed him and Callaghan became the shadow chancellor. After fifteen years in the House of Commons he had become an indisputable member of the Labour leadership. Three years later that status was confirmed when in February 1963, after Hugh Gaitskell's death, he stood for election as leader of the Labour Party. It is impossible to believe that he ever thought that he could win -- an assumption supported by the brevity with which the subject was dealt in his autobiography. It is far more likely that he was establishing his credentials as one of Labour's 'big three'. He came bottom of the poll with just forty-one votes and, like many candidates in subsequent Labour leadership contests, boasted about the quality rather than the size of his support. He was particularly flattered by the endorsement of Tony Crosland, a man of vastly different background and temperament. It was Crosland, not Roy Jenkins, he chose to make foreign secretary in 1976. 
Reginald Maudling -- shadowed as chancellor of the exchequer by Callaghan for two years before the 1964 election -- believed that the solution to Britain's economic malaise was expansion at all costs. The result was increased pressure on the already precarious pound. When Labour won the election with an overall majority of four seats Callaghan was required to wrestle with a sterling crisis that was likely to be exacerbated by the arrival of a government in which international creditors did not repose immediate confidence. Maudling, packing to leave the chancellor's residence in Downing Street, passed on the torch to his successor with an apology: 'Sorry old cock to leave it in this shape. I suggested to Alec [Douglas-Home] this morning that perhaps we should put the bank rate up but he thought it best to leave it to you' ('Time and Chance', 162). Callaghan was about to make the first of the two great mistakes which removed at least a little of the shine from an otherwise glittering career. 
On the day that Callaghan became chancellor Harold Wilson, the new prime minister, called a meeting in Downing Street to discuss the outline of government economic policy. Only two other ministers were present, Callaghan and George Brown, the first secretary of state for economic affairs, and head of the new department that was supposed, when pitted against the Treasury, to provide the energy that comes from 'creative tension'. In the months that lay ahead the tension was more apparent than the creativity. But at that first meeting of the Labour government the two ministers -- and the four senior officials who accompanied them -- were unanimous in support of the wrong decision. It was agreed that the pound should not be devalued, virtually without discussion and completely without thought of consulting cabinet colleagues. 
It was later often argued that Callaghan -- despite taking a course in economics while a visiting fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford -- lacked the intellectual self-confidence to argue against the decision not to devalue. In fact the decision was based more on patriotism and politics than economics. Wilson, Callaghan, and Brown took an old-fashioned pride in the integrity of sterling. Devaluation was, to them, capitulation. It was also a betrayal. Two years later, during his visit to see President Lyndon Johnson in Washington, Callaghan asked a young back-bencher -- who had impatiently argued for devaluation back in 1964 -- if he realized that the pound was a reserved currency and that to have reduced its value would have been to rob the developing nations of the Commonwealth that held sterling balances in the Bank of England. There was also the government's reputation to consider. To economists devaluation was no more than an economic adjustment. To the general public it was both a humiliation and proof that Britain was a step nearer to bankruptcy. Ramsay MacDonald (admittedly after he formed the National Government) and Clem Attlee had both presided over a devaluation. Wilson and his ministers did not want it to seem a Labour habit. 
Callaghan's first budget had therefore to respond to the nation's traditional weakness with traditional methods. The reduction in international confidence and the inevitable run on sterling that followed was to be combated with spending cuts of approaching $240 million -- though the increases in pensions, national assistance, and national insurance benefits (promised in the budget) were honoured. The standard rates of income tax and petrol duty were increased by 6died and a new capital gains tax and corporation tax were introduced. The hope that the bank rate would not have to be raised was confounded within days. On 23 November 1964 it was increased by two points to 7 per cent. 
The balance of payments deficit was tackled by an 'import surcharge', a temporary financial imposition which was intended to make foreign purchases more expensive and therefore less attractive. The European Free Trade Area, of which Britain had retained its membership after President de Gaulle vetoed the application to join the Common Market, claimed that the scheme was an infringement of Britain's treaty obligations. The foreign secretary, at an EFTA summit meeting, had to agree to limiting the life of a policy that was clearly an inhibition on free trade. But the crisis, which could not be avoided, had been postponed. An electioneering budget on St David's day 1966, which included the promise of a decimalized currency, was followed by a general election on the last day of March, which Labour won with an overall majority of ninety-six seats. The chancellor of the exchequer's stock was high. In the autumn of 1967 he was elected treasurer of the Labour Party with an automatic seat on the national executive. It was an eminence which could not last -- though for a time public attention was diverted from the economy by the rebellion in Rhodesia and the attempts by George Brown (transferred from the Department of Economic Affairs to the Foreign Office) to prepare the way for another British application to join the Common Market. 
A forced devaluation was only a matter of time. It came on 18 November 1967, the day that the trade figures for October were released showing a monthly deficit of $107 million, the largest on record. What doubts there might have been about taking that drastic decision were removed on 16 November when Robert Sheldon (a Labour back-bencher and accountant) asked, during questions to the chancellor of the exchequer, if Callaghan would confirm that a $1000 million loan had been negotiated with foreign banks. The question was followed by supplementary questions about the prospects of devaluation. Despite Callaghan's impassive procrastination $1500 million was lost in twenty-four hours in an attempt to prop up sterling. The chancellor's performance got very near to deceiving the House of Commons. Everyone agreed that deception had been justified. Callaghan made a statement to the House of Commons that spoke of both his 'great personal regret' and the prospects of 'a lasting and substantial improvement in the balance of payments'. Iain Macleod, the shadow chancellor, accused the chancellor of having 'broken faith' and 'devalued his word'. He ended his philippic with the dubious compliment that, since Callaghan was 'an honourable man, he should resign' ('Hansard 5C', 754.939, 20 Nov 1967). 
After defending his decision in the House of Commons debate, Callaghan told the prime minister that he must return to the back benches. Wilson urged him to stay. Callaghan agreed and asked to become secretary of state for education and science. That, the prime minister said, was too junior a portfolio. A move there would look like punitive demotion. The best -- and easiest -- solution would be a straight swap with Roy Jenkins at the Home Office. Callaghan took up the new post on 30 November. The new department was to prove his passport to the triumphs that were to follow. 
Callaghan's period as home secretary began badly. On 20 February 1968, following a number of suspicious deaths in Fulham and Acton, he informed the House of Commons that 'the murderers' had been arrested -- and refused, absolutely, to apologize for stigmatizing the men while they were still only suspects. But he dealt with the anti-Vietnam war protests outside the American embassy in Grosvenor Square with a mixture of strength and sensibility that the public applauded. He received -- generally unfairly -- much criticism for the introduction of the 1968 'Commonwealth Immigrants Bill'. He began the press conference at which the bill was unveiled with the announcement -- brazen in the opinion of many of his critics -- that the proposed legislation was the work of Jenkins, his predecessor at the Home Office. The disclaimer was an indication of his acceptance that succeeding the conspicuously 'liberal' Jenkins would be a difficult task. But it was also a tacit admission that the bill was a moral embarrassment to a government that prided itself on taking a stand against racism. When Kenya and Uganda had been granted independence the British government of the day had made an explicit promise to the Asian minorities within those countries that if the process of 'Africanization' drove them out of east Africa, they could always find a home in Britain. The 'Commonwealth Immigrants Bill' legalized the breaking of that promise. But there were other initiatives that illustrated Callaghan's own libertarian instincts. Rudi Dutschke, a German radical, was, despite a tabloid outcry, allowed into Britain to study for a research degree at Cambridge. And Callaghan expressed strong and public opposition to all-white South African sports teams touring Britain. A more truly characteristic initiative was 'Children in Trouble', a white paper of May 1968, which prepared the way for the 'Children and Young Persons Act' 1969, which provided a more humane system of detention for young offenders. There was a moment of deep embarrassment before the general election of 1970 when, as home secretary, Callaghan performed his statutory duty of presenting the boundary commission's report to the House of Commons but then -- knowing that the redistribution of seats disadvantaged the Labour Party -- recommended that his honourable friends vote against it. 
If Callaghan performed the domestic duties of the office of home secretary with mixed success and acclaim the task of supervising the governance of Northern Ireland, then one of the home secretary's responsibilities, was discharged with undisputed brilliance. The late 1960s marked the beginning of new Irish 'troubles'. Callaghan proved the ideal man to deal with them. His period as effective viceroy, lord lieutenant, and chief secretary lasted for less than a year. It began with mass riots in Belfast on 2 August 1969 and ended with Labour's general election defeat on 18 June 1970. Throughout August 1969 the situation -- bad at the beginning of the month -- deteriorated. Peace had barely been restored in Belfast when the Apprentice Boys' march in Londonderry provoked an outbreak of even greater violence than that which had scarred the provincial capital. Then it was Belfast again. Nationalists, reinforced by members of the Irish Republican Army, fought with police and B special paramilitaries, who made no secret of their support for continued protestant domination of the Northern Ireland government. On 14 and 15 August two hundred houses were burned down in Belfast's predominantly Catholic Falls Road area. Seven people, including a nine-year-old boy, were killed. In the Short Strand area of the city a massacre of Catholics was only averted by the intervention of republican gunmen. 
On 7 August the Londonderry police had made an official request for 'the military to come to the aid of the civil power'. The Ministry of Defence, conscious of the implications of taking such a step, recommended the home secretary to tell the chief constable that the time had not yet come to put soldiers on the streets of a city in the United Kingdom. Wilson supported that view with the comment, 'Once the troops go in, they could be there for weeks' (personal knowledge). But on 14 August the line could be held no longer. Reinforced by a plea from Bernadette Devlin -- later a republican MP -- the home secretary accepted that British soldiers were needed to prevent Irish deaths. The Prince of Wales's Own Yorkshire regiment entered Londonderry and imposed something approaching martial law. Callaghan realized that nothing in Northern Ireland could ever be the same again and that if the situation was to improve rather than deteriorate a political, rather than a military, solution would have to be found. 
The solution -- only partial, but clearly a great leap forward -- had to be imposed on the protestant majority on behalf of Catholic communities that had suffered a whole range of gross injustices. The RUC was disarmed and the B specials disbanded and replaced by the Ulster Defence Regiment, operating under strict military discipline. The Whitehall government provided money for slum clearance and house building, on the strict understanding that the allocation of the new tenancies should be even-handed between Catholics and protestants. But Callaghan's greatest contribution to the fragile peace was the atmosphere of calm that his persona exuded and the promise of a fairer society that he bravely made. His year in charge of the troubled province is best remembered by the photograph taken on his second visit, in October 1969, in which an obviously adoring crowd listened to him speak from the bedroom window of a terraced house. Asked, years later, what he remembered about the moment of triumph Callaghan said that all he could recall was that his special branch escorting officer lost a shoe in the crush -- and charged for a new pair on his expenses. 
Callaghan's year of Ireland was not all triumph, however. Barbara Castle, first secretary of state and secretary of state for employment and productivity, had never been one of his favourite politicians and in the dying days of 1968 she had compounded all the other causes of his criticism by circulating the draft of a white paper that proposed that the conduct of trade unions should be regulated by an industrial relations act. (A royal commission, under the chairmanship of Lord Donovan, had come to quite the opposite conclusion, but the ever active Mrs Castle wanted direct government intervention.) Her proposals -- paradoxically set out in a command paper entitled 'In Place of Strife' (1969) -- were anathema to the TUC. Negotiations between employers and employees had always been carried on by the process of 'free collective bargaining' and in 1969 there were many influential figures in the Labour movement who could not imagine why that should change. Callaghan, still loyal to his trade union roots, was among them. 
In his autobiography Callaghan insisted that he had always believed that industrial reform was necessary but had no doubt that the best way to bring it about was for the trade unions to make the changes themselves. Indeed, before the royal commission reported he told the Fire Brigades Union that the TUC should anticipate its recommendation with reform proposals of its own. He should have known, and perhaps did know, that there was no chance of the unions accepting his advice. He nevertheless argued against Castle's proposals in cabinet and organized against them in the Parliamentary Labour Party and in the party in the country. Ministers -- before and since -- have been known to do the same. But Callaghan took his rebellion a step further. On 26 March 1969, at the meeting of Labour's national executive, he voted in favour of a resolution that condemned government policy. Not surprisingly his cabinet colleagues (at least those who supported 'In Place of Strife') regarded his conduct as unforgivable. Dick Crossman, secretary of state for health and social security and a Castle ally, shouted that he should resign. Wilson removed Callaghan from the management committee -- known colloquially as the inner cabinet -- and made his demotion public. 
Callaghan was not deflected from his purpose. In any event it was too late for him to recover his colleagues' esteem by recanting his strongly held views. And he had little doubt that feeling was running too strongly in his favour to leave him, at the end of the argument, on the losing side. The climax of the drama came at a meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party with Douglas Houghton, Callaghan's old trade union boss, in the chair. That afternoon, speaking at a trade union conference, Callaghan had reiterated his opposition to the statutory control of collective bargaining. Houghton began the meeting with a resounding declaration that the party 'simply would not accept' the proposed legislation. His proclamation was greeted with thunderous applause. Barbara Castle's parliamentary secretary hurried to her department with the news, 'It's dead', she said. 'It's dead. That bastard Callaghan has killed it' (personal knowledge). 
It is at least arguable that the defeat of 'In Place of Strife' -- both because of the popularity of trade union reform and the inevitable consequences of so obvious a cabinet split -- was the cause of Labour's unexpected general election defeat in June 1970. Other possible explanations were canvassed, including the publication, in the week before polling day, of balance of payments figures that were made to look far worse than they were by the inclusion of the cost of several commercial aircraft bought from America. But the general view was that the dispute over 'In Place of Strife' had made the government seem divided and its eventual abandonment had caused the prime minister to appear ineffectual. The defeat was as substantial as it was surprising. Edward Heath's Conservatives enjoyed a majority of thirty over all other parties. However, in the post mortem Labour did not turn on Callaghan and accuse him of ensuring a tory victory. In the shadow cabinet elections that followed the convening of the new parliament it was Barbara Castle who failed to gain a place. Callaghan -- always able to judge the mood of the party -- came a respectable fifth. 
Anthony Barber, chancellor of the exchequer in the Heath government after the death of Iain Macleod, suggested to Callaghan that he might be interested in becoming managing director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). For a time he was tempted, even though Audrey Callaghan had expressed her doubts about moving to America. But before he had made up his mind the French vetoed his nomination. His career was saved for British politics. 
Callaghan played a remarkably passive role in the four years of opposition that followed Labour's 1970 defeat. As shadow home secretary he dominated the debates on Ireland which preceded the suspension of Stormont and the imposition of direct rule. But the real issue of the 1970 parliament was Europe. Heath secured Britain's entry into the Common Market -- an achievement that eluded Labour in government and one the party opposed in opposition. Sixty-nine Labour MPs, under the leadership of Roy Jenkins, the deputy leader of the party, voted with the government in favour of British entry. Callaghan was a passionate -- at times it seemed pathological -- opponent of British membership. 
In the spring of 1972 Jenkins, unable to reconcile his conscience to the need to vote with his party during the long committee stage of the 'Common Market Entry Bill', resigned as Labour's deputy leader. Several prominent trade unionists urged Callaghan to contest the consequent vacancy. In all probability he would have won an election, which in those days was carried out exclusively in the Parliamentary Labour Party. However, he declined. But he was again the beneficiary of events outside his control. Denis Healey became shadow chancellor in place of Jenkins, and Callaghan moved from shadowing the Home Office to become shadow foreign secretary. 
The Heath administration ended with the election in which the prime minister invited the voters to decide 'Who governs Britain?' In 1972 the National Union of Mineworkers had -- after much agitation, a strike, and an arbitration award -- won a wage increase that flouted the government's pay guidelines. Faced with a second confrontation the Conservatives decided to appeal to the electorate for a mandate to put the mineworkers' union in its place. The election was anticipated weeks before it was declared. In Birmingham, at Labour's local government conference, Callaghan, that year's chairman of the Labour Party, spoke solemnly about the 'constitutional outrage' of holding a general election on a voters' register that was out of date. 'Surely', he said, 'the Prime Minister will wait for the new register' ('The Times', 14 Jan 1975). In private he conceded, 'Of course he won't'. Nor did he. The election was held on 28 February 1974 and, to general surprise, Labour won 301 seats to the Conservatives' 297 (though on a lower share of the vote). After a futile attempt to attract the Liberals into a coalition Heath resigned. Wilson became prime minister again and Callaghan his foreign secretary. 
During the campaign -- as the Labour Party struggled to distract the public's attention from the striking miners -- Callaghan had constantly warned the country about what, according to Labour's manifesto, were the dangers of Common Market membership. Chief among them was the rising price of food. The shadow foreign secretary had gone so far as to appear on platforms carrying a basket of groceries that illustrated, or were said to illustrate, Europe's influence on the cost of living. There is no doubt that many of the Foreign Office staff who watched his performances comforted themselves with the belief that the grocery stunt proved that his antagonism was no more than cheap populism. They discovered they were wrong during his first week in the Foreign Office, when he convened a meeting of British ambassadors to the Common Market capitals. Immediately, before he addressed them, he gave each one a copy of Labour's election manifesto. One of the more senior ambassadors, anxious to demonstrate independence of mind, thought it would be amusing to ask if he and his colleagues were expected to buy their copies. 'No', the foreign secretary replied, 'just implement them' (private information). There was a gasp of amazed realization that Callaghan really meant 'to renegotiate the terms of British membership' -- or leave the Common Market. 
The 'renegotiation' began in Luxembourg on 1 April 1974. Callaghan had rejected all official advice to seek the new terms in a spirit of friendship and compromise. Emollience was not to be part of his negotiating technique. He could not address the council of foreign ministers until a debate had been concluded on the export of cattle between France and Germany. The delay neither improved his temper nor softened his approach. As a result both the content and the manner of his speech (which became a government white paper) shocked his fellow foreign ministers into believing that not only was Britain prepared to leave but that withdrawal was the option Callaghan wanted. The Foreign Office officials, who still hoped that they might rescue British membership, were certain that Callaghan's aggressive attitude had made an acceptable outcome more difficult to achieve. Even other ministers, present with him at those early meetings, were unsure if he wanted the renegotiation to fail or to succeed. And they feared that if he had made a calculated decision to begin hard and gradually soften he might well not win the support of Europe but lose the support of the Labour Party. Fortunately for those who believed Britain's destiny to lie in Europe, his attitude changed, almost overnight. 
Two months after he became foreign secretary Callaghan attended a 'political co-operation meeting' at Schloss Gymnich in Germany. His suspicion that much of the talk about European unity was rhetorical was confirmed. He was reinforced in the view that heady promises about closer integration would not be matched with either hard thought about how it could be achieved or a willingness to make the sacrifices necessary to achieve it. But although he was irritated by his colleagues' style, the absence of substance made him realize that Britain need not fear being sucked into a federation. Equally important, he enjoyed the discussions with his fellow foreign ministers and welcomed the opportunity of the European powers to combine their strength in voluntarily agreed policy positions. From then on he wanted the renegotiations to succeed. But a renegotiation there had to be. 
The two key issues that had to be resolved were Britain's budget contribution and access for Commonwealth agricultural products, particularly sugar from the Caribbean and New Zealand cheese, butter, and lamb (known in the Common Market as 'sheep meat'). The argument over the budget illustrated a difference in logic between Britain and her European colleagues. The United Kingdom paid a contribution of between 10 and 12 per cent of the total Common Market budget, and received 8 per cent of Brussels' expenditure in return. Worse still, the contribution was estimated to rise to 20 per cent of the total after the transition period consequent on Britain's entry. The French and Germans did not think the arithmetical discrepancy was important. Britain did not behave in a way that attracted expenditure. They did. 
Callaghan found the Common Market's methods hard to accept. British empiricism often clashed with the continental reverence for rigorous rules. Occasionally the tension turned into violent dispute. Discussions on the proposed meeting of oil producers was proceeding peacefully until Callaghan discovered that Britain, an oil producer, was not to participate directly but would be represented by Gaston Thorn, prime minister and foreign minister of Luxembourg, and temporary president of the council of ministers. That was the requirement of the rules, but Callaghan would not accept it. After a morning of angry confrontation it was agreed that Britain should be added to the list of participants. 
Even as Callaghan edged closer to a deal both he and Wilson were careful to protect their position within the party by preserving the appearance of scepticism. Callaghan's autobiography later suggested that they welcomed the French proposals that heads of government should meet regularly in a formal European council. But at the time the idea was proposed both he and Wilson were so cautious about appearing to support the idea that they refused to attend the inaugural meeting. A trembling junior minister went in their place. The early vicissitudes of the Foreign Office were also made more tolerable by retreat to his farm (on the Weald of Sussex) and his family. One day, leaving unexpectedly by the ambassadors' entrance in Horse Guards Parade, he told a startled junior minister, 'You take the meetings this afternoon. I'm going to see my granddaughter' (personal knowledge). 
There were other moments of drama during Callaghan's eighteen months at the Foreign Office. The Turks, having given assurances to the contrary, invaded Cyprus. Callaghan, impatient to get to Whitehall at the first opportunity, refused to wait for his official car to arrive and commandeered a milk float. Idi Amin, the president of Uganda, arrested a British citizen, Denis Hills, and, accusing him of imperfectly defined crimes, threatened execution unless Callaghan visited east Africa and pleaded for his release. Callaghan duly complied. Britain fought (and lost) a 'cod war' with Iceland. The Armed Forces Movement restored democracy to Portugal and Callaghan insisted to Henry Kissinger that the new government should not be ostracized. But the real issue was the Common Market. By the end of the negotiations -- the principle of a budget rebate being conceded, and sugar and diary product imports having won a temporary stay of execution -- Callaghan felt able to announce that the renegotiation had succeeded. But the Labour Party still had to be convinced. The solution (a tribute to Wilson's traditional tactical ingenuity) was a referendum on continued membership -- a constitutional innovation the prime minister had dismissed out of hand two years earlier. A special Labour Party conference, basing its debate on a general 'anti' party document and the government's unequivocally 'pro' white paper, agreed that 'the government proposes and the people decide'. On 5 June 1975 the people duly decided that Britain should remain a member of the Common Market. 
Callaghan enjoyed the Foreign Office. And, after the Foreign Office got used to his occasionally irascible ways, the Foreign Office enjoyed him. Often his short temper was the result of a (usually mistaken) view that he was being patronized by the over-educated. The suggestion that Bryan Gould (a former diplomat and Oxford don, now Labour MP for Southampton Test) should be made a parliamentary secretary was greeted with the announcement that he did not promote anyone who 'talks to me as if I have just come down from the trees' (private information). The intellectual parity of his relationship with officials was confirmed when, frustrated by an abstruse explanation of what he regarded as a simple point, he quoted Roy Campbell, the South African poet: '
I'm with you there of course: 

They use the snaffle and the curb all right 

But where's the bloody horse? 

' 

On 16 March 1976 -- much to general surprise -- Harold Wilson first told the queen, then the cabinet, and eventually the general public, that he proposed to resign his seals of office as soon as a successor was appointed. Long after the event, 'soi-disant' close friends claimed that they had known of his decision long in advance. Few of the claims were justified. But it does seem that Callaghan knew at least the night before the announcement. He asked a couple of carefully selected ministers of state which cabinet job they would most like in what he described as an imminent reshuffle. It seems that none of them realized that it would not be Wilson who carried it out. Wilson predicted to his staff that the following day's headlines would proclaim 'It looks like Jim'. The prediction proved to be correct. 
Before the outcome of the leadership election was determined, Callaghan, already a declared candidate, announced to parliament the details of an initiative, unsuccessful as it turned out, by which he had hoped to break the deadlock in negotiations with still unlawfully independent Rhodesia. Cynics said that it was part of his election campaign. In fact it was the result of another facet of his character which became more apparent as the years passed. A few days earlier he had sat next to the queen at dinner in the Italian embassy and had told her of his hopes of moving towards a peaceful settlement. She had expressed her approval of the plan. Callaghan, a monarchist who held the royal family in personal esteem, accepted his sovereign's implicit command. His reverence for the institution and the individuals who embodied it increased with the years. During his retirement he developed the habit of writing to the queen, who invariably replied. 
At this time the leader of the Labour Party was elected by Labour MPs. Six candidates contested the election held on 5 April 1976: Callaghan, Roy Jenkins, Michael Foot, Denis Healey, Tony Benn, and Tony Crosland. Callaghan -- with a strong following in parliament -- was sure that he would top the first ballot. He came second, with 84 votes to Michael Foot's 90. Jenkins, Crosland, and Benn pulled out or were eliminated. On the second ballot Callaghan won 141 votes to Foot's 133 and Healey's 38. He won on the third ballot by the decisive, but not overwhelming, majority of 39 votes. The next day he was prime minister. 
A new prime minister has to put his decisive stamp on the cabinet. Callaghan accomplished that necessity by sacking Barbara Castle, his old adversary from the days of 'In Place of Strife'. It was a controversial beginning to what was to remain a controversial premiership. At the first party conference he addressed as leader Callaghan, encouraged by Peter Jay, his son-in-law and sometime economic correspondent of 'The Times', renounced John Maynard Keynes's belief in a 'cosy world... where employment could be guaranteed by the stroke of a pen'. He went on to argue that Keynes was not just outdated but plain wrong. 'We used to think that we could spend our way out of recession... That option no longer exists... In so far as it ever did exist, it only worked on each occasion... by injecting a bigger dose of inflation into the economy.' Reality -- as the prime minister saw it -- burst in on the conference next day when Denis Healey, the chancellor of the exchequer, returned from Heathrow airport, where he had been about to board a plane for New York and a meeting of the IMF, to deal with a sudden deterioration in the value of sterling. There followed the IMF crisis, during which the government boosted international confidence in the pound by reducing what was thought to be a public sector borrowing requirement of $12 billion. In fact the deficit was barely $8 billion. But, working on the over-estimate, the cabinet struggled through October 1976 to cut public expenditure and services to a level at which the imagined deficit was reduced by half. 
For the next three years the government was derided for accepting a more rigorous fiscal regime imposed on it by the IMF. In fact Callaghan used the pressure of international opinion to implement policies he had meant to employ from the day on which he became prime minister. Public expenditure had been cut by $1 billion during the previous July, but that clear indication that the government intended to operate a more stringent economic policy had little effect on either the balance of payments (in deficit by $3 billion) or the value of the pound (almost two dollars in January 1976 but only $1.64 in September and forecast to fall by a cent a day until it reached $1.50). The crisis made the need for dramatic action more urgent and the justification easier to explain. But accepting the IMF's stern advice was what Healey called a 'Pyrrhic defeat'. He allowed himself to be forced to do what he had always wanted to do. 
Concern for the state of the economy did not prevent Callaghan from pursuing what, back in 1967 when he resigned from the Treasury, he had described as his 'real interest' -- education. Within days of becoming prime minister he had sent a memorandum to the secretary of state for education asking about the quality of basic teaching, the relevance of the curriculum for older children in comprehensive schools, and the examination system's competence to test ability and attainment. While the department was still composing its answer the prime minister laid the foundation stone for a new hall of residence at Ruskin College, Oxford. The speech that accompanied the ceremony horrified the education establishment. Its insistence that the purpose of education was 'to equip children to the best of their ability for a lively and constructive place in society and also fit them to do a job of work' ('The Times', 19 Oct 1976) was interpreted -- almost certainly correctly -- as an expression of doubt about the non-selective (comprehensive) system of secondary education and a declaration that the traditional freedom of teachers to teach how and what they chose could not continue. It began a debate about teachers and teaching that was still raging decades later. 
The economic policy the Callaghan government had inherited from its predecessor was crucially dependent on income restraint, which its economic advisers believed was vital to the defeat of inflation. Experts later disagreed about how much the reduction of the retail price index, from over 20 per cent to single figures, was the result of the wages policy and the price code that accompanied it (largely to convince the unions that profits, like earnings, were being held down). What is certain is that, at the time, it was believed to be crucial. Callaghan, unlike Wilson, felt emotionally involved in the campaigns to encourage the trade unions to co-operate in holding wages down. He supported the trades unions and they should support him. 
In the summer of 1977 Callaghan was at least privately sympathetic towards the moderate ministers who joined the picket lines outside the Grunwick film processing laboratory in Willesden, where the largely female and Asian workforce had been refused the right of trade union membership. And although he supported -- indeed initiated -- the cabinet's hard line towards the Fire Brigades Union (which was on strike in support of demands for a 30 per cent wage increase and a reduction in the working week) he admitted to feeling deep regret that a generally devoted group of men and women were being used, by less worthy comrades in other unions, to blow a hole in wages policy. 
The feeling of mutual affection survived, despite some strain, until the summer of 1978, when it became clear that trade unions were unlikely to accept any level of wage restraint and certain to reject the 5 per cent ceiling (with exceptions for the lowest paid) on which Callaghan personally insisted. Co-operation broke down in part because of two misconceptions. One was that real wages would be higher if freely negotiated. The other was that the IMF settlement had marked the end of the Labour government's commitment to high levels of public expenditure providing a constantly improving level of public services -- regarded by the TUC as the 'quid pro quo' of old justifications for pay policy. And, since the economy was obviously improving, was pay policy still necessary? 
The path towards full rejection of income restraint was marked by a series of mile posts that should have left the prime minister in no doubt that the 5 per cent limit on earnings increases would be impossible to enforce. But he remained determined to impose it on the unions. Indeed, he was far more resolute (or inflexible) in pursuit of the impossible than was Healey and actually sent messages to some cabinet ministers that, if they argued for an even lower figure, he would have no objection. Throughout 1977 it was nevertheless clear that support for a voluntary incomes policy had ebbed away. The TUC general council was evenly tied on a vote proposing support of the government's proposal and Tom Jackson -- chairman, leader of the Post Office union, and himself a supporter of 'restraint' -- thought it his constitutional duty to declare the resolution 'not carried'. The biennial conference of the Transport and General Workers Union not only rejected 5 per cent but shouted down Jack Jones, the general secretary, when he asked the delegates not to risk the re-election of a tory government. 
By the time the prime minister addressed the TUC in Brighton, in September 1978, it was clear that pay policy was dead. But as the economy improved so did the government's opinion poll rating. Pundits agreed that if there were to be an autumn election Labour would -- at worst -- be the largest single party. At dinner with the general council on the night before he addressed the delegates Callaghan gave the impression that an announcement was imminent. Even his speech, which included an embarrassing version of 'There was I, waiting at the church', did not convince them that the election would not be announced before the end of the week. 
At the end of the last cabinet meeting before the summer recess Callaghan -- in typical style -- had told ministers that he did not want letters advising him what the election date should be. When the cabinet reassembled, on the day after his TUC speech, he informed them of the decision he had taken by reading a letter he had sent to the queen earlier that morning. He clearly enjoyed the atmosphere of increasing tension as he went through the opening paragraphs which set out the state of the nation -- inflation down, sterling stable, productivity improving. However, there was much work still to be done. There was a dramatic pause before the last paragraph. 'I therefore do not propose to ask Your Majesty for an early dissolution of Parliament.' There was a second pause and then -- the style maintained -- he added, 'You can discuss it if you want to. But I doubt if you'll persuade me to write to the Queen again, telling her that I've changed my mind.' There was a ripple of half laughter round the Cabinet table. 'You're laughing with relief', the prime minister said. 'But if we have trouble with the unions during the winter, we lose our majority and are forced out, you'll all feel differently' (personal knowledge). Few prime ministers have made a more prophetic announcement. 
The alternative to an incomes policy accepted by the unions was a statutory pay code enforced by penalizing companies that agreed to wage increases above the government's stipulated maximum. Sustaining such a controversial policy -- indeed making progress in any field of government -- required a robust House of Commons majority. And the Callaghan administration, with never more than a handful of votes more than the combined opposition, lost by-elections. The only way to retain office was to forge a pact with the Liberal Party. It was a stratagem that Michael Foot, effectively the deputy prime minister, pursued with enthusiasm. Callaghan himself regarded it as no more than a tedious necessity, even though the Liberal Party never imposed one of its policies on the government as the price of co-operation. The pact offended his partisanship and his pride. And it was those emotions that prevented him, in the end, from extending the government's life by the arrangement of another humiliating deal. 
Although the Liberals asked for very little Callaghan asked his cabinet to throw a crumb in their direction by supporting, in a free vote, proportional representation as the method by which members of the European parliament should be elected. Some ministers responded to his wishes. But indiscipline was becoming endemic. The government lost the vote on the annual estimates and was beaten in the major attempt to impose sanctions on companies that breached pay policy. On both occasions Labour back-benchers had made the difference between victory and defeat. There was only one moment, during those fractious days, when members of the cabinet thought the prime minister looked less than composed. That was when a note was passed to him from an official and he immediately -- and peremptorily -- left the meeting. Audrey, his wife, had received slight injuries in a motor accident. 
In the middle of what came to be called the winter of discontent Callaghan joined the presidents of the United States and France and the chancellor of Germany on the island of Guadeloupe. There was no doubt about the importance of their discussions. They tried to lay the foundations of a world stability pact that would underwrite the value of currencies and they examined the emergence of militant Islam in Iran and the pressure that might be brought on the apartheid regime in South Africa. A new round of arms limitation talks was initiated. But they met in the sun while Britain was in the grip of a politically bitter winter. On his return the prime minister's staff urged him not to hold a press conference at the airport. But Callaghan -- happiest when he was talking to other world leaders -- insisted on giving the newspapers an immediate account of his discussions. A reporter from 'The Sun' asked if it had been right to abandon Britain at such a time. The prime minister replied with a homily on discussions about great international events putting domestic issues in perspective. It ended, 'I don't think other people in the world would share the view that there is a crisis'. 'The Sun' paraphrased his comments on its front page as 'Crisis. What Crisis?' (11 January 1979). Support, in and out of parliament, continued to ebb away. 
There was, however, one policy that -- as long as its implementation remained possible -- was guaranteed to ensure that the Liberal Party would keep the Labour government in power. It was the devolution of power from Westminster to Edinburgh and, to a lesser degree, to Cardiff. It was not a policy for which Callaghan felt any great enthusiasm. But, although it was an initiative with too intangible benefits to stir his passions, he realized the advantages of pursuing the idea with resolute determination. 
The devolution bill made slow progress through parliament. However, trade union dissatisfaction with government policy accelerated more quickly. It was the public service unions which took the most dramatic action. Hospital porters picketed hospital gates, allowing the entry only of patients whom they regarded as emergencies. Refuse collectors refused to empty dustbins, forcing householders to leave rubbish in black bags at street corners and thus creating ideal photographs for use by anti-government newspapers. In a cold winter school caretakers neglected to switch on classroom heating and local government workmen left icy roads ungritted. In Liverpool members of the General and Municipal Workers Union parks and cemeteries branch refused to bury the dead. 
Parochially minded MPs in the House of Commons -- uncertain about the constitutional propriety of a bill to devolve power from the Westminster parliament -- inserted a clause that required the proposal to be subject to a referendum that must endorse the notion not only with a majority of the votes, but with 40 per cent of the electorate voting in favour. When the referenda were held on 1 March 1979 Wales voted against it, Scotland just in favour, but with only 33 per cent of the registered electorate in favour. Devolution was dead and the nationalists withdrew their support from the government. Margaret Thatcher, the leader of the opposition, knowing that the government no longer commanded a majority, tabled a vote of no confidence that was debated on 28 March 1979. Much work was done to persuade individual MPs from the minority parties to support the government -- but not by Callaghan. Indeed, when Enoch Powell offered at least the abstention of the Ulster Unionists, in return for a gas pipeline joining the province to the mainland, he explicitly vetoed the idea on the grounds that it had not been properly discussed by the cabinet. He had grown weary of cobbling together fragile and temporary majorities and lost patience with the indignity of modifying policies to meet the whims of fractious back-benchers. The vote of no confidence was carried by one vote. 
The cabinet and the national executive of the Labour Party met in the Waterloo room of 10 Downing Street to consider the election manifesto. There was argument about almost every paragraph. But the fiercest argument was over a proposal to promise the reform of the House of Lords. Although it was fierce it did not last for long. It had barely begun when Callaghan announced that, if the party fought the election on a promise to make radical changes to the upper house, it would do so under another leader. During the campaign that followed Callaghan put on a convincing show of optimism. But, at least according to Bernard Donoughue, the head of his political office, he always believed that the tide had turned irrevocably. The likelihood was, however, that he would have won in the previous autumn and might well have been equally successful a year later when the memory of the winter of discontent had begun to fade. Choosing the wrong election date was Callaghan's second great mistake -- greater even than his reluctance to devalue the pound in 1964. In the event, the Conservatives won 339 seats to Labour's 269. 
Some of Callaghan's closest friends advised him to resign as leader of the Labour Party immediately after the new parliament assembled. He rejected the idea on the grounds that he should 'take some shine off the ball' in the hope of making the batting easier for Denis Healey, his preferred successor. The months that followed were, he freely admitted, among the unhappiest in his life. The Labour Party was in open revolt -- not simply hell-bent on moving policy to the left, but equally determined to change its constitution in a way that made the leftward shift permanent. The leader should be elected by the party at large. Candidates should be subject to re-selection (or not) by their constituency parties. The Parliamentary Labour Party should be denied all influence over the contents of the manifesto. In an effort to hold back the tide Callaghan met those he believed to be the most tractable trade union leaders at the Association of Scientific, Technical and Managerial Staffs training college at Bishop's Stortford. The re-selection of MPs was conceded but the battle over the method of electing the leader went on. It was still raging when Callaghan resigned his leadership of the Labour Party, on 15 October 1980. He was succeeded not by Denis Healey but by Michael Foot. 
Callaghan stayed to fight the 1983 election in the re-drawn Cardiff South and Penarth constituency, dissociating himself from the party's defence policy in a speech made there. But his interest increasingly turned to international affairs. He was never so happy as when he was with the other great men of his era -- Helmut Schmidt, Gerald Ford, Valery Giscard d'Estaing -- discussing how to put right the world they could no longer influence. He became father of the House of Commons and, much to his monarchist delight, in 1987 a knight of the Garter. True to both his affection for Wales and his well-ordered life, he arranged -- long before he died -- to have his Garter banner hung in the cathedral at Llandaff. On retirement from the Commons he was made a life peer, as Baron Callaghan of Cardiff, later in 1987. 
The abiding feature of Callaghan's final years was his devotion to Audrey, his wife. For the last decade of her life she suffered from accelerating Alzheimer's disease. Towards the end she was cared for by nuns at St George's Retreat, Burgess Hill, a home for the elderly near the Callaghans' farm near Ringmer in Sussex. Callaghan visited her every day and sat by her bedside for hours. At the party in Downing Street given by Tony Blair to celebrate Callaghan's ninetieth birthday he confided to an old associate, 'She does not recognise me. But I recognise her. And that's what matters' (personal knowledge). Audrey Callaghan died on 15 March 2005. In the words of Peter Jay (his son-in-law), in the week after her death, 'He decided that there was nothing else he had to do. The work was finished'. He settled down in the room at St George's Retreat which she had occupied during her final days and went peacefully to his rest on 26 March; the causes of death were given as lobar pneumonia, cardiac failure, and kidney failure. 
Jim Callaghan risks the judgements of history that haunt almost all prime ministers whose tenure was brief and ended in defeat. But he deserved much better. He inherited an administration that would not, or could not, face up to Britain's burgeoning economic crisis and he left office with sterling stable, the balance of payments in surplus, and inflation moving down. He was a good prime minister. Given another four or five years he might have become a great one. 


@@@@@


doc= 94840


Skeat, Walter William (1866-1953), colonial administrator and ethnographer, was born at 22 Regent Street, Cambridge, on 14 October 1866, the elder son in the family of two sons and four daughters of Walter William Skeat (1835-1912), philologist, and his wife, Bertha Clara, 'nee' Jones (1840-1924); his elder sister was Bertha Marian Skeat, the schoolmistress ['see under 'Skeat, Walter William]. His father, a clergyman with a degree in mathematics, was a fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge, and in 1878 was appointed professor of Anglo-Saxon; he collaborated with James Murray in the compilation of the 'Oxford English Dictionary'. After education at Weybridge preparatory school, London, and Highgate School, London, Skeat became a student at Christ's College, where he read classics, graduating in 1888. What later became social anthropology was at this time a discipline that emphasized the need to record in a systematic fashion the elements of primitive and traditional societies, which were already beginning to change or disappear under the pressure of the 'civilized' world. It is evident that this approach, advocated by Alfred Haddon, later a fellow of Christ's, had much influence on Skeat's ethnographic work in Malaya. 
Skeat secured a nomination to the Selangor civil service in 1891, where he began his tenure under William Edward Maxwell, then resident of the state and an outstanding Malay scholar who recognized Skeat's potential. Throughout his six years (1891-7) in Selangor, Skeat showed himself a capable and hardworking administrator in several districts of the state. He also found time for steady ethnographic work, at first in collaboration with Richard James Wilkinson, a Cambridge contemporary, in the latter's Malay dictionary project, and later in his own fieldwork, which took him on trips into remote parts of the state. He published a number of articles in local journals. When he returned on leave to England in 1898, Haddon and others supported Skeat's project for a scientific expedition to north-east Malaya, then under Siamese suzerainty, to survey the lifestyle, fauna, and flora of an almost unknown region. The expedition was a success until towards the end, when Skeat left his companions to set off alone on an ill judged attempt to climb Gunong Tahan, the highest peak in the peninsula. The hardship of the ascent so damaged Skeat's health (by recurrent malaria) that he became permanently unfit for further service in the tropics and was obliged to retire from the Malayan service. 
After sufficient recovery in his health Skeat was able to work in England for thirty more years, but it was a struggle to find suitable employment and to support a family; on 15 April 1903 he had married (Mary Emmeline) Theodora Duckworth (1874-1956), daughter of Henry Duckworth, gentleman, and they had three sons. Skeat was a good anthropologist, but in that new discipline the few opportunities went to men of the standing of Haddon, Sir Edward Tylor, and Charles Seligman. From 1903 to 1911 Skeat held administrative posts in the University of London. Then, after a further bout of illness, he was appointed in 1913 a 'guide-lecturer' at the British Museum. After a spell in the Colonial Office library during the First World War he returned to the British Museum, where he became the principal lecturer to parties visiting the ethnographic gallery, and brought to the task both scholarship and enthusiasm that earned him praise, until his retirement in 1934. He then moved to Dawlish in Devon. 
Skeat's best, and best-known, work was 'Malay Magic', a title that concealed an extensive study of Malay culture and belief. This had been written during a year's leave from Malaya in 1898 and was published by Macmillan in 1900, to critical acclaim but poor sales. In 1906 came 'Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula' (to which Charles Otto Blagden contributed chapters on aborigine dialects). In a lighter vein Skeat wrote 'Fables and Folk-Tales from an Eastern Forest' (1901), which is said to have been a model for Rudyard Kipling's 'Just So Stories'. He also contributed numerous articles to journals and chapters in popular books on south-east Asian lifestyles. In 1938 he produced a reader's guide to the poems of John Milton, and finally edited for publication (in 1953) the long and informative journal of his 1899 expedition. As an ethnographer he concentrated on description, though he subscribed to Tyler's theory of 'animism', which attributed to primitive minds a belief that plants, animals, and even substances possessed a spiritual force or 'soul', that in anthropomorphic fashion might be benign or hostile to mankind, so that manipulation or invocation was necessary to secure a favourable outcome. By his quick and sensitive understanding Skeat recorded valuable data (including charms and invocations) for modern analysis, so that 'Malay Magic' was reprinted more than once, including in 1984 and 2005. 
A tall figure, and a quiet and congenial colleague, Skeat was a scholar of talent and immense industry who would have achieved greater recognition and success in his own time if chance had been kinder to him in his health and the career opportunities open to him. He died on 24 July 1953 at St Pancras Hospital, London, of pneumonia and pulmonary tuberculosis, and was cremated at Golders Green five days later. His collection of books and pamphlets was donated to the Institute of Cultural and Social Anthropology at the University of Oxford. 
Skeat's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 94841


Maxwell, Sir (William) George (1871-1959), colonial administrator, was born on 9 June 1871, probably at Malacca, the eldest of six sons of Sir William Edward Maxwell (1846-1897), colonial governor, and his wife, Lillias Grant, 'nee' Aberigh-Mackay (1846-1925), daughter of James Aberigh-Mackay, colonial chaplain. At the age of eleven he was awarded the medal of the Royal Humane Society for a rescue from drowning in Guernsey harbour. He was educated at Clifton College, Bristol (1885-90), where he was a scholar. 
In 1891 Maxwell was appointed to the civil service of the Malay state of Perak, of which Frank Swettenham was then resident. For the next decade he held district posts in Perak and Pahang, before transferring to the civil service of the Straits Settlements, where he held the appointment of solicitor-general and acted as attorney-general. His first book, 'In Malay Forests' (1907), described his experiences in Perak and Pahang, more especially in hunting big game, and displayed the deep knowledge of and sympathy with the Malays which was evident throughout his Malayan career. Part-time legal study while on leave and magistrates' posts in Malaya prepared him for a call to the bar (by the Inner Temple in 1906), like his father and grandfather before him (both of whom had also served in Malaya). On 23 August 1902 he had married (Florence) Evelyn Stevenson (1875/6-1957), daughter of Walter Ferguson Stevenson, merchant; they had two sons. 
In 1909 four northern Malay states were transferred from Siamese to British suzerainty, and Maxwell was appointed the first British adviser to the ruler of Kedah. The latter had begun to model its government, to a limited extent, on those of the Malay colonies, but it was beset by financial problems, differences within its ruling oligarchy, and the mental illness of its ruler. In the state council, the key institution, Maxwell dealt with Malay notables who were quite as obstinate as he, and resentful of British intervention. However, he was able to establish the system of registered land title that his father had introduced to Malaya twenty years before, and to bring about the abolition of debt-bondage. His first annual report (in 1909) was a very informative account of the traditional structure of political authority in Kedah. He remained British adviser to the ruler of Kedah until 1915, the year in which he was appointed CMG. 
In the sequence of senior administrative posts in the Malay states and the Straits Settlements that Maxwell filled for short periods between 1915 and 1920, he showed that he was the ablest Malayan administrator of his generation, leading to his appointment in the latter year as chief secretary (administrative head) of the Federated Malay States. The post-war financial crisis of 1921 obliged him to impose drastic retrenchment of public expenditure. The resident of one state saw his new building programme cut by 90 per cent. Maxwell's was a skilful and resolute performance but one that made him no friends among his senior colleagues. However, the greatest controversy of the time was the proposal to 'decentralize' the Federated Malay States government by returning to the state governments powers that the federal centre had absorbed over a quarter of a century and vested in the chief secretary. Maxwell conceded the principle but demurred at its immediate implementation, and, with the support of powerful commercial interests, he resisted the efforts of Sir Laurence Guillemard, the high commissioner, to replace the post of chief secretary at the centre with a less omnipotent bureaucrat. The dispute over policy between the two men degenerated into a bitter and public personal feud, damaging to both. Maxwell's merits were recognized by a knighthood (KBE) in 1924, but he had to retire (at the normal age) in 1926. Guillemard soon followed, having achieved little. 
In retirement Maxwell was one of a group of retired Malayan administrators who used the Association of British Malaya as their base in strong criticism of the policies of the Colonial Office and of their successors. Maxwell contributed a number of articles to 'British Malaya' and other journals, and also found time to serve as vice-chairman (1932-9) of the League of Nations committee on slavery. When the fall of Malaya to the Japanese in 1942 brought much criticism of the local government, Maxwell was chairman of a committee that published 'The Civil Defence of Malaya' (1944) in attempted vindication of it; he knew more about the system than anyone else in Britain at the time. After the war the same group of veterans, with Maxwell generally a moderating influence on their counsels, campaigned against the first attempt at post-war reconstruction, the over-centralized Malayan Union of 1946. Its successor, the Federation of Malaya, accorded with his ideas, but by the time it replaced the Malayan Union in 1948 he was a spent force, and absorbed in the care of his invalid wife, who died in 1957. 
A contemporary wrote that Maxwell's 'singular ability' was combined with 'extraordinary driving force [and], untiring energy', adding that he 'loves his work [but] has his faults' (Robson, 150). Compromise was not in the Maxwell genes, a fact that almost certainly prevented his rise further up the colonial hierarchy. He died of heart failure on 22 August 1959 at Southlands Hospital, Shoreham, Sussex, near his home in High Salvington, Worthing. He was survived by his two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 94842


Ackroyd, Peter Runham (1917-2005), Old Testament scholar, was born on 15 September 1917 at 66 Stone Hill Road, Derby, the son of Jabez Robert Ackroyd, Congregational minister, and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Brown. When the family moved to Harrow, Middlesex, he attended the county boys' school. He matriculated from Downing College, Cambridge, in 1935 to read modern and medieval languages as an exhibitioner, and graduated in 1938. After theological study in London (BD, 1940; MTh, 1942) he returned to Cambridge as Stanton student at Trinity College (1941-3), and received the degree of PhD in 1945 for a thesis on the criteria for the Maccabean dating of psalms. Meanwhile he was ordained a minister of the Congregational church in 1940. On 25 July the same year he married Evelyn Alice Nutt (died 1990), a 25-year-old schoolteacher, and daughter of William Young Nutt, auctioneer and valuer. They had five children (two sons and three daughters). 
Ackroyd served as minister of Congregational churches in Roydon, Essex (1943-7) and Balham, London (1947-8). In 1948 he was appointed lecturer in 'Old Testament' and Hebrew studies at Leeds University and in 1952 he became lecturer in divinity at the University of Cambridge. In 1957 he was ordained deacon in the Church of England and in 1958 priest, serving as honorary curate of Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge. In 1961 he was elected to the Samuel Davidson chair of 'Old Testament' studies at King's College, London, which he held until his retirement in 1982. 
Drawing on his competence in German Ackroyd published, in 1957, an English translation of Ernst Wurthwein's 'The Text of the Old Testament' and, in the same year, a translation of Ludwig Kohler's 'Hebrew Man'. These were followed in 1965 by 'The Old Testament: an Introduction', a translation of the comprehensive work by Otto Eissfeldt, which was extensively revised and updated from the first German edition of 1934. These books provided major study tools for English-language readers; the latter volume in particular presented detailed surveys of the complex literary analyses of the sources, structures, and forms of the Hebrew 'Bible'. In 1968 Ackroyd published a revised version of his Hulsean lectures given in Cambridge in 1960-62, as 'Exile and Restoration: a Study of Hebrew Thought of the Sixth Century BC'. This was his most original published writing and marked a fundamental rethinking of the literary consequences of the sixth century BC in the formation of the Hebrew 'Bible'. It proved a seminal work of historical research, highlighting the theme of continuity through experiences of crisis which Ackroyd also explored in several short essays and articles. He contributed a chapter on this Persian period to the first volume of the 'Cambridge History of Judaism' (1983). 
The theme of continuity provided the subject of Ackroyd's inaugural lecture at King's College in 1962, in which he affirmed his regard for the 'Bible' as the church's primary vehicle for upholding spiritual values. Both within the 'Bible' and in its subsequent literary history, he traced the theme of continuity through periods of crisis and upheaval, returning to the theme repeatedly in numerous short perceptive studies. Both prophets and historians he regarded as agents fulfilling such a role. 
Throughout his career in London he also made an extensive contribution as editor and promoter of popular commentaries, dictionaries, and surveys of current biblical research, encouraging a new generation of younger scholars to place a modern understanding of the 'Bible' at the service of the church. He edited the 'Old Testament' volumes of the 'Cambridge Commentaries on the New English Bible' for Cambridge University Press and, with James Barr, the 'Old Testament Library' and 'Studies in Biblical Theology' for the SCM Press. He was also instrumental in promoting and editing, with C. F. Evans, the 'Cambridge History of the Bible' (vol. 1, 1975), which marked a new departure in awakening interest in the contribution of the 'Bible' to the history of ideas and to world literature. His short commentaries on several of the biblical historical books -- '1 Samuel' (1971), '2 Samuel' (1973), '1 and 2 Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah' (1973), and 'The Chronicler in his Age' (1991) -- reflected his close interest in historical writing as an expression of moral and spiritual vitality. 
Ackroyd was assiduous in engaging and encouraging friends and colleagues to write for a wide readership, offering advice and urging the necessity of combining scholarship with piety and social commitment. He himself lectured extensively abroad and maintained close links with colleagues and former students internationally. He was honorary secretary of the Palestine Exploration Fund (1962-70), editing its quarterly journal, and the annual 'Book List' of the Society for Old Testament Study (1967-73), becoming the society's president in 1972. He served as dean of the faculty of divinity at King's College, London, in 1968-9 and was elected a fellow of the college in 1969; he served as dean of the university faculty of theology in 1976-80. He was made a DD of the University of London in 1970 and an honorary DD of the University of St Andrews the same year. 
Following the death of his first wife, on 7 September 1991 Ackroyd married Ann Golden, aged fifty-seven, also a schoolteacher, and the daughter of Arthur James Golden, sales representative. He died on 23 January 2005 at Littleport Grange nursing home, Grange Lane, Littleport, Cambridgeshire, and was survived by his second wife, two sons, and two daughters, one daughter having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 94844


Aprahamian, (Apraham) Felix Bartev (1914-2005), music critic and concert organizer, was born on 5 June 1914 at 16 Inderwick Road, Hornsey, London, the son of Avedis Aprahamian, formerly Hovhanessian ('b'. 1871), carpet dealer, and his wife, Araxie, 'nee' Garabedian. His parents were both Armenian immigrants from Turkey. In 1919 the family moved to 8 Methuen Park, Muswell Hill, London, where Aprahamian lived for the rest of his life, for many of the later years sharing his house with his widowed mother. He was educated at Tollington School, Muswell Hill, where he developed a love of music, particularly organ music, so strong that it was detrimental to his schoolwork. On leaving school he was found a job by his father as an office boy in Fenchurch Street, then Mincing Lane, but he had no real interest in business. Meanwhile he took organ lessons, and became lifelong friends with another organist, William Lloyd Webber, father of the composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and the cellist Julian Lloyd Webber. He was assistant secretary of the Organ Music Society from 1931, and secretary from 1935 to 1970. In these capacities he began an extensive correspondence with composers, conductors, and musicians, both in Britain and elsewhere (particularly France), which he preserved (along with diaries, notebooks, autographs, and scores) in an ever-burgeoning archive in Muswell Hill. In 1933 he and two friends visited Frederick Delius at Grez-sur-Loing, and on the same trip he sat in an organ loft beside Charles-Marie Widor. 
During the Second World War Aprahamian served as concert director of the London Philharmonic Orchestra, and as an ARP warden. He also, with Tony Mayer, the cultural attache at the French embassy, organized an extensive series of concerts of French music, including contemporary music, and broadcast for the BBC in French, in which he was fluent. He came to be most closely associated with the promotion of French music, and, during the war and later, organized concerts for, and got to know, all of the leading lights of contemporary French music. He played host to Messiaen and his wife, and liked to point out to visitors the plane tree outside his house where Poulenc had relieved himself. 
From 1946 to 1984 Aprahamian acted as a consultant to United Music Publishers, the principal publisher of French music in the UK; he kept an office there, which he used primarily as a base from which to promote French music. He pursued a parallel career as a music critic, having penned his first contribution to the music press in 1931. From 1948 to 1989 he was deputy music critic on the 'Sunday Times', initially working under the increasingly eccentric Ernest Newman; later, in 1956 and 1958, he edited two volumes of Newman's essays. His own reviews were appreciated for their elegance, perceptiveness, and breadth of interest. He also wrote record reviews for 'The Gramophone' from 1964 to 1975, and innumerable programme notes, which were invariably stylishly written and informative. His career as a music critic was not without controversy. He was dropped by 'The Gramophone' for failing to meet deadlines, and by the 'Sunday Times' for submitting a review of a Gennady Rozhdestvensky concert when Rozhdestvensky had in fact cancelled the concert because of illness. 
Bespectacled, with a neatly trimmed goatee beard, and frequently in the evenings dressed in white tie and opera cloak, Aprahamian was an exotic and larger-than-life character, and a raconteur of notable wit. He had many friends, and was a hospitable host at his home in Muswell Hill. He kept two pianos and an organ there, the latter brought from the Basque country in 1982 specifically for the use of Aprahamian's friend and protege David Liddle (who later took Aprahamian as a middle name). He also held open house for younger scholars and enthusiasts anxious to make use of his archive of scores and other materials. The 'conversation... at the kitchen table would always range from the extremely intellectual and musically involved, through to the most uproarious and ribald' (Liddle). He published 'Conversations with Olivier Messiaen' in 1976, a translation of Claude Samuel's original, and selections of his correspondence with Messiaen, Poulenc, and Charles Tournemire were published in 1998, 2000, and 2003, edited by Nigel Simeone. 
Aprahamian reputedly refused appointment as an OBE in 1987, but in 1996 became officier de l'ordre des Arts et des Lettres, in recognition of his promotion of French music. He lectured widely, including at Morley College and Surrey University. From 1989 he was a visiting professor at the University of East London, and in 1991 at the University of California. He received an honorary doctorate from City University in 1995. His last years were clouded by a series of strokes, with increasingly debilitating effect. He died on 15 January 2005 at St Mary's wing, Whittington Hospital, Islington, London, of heart failure. He never married and had no known descendants. 


@@@@@


doc= 94848


Fogg, Gordon Elliot (1919-2005), botanist and ecologist, was born on 26 April 1919 at Langar, near Bingham, Nottinghamshire, the eldest of four children of Leslie Charles Fogg, Wesleyan minister, and his wife, Doris Mary, 'nee' Elliott. His early schooling was complicated by his father's frequent moves between circuits as a Methodist minister, from Northumberland to Lancashire and subsequently in a series of circuits in the London area. His boyhood hobbies ranged from chemical experiments to watercolour painting; an increasing interest in the living world (and particularly plants) was stimulated by frequent visits to his maternal grandparents' home in Nottinghamshire. He was also an active boy scout, and went camping on many occasions. When the family moved to London he won a London county council scholarship to Dulwich College, where his interest in biology was fostered, and on leaving school he went to Queen Mary College, University of London, as an exhibitioner and, later, scholar. He graduated with first-class honours in botany in the summer of 1939, planning to embark on research at Queen Mary College with the algologist F. E. Fritsch, professor of botany there. 
With the Second World War impending Queen Mary College was evacuated to Cambridge. Fogg had registered as a conscientious objector, and was given that status on condition that he undertook research work. This he did at Cambridge under Fritsch's supervision, embarking on research into the so-called blue-green algae -- soon to be reassigned as bacteria rather than plants, under the designation of cyanobacteria. This group was to remain the focus of Fogg's research for much of his career -- organisms playing a major role as plankton in the world's oceans and in many freshwater bodies. In addition to contributing to the beginning of the food web for many marine and other aquatic organisms they share with a few other bacteria the capacity to take nitrogen gas from the air and convert it to ammonia and thence to protein. This 'nitrogen fixing' capacity of cyanobacteria became a central feature of the subsequent research of Fogg and his students. In the later part of the war, from 1942 onwards, Fogg was directed by the Ministry of Supply to join a research team under V. J. Chapman (later to become a world renowned algologist, and professor of botany at the University of Auckland), together with two young colleagues, to conduct a survey of seaweeds of the western coast of Britain. Their research contributed later to the exploitation of the red seaweeds to make culture media for medical microbiology, but the brown seaweeds were used to make (among other things) a water-soluble parachute silk for the air-dropping of sea mines. Fogg was later to ponder his role in this, as a conscientious objector. 
After completing his PhD on cyanobacteria Fogg went on in 1943 to work for Pest Control Ltd in Cambridge, where he met (Elizabeth) Beryl Llechid-Jones (died 1997), who was working there on anti-malarial drugs. Two years younger than him, she was the daughter of Thomas Llechid-Jones, clergyman. They were married on 7 July 1945 in Colwyn Bay, Denbigh, her family home. They had a daughter, Helen, and a son, Timothy. Earlier in 1945 Fogg had been appointed an assistant lecturer in the botany department of University College, London, where he resumed his research on cyanobacteria, but also on other aspects of algal plankton ecology and physiology. He and his growing research group fitted well into the ecologically slanted department headed by W. H. Pearsall, and he was soon promoted to reader. This led, very appropriately, to his nickname of Gentle Reader, with a teasing reference both to his status and his personality. Fogg's work laid the foundation for the discovery that the specialized colourless cells in the cyanobacterial filament known as heterocysts were the site of nitrogen fixation -- a process that has enormous significance in the sustained cropping of rice as a global food source, for the rice obtains much of that vital element 'second hand' from cyanobacteria. Using carbon-14 to 'label' organic compounds, a technique he acquired while on a Rockefeller fellowship in Chicago, Fogg was able to demonstrate that marine micro-algae could leak up to 50 per cent of their products of photosynthesis back into the sea. This came to be recognized as a previously unsuspected feature of the global carbon cycle. 
In 1960 Fogg was appointed to the chair of botany at Westfield College, London University. Now head of his own department, he appointed staff so as to cover the major fields of botany while also building up a group of specialists in cyanobacteria. The latter included Bill Stewart, who was later to become chief scientific adviser to the government. Much of the work of that group was summarized in 'The Blue-Green Algae' (1973), by Fogg and others. In 1968 Fogg gave the Royal Society's Leeuwenhoek lecture, based on his cyanobacterial work. 
Fogg's final move was in 1971 to take the chair of marine biology at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, where he remained until his retirement in 1985. While this brought his wife Beryl back home to Wales, and brought Fogg the chance of defending the importance of algal ecology within the field of marine biology, it also brought him a range of administrative problems that he had been largely spared in Westfield. These ranged from rivalries with colleagues in the Marine Science Laboratories in Menai Bridge on Anglesey, to conflict with the university administration over resources. He later gave a diplomatic version of some of these events in his memoir for the Royal Society of his colleague Dennis Crisp (1992). Despite these distractions Fogg continued the research on the extracellular products of marine algal plankton that he had started at Westfield, with a number of research students. 
An important and separate phase of Fogg's life, which extended from his time in Westfield well into his retirement, was his enthusiastic commitment to Antarctic ecology and algology. His first visit was in 1966 while still at Westfield College, when he spent two months in the South Orkneys studying primary production and nitrogen fixation by marine algae in the Antarctic marine environment. Over the following years he made a number of other visits to Antarctica. When the British Antarctic Survey was placed under the control of the Natural Environment Research Council, Fogg was appointed to its Antarctic committee. He continued to visit Antarctica after his retirement, in the capacity of lecturer on cruise ships. He published three books on Antarctic science, the last of which, 'The Biology of Polar Habitats' (1998), he dedicated to his late wife, who had accompanied him on his last voyage south. He was very proud that his son, Timothy, became involved in work in Antarctica in the late 1970s, with the British Antarctic Survey; the family name is commemorated in the name of the Fogg Highland at 72 degree 45' S, 60 degree 50' W. 
Fogg played an active role in many societies and other bodies involved in his research fields. He was secretary, vice-president, and then president (1976-7) of the Institute of Biology, president of the British Phycological Society (1961-2) and of the International Phycological Society (1964), and a trustee of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (1983-9), and of the British Museum (Natural History) (1976-85). He was elected FRS in 1965 and appointed CBE in 1983. 
Tony Fogg (as he was always known to friends and family) was an outstanding lecturer and a very approachable, calm, and diplomatic colleague. He was the scientist who more than any other elucidated the mechanism of nitrogen fixation by the cyanobacteria, and illuminated their role in the global ecosystem. He also made a unique contribution to the record of Antarctic exploration and ecology. He died shortly after suffering a stroke, at the Gwynedd Hospital, Bangor, on 30 January 2005. He was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94858


Holland, Joan Mary Crossley- (1912-2005), potter and gallery owner, was born on 3 April 1912 at Peatling Magna, Lutterworth, Leicestershire, the daughter of Claude Marriott Lovell Cowper, medical doctor, and his wife, Mary Bourne, 'nee' Collard, a nurse who was also a gifted amateur artist. Unusually she was educated at a Plymouth Brethren boys' school before going to Wycombe Abbey and the Central School of Arts and Crafts. She became a gifted potter, designed for Doulton, and was exhibited at Heal's and Liberty. Following her marriage on 10 September 1939 to the composer Peter Charles Crossley-Holland (1916-2001) she resigned her career in favour of full-time housewifery and parenting of their son and daughter. The marriage lasted several decades and after its painful dissolution with marvellous improbability Joan Crossley-Holland through the introduction of a friend managed the fabulous Lake Palace Hotel in Udaipur for the maharana of Mewar. India is a country where art and craft are indissolubly linked and the experience also led to a store of wonderful stories with which her colleagues were later entertained. 
With both administrative and art experience, Joan Crossley-Holland became the manager of the Bear Lane Gallery in Oxford after her return to England in the mid-1960s. The gallery had held pioneering exhibitions in the 1950s and 1960s of contemporary British art, often with the help of the Arts Council and the brightest of critics and art historians, an achievement continued under Crossley-Holland's stewardship; but the trustees balked at Crossley-Holland's idea of exhibiting craft, denouncing potters as the producers of (mere) casseroles. Crossley-Holland therefore struck out independently, founding in 1968 the Oxford Gallery at 23 High Street. She was backed with a minimum of capital from dons and enthusiasts who believed in the worth of the cause. 
The Oxford Gallery was one of the first commercial craft and art galleries to be professionally designed for its purpose, by the architect Michael Brawne, a specialist in museums. In the face of high college rents, impossible parking, and initially an indifferent or even unsympathetic environment and without public subsidy, the gallery carried on as a genuine pioneer (and indeed long outlived the Bear Lane Gallery). Its tone was set by Crossley-Holland's robust and implacable perseverance, commitment, and belief in the work she exhibited. In her eighteen years as managing director, the work of artists was shown in more than 180 exhibitions; the judicious mingling of the known and unknown was authoritative, and visits to all the graduating shows of the leading art colleges led to many a discovery. The gallery's mix of fine art, notably prints and occasionally paintings, and the crafts in all media was unique and unexpected. 
Crossley-Holland's extraordinarily well-developed aesthetic sense, immense knowledge, and commitment often turned window shoppers into collectors. However her occasional bossiness, fussiness, frankness, and even determination not to charm could at times alienate rather than soothe; her staff were used to picking up the pieces. Happy to educate, she was nevertheless intolerant of mental dullness. She believed with passion that an appreciation, even better ownership, of fine contemporary pieces enhanced life; the standards of the gallery were, for the time, outstanding. Some of the more rarefied artists objected to the creative jumble that at times characterized the gallery's displays, but the intention to be more of a shop than a gallery was designed to disarm those potential clients who might be intimidated by the typically austere art gallery displays that mimicked the museums of the day and could seem unapproachable. 
The Oxford Gallery antedated by several years the Crafts Advisory Council and its successor the Crafts Council, and no one at the time could have foreseen the expansion of interest in contemporary applied arts and in contemporary craft and design on the part of both museums and the major auction houses. The genuine transformation of the climate for craft in Britain by the early twenty-first century, the proliferation of museum collections and of dedicated galleries within museums, and the growth of public and private collections owed a great deal to Crossley-Holland's robust character and determined advocacy. In 1984 and 1985 the gallery held innovative exhibitions outdoors in the gardens, designed by Harold Peto, of High Wall in Headington, Oxford (owned by Brian Beynon Lloyd, first director of Oxford Polytechnic and chairman of the board of the Oxford Gallery), which mixed everything from wicker baskets to fountains to huge outsize pots. These exhibitions illustrated magnificently the possibilities for objects displayed and integrated into the man-made landscape. In tribute to Crossley-Holland after her retirement to Suffolk in 1986, the Oxford Gallery staged another indoor-outdoor show in the conservatory at the Barbican. The Oxford Gallery continued as a significant and important outlet for ceramics, glass, textiles, furniture, jewellery, and artists' prints for another fifteen years after her retirement. Moreover, a number of her fellow directors and assistants went on to influential careers in the promotion of contemporary craft in public and private contexts. Not only did the Contemporary Art Society purchase from the gallery but the Ashmolean Museum benefited directly from gifts and bequests from collectors nurtured by Crossley-Holland and by donations of craft in her honour and in that of her successor, Valerie Stewart. 
Crossley-Holland was always impeccably and neatly dressed with an old-fashioned approach to fashion, looking more like a bustling headmistress than a gallery owner. Beautifully made up, and with a preference for subdued colours from sludge green to rust red, she did however sport the unexpected piece of avant garde jewellery. Her artists attested to her loyalty; it was on their behalf that she was such a formidable figure. She had a surprisingly gentle descent into the classic ailments of old age, ending her days at Pinford End House nursing home, Hawstead, Suffolk, near her son, the poet and children's author, Kevin Crossley-Holland, whose own professed delight was devotion to East Anglia. She died at Pinford End House on 12 January 2005, of Alzheimer's disease; both her son and her daughter survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 94859


Cudlipp, Reginald William (1910-2005), journalist and promoter of Anglo-Japanese relations, was born on 11 December 1910 at 118 Lisvane Street, Cardiff, the second of three sons and second of four children of William Christopher Cudlipp, commercial traveller for a provision merchant, and his wife, Bessie Amelia, 'nee' Kinsman. The sons -- Percy Cudlipp (1905-1962), Reginald, and Hubert (Hugh) Cudlipp (1913-1998) -- were unique in that, for a brief period in 1953, they all had editorial control of London-based national newspapers. 
The three boys were educated in Cardiff, at Gladstone elementary school and Howard Gardens secondary school, which they all left in their early teens to become apprentice journalists. Reginald occupied a lowly position on the 'Penarth News', a small weekly paper serving the seaside resort just south of Cardiff, which later gave Hugh his first job. Reginald had been assiduous in acquiring the basic skills of shorthand and typing and, while still a teenager, was hired as a reporter and sub-editor by the 'Western Mail', the national newspaper of Wales. He stayed in Cardiff until 1938, when he moved to London to work as a sub-editor on the 'News of the World'. When the Second World War broke out in 1939 he joined the Royal Artillery and was posted to Gibraltar, where he edited a monthly magazine for servicemen, 'The Rock'. Towards the end of the war he was made a captain and sent to Calcutta as associate editor of a similar publication, in which capacity he witnessed the surrender of the Japanese in Singapore in September 1945. The same year he married Rachel Joyce Braham. There were no children of the marriage. 
On demobilization Cudlipp returned to London and in 1946 rejoined the 'News of the World', which sent him to New York as its United States correspondent. In 1948 he returned to London as features editor, rising to deputy editor two years later, and inheriting the editorial chair in 1953 when his predecessor, Arthur Waters, died in office. He was the last of the brothers to achieve this status: Percy was by then editor of the 'Daily Herald' and Hugh editor-in-chief of the 'Daily Mirror' and 'Sunday Pictorial'. When Reginald won his promotion the three met for a celebratory dinner -- but Percy was dismissed by the 'Herald' ten days later. 
The 'News of the World''s circulation was then above 8 million -- more than any other British newspaper has achieved before or since. It was notable for its thorough reporting of divorces and court cases involving sexual offences. 'We'd have one page for the dirtiest cases of the week,' Cudlipp recalled in 2002, 'although they wouldn't raise an eyebrow these days' (Hagerty, 27). Yet he was probably not the most suitable editor for that kind of newspaper. A tall, lean man of studious demeanour, he was known by his colleagues as the Bishop. By 1959 the 'News of the World''s circulation had fallen to just over 6 million and he was replaced by his deputy, Stafford Somerfield, a portly 'bon vivant'. 
Unemployed at forty-nine, Cudlipp took some time to find a new career path; and when he did it was a surprising one for a former editor of a mass-market newspaper. In 1961 he became director of the Anglo-Japanese Economic Institute and editor of its quarterly journal, 'Japan'. The institute's primary mission was to foster trading links between Britain and the nation that had emerged from wartime defeat to develop the most powerful economy in the Far East. Cudlipp also became enthused by the possibilities of co-operation between Japan and developing countries, especially those in Africa. He took on his role with energy and became deeply attached to Japan. In a booklet in 1973 he wrote: 'I always tell diehard sceptics who prefer to think of Japan in terms of sweated labour and shoddy products that they really ought to go there some time' (R. W. Cudlipp, 'Japan: Some of the Problems of the Seventies', 1973, 6). In the numerous articles and pamphlets that he wrote for the institute he adoped a schoolmasterly tone, urging British exporters to redouble their efforts to break into this expanding market, however great a challenge it represented. His commitment made a powerful impression on the Japanese and in 1982 he was awarded their equivalent of a knighthood when admitted to the order of the Sacred Treasure. 
Cudlipp regarded himself as a journalist first and foremost, and when he stepped down from the institute in 1986, at the age of seventy-five, he was proud to declare that he had served sixty years in the profession. He spent an active retirement with his wife in Arundel, Sussex, writing and lecturing well into his eighties on Japan and its relations with the rest of the world. He died from prostate cancer at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, on 21 January 2005, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 94861


Dacie, Sir John Vivian (1912-2005), haematologist, was born at 30 Montserrat Road, Putney, London, on 20 July 1912, the son of John Charles Dacie (1860-1928), accountant, and an ardent collector of snails and especially shells, and his wife, Lilian Maud, 'nee' Vivian (1877-1960), a gifted amateur musician. He had three half-sisters through his father's previous marriage, and one sister, Barbara Gertrude ('b'. 1910), later a schoolteacher. He was educated at King's College School, Wimbledon. His main extra-curricular activities during his schooldays, undoubtedly influenced by his parents, were lepidoptery and music, both of which remained absorbing interests throughout his life. After his father died his mother decided to sell his collection of shells, and two of his conchological colleagues offered to catalogue his collection prior to auction. One of them, Colonel Peele, took an interest in Dacie's future and suggested that he should think of a career in medicine. In 1930 he obtained a leaving exhibition from King's College School, a London county council senior county scholarship, and a scholarship to King's College Hospital. He had a brilliant career as a medical student, winning prizes for anatomy, clinical pathology, surgical pathology, and medicine. He had acquired a microscope and particularly enjoyed staining and examining blood films, building up his personal collection of interesting films. This, together with his continuing enthusiasm for collecting butterflies and moths, gave him the training and skill of a meticulous collector and classifier that would serve him well in his future professional career. After qualifying he held posts in rotation as a house physician, resident biochemist, and resident pathologist. On 8 January 1938 he married Margaret Kathleen Victoria Thynne, a 25-year-old staff nurse at King's College Hospital whom he had met while he was working as a house officer on a medical ward. She was the daughter of Arthur Victor Thynne, minister of religion. They had three sons and two daughters. 
After completing his early clinical training Dacie obtained a Medical Research Council studentship that enabled him to work for six months with Janet Vaughan at the University of London British Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith Hospital, and then for the next six months with John Wilkinson and Martin Israels at the Manchester Royal Infirmary. Then, with a Will Edmonds fellowship, he returned briefly to King's. On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, when King's was largely evacuated, he remained in London as blood transfusion officer until January 1940, when he was moved to the Central Pathology Laboratory at Epsom. In 1943 he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps, serving at a casualty clearing station in Normandy six days after D-day, and then in Italy with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In Italy he saw an advertisement in 'The Lancet' for the position of senior lecturer in clinical pathology at the British Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith Hospital, the post that Janet Vaughan had vacated on becoming principal of Somerville College, Oxford. He was appointed to this post in September 1946 and he remained at Hammersmith Hospital for the rest of his career. In 1950 he was appointed reader in haematology by London University, and in 1957 he became the first professor of haematology in the UK. He held this post until his retirement in 1977, when he became an emeritus professor. 
Dacie had been attracted to Janet Vaughan's department at Hammersmith by her book 'The Anaemias', the second edition of which, published in 1936, included a chapter on haemolytic anaemias. Her tuition was to inspire his life's work on the haemolytic anaemias, complementing his earlier appreciation of blood cell morphology. In 1952 he was awarded the degree of MD by London University for a thesis entitled 'Auto-antibodies in acquired haemolytic anaemia in man'. He developed simple diagnostic tests using test tubes and a Pasteur pipette, from which, together with examination of stained blood films, he was able to make astute observations on the behaviour of blood in various haemolytic anaemias. He never felt quite at home with the advent of automatic analysers -- not because they were too complex, but because he would not trust a procedure in which blood was put in at one end and a result was printed out at the other. He needed to know exactly how the sample behaved during the process. His simple tests enabled him to detect minor differences in reaction of different blood samples, from which he could recognize variants of haemolysis. By analysing the features that might be present in the blood of a patient, especially blood cell morphology by microscopy, together with critical assessment of the clinical and laboratory data, he could solve the most complex diagnostic problems. 
While he was a well-qualified physician, having obtained his membership (1936) and subsequently fellowship (1956) of the Royal College of Physicians, Dacie was not attracted to clinical practice, preferring to study the pathophysiology of blood in the laboratory, though always in close consultation with his more clinically oriented colleagues. He investigated a large number of patients with various haemolytic anaemias who were referred to him from all parts of the UK as well as from overseas, and also reviewed blood films with unusual features sent to him for elucidation. In his office he maintained carefully classified files on all these patients, and contacted them regularly to assess their progress. This enabled him to make careful notes of the clinical course of their illnesses as well as to examine changes in their blood films, which he filed for future reference. 
At the same time Dacie was building his department into the leading haematology centre in Britain for all aspects of the speciality. London University had established a one-year postgraduate diploma course in clinical pathology, in which he ran the haematology section; he was also attracting to his department other graduate trainees, initially from the dominions and former British colonies, but also from countries of western Europe and the United States, and from as far afield as China. Thus he greatly influenced the practice of haematology in many other countries besides the UK. He was in great demand to lecture in these countries and to participate in international congresses. Although he enjoyed meeting his old post-doctoral students and trainees, many of whom became distinguished academic and consultant haematologists, he would accept invitations with some reluctance as he preferred to spend his free time at home with his close-knit family -- but when he did accept invitations he would at least compensate by including in his luggage his equipment for augmenting his lepidoptera collection. 
Dacie had been a member (and later chairman) of a Medical Research Council working party on the treatment of leukaemia. In 1966, at the request of the Department of Health and the Medical Research Council, he established the council's leukaemia unit at Hammersmith, with David Galton as director. This unit became a national (and international) reference centre for research in and diagnosis and management of leukaemias and lymphomas. He helped create the Leukaemia Research Fund and was, from 1975 to 1985, the first chairman of its medical and scientific advisory panel. 
During his academic career Dacie published over 170 scientific papers, while a further 670 papers were published independently by other members of his department. He respected their academic freedom and he would not have his name attached to any paper if he had not made a significant contribution and had not been personally involved in its writing. His published papers were later listed in an annotation in the 'British Journal of Haematology' (2005). He was also the author of two major books, both published by Churchill-Livingstone. The first of these was 'Practical Haematology', which was originally published in 1950 and subsequently (with S. M. Lewis as co-author) went into nine editions, becoming a standard textbook worldwide, with translated editions in several languages. The tenth (multi-author) edition, entitled 'Dacie and Lewis Practical Haematology', maintained the principles of good laboratory practice that had been established by Dacie; he had an affinity with his technical staff, and in 1953 he was invited to be an honorary fellow of the Institute of Medical Laboratory Technology. His other major undertaking was 'Haemolytic Anaemias'. The first edition of this unique treatise appeared in 1954; the third edition was published in five volumes, the first in 1985 and the last in 1999, a 'magnum opus' that was a fitting memorial to his intellect, to the breadth of his scientific and technical knowledge of the subject, and also to his scholarly style of writing. When his retirement had deprived him of his secretary he continued his writing at home in his study, with Margaret in the breakfast-room typing the drafts on their faithful Remington typewriter and pasting in any corrections by hand: as with his attitude to the automated blood counters, he could not bring himself to start using the newfangled computer. 
Dacie's influence on haematology was further extended by his distinguished editorship of the 'British Journal of Haematology', which was launched by Blackwells in 1955. His dedication and insistence on an impeccable standard of both scientific content and literary style ensured that the journal quickly acquired an international reputation. When he relinquished the editorship in 1962 he remained as chairman of the editorial board, providing valued advice to the next six editors who successively took up the mantle. He was a co-founder of the British Society for Haematology, and became its president in 1964. He was also president of the European-African division of the International Society of Hematology for its congress in London in 1975. Many awards testified to his contributions to British haematology. He was elected FRS in 1967, served as president of the Royal College of Pathologists (1973-5), and of the Royal Society of Medicine (1977), and received honorary degrees from the universities of Uppsala (1961) and Marseilles (1977). He was knighted in 1976. 
Dacie's lifelong interest in lepidoptera and his skill and devotion to collection and classification led him to become distinguished in that field too. To this hobby he applied the same scholarly and scientific aptitude as he did with his professional work. He enjoyed inviting selected visitors to inspect his mounted display of various species. He was very proud to have become a member of the British Entomological Society, with three papers published in the 'Entomologists' Record'. He lived latterly at 10 Alan Road, Wimbledon, and died at St George's Hospital, Tooting, on 12 February 2005, of peritonitis. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, and by four of their children: Janet, a diagnostic radiologist at St Bartholomew's Hospital, Julian, a general practitioner, (Mary) Jocelyn, a teacher of children with learning difficulties, and (Adrian) James, a teacher of English. His eldest son, John, who worked in advertising, died of a brain tumour in 1985. 


@@@@@


doc= 94863


Deakin, Sir (Frederick) William Dampier (1913-2005), special operations officer, historian, and college head, was born on 3 July 1913 at 30 Temple Gardens, Golders Green, London, the elder son of Albert Whitney Deakin, motor engineer and farmer, and his wife, Bertha Mildred, 'nee' Measures. At Westminster School an inspiring teacher reported in 1930 that 'He has a fine critical intelligence, plenty of drive and a command of words which is sometimes brilliant' (Deakin papers, priv. coll.). After brief spells at a college in America and at the Sorbonne in Paris, Deakin entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1931. He flourished there, took a first in modern history in the summer of 1934, and went to teach for a while in Germany, where he met and disliked Anthony Blunt. On 22 October 1935 he married Margaret Ogilvy Beatson Bell, the 21-year-old daughter of Sir Nicholas Dodd Beatson Bell, vicar of Cornish Hall End, Essex, and former governor of Assam. They had two sons, Nicholas ('b'. 1936) and Michael ('b'. 1939). The marriage ended in divorce in 1940. 
In 1936 Deakin was appointed a fellow of Wadham College, Oxford. Before then an even more momentous event had occurred. Winston Churchill, seeking help with the later stages of his work on Marlborough, sought advice from Keith Feiling at Christ Church. Feiling recommended Deakin, a man of 'great spirit and courage, as I have seen in several trials' (Feiling to Churchill, 2 Dec 1935, Churchill papers, CHAR 8, 506/23). The elder statesman and the new recruit, separated in age by almost forty years, took to each other swiftly. Deakin's knowledge, orderliness, and zeal impressed Churchill. For his part Deakin admired Churchill's fierce concentration and loved his company. Soon he was regarded almost as a member of Churchill's family. He also won within a couple of years his master's complete confidence in political matters. 'Mr. Deakin is a young man of the highest character and intelligence', Churchill wrote to the president of Czechoslovakia in the spring of 1938, 'and shares my outlook on European affairs' (Churchill to E. Benes, 1 April 1938, Churchill papers, CHAR 8/595). Marlborough completed, Churchill embarked on 'A History of the English-Speaking Peoples' with Deakin as his chief coadjutor. The two often laboured until the early hours in the library at Chartwell; Deakin would then drive to Oxford and teach at Wadham from 9.00. 
With Churchill's blessing Deakin had before the outbreak of the Second World War joined the Queen's Own Oxfordshire hussars. During the first winter of the conflict he combined his military duties with research and drafting. In April 1940, while the battles for Norway raged, he found himself late at night in Admiralty House discussing the Norman conquest, and he lunched alone with Churchill at the height of the battle of Britain that summer. Briefly posted to Northern Ireland, he then went for a time to work for British security co-ordination under Sir William Stephenson in New York, before returning on his own insistence to Europe. He was recruited into the Special Operations Executive, sent to Cairo, and there met Livia Stela (Pussy) Nasta (died 2001), daughter of Liviu Nasta of Bucharest. They married in 1943. 
In May 1943 Deakin was dispatched to Yugoslavia, to find out what he could about the mysterious Tito, of whose identity and whereabouts the British were ignorant. He pretended to no expertise in the tangled affairs of Yugoslavia and did not speak any of the local languages. His senior officer in Cairo, a strong supporter of General Mihailovic, apparently hoped that he would not return. When the tiny British party landed by parachute in Montenegro, near Mount Durmitor, the enemy forces were all around. Within a few days Deakin's fellow officer was killed in an attack during which Tito, Deakin, and others were wounded. As Churchill later remarked in the House of Commons, to be wounded by the same bomb constituted 'a bond between people, but a bond which, I trust, we shall not have to institute in our own personal relationships' ('Hansard 5C', 22 Feb 1944, 397.694). 
Neither then nor later did Deakin doubt that Tito, revealed to be Josip Broz, was a man of distinction and quality; Tito appears to have reached with equal speed the same conclusion about Deakin. They spent many hours in each other's company. Deakin admired the fortitude, calmness, and determination that Tito displayed in often desperate circumstances. He knew that the partisans -- starving, living sometimes on nettle soup or handfuls of grass, infested by lice, daily witness to acts of heroism and terror -- were doing the allies a service of the first order by engaging so many German and Italian divisions, a diversion of forces that became the more significant as the campaigns in Sicily and Italy developed. Because Tito spoke no English and Deakin no Serbo-Croat, they plotted the downfall of the Fuhrer entirely in German. In his own account Deakin made no attempt to glide around the horrors of this guerrilla warfare. When the cries of the wounded, soldiers of a Croat division that had fought under German leadership, sounded from the pathways and ditches, 'Pity had long drained out of us. Edging my horse among the bodies, a flick of the rein would have avoided the trampling of the imploring shadows. But in our triumphant wrath and the explosion of our release, we crushed them' ('Embattled Mountain', 22). In Cairo towards the end of 1943, when Churchill passed through on his way from the conference with Stalin and Roosevelt at Tehran, Deakin found himself seated next to a trim figure in the uniform of a field marshal. This was Jan Smuts. 'And what do you do?' he asked. 'I think I am some sort of bandit', Deakin replied. Smuts winked. 'So was I once' (ibid., 261). 
In due course a larger mission under Fitzroy Maclean was sent to Yugoslavia. The two of them, and others, advised that the most effective opposition to the axis in Yugoslavia came from the partisans rather than from Mihailovic, and the British government decided eventually to withdraw support from the latter and concentrate it on the former. That Maclean and Deakin had contributed to this decision is not in doubt; what counted for far more, it is now plain, was the interception of many enemy communications revealing links between Mihailovic and the Italians and Germans and the fact that it was the partisans, not Mihailovic, who caused them most trouble. 
In 1944 Deakin became head of SOE's Yugoslav section in Cairo and, later that year, was transferred to the staff of Harold Macmillan and became adviser to a new command, Balkan Air Force, responsible for all military operations into central and south-eastern Europe. Macmillan valued him as highly as Churchill did. After the war he served for a while as first secretary in the British embassy at Belgrade, confronted hourly by obstruction and outright hostility on the part of the Yugoslav authorities, of which he did not fail to provide many examples when taking official farewell of Tito at the end of January 1946. For his services in Yugoslavia Deakin was awarded the DSO and the Russian order of Valour, and later the Yugoslav Partisan Star, first class. 
Churchill had already resolved to follow the habit of a lifetime; having lived in the eye of the storm for six years, he would write about the war. On his return to England Deakin found himself intercepted and asked to deal with all the political and diplomatic side of the memoirs. To this task he devoted himself for years, combining it with his duties at Wadham. By his mastery of languages, wide intellectual interests, coiled energy, cordial relations with colleagues in Whitehall, readiness in drafting, and harmony with Churchill, Deakin made the enterprise possible. Describing himself as 'one who surrendered without terms long ago to the magic of the man' ('Churchill the historian', 1), he felt the tension immanent in the position of a research assistant who was also a professional historian. 'It was always Winston's book', he nevertheless said long afterwards; 'the rest of us were there to help as best we could, not to interpose our own views' (private information). 
At the instance of Churchill, Wadham College converted Deakin's post in 1949 to a research fellowship. But it chanced that Antonin Besse, a French citizen whose main enterprises were based in Aden and east Africa, had offered Oxford over $1 million for the foundation of a college. Negotiations dragged; Besse became impatient; there was a risk that the benefaction would be lost. It was probably the warden of Wadham, C. M. Bowra, who proposed that Deakin should become head of the new enterprise. At all events it was he who explained the position to Churchill. 'I was delighted to hear of this plan which will give Bill Deakin the opportunity his talents have so long deserved', Churchill replied. 'I do not think you could have made a better choice' (Churchill to Bowra, 20 March 1950, Churchill papers, CHUR 2/168B). 
St Antony's might have taken any one of several forms; indeed, it might have proved little more than a hostel. Deakin, however, saw and seized the opportunity. Oxford could now build up a purely graduate international college. He travelled to meet Besse in the south of France and expounded his plans. Between the two an immediate alliance of respect was forged, soon reinforced by strong affection. Besse judged Deakin to be 'altogether a superior man', who had in him 'a spark of adventurous spirit which endears him to me' (Footman, 185-6). Within weeks Deakin surmounted innumerable difficulties. He gathered the nucleus of a staff, looking for people of high talent who would not only bring distinction on the nascent college by their research but also devote themselves to their pastoral and teaching duties. 
St Antony's opened in October 1950 with seven students. It concentrated largely, but in no rigid fashion, on the study of modern international history, politics, and economics, acquiring buildings by lease or purchase. Student numbers grew rapidly. The college's areas of expertise expanded almost by the year. It became and remained a renowned centre of 'regional studies' of a distinctive kind, firmly rooted in established academic disciplines. Like the warden himself it provided a bridge between the worlds of public affairs and of academic study. 
Somehow Deakin combined these duties with research and drafting for the last three volumes of 'The Second World War' (1951-4), paying a heavy price in respect of his own scholarly interests, but with a dividend beyond calculation; for in the study at Chartwell he had learned 'vastly more of the sense of history than my formal education as a student, and later as a teacher, ever taught me' ('Churchill the historian', 12). After Churchill retired exhausted from the prime ministership in 1955 Deakin helped at every stage with the revision of 'A History of the English-Speaking Peoples', issued in four volumes between 1956 and 1958. Then the way was at last open for pursuit of his own academic interests. His masterly account of the relations between Hitler and Mussolini, and of the implosion of the fascist regime in 1943, appeared as 'The Brutal Friendship' in 1962, and 'The Case of Richard Sorge', written with his close friend and colleague at St Antony's, Dick Storry, in 1966. 
The original endowment had proved inadequate to support St Antony's as its work and reputation grew. Though he always said he disliked the activity Deakin sought funds assiduously and successfully; Besse's family made further generous donations, as did a wide variety of foundations. With support from Macmillan, now chancellor of the university and prime minister, and Churchill, he obtained a handsome grant from the Ford Foundation. From a conference he organized at St Antony's in 1962 sprang the British National Committee for the History of the Second World War, over which he presided for thirty-five years. He also served as vice-president of the international committee to which the British organization was affiliated, and did much to sustain contacts with former enemies and especially with the countries behind the iron curtain. His genius for friendship, accessibility, and reputation as a scholar and as a man of action gave him unique standing and he remained quietly determined that justice should be done to the role which Britain and the Commonwealth countries had played. Deakin's other concerns while warden were numerous, not least when he yielded to the urgent entreaty of Macmillan to serve as one of the five who under the chairmanship of Lord Radcliffe scrutinized security procedures in the public service. The committee examined the techniques of communist penetration, and in November 1961 made numerous recommendations that were accepted by the government in full. 
With the college on a sounder financial footing at last, and after nearly two decades as warden, Deakin retired to Le Castellet, in the south of France, in 1968. There he wrote 'The Embattled Mountain' (1971), a candid account of the horrors and heroics he had witnessed in Yugoslavia, followed by an examination of the same events in the light of facts and evidence largely unknown at the time. He could make but guarded reference to the mass of intercepted evidence on which the British government had chiefly relied in deciding to support Tito. That policy had been strongly criticized from the start, and over a period of some sixty years Deakin found himself censured in wounding terms. This fate he endured with stoicism. 
Clubbable and hospitable to a degree, Deakin (who was knighted in 1975) loved in retirement to visit London and old haunts in Yugoslavia. He travelled widely to conferences, and delivered numerous lectures. Self-effacing and unpretentious, he resisted suggestions that he should write an autobiography or an account of his time with Churchill. 'You are so modest', exclaimed Macmillan, 'that you do not realise the high reputation that you have' (Macmillan to Deakin, 22 April 1981, Deakin papers, priv. coll.). He did however leave behind a large body of unpublished material about Yugoslavia, and his papers were later housed alongside those of his mentor at Churchill College, Cambridge. 
Deakin was intuitively aware of subtleties of personality and situation that eluded others. His natural dignity enabled him to disdain the frailties of old age; his spirit and courage remained undimmed to the last. Shortly before his death the nurses asked him, 'Is there anything we can do for you, Monsieur Deakin?' 'Certainly', he replied with decision, 'champagne for everyone' (private information). He died on 22 January 2005 at Le Castellet, and his ashes were buried there a week later. A memorial meeting was held on 23 April 2005 at St Antony's College. He was survived by his two sons. 
Bill Deakin had achieved high academic distinction; he had played the dominant role in the creation of a pioneering college; he had fought with the utmost valour; he had been a trusted friend and servant of the greatest Englishman of his time. That no one else in his generation had achieved this combination of feats is not a thought likely to have crossed his mind; had it done so, he would have dismissed the notion instantly. 


@@@@@


doc= 94864


Benenson, Peter James Henry (1921-2005), barrister and human rights campaigner, was born on 31 July 1921 at 6 Albert Court, Knightsbridge, London, the only child of Lieutenant-Colonel Harold Josiah Solomon (1885-1930), army officer, and his wife, Flora (1895-1984), daughter of the Jewish Russian banker Grigori Benenson. He became known as Peter Solomon-Benenson in 1939, following the death of his grandfather, before formally adopting the surname Benenson in 1949. After education at home (where his tutors included W. H. Auden) he studied at Summer Fields preparatory school in Oxford, Eton College, and -- briefly, due to the onset of the Second World War -- at Balliol College, Oxford. While at Eton he actively supported the cause of the Spanish republic and assisted child refugees from Nazi Germany. During the war he served in military intelligence at Bletchley Park. On 25 August 1941 he married Margaret Susan Anderson (1917-2004), daughter of Hector James Anderson, a civil servant in South Africa. They had two daughters. 
After the war Benenson, who was called to the bar in 1948, became involved in Labour Party politics, standing unsuccessfully in all four general elections of the 1950s. More significantly for his later career, however, he had become active in monitoring political trials in Franco's Spain from 1948 onwards, and by the mid-1950s this had broadened into a more general interest in violations of human rights. His interest was sharpened by his experiences in Cyprus, which he first visited in October 1956, where he called for the proper investigation of Cypriot allegations of abuses by the British authorities. In 1957 he played a central role in the establishment of Justice, a cross-party organization of British lawyers dedicated to upholding the rule of law. 
In the late 1950s Benenson went through a period of profound personal reassessment. He retired from the bar due to ill health in 1960 and went to recuperate in his beloved Italy. He had converted to Catholicism in 1958 and distanced himself from party politics. On his return to Britain in the autumn of 1960 he conceived the idea of a year-long campaign for the release of those imprisoned for their beliefs -- the 'prisoners of conscience'. He galvanized the support of a group of like-minded lawyers, journalists, and other opinion formers, and the Appeal for Amnesty, 1961 (which formally became known as Amnesty International in 1962) was launched with Benenson's clarion-call article on 'The forgotten prisoners' in 'The Observer' on 28 May 1961. The article, which received much international attention, evoked a remarkable response and Benenson soon found himself at the head of a voluntary movement with branches across Britain and western Europe. He also contributed a 'Penguin Special' entitled 'Persecution 1961', which presented case studies of nine political prisoners. 
Between 1961 and 1966 Benenson was at the height of his powers. His tireless and charismatic leadership, as well as his willingness to draw on his great range of political and personal connections, all greatly facilitated Amnesty's rapid early growth. During its first three years alone Amnesty adopted 1367 prisoners (of whom 329 were released) and organized 360 groups in 14 countries. Although others played a valuable role, Benenson was Amnesty's unquestioned inspiration and leader: in the words of one colleague 'Amnesty was Peter'. He oversaw the development of an archive of information on political prisoners, and addressed countless meetings of the local groups that campaigned for their release. His idea that these groups should campaign for three prisoners (from the West, the communist states, and the third world) was highly innovative and reinforced the movement's impartiality. He undertook some early investigative missions, notably to Haiti where he posed as an artist while researching the crimes of the Duvalier regime. He also had a keen eye for the power of symbols and provided the concept for the famous Amnesty motif -- a candle in barbed wire. 
Even during these early years, however, there were signs of problems to come. Benenson had little time for administration, and organization was often chaotic. Tellingly, he would later confide that 'It has always seemed to me that a humanitarian movement should decide its actions from the heart not from the book of law' (Benenson to Marie-Jose Protais, 11 July 1991, Amnesty International papers). He was also overly trusting of Harold Wilson's new Labour government. In 1966-7 Amnesty was engulfed in a complex crisis that had two distinct components. First, there was the damaging revelation that Benenson had agreed for Amnesty to channel secret British government funds to the families of political prisoners in Rhodesia. Second, Amnesty crossed swords with Wilson's government over its allegations of torture in the crown colony of Aden. The crisis culminated in the allegation by Benenson, now under severe mental strain, that British intelligence had infiltrated Amnesty. In March 1967 he was forced to stand down as president. Benenson's break with Amnesty was a cause of great sadness on both sides, but was not permanent. He formally rejoined the organization in 1978, and Amnesty's leaders continued to seek out his advice. He remained very proud of his creation -- especially when it was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 1977 -- although he also continued to argue that its headquarters should move to a neutral country. 
In 1967 Benenson withdrew to farm near Aylesbury, but he remained an active campaigner for human rights, and created a number of new organizations. These included Pour l'Imaginaire (1978), a trust fund to aid persecuted artists and writers, and Nevermore (1980), a campaign to address the roots of conflict. He later became chairman of Action by Christians against Torture. However, his most significant contribution in these years was arguably his role as co-founder of the Coeliac Society in 1968 (Benenson himself had been recently diagnosed with the condition). His first marriage ended in divorce in 1973, and on 3 August the same year he married Susan Elizabeth Booth ('b'. 1944), daughter of James Booth, heating engineer. They had a son and a daughter. Benenson suffered a car accident in 1993 and his final years, which he spent at Nuneham Courtenay near Oxford, were marked by serious ill health. 
Peter Benenson was offered -- and refused to accept -- an honour from the British state. However, he accepted the Gandhi peace award in 1978 (for pioneering a method of checking the 'vicious devices in various lands for the suppression of political dissent'), and an honorary fellowship of Balliol College (2002). His reputation will always be associated with Amnesty International, his finest achievement. Those who worked with Benenson at that time saw him as an inspirational, dynamic force. In the words of one close associate, Peggy Crane, he was an 'evangelist with a divine spark' (Buchanan, 'Truth will Set You Free', 597). His thinking was coloured by a deep spirituality, and he presented his thoughts on the role of religion in world history in 'The Other Face', a short book privately published in 1977. However, he never lost sight of the need to employ practical -- and sometimes shocking -- means to arouse what he termed 'the world conscience'. He was a man of powerful and impulsive enthusiasms, and these qualities were essential to the founding and early advance of Amnesty International. He died on 25 February 2005 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 94873


Green, Vivian Hubert Howard (1915-2005), Church of England clergyman, historian, and college head, was born on 18 November 1915 at 101 Thurlby Road, Wembley, Middlesex, the only child of Hubert James Green, law stationer's clerk, and son of a Hampstead master tailor, and his wife, Edith Eleanor Playle, 'nee' Howard, daughter of a civil servant. His father had at one point had a confectioner's shop in Wembley but at some time in the late 1920s the family moved to Shanklin on the Isle of Wight, where Green's mother's family lived. They again moved a few years later to Minehead in Somerset. The family was not wholly untroubled. Green had little affection for his father. He was, however, deeply devoted to his mother and to his aunt, Gertrude, who accompanied the family to Minehead. As the owner of successive confectionery shops in seaside towns, Green's father prospered modestly, and Green's mother took on additional work to help send him to Bradfield College. From Bradfield he obtained a scholarship to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he obtained a first in both parts of the tripos. In 1937-8 he was a Gladstone research student at St Deiniol's Library, Hawarden. He set himself the life of Bishop Reginald Pecock as an appropriate research subject. His essay on Pecock won the Thirlwall medal and prize in 1941. 
Green had been ordained in 1940 and became chaplain at Exeter School and St Luke's Training College. He later vividly remembered his service as an air raid warden and the havoc that Baedeker raids inflicted on Exeter. (They incidentally destroyed his papers, delaying publication of his book on Pecock until 1945.) In 1942 he became chaplain and history master at Sherborne School, a post that suited him well. His pupils accorded him respect and liking, though they could not resist naming him Gumboil Green on account of the cyst that he bore on his cheek at that time. He travelled widely in Europe with his closest colleague, H. H. Brown, whose friendship he enjoyed for many years. Their regular trips to Switzerland resulted in a notable account, 'The Swiss Alps' (1961). Green's historical works as a schoolmaster were necessarily based on secondary materials. His 'The Hanoverians: 1714-1915' (1948) sold well, but ignored the Namierite revolution that was transforming eighteenth-century history. On the other hand 'Renaissance and Reformation' (1952) was widely appreciated as a balanced account of European history in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and remained a school textbook for many years. 
In 1951 Green applied for the chaplaincy of Lincoln College, Oxford. He was placed 'proxime accessit'. Fortunately for Green the successful candidate felt unable to give communion to the rector of the day, Keith Murray, a keen supporter of chapel but a Scottish Presbyterian. Green had no reservations on the subject and was duly appointed. In addition to the chaplaincy he taught medieval history, held various offices including the senior tutorship, and was sub-rector from 1970 to 1983. In that role he was esteemed by an expanding fellowship. He enjoyed reminding his colleagues that sub-rectors had once had a whip with which to keep order among them. He was entirely lacking in malice though he was not incapable of sending up humbug. His good nature and congeniality extended to all he knew and met. He was an unfailing source of good sense and judgement, though he never patronized his juniors. He was a conscientious but not a rigorous and demanding tutor. He was, however, exceptionally empathetic and supportive. He was never taken in, but neither did he betray a confidence. 
Though he gave up his chaplaincy in 1969 Green did not lose his love of the liturgy, the poetry, and the music of traditional Anglicanism. In his later years he increasingly doubted its supernatural doctrines. If his latitudinarianism turned to agnosticism he avoided controversial debate. None the less, his wide-ranging book 'A New History of Christianity' (1996) reflected his belief that the church was increasingly remote from modern life. 
Green was perhaps at his best as the historian of an ancient, small, and beautiful Oxford college, preserved mainly because it was for long one of the poorest Oxford colleges. Immersed in its archives, he wrote a succession of books that reflected great scholarship, as well as deep affection for the collegiate tradition that Lincoln maintained. His instinctive tolerance always carried over into his historical world. 'Oxford Common Room' (1957) was a delightful evocation of an intimate, sometimes factious little world of nineteenth-century fellows. 'The Young Wesley' (1961) portrayed Wesley before his heart was 'strangely warmed', struggling with his own impulses and thoughts, relishing the wine, cards, and evening parties of early eighteenth-century Oxford, and not a little attracted by young women whom he encountered among the Cotswold families with which he became acquainted. Among other things Green identified the room that Wesley had occupied in his younger days, where the Holy Club met and Methodism had its origins, distinct from the so-called Wesley Room, restored by American Methodists in 1929. It seems likely that Wesley lived in the latter during his last years as a fellow. Green's magnum opus was 'The Commonwealth of Lincoln College' (1979), a work of scholarship applied to five centuries of the college's history. His mastery of the college's records never obscured his appreciation of the human colour of its changing community. He always took a particular interest in Mark Pattison, for many years a formidable figure in Lincoln, a leading intellectual light in the university as a whole, and not least a likely model for George Eliot's Edward Casaubon. He never published the biography that he had worked on. He did, however, write up the story of Pattison's deep affection for a young woman of tender years in 'Love in a Cool Climate' (1985), as well as editing his 'Memoirs of an Oxford Don' (1988). 
In 1983 Green became rector of Lincoln College in succession to Lord Trend, albeit for only four years since it was known that he would retire at seventy. In the event his tenure proved more than a sentimental gesture. He was a force for moderation and toleration, and showed astuteness in managing colleagues and students alike. He treasured the opportunity to lead the little 'collegiolum' that Richard Fleming, bishop of Lincoln, had founded, somewhat precariously, in 1427. Green's portrait by Richard Foster was hung in college with that of Lord Trend, but more characteristic was the cover photograph on the student magazine of the day, 'The Lincoln Imp', which displayed him astride a motorbike, kitted out in black leather. 
In later life Green was identified publicly as the partial original of John le Carre's inscrutable Smiley, a character rendered all the more plausible by Alec Guinness's television performance. le Carre (David Cornwell) owed Green a considerable debt for his friendship and support both at Sherborne and Lincoln, a debt that he amply returned in later life. Green seemed an unlikely spy to other friends and colleagues, but in his construction of Smiley, le Carre was aiming to convey that spies or 'spooks' were not at all what most people supposed. 
Green's retirement was a happy one. His friendship with William Scoular was a source of great strength to him. It began with Scoular's casting of Green as Canon Chasuble in his production of 'The Importance of Being Earnest' at the Apollo Theatre in Oxford (1979). In 1988 they published jointly 'A Question of Guilt: the Murder of Nancy Eaton', an investigation of a Canadian crime that had uncomfortable implications. The case was subsequently made the subject of a film by Scoular in 2003. Green continued to write to the end. In his last days he edited the proofs of the second edition of his 'The Madness of Kings', a study of the psychiatric disorders of monarchs throughout history which he had first published in 1993. He died on 18 January 2005 at Old Prebendal House, a nursing home in Shipton-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire, a few miles from his delightful if somewhat decaying residence, Calendars, in Burford, where he had over many years entertained students, colleagues, friends, and acquaintances with characteristic generosity, kindness, humour, and charm. He never married, and had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94876


Hardee, Malcolm Gerrard (1950-2005), comedian and comedy promoter, was born on 5 January 1950 in Lewisham Hospital, London, the eldest child of (Harry) Frank George Hardee, Thames lighterman, and his wife, Joan Annie Alicia, 'nee' Hurley. He attended St Stephen's Church of England primary school, Colfe's Grammar School, Lewisham, and Sedgehill comprehensive school, Catford, and was expelled from all three. After stealing a bicycle at the age of eleven he fell into a life of petty crime, which encompassed car theft, burglary, and cheque fraud. 'Later, when it suited me, I would claim I'd fallen in with a bad lot, but the truth was that 'I' was the bad lot' (Hardee, 18-19). As a result he spent much of his youth and early adulthood in borstals and in Wandsworth, Exeter, and Grendon Underwood prisons. By the late 1970s he had got bored with crime and incarceration, and he later reflected that 'Prison is like mime or juggling: a tragic waste of time' (ibid., 49). 
In 1978 Hardee joined Martin Soan and others in The Greatest Show on Legs, which performed an adult Punch and Judy show and various comedy sketches in pubs and at hippy festivals in Devon and East Anglia. The group was introduced to the emerging alternative cabaret scene by Rik Mayall and Ade Edmondson, and started appearing at the Comedy Store in London. In 1981 they developed the infamous balloon dance, which involved the three members of the group appearing naked and precariously covering their genitals with balloons. Performing it on the late-night television show 'OTT' brought them national fame and cult status in Sweden. 
By the time The Greatest Show on Legs split up in 1983 Hardee had already started to establish himself as a solo stand-up (with the catchphrase 'Oy Oy!'). He was described by John Connor as 'not exactly the world's greatest comic [but] probably the world's best con-man of comedy' (Connor, 27); Hardee's material was unremarkable, often consisting of old gags introduced with a bark of 'Joke number one', 'Joke number two', etc. What brought him notoriety on the comedy circuit was his tendency towards nakedness and urination. One routine involved him doing an impression of General de Gaulle with his penis, and he was once sacked for urinating on stage while compering at the Albany Empire. 
Hardee was probably more significant on the alternative comedy circuit as a promoter than as a performer, running venues and managing other acts. He set up the Tunnel Club in a pub called The Mitre in Greenwich in January 1984, and it became legendary for the boisterousness of its audience, which many comedians found terrifying. Indeed, in a notable incident that Hardee saw as the beginning of the end for the venue Babs Sutton of the double act Clarence and Joy Pickles was hit in the face by a glass which had been hurled at the stage. After the Tunnel closed, Hardee set up another Greenwich venue, Up the Creek, with a slightly less fearsome reputation. He also managed various comedians, including Jerry Sadowitz, and was credited with helping the careers of Harry Enfield, Vic Reeves, and Jo Brand (with whom he had an affair). 
Perhaps Hardee's greatest attribute, though, was his genius for publicity stunts. In the 1983 Edinburgh festival fringe he disrupted the show of the American performance artist Eric Bogosian by driving a sit-down lawnmower through the tent in which he was performing. In 1986 he stole an enormous birthday cake that had been baked for Freddie Mercury's fortieth birthday party, the incident providing the title for Hardee's autobiography. He ran for parliament in Greenwich in 1987, winning 174 votes for the Rainbow Alliance Beer, Fags and Skittles Party, and again in 1991, this time as a way of exploiting the free mail shot to get leaflets promoting Off the Kerb to 10,000 constituents. This was not the only example of publicity stunts being used to promote his comedy ventures. In 1989 he got his friend and fellow comedian Arthur Smith to review his Edinburgh show and submit it to 'The Scotsman' under the name of the noted comedy critic William Cook, only revealing the scam after it had been published. 
From the late 1970s until 1990 Hardee's partner was Philippa (Pip) Hazelton, with whom he had two children, Frank ('b'. 1985) and Poppy ('b'. 1988). Fittingly, he married Jane Kintrea Matthews (a 35-year-old publicity officer, and daughter of Robert Ian Matthews, farmer) on April fool's day 1993. They split up in 2000, causing him to abandon his final Edinburgh show (his first was in 1982) after only two nights. About 31 January 2005 he drowned in Greenland Dock, Bermondsey, when he fell out of the dinghy that was carrying him from the boat-based pub he ran, the Wibbley Wobbley, to his houseboat; his body was found on 2 February. His funeral, at St Alfege's Church in Greenwich on 17 February, included contributions from a number of comedians, and his coffin bore a floral tribute that spelt out the words 'Knob Out'. He was survived by his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94879


Hughes, Margaret Patricia (1919-2005), writer on cricket, was born on 1 October 1919 at 5 Beach Houses, Margate, Kent, the daughter of Arthur Hubert Hughes (died 1944), pianoforte ironmonger, and his wife, Dorothy Maud, 'nee' Townsend. She had three brothers and it was from them that she was infected by the cricket virus during games played in the back garden of their house. She does not appear to have sought to play more seriously as an adult, perhaps slightly surprisingly since the 1930s saw a growth in interest in playing the game among young middle-class women. After leaving school at seventeen she took a job in the advertising department of the 'Star' newspaper in London, the only woman in the company of a number of men who, as she later wrote, 'were as amusing as they were difficult to deal with' ('All on a Summer's Day', 37). At least she got to see the cricket scores before the general public. During the MCC tour of Australia in 1936-7 she and her brothers took turns to find out the latest test scores broadcast on BBC radio from 3 a.m. and tuned in to the ball-by-ball commentary that began from 7.30 a.m. before catching their trains into London. Walter Hammond and Patsy Hendren were her cricketing heroes and Lord's her Valhalla. She saw Hendren's last appearance for Middlesex -- he was forty-eight -- and found it an emotionally powerful experience. 
In 1941 Hughes joined the Women's Royal Naval Service (the Wrens), and spent a good part of 1944-5 on a posting to the United States. She found herself impressed both by the east coast and by the 'marvellous hospitality' but puzzled by the national fetish for hygiene and hot water. Demobilized at the end of April 1946, she spent much of her two months' leave at Lord's, her one disappointment being that it was one of the coldest and wettest summers on record. She later wrote that her passion for cricket was so intense that she determined to make it her central life interest. She would mark time through each winter and save enough money to see her through the cricket season. 'I wouldn't be hurting anyone... the country wasn't having to bear the brunt of my unemployment and I wouldn't be fretting in an office from May to September, wondering how events were shaping up at Lords' ('All on a Summer's Day', 69). She found a job on the editorial staff of 'Queen' magazine; she was one of three, her appointment assisted by the fact that the editor's secretary had also been in the Wrens. 
It is not clear how or when Hughes met the music critic and cricket correspondent of the 'Manchester Guardian', Sir (John Frederick) Neville Cardus (1888-1975), but there is no doubt that they became intimate friends, so much so that she became known as his 'cricket wife', as distinguished from his 'music wife', Else Mayer-Lismann. It was to Hughes that Cardus turned in 1949 when he was suffering from writer's block and he also wrote the foreword for her semi-autobiographical 'All on a Summer's Day' (1953), possibly the first book on cricket not written by a man. Cardus must have helped her to obtain a place at cricket's exclusively male table. But that she was not lacking in self-belief is shown by her success in persuading the tough proprietor of the 'Sydney Daily Telegraph', Frank Packer, to allow her to cover the 1954-5 test series between Australia and England. She was rewarded by a stunning English victory which had seemed unlikely after defeat by an innings in the first test. She wrote about the series in her second book, 'The Long Hop' (1955), described by John Arlott in his 'Wisden' review as 'the book of an enthusiast' ('Wisden', 1954, 976). She did not write another book but after the death of Cardus in 1975 became his literary executor and edited several anthologies of his writings, including 'What is Music' (1977), 'A Cardus for all Seasons' (1985), and 'Cardus on the Ashes' (1989). She took upon herself the role of guardian of his reputation. 
Cricket is a game in which style is often thought more important than effectiveness. Cardus valued players for their style and character as much as their ability, and Hughes seems to have shared this preference. On the nawab of Pataudi, for example, 'you could look forward for weeks' to an innings by him, 'knowing you would see a true stylist' ('All on a Summer's Day', 60). Lala Amarnath bowling off the wrong foot had 'the same effect on me as the scraping of a rusty file' (ibid., 62), while Joe Hardstaff was a 'Cyrano de Bergerac at the crease, erect and lithe and quick of foot, with his bat as a rapier, he makes exquisite poetry as he thrusts and parries' (ibid., 63). Grace and charm were important to her in cricketers, especially batsmen, and she spotted it in the eighteen-year-old Colin Cowdrey, whose '45 runs in that style is good enough for me' (ibid., 65). 
Hughes was a true pioneer in a very male world and by the time of her death few others had followed where she led. She never lost her passion for cricket. Only in the final two years of her life did she stop going to watch cricket at Lord's. Having lived latterly at Melcombe Regis Court, Weymouth Street, London, she died on 30 January 2005 at St Mary's Hospital, Westminster, of pneumonia. She never married. Her brother David survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 94881


Cabrera Infante, Guillermo (1929-2005), novelist and writer, was born on 22 April 1929 in Gibara, Cuba, the eldest son of Guillermo Cabrera Lopez ('c'.1900-1990) and his wife, Zoila Infante Castro (1909-1965). His parents founded the Cuban Communist Party and were imprisoned in 1936 for their political activities. In 1941 the family moved to Havana, which came to occupy the centre of his literary imagination. 
Cabrera Infante began studying medicine at the University of Havana in 1949 but soon devoted himself to journalism and literature, entering the school of journalism, where he studied from 1950 to 1954. His journalism focused on the cinema, a lifelong passion, and in 1951 he co-founded the Cinemateca de Cuba (Cuban Film Archive). He contributed to the magazine 'Bohemia', and in 1952 was briefly jailed for publishing a story containing 'obscenities', and forbidden to write under his own name. He subsequently adopted the pseudonym G. Cain (a characteristic pun based on the first syllables of his surnames). Between 1954 and 1960 he wrote film reviews for the weekly 'Carteles', of which he became editor from 1957 to 1960. His knowledge of film was wide-ranging, and his collection of film criticism from this period, 'Un oficio del siglo XX' (1960; published in translation as 'A Twentieth-Century Job', 1991) is urbane and perceptive. In 1953 he married Marta Calvo, with whom he had two daughters, Carola and Ana. They divorced in 1961 and that same year he married the actress Miriam Gomez, a relationship which endured until his death. 
When Fidel Castro came to power in 1959 Cabrera Infante initially supported the new regime. He was appointed a director of the new film institute (ICAIC) and also edited 'Lunes de Revolucion', the weekly literary supplement of the communist newspaper, 'Revolucion'. He published his first book of short fiction, 'Asi en la paz como en la guerra' in 1960 (this was subsequently published in translation as 'Writes of Passage', 1993). In 1961 he clashed with the government over the censorship of the film 'PM', directed by his brother, and a polemical discussion appeared in 'Lunes de Revolucion'. The latter was closed down and Cabrera Infante banned from publishing. Distancing himself from increasing political control, he accepted appointment in 1962 as cultural attache in Brussels, becoming charge d'affaires in 1964-5. 
In Brussels Cabrera Infante worked on what became his most acclaimed novel, 'Tres tristes tigres' (1967; 'Three Trapped Tigers', 1971). The novel's tongue-twisting title perfectly captures its wit. It is a celebration of Havana's pre-revolutionary night life, full of word play, often humorous and sexual in nature. An initial note insists that it is an attempt to capture the human voice on the wing and that it is written in 'Cuban'. The linguistic improvisation and passages of rumination are reminiscent of jazz, by turns joyous and reflective. Displaying immense technical sophistication, the novel has little conventional narrative (the structure is akin to collage), but storytelling is not the point. It is an exploration of Havana voices, as well as having elements of scintillating parody, questioning the very nature of literary representation. Faulkner and Sterne are antecedents, but it is above all James Joyce (Cabrera Infante referred to him as 'J'aime Joys') who inspired the intoxicating invention. It won the prestigious Biblioteca Breve award in Spain. 
Cabrera Infante returned to Havana in 1965 for his mother's funeral and then opted for exile and never returned. He initially went to Spain but the Franco regime refused him resident's status, and in 1966 he moved to London where he remained until his death, becoming a British citizen in 1979. In a BBC interview he later expressed the view that exile had made him a professional writer. But exile was demanding and he experienced severe depression, which curtailed his writing. He recovered and his later output was diverse. He wrote screenplays for the cinema ('Wonderwall', 1968, and 'Vanishing Point', 1971) and adapted 'Tres tristes tigres' for the screen (2005, as 'The Lost City'). Other notable works of his exile years were 'Vista del amanecer en el tropico' (1974; 'A View of Dawn in the Tropics', 1978), exploring the story of Cuba from discovery to the present; the experimental 'Ejercicios de esti(l)o' (1976; 'Exercises in style'); a second volume of film writing, 'Arcadia todas las noches' (1978; 'Arcadia every night'); and, above all, his second novel, 'La Habana para un infante difunto' (1979; 'Infante's Inferno', 1984). This semi-autobiographical novel is a nostalgic examination of growing up in middle-class Havana during the 1940s and 1950s. He also published 'Holy Smoke' (1985), a celebration of smoking (he was a devoted smoker of cigars), written in English. He won a Guggenheim fellowship in 1970, and the foreign book prize (France) in 1971. 
Cabrera Infante's writings on Cuba under Castro were collected in 'Mea Cuba' (1992), which reveals his contempt for the regime. In an interview in 1968 he attacked Castro, and he was then declared a traitor. He insisted that he was never a communist, but his anti-Castroism did not derive from a commitment to the right. In political terms he is probably best described as liberal. In his last years he remained prone to depression and illness. He died in Charing Cross Hospital on 21 February 2005 of MRSA and a chest infection caught after fracturing his hip. He was survived by his wife and the two daughters of his first marriage. 
Cabrera Infante was the leading Cuban novelist of his generation and one of the most distinguished Latin American writers of his time. For his lifetime achievement he was awarded the Premio Cervantes in 1997, the leading literary award in the Spanish-speaking world. His masterpiece was 'Tres tristes tigres', but he had considerable achievements beyond that. He wrote with wit and elegance, and had a fascination with words and their plasticity that was allied to daring humour or sarcasm. He said that Havana was the greatest discovery of his life, and his themes and ideal readers undoubtedly remained Cuban. Never a political writer like other leading Latin American writers, none the less he articulated trenchant anti-Castro views. In Cuba 'Tres tristes tigres' was classified as counter-revolutionary, and from 1968 until his death his books were banned. He remained devoted to the island of his birth and it was his wish that his ashes be kept for burial in Cuba after the death of Castro. 


@@@@@


doc= 94884


Jenkins, (John) Robin (1912-2005), novelist, was born on 11 September 1912 at Burnside Terrace, Flemington, near Cambuslang, Lanarkshire, the son of James Jenkins, spirit salesman, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Robin. His father died in 1919, after serving in the trenches during the First World War; his early death, which Jenkins attributed to the war, meant his mother had to work in domestic service to maintain her children. He was educated (on a bursary) at Hamilton Academy and then at Glasgow University, where he graduated MA in English in 1936, going on to become a teacher in Glasgow in 1937. On 30 June the same year he married Mary McIntyre (May) Wylie (1915-1988), hospital nurse, and daughter of John Wylie, shipyard worker. They had two daughters, Helen and Ann, and a son, Colin. 
Pacifism, brought about by powerful memories of his father's death, led Jenkins to become a conscientious objector in the Second World War, and he worked for six years for the Forestry Commission in Argyll. After the war he taught abroad, in Afghanistan (at the Ghazi School, Kabul, 1957-9), Spain (at the British Institute, Barcelona, 1959-61), and Malaysia (at Gaya College, Sabah, 1961-5), before returning to teach at Dunoon grammar school. He left teaching to take up a full-time career as a writer in 1970, producing a prodigious number of novels, not all of which were published before his death. 
Jenkins's impressive body of work drew heavily on the distinctive and colourful elements of his personal experience. A clutch of early novels focused on childhood and poverty, clearly determined by his position as a scholarship boy (as in 'Happy for the Child', 1953), and his life as a teacher in Glasgow; he returned to such themes throughout his career, as in the striking 'Just Duffy' (1985). 'The Cone-Gatherers' (1955), one of his most successful novels in its wider public recognition and his personal favourite, used conscientious objectors in a forest setting as its subject; 'A Would-be Saint' (1978) and 'The Pearl-fishers' (published posthumously in 2007) also drew on Jenkins's Forestry Commission experience. A number of mid-career novels depicted situations made familiar to him by his teaching experience overseas; again he was interested in cultural conflicts and the misunderstandings they produce, through ethnicity as well as class. 'Dust on the Paw' (1961) was one of his best and most ambitious works from this period but he also returned to these settings in later years in 'Leila' (1995). The focus of all his novels, however, remained the same: the difficulty of goodness, both in the sense of being good, and the complicated responses that apparent goodness in an individual produces in others. Childhood, and the dynamic between innocence and experience, were consistently a basis for these explorations, from the early novel 'The Changeling' (1958) to 'Matthew and Sheila' (1998), although some later novels also explored the idiosyncrasies of old age (for instance 'Willie Hogg', 1993, and 'Childish Things', 2001). The particular implications of goodness, perceived or real, in a Scottish context were addressed through contemporary settings in 'A Very Scotch Affair' (1968) and 'Fergus Lamont' (1979), and with a historical backdrop in 'The Awakening of George Darroch' (1985) and 'Lady Magdalen' (2003). He also made forays into the short story with 'A Far Cry from Bowmore' (1973) and 'Lunderston Tales' (1996). 
While Jenkins eschewed the vernacular and the visceral espoused by younger Scottish writers, his moral realism, the desire to confront the uncomfortable and unspeakable, can be seen recurring in such novelists as Iain Banks and A. L. Kennedy, whose subject matter might initially appear very different from his own. Jenkins himself cited Evelyn Waugh as an influence, and praised Robert Louis Stevenson's south sea fiction, but his interest in characters who represent fantastic or grotesque personalities might also be linked with earlier writers like James Hogg and Sir Walter Scott. Although he was described as 'the Scottish Thomas Hardy' because of the bleakness of his perspective, and while some of his novels might be aligned with Scottish working-class fiction of the 1950s, Jenkins saw himself as a blackly comic moralist, 'a mixture of dour Presbyterian realism and another part of me which says to hell with all that' (Norquay, 'Moral absolutism', 439), returning to the same concern with goodness and hypocrisy in all his novels. 
Scottish literary critics frequently argued that Jenkins never fully achieved the commercial success his novels deserved. He may have failed to attract a wider readership and critical acclaim because his novels initially appeared to offer social realism but were concerned with much wider metaphysical explorations: they were uncomfortable to experience but profound in impact. As a writer he saw himself as very much working on his own. Although he attributed critical neglect to his time living in (and writing about) foreign parts, in later years he gained recognition for his contribution to Scottish literature, being appointed OBE in 1999 and receiving the Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun award in 2001, for services to Scottish life and culture. In 2003 he was given a Saltire Society lifetime achievement award. He died on 24 February 2005 at Inverclyde Royal Hospital, Greenock, following a stroke. He was survived by his daughters, Helen and Ann; his wife, May, and his son, Colin, predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 94887


Large, Sir Peter (1931-2005), civil servant and campaigner for the rights of disabled people, was born on 16 October 1931 at 100 Hawkeys Lane, Tynemouth, the son of Rosslyn Victor Large (died 1955), bank clerk, later a principal at the Bank of England, and his wife, Ethel May, 'nee' Walters (died 1981). At the time of the registration of his birth his parents lived at 34 Chase Court Gardens, Enfield, London. He was educated at Enfield grammar school and University College, London where he graduated BSc in civil engineering. His love of sport and his ability on the football field earned him a trial with Arsenal Football Club. During his national service (1953-5) he served on submarines and was the first national serviceman to be appointed a submarine engineer officer. He left the navy as a sub-lieutenant. 
In 1956 Large joined Shell International Petroleum as an engineer. Initially posted to Nigeria, he served also in Ghana and the Persian Gulf before being posted to Indonesia in 1962. There he contracted poliomyelitis, which left him paralysed. He was flown back to the UK by the Royal Air Force and spent fourteen months in hospital. He was unable to use his legs or arms and was totally dependent on others. Had it not been for his determination and intellectual vigour he could well have been consigned for life to an institution. On 27 April 1962, while still an in-patient at the Royal Free Hospital, London, he married Susy Baber, a 33-year-old divorcee (through whom he acquired a stepson and two stepdaughters), and daughter of Bernard Fisher, medical practitioner. With her assistance he was able to leave hospital. In 1966 he joined the Board of Trade and in 1976 he became a senior scientific officer. 
Although he remained a civil servant until 1991, Large's main impact was elsewhere. Also in 1966 he joined the board of the British Council for Rehabilitation of the Disabled, and when this merged with the Central Council for the Disabled in 1977, to form the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation (RADAR), he became a member of the executive committee of the new organization, a position he held until 2001. This gave him a pivotal role in the world of disability politics. Meanwhile he had noticed that services for disabled people were geared towards those of non-managerial status and, together with Mary Greaves, he established the Association of Disabled Professionals in 1971. He became its first chairman, a post he retained until 1993 when he became its parliamentary adviser. 
Large quickly became a superb lobbyist who won the respect of those he worked with as well as of the ministers and civil servants whose minds he had to change. In the 1960s there were no social security benefits to meet the particular needs of disabled people who had not been in the military. Large campaigned for a disability benefit in two parts. One part would be taxable and would compensate for loss of earnings and the other, which would be tax free, would meet the extra costs that disability inevitably imposed. Although this was never achieved in the form Large wanted, his efforts bore fruit in social security benefits such as the disability living allowance and incapacity benefits. For twenty years Large was the parliamentary adviser to the Disablement Income Group and from 1985 to 1993 was its vice-chairman. 
Large also made a major contribution to the mobility of disabled people. In the 1960s the assistance disabled people received towards their mobility was, apart from wheelchairs, an invalid tricycle that had only one seat; passenger carrying was forbidden. A number of disability organizations campaigned to have these tricycles replaced by a small car. Large, who could not drive because he could not use his arms, argued that the existing scheme helped those who already had the most mobility and ignored those with greater impairments. Against considerable opposition he won the argument and the government introduced the mobility allowance, a cash payment intended to enable disabled people to purchase a car. However, as the allowance was not enough for that purpose Large joined a working group set up by the Central Council for the Disabled. The government accepted its main recommendation that a new organization should be established to enable disabled people to lease a car for the value of their allowance. The charity Motability was the result and Large was a trustee from its inception in 1978 until his death. By that time it was supplying cars to 440,000 disabled people and was responsible for 5 per cent of all new car sales in the UK. Large also worked to make public transport accessible. His main platform was his chairmanship of the Joint Committee on Mobility for Disabled People (1971-97) but he also advised the Department of Transport through his membership of the influential Disabled Persons Transport Advisory Committee (1986-2002). He promoted accessible air travel but his diffidence seemed to prevent him taking advantage of the services he won for other people. He rarely travelled further than London. 
Perhaps Large's greatest contribution was his successful fight for legislation outlawing discrimination against disabled people. The world's first minister for disabled people, Alfred (Alf) Morris, invited Large to chair the Silver Jubilee Committee on Improving Access for Disabled People (1977-9) to investigate the extent to which disabled people were prevented from getting around by the structure of the built environment. His report, 'Can Disabled People Go Where You Go?' (1979), prompted the response 'no'. Also in 1979 Morris invited Large to chair another committee, the Committee on Restrictions Against Disabled People, which reported in 1982. The new (Conservative) minister was less responsive to meeting the needs of disabled people than Morris had been. Large pointed out that discrimination was not only about employers and service providers treating disabled people unjustly because of their disability. It also occurred when buildings were designed with features such as steps that prevented wheelchair users getting into them. Hotels routinely turned disabled people away, as did cafes, restaurants, and shops. He argued that seeking to tackle discrimination by persuasion was a waste of time; legislation was needed to make it unlawful. He argued that he did not care what people thought about him, what was important was the way they treated him. Jack Ashley introduced a 'Disability Discrimination Bill' into parliament. It was defeated, as was every other attempt until 1995, when a 'Disability Discrimination Act' was finally passed. This legislation provided inadequate means to enable disabled people to enforce their rights, but in 2000 the Disability Rights Commission was established. A twenty-year battle had been won. 
Large's wife, Susy, developed a kidney disease in 1979 and was advised to stop smoking. Large, who was a heavy smoker, supported his wife and gave up overnight, another example of his remarkable willpower. Susy died in 1982. Large needed help for all physical activity and hired a number of carers to support him. Eventually he employed Sheenah McCaffrey (the daughter of Joseph James McCaffrey, hospital boiler stoker), who moved into his home to provide the twenty-four-hour care he needed. They married on 16 October 1992. With her support he was able to continue attending countless meetings in London to press the cause of disabled people. In later years he used artificial respiration during the day as well as at night. He was drafting a response to a government document on behalf of the Association of Disabled Professionals the day before he died. 
Large was appointed MBE in 1974 and CBE in 1987, and knighted in 1993. Those who knew him were struck by his intelligence and determination, and his endless ability to support any disabled person who sought his help. He was always courteous and modest. His favourite entertainments were talking to his cats and listening to jazz. He died of respiratory failure on 23 January 2005 at his home, 14 Birch Way, Warlingham, Surrey, and was survived by his wife, Sheenah. 


@@@@@


doc= 94888


Law, Sir Horace Rochfort (1911-2005), naval officer, was born on 23 June 1911 at 46 Merrion Square, Dublin, the younger son of (Samuel) Horace Law (1973-1940), ear, nose, and throat surgeon, and his wife, Sybil Mary (1878-1952), daughter of Sir George Clay, first baronet. Though intent on a naval career (he traced his descent back to Lord Nelson's elder brother, William) he was unable to enter the Royal Naval College on account of ill health and spent four years at Sherborne School before joining the Royal Navy as a special entry cadet at seventeen. Throughout the 1930s he served in surface ships and specialized in gunnery, achieving advanced or 'dagger' qualifications. 
The outbreak of the Second World War found Law as gunnery officer of the cruiser 'Cairo', in which he served through the ill-fated Norway campaign of 1940. His experience in fighting off air attacks and dodging bombs delivered both in dives and level flight was a notable baptism of fire, and resulted in a mention in dispatches. His ship was damaged off Narvik and he moved on to HMS 'Coventry', in which he went through the Greece and Crete campaigns in the Mediterranean in 1940-41. These involved intensive attacks by Italian and German aircraft in which Law distinguished himself, earning the DSC. He returned to the United Kingdom at the end of 1941 and on 13 December that year married Heather Valerie Coryton (died 1996), the 24-year-old daughter of Henry Haworth Coryton, rector of Merrow, Surrey. The wedding cake had been made by Groppi's in Cairo -- a rare sight in wartime Britain. There were two sons and two daughters of the marriage. Law's wartime naval service continued with trials of an American anti-aircraft gunnery system in the cruiser 'Delhi'. His enthusiasm for this did not endear him to the Admiralty authorities. In 1942 he joined the cruiser 'Nigeria', in which he served for the remainder of the war. 
Law was promoted commander in 1946. His first command was the frigate 'Modeste', the gunnery training ship. Thereafter, after an Admiralty appointment in the gunnery division, he moved on to be fleet gunnery officer in the Far East. During the Korean War he was closely involved in the intricate business of naval gunfire support for the UN forces and particularly the South Korean army. For this work he was appointed OBE in 1950. Promotion to the rank of captain followed, with command of the new and powerful destroyer 'Duchess'. After further staff appointments he assumed command of HMS 'Centaur', then employed as the training carrier, and then moved on to be captain of the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, in 1960-61. There he oversaw the introduction of a new scheme of entry and training, with the ability to manage change effectively that was increasingly a feature of his career. 
On promotion to rear-admiral in 1961, Law became flag officer sea training, in charge of working-up ships from Portland, then flag officer submarines, an unusual appointment for a non-submarine officer. Promoted vice-admiral in 1965, he became controller of the navy, responsible for all aspects of the service's material development. Tenure of this gruelling post coincided with the navy's battle to keep alive the project for a new generation of fixed-wing aircraft carriers, ultimately lost with its cancellation under Denis Healey in 1966. Law, who had some doubts (never voiced in public) about the project, remained in post as controller and oversaw the subsequent evolution of the 'through deck cruiser', eventually to become the Invincible class. His final appointment, from 1970 to 1972, was as commander-in-chief, naval home command, in charge of all shore establishments in the United Kingdom, serving simultaneously as first and principal naval aide-de-camp to the queen. He was appointed CB in 1963, knighted KCB in 1967, and promoted GCB in 1972. 
Law's most striking characteristic, among senior officers of his generation, was his devout Christianity. He underwent two deep religious experiences, one as a midshipman and one during the Second World War; and, strikingly, he sought divine guidance during the successful installation, in action conditions, of new gun barrels in a twin 4 inch mounting. He demonstrated his faith in an address given at the empire youth service in Westminster Abbey on 26 April 1942. In later years he was president of the Officers' Christian Union (1976-86) and chairman of the Church Army Brigade (1980-87). This aspect of his life was generally acknowledged and respected throughout the navy -- he said, wryly, that he was 'known as a God-botherer' (interview with J. Parsons) -- but his unfailing fairness and professional judgement ensured that it did not cloud his views of those with differing opinions. 
After his retirement in 1972 Law was chairman of the shipbuilding firm R. and W. Hawthorn Leslie & Co. (1973-81), a member of the security commission (1973-82), and president of the Royal Institute of Naval Architects (1975-7). As a governor of Sherborne School he had to handle a difficult matter of staff succession, which he did with skill. He lived during his retirement at Cowpers, West Harting, near Petersfield, Sussex, and died there of bronchopneumonia on 30 January 2005. He was survived by his four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94889


Leach, Bernard Howell (1887-1979), potter and writer, was born on 5 January 1887 in Hong Kong, the only child of Andrew John Leach (1852-1904), barrister and puisne judge, and his wife, Eleanor 
(known as Nellie; 1862-1887)
, daughter of Hamilton Sharp of Manchester, headmaster, and his wife. 
Three months after the death of his mother, who died while giving birth to Bernard, Leach was taken from Hong Kong to Japan by his maternal grandparents who were travelling to Kyoto to work as missionary teachers. About 1891 his father married a distant cousin of his mother, Jessie Sharp, a devout Catholic, and he came to Japan to take the four-year-old child back to Hong Kong and then to Singapore where Andrew Leach was appointed to the bench in 1894. While devoted to his father, Bernard Leach remembered his childhood as lonely, his only friend being his half-Irish, half-Chinese amah. Relations with his stepmother were difficult, and his father seemed distant and undemonstrative. Although there are no records of any early education Bernard discovered the joys of drawing as a child, spending hours sketching the boats in the harbour. 
In 1897, at the age of ten, Leach was taken to England by a great-uncle, travelling across the United States by train, to attend Beaumont Jesuit College on the edge of Windsor Great Park, generally regarded as the 'Catholic Eton'. Again he was lonely and isolated, and formed no lasting friendships within the school, an environment he found needlessly severe. While he made little impact academically he did excel in drawing and elocution, for which he was awarded prizes, and made the first eleven at cricket, a sport he continued to enjoy throughout his life. Religious ceremony and sacred music also offered some consolation for his continuing unhappiness. 
Since Leach showed no inclination for an academic career in business or law his father reluctantly agreed to allow him at the age of sixteen to enter the Slade School of Fine Art at the University of London. Under the watchful if highly critical eye of Henry Tonks, who was in charge of drawing at the Slade, Leach's graphic skills blossomed, though his ability to handle paint proved elusive. After only three terms his father was diagnosed as having advanced cancer and Leach was forced to leave the Slade and to spend the final few months with his father at his home in Bournemouth. In a desperate bid to please him, Leach made a deathbed promise to enter the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and embark on a respectable and secure career. For a time he studied for his bank examinations in Manchester, staying with his uncle, William Evans Hoyle, director of the Manchester Museum, his aunt Edith (his mother's sister), and their daughter his cousin (Edith) Muriel (1885-1955), with whom he fell in love. Her parents, however, did not approve of the relationship. 
After returning to London Leach found work as a junior bank clerk intolerable. In complete despair he lost his belief and never returned to the Roman Catholic faith. Despite the promise made to his father, he resigned from the bank and at the age of twenty-one used his modest inheritance to attend the London School of Art where he came under the powerful influence of Frank Brangwyn who taught him etching. Brangwyn, who had worked for several years in William Morris's workshop, was a keen Japanophile, and may have impressed Bernard with ideas about the relationship between art and craft and with his fascination with Far Eastern culture. The return of his grandparents from Japan, and the vivid images of old Japan described in the accounts of the travels of Lafcadio Hearn, rekindled childhood memories and Leach decided to move to Japan, and try to make a living by teaching etching. His love for his first cousin Muriel had never wavered and eventually family objections were overcome and they made plans to marry in Kyoto. Leach moved to Japan in 1909, and lived in Tokyo; and he and Muriel married there later the same year. 
Much to his surprise Bernard Leach found it hard to adapt to Japanese life; tall, thin, with a mass of hair and a bushy moustache, he found the rooms were too small for his large frame and sitting cross-legged on the hard floor proved to be a trial. Despite this he had a traditional Japanese house built, although he sought to retain some Western customs by having a central well in the living room fitted with a table so he could avoid sitting cross-legged. He also designed furniture in a mixture of oriental, Western, and arts and crafts styles. Although critical of many aspects of Japanese culture, he was enthralled by the craftwork and the use of traditional techniques, but he felt that in the urge to Westernize many old and valuable customs were being lost or forgotten. His first child, David Leach ['see below'], was born in 1911, eventually followed by another boy and three girls. 
Unfortunately few Japanese responded to the etching process, and far from finding himself continuing in the role of teacher Leach became a student, eager to learn about a culture that seemed so fundamentally different from anything he had encountered in the West. Through an involvement with a group of progressive young intellectuals known as the Shirekaba (White Birch) he became friends with Soetsu Yanagi, who later established and became director of the Folk Art Museum or Mingei Kan. In an attempt to escape the limits of traditional Japanese life the Shirekaba investigated the spiritual aspects of Western literature, poetry, and painting, and published their ideas in a journal of the same name. Like Leach they were concerned with the impact of industrial modernization, fearing that the values of new Japan would eliminate rather than free the spirit of man. Leach's involvement with the group was largely to introduce the work of European artists and writers such as William Blake and Augustus John. 
It was through the Shirekaba that Leach was introduced to the magic of pottery for the first time. Invited to a raku party, he painted a biscuit-fired pot that was then covered with glaze and fired quickly in a small portable charcoal kiln. Enraptured, Leach decided to learn the craft and found an old potter, Urano Shigekichi (then living in the slum area of Tokyo), who held the title Ogata Kenzan VI, for he claimed descent from the poet, painter, and potter the first Kenzan. From Shigekichi, Leach learned the rudiments of pottery, the art of painting on pots, and the techniques of raku and high-fired stoneware and porcelain. Although the convention was to employ a skilled thrower who threw under direction, he acquired limited throwing skills working on a wheel that revolved clockwise, the opposite of Western wheels, a method that he would retain throughout his life. In 1914, prior to a move to Peking (Beijing) in China, Leach held his first one-person show of pots, paintings, fabrics, and furniture in Tokyo and published a book 'A Review, 1909-1914'. This contained poems, prose pieces, his credo and his belief in the unity of East and West, as well as illustrations of pots and reproductions of etchings. This was the first of a series of books in which he propounded his personal philosophy and aesthetic concepts, most notably in 'A Potter's Outlook' (1928). 
In China, under the influence of the mysterious and rather sinister German Dr Westharp, Leach sought to revive aspects of traditional Chinese teaching methods following the ideas of Maria Montessori. In 1917, realizing the futility of his quest, he and his family returned to Japan, thoroughly disillusioned with the search for social, philosophical, and educational fulfilment, accepting Yanagi's advice that his true vocation was to be a potter. Encouraged by friends he set up a workshop on Yanagi's land at Abiko in Chiba province. When this was totally destroyed by fire Viscount Koroda, a patron of the arts, came to the rescue by building a workshop and kiln for his use and supplying two skilled potters to work under his direction. For his final exhibition before returning to England Leach published another small book with essays by Yanagi and his friend and fellow potter Kenkichi Tomimoto among others. 
To enable his children to have an English education, and assuming that his work would find as enthusiastic a response as it had in Japan, Leach returned to England in 1920, bringing with him Shoji Hamada, a potter who had studied at a technical school in Tokyo. With financial help from a local philanthropist, Frances Horne, Leach set up the Leach Pottery on the outskirts of St Ives, Cornwall, building a large, oriental-type climbing kiln fired with wood, the first of its kind to be built in the West. Despite great technical problems local materials were found and they produced stoneware and porcelain that reflected oriental influence. In a smaller round kiln he fired earthenwares drawing on more Western styles, and also raku. In organizing a workshop and in the sort of pots that were produced the pottery played a pioneering role in establishing an identity for studio potters in the twentieth century. 
Early exhibitions of both individual pots and tablewares in London attracted favourable reviews but limited sales, and until the standard range of tableware was introduced the pottery struggled financially. Fortunately regular shipments of pots and drawings to Japan were a continuing success and helped supplement the finances of the pottery at St Ives. Much to Leach's surprise the Japanese preferred earthenware pots with slip-trailed decoration, described by Yanagi as 'born not made', rather than the individual stoneware pieces that more closely emulated oriental wares. 
Early students at the pottery included Michael Cardew, Katharine Pleydell-Bouverie, and Norah Braden, and contact with contemporary stoneware potters, who included William Staite Murray, proved useful in discussing technical and aesthetic problems. Several times the pottery teetered on the verge of bankruptcy and was eventually rescued by Leonard and Dorothy Elmhirst at Dartington who invited Leach to move the pottery to their estate in south Devon. In 1932 a combination of the breakdown of his marriage and worsening financial situation led Bernard to accept the offer and he settled in Dartington, where he set up a small pottery making earthenware, while continuing to operate the Leach Pottery at St Ives. At Dartington Bernard was introduced to the Baha'i faith by the American painter Mark Tobey and in 1940 he proclaimed himself a believer in Baha'u'llah, a faith that strengthened to become more central in his life. On 7 July 1944 he married Laurie Gladys Annie Cookes (1895-1976), who had worked as secretary and helper at the Leach Pottery. 
From 1937 Leach's elder son, David, who joined the pottery in 1930, introduced a series of innovations that put the Leach Pottery at St Ives on a more stable footing, converting the kiln from the laborious process of firing with wood to oil, and introducing a range of repetition wheel-thrown tablewares that became known as standard ware. This was fired to high temperature with a white or black glaze on the inside only so that it contrasted pleasantly with the rich, toasted colour of the body. Leach standard ware was made by assistants like Bill Marshall, many of whom remained for many years. Production of standard ware continued until Leach's death, and was regarded by many as setting the classic standard for handmade high-fired pottery, and in time was widely emulated. 
In 1934 Leach returned to Japan for a fifteen-month visit where he toured country potteries and collected material for 'A Potter's Book' (1940), by far his most influential text. With its blend of philosophical thoughts on 'standards' for studio pottery and sound practical advice on clay bodies, techniques, glazing, and kilns, the book became regarded as the 'potter's bible' and is still in print. 
Following the Second World War Leach felt confident enough to want to talk about his ideas, successfully touring Scandinavia in 1949, the United States and Canada in 1950, 1952 (with Yanagi and Hamada), and 1961, and later Australia and New Zealand, always accompanied by exhibitions of his pots. In talks, lectures, slide and film shows he advocated the need for work that involved the 'head, hand and heart', that was anti-materialistic and that looked to but did not seek to emulate tradition. An engaging speaker, Leach quickly got the feel of his audience. His manner tended to be conversational rather than declamatory and often involved much waving of arms. He could be generous in his praise though always wary of anything that might be construed as imitative or superficial. Favourite topics in his talks and lectures were based on his personal experience such as his impressions of Japan and his early training. In the alternative society of the 1960s Leach and 'life-style' pottery had a great vogue. 
Leach continued to make regular visits to Japan, often travelling round the country, making sketches of the landscape, and decorating with lively brushwork pots made to his design at country potteries. On 26 March 1956 he married his third wife, Janet Darnell (1918-1997) ['see 'Leach, Janet], an American potter he had first met in the States, who, following David Leach's departure in 1955 to set up his own workshop, took over the running of the Leach Pottery. His pots still received a muted reception in England but in Japan exhibitions of his work sold out almost instantly; in 1967 he was awarded the order of the Sacred Treasure, second class, the highest accolade the country could give to a non-Japanese person. In 1974 the Japanese Foundation awarded him the equivalent of the Nobel prize for services to East-West understanding. Although there was an Arts Council retrospective exhibition 'Fifty years a potter' in the council's London gallery in 1961, he was given no further major exhibitions in the UK until 1977 when a large retrospective at the Victoria and Albert Museum finally brought the full range of his achievements to wide public acclaim. Public honours included freeman of St Ives in 1968, the appointment as a CBE in 1966 and CH in 1974. With failing sight Bernard Leach stopped making and decorating pots in 1973-4, when glaucoma was diagnosed, and he concentrated on writing. A book of his poems, 'Drawings, Verse and Belief', published in 1973, expounds the importance of his commitment to the Baha'i faith, and it was followed in 1978 by a book of memoirs 'Beyond East and West: Memoirs, Portraits and Essays', a series of autobiographical writings about his life and his views on pottery and religion. Other books included a translation of Yanagi's writings, 'The Unknown Craftsman: a Japanese Insight into Beauty' (1972), a study of Hamada, 'Hamada: Potter' (1975), and 'Kenzan and his Tradition' (1966). Leach died on 6 May 1979 in St Ives, and was buried there in Longstone cemetery. 
In his work as a potter Bernard Leach sought to unite the high-firing processes of oriental wares with a Western understanding, producing bottles, bowls, lidded boxes, and vases in stoneware or porcelain mostly thrown on the wheel. At their best the pots have a powerful sense of form enhanced with minimal decoration, many freely but surely painted or incised. Few pots over 12 inches were produced; most were smaller, so ensuring that their scale was essentially domestic. Preferred colours were muted creams, pale blues and greens, or dark intense glowing blacks and browns, intended to be objects of contemplation and quiet reflection. Some jug forms were based on medieval forms. Leach came closest to traditional English country wares in the range of large earthenware dishes in terracotta that he made in the 1920s and 1930s and again briefly in the early 1950s. Many were decorated with slip patterns, carried out with great freedom and assurance, which included the Mermaid of Zennor, reflecting Cornish folklore, while others offered powerful interpretations of Japanese landscape. 
The influence of Bernard Leach, both nationally and internationally, lies in both his writing and his practice as a potter. As an author he attempted to 'set standards', whether in the quality of work made, or in discussing concepts of beauty. Pots were often imbued with human characteristics and references were made to the neck, belly, shoulder, and foot. 'The pot is the man' was an oft-repeated maxim used when seeking to assess quality. Following William Morris's ideas, Leach believed that the nature of work affected the person who made it and should be a 'joy to the maker and to the user'. Yanagi, who inclined towards Buddhism, introduced Leach to Zen Buddhist concepts and their intimate relationship with aesthetics. Leach attempted to look at the fundamental basis of the religion and how this related to the idea of beauty in pots. As a Western artist he often found the concept of rejecting self in favour of a wider and more anonymous creativity a great challenge. 
For the form of his pots, Leach drew heavily on the classic bottle shapes of Korea rather than China or Japan, having seen them at first hand during visits to the country in 1918 and 1935, though always softened and muted rather than austere and sharp. He was a great initiator, more famous and influential than contemporaries such as Charles Vyse or William Staite Murray, partly because he courted publicity and partly because of the widespread success of 'A Potter's Book' that combined theory and practice with personal experience. Leach saw himself as having a mission in bringing together the cultures of East and West, and to propound the value of hand as opposed to machine work. Following his death in 1979 Leach's reputation went into severe decline. After dominating the world of studio pottery for over fifty years there was a strong reaction against his oriental-inspired aesthetic of sombre tones and eastern forms in favour of more colour and a lighter mood. Leach's own pots also suffered from a series of fakes made in the early 1980s. More recently a large retrospective at the Crafts Council Gallery, London (1997) and a monograph (1999) have begun to offer a more balanced view of Leach and his undoubted position as the most influential figure of twentieth-century studio pottery. 
Leach's elder son, David Andrew Leach (1911-2005), potter, was born on 7 May 1911 in Japan, where (with the exception of a brief interlude with his parents in China) he spent the first nine years of his life, until the family settled in St Ives. He originally hoped to study medicine, but his family could not afford the fees. In 1930 he joined the Leach Pottery, but recognizing his own technical ignorance spent two years studying ceramics at Stoke-on-Trent, much to the disapproval of his father, who referred to it as 'the industrial devil'. Luckily David Leach inherited his father's passion for ceramics but not his lack of business sense. He was instrumental in establishing the pottery on a firm financial footing, particularly through the introduction of repetition tablewares, and such other innovations as mail-order catalogues. On 23 April 1938 he married the 25-year-old (Mary) Elizabeth Facey, daughter of Surgeon Commander Samuel Henry Facey RN of Harting, Sussex. They had three sons. 
During the Second World War David Leach served with the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry. He then returned to the Leach Pottery, whose growth he continued to nurture. He also helped establish potteries in Norway and at Aylesford in Kent (the latter for the Carmelite friars, in 1954). He began to acquire a reputation for his own pots, particularly after an exhibition at a St Ives art gallery in 1949. In 1955 David and his younger brother Michael left to start their own potteries, David founding Lowerdown Pottery at Bovey Tracey, Devon. There he produced many acclaimed examples of earthenware, and more especially stoneware and porcelain. He was an excellent thrower, and made some beautiful, and often very large, stoneware pots. His development in 1967 of a light, translucent porcelain (later widely used by other potters) enabled him to produce some exquisitely delicate, fluted pots and bowls. His work was acquired by more than forty public collections in Britain alone, and was exhibited in many countries. 
David Leach was chairman of the Craftsmen Potters Association of Great Britain in 1967 and won the gold medal of the International Academy of Ceramics the same year. He was also a committed and talented educator. Having spent the year 1953-4 running the pottery department at Loughborough College of Art, he continued teaching there until the mid-1960s. In 1963 he advised Harrow School of Art on its new two-year diploma in studio pottery, and in 1976 he was a key figure in the establishment of the Dartington pottery training workshop. He continued living in Bovey Tracey until his death, on 15 February 2005, at Torbay Hospital, Torquay, of a lower respiratory tract infection. He was survived by his wife of sixty-six years, Elizabeth, and their three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 94891


Maddox, Conroy Ronald (1912-2005), artist, was born on 27 December 1912 at 8 The Homend, Ledbury, Herefordshire, the only son and elder child of Albert George Maddox (1886-1958), rate collector and Territorial Force volunteer, and his wife, Eleanor Annie, 'nee' Ballinger (1884-1975). His sister, Eleanor Joan, was born on 29 December 1913. His earliest memory, which was to influence his mature paintings, was of travelling to a Manchester hospital in August 1915 with his sister and mother to visit his father, who had been wounded at Gallipoli. His elementary education began in 1918 at the Court House School, where he was singled out for an art prize. From there he went in 1924 to Ledbury grammar school and then the newly opened Chipping Norton county school, when the family moved to Chipping Norton in 1928 to take proprietorship of the Blue Boar inn. He spent his free time painting landscapes in one of the inn stables. In 1933 the Maddox family moved again, to Birmingham, where Maddox's father became a representative in the wine and spirits trade. Aged twenty, Maddox started work as a clerical assistant in a solicitor's office. He went on to be an assistant in an analytical laboratory and then a designer in a car mascot casting firm. By 1935 he was working more permanently as a designer of trade fair exhibition stands. 
The year 1935 also coincided with Maddox's discovery of surrealism, which he regarded as a turning point. He visited the International Surrealist Exhibition in London in 1936 and spent the summer of 1937 in Paris, attending classes at the art academy in the rue de la Grande Chaumiere, where he experimented with 'invented surrealist transformations of the model'. On his return he exhibited at the Birmingham Group exhibition at the Lucy Wertheim Gallery in September 1937. By this time he had met the painter John Melville and his brother Robert, a writer and art critic, with both of whom he formed the nucleus of the surrealist group in Birmingham, which was to include Eric Malthouse, Desmond Morris, Emmy Bridgwater, Oscar Mellor, Stephen Gilbert, and William Gear. In the summer of 1938 Maddox again stayed in Paris, where he associated with William Gear, Reinhart Kalnine, and Georges Hugnet, and met Marcel Duchamp and Man Ray, the last of whom influenced his 'Onanistic Typewriter' (1940), a typewriter that sports vertical nails on each of its keys. In January 1939 he participated in the Living Art in England exhibition at the London Gallery, the nerve centre of surrealism in Britain, and had a page devoted to him in 'London Bulletin', the surrealist journal edited by E. L. T. Mesens. Maddox's artistic production at this time was diverse: his lyrical, colourful gouaches depicting biomorphic, semi-abstract figures contrasted with collages containing violent and erotic surrealist juxtapositions. His object-mannequin 'Cloak of Secrecy' (1940) was suggestive of dismembered limbs and a severed female body. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War Maddox entered a reserved profession with the Birmingham firm Turner Brothers, manufacturers of aircraft parts. He continued to flourish as an artist and played a key role in the Zwemmer Gallery's Surrealism Today exhibition, for which, as well as exhibiting, he designed a window display in which a child's cot containing rumpled sheets was transfixed by a dagger. His collages were equally disconcerting and, at the height of the war, several were seized by the special branch during a raid on the home of Simon Watson Taylor, on suspicion of being coded messages to the enemy or anarchist propaganda. Ironically, Maddox's war work had intensified at this time with a posting to British Thomson-Houston in Rugby for secret work on the stereopticon projector used by Rank Studios. In that year he met Wilhelmina Nancy (Nan) Burton (1924-1996) and entered a relationship even though Nan was married to Wilfred Sullivan Bruce Burton. Two children were born outside wedlock, Stefan (1945-1971) and (Wilhelmina) Lee ('b'. 1947). The couple had settled at 29 Speedwell Road, Edgbaston, in 1946, but it was not until 14 February 1948, following Nan's divorce, that they married, at Birmingham register office. The choice of a register office was significant. Maddox maintained that organized religion was corrupt and he repeatedly attacked the clergy in his work. At times this attitude resulted in irreverent humour, particularly evident in a series of staged photographs, 'Entertaining a Nun' (1946), in which Maddox progressively inebriates and plays pranks on a young woman dressed as a nun. At this time he also invented the semi-automatic procedure of 'ecremage', which ranks alongside coulage, fumage, grattage, and decalcomania as a surrealist painting technique. 
In 1954 Maddox and his family moved to London but he and Nan soon separated, and were living apart in 1955. A new relationship began with Pauline Drayson ('b'. 1935) in 1957 and, with her financial help, Maddox settled at 17A Lambolle Road, Belsize Park, in 1965. There he developed a more representational style of painting, as well as experimenting with pop art techniques. The 1967 surrealist festival, The Enchanted Domain, involved Maddox both as exhibitor and organizer, and served to renew his friendship with E. L. T. Mesens, with whom he collaborated on collages. The early 1970s saw great productivity and regular exhibitions in London, as well as regular contact with the Chicago surrealist group. The premature death of Maddox's son, Stefan, in 1971 prompted a stream of unsettling, grief-ridden paintings, such as 'Residue of the Day' (1971). A fascination with hysteria and the nineteenth-century Parisian neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot led to works depicting madness and mayhem at the Pitie-Salpetriere hospital, which was in keeping with the defamiliarization of the commonplace that underpinned all his work. When the Hayward Gallery mounted the Dada and Surrealism Reviewed exhibition in 1978, Maddox felt that surrealism had not been properly represented and promptly organized a protest exhibition, Surrealism Unlimited. 
In 1979 Maddox met Deborah (Des) Mogg ('b'. 1963), who became his final companion. A retrospective was held at the Stoke-on-Trent City Art Gallery in 1995, and the last of some twenty one-man exhibitions was held at Whitford Fine Art in 2002. During his seventy years as an active surrealist, Maddox produced over 2000 works and constantly championed the theoretical purism of the surrealist movement. He died on 14 January 2005 in the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, of bronchopneumonia and was cremated in Finchley, north London, on the 21st. His ashes were scattered in the garden of his home. He was survived by Des, Pauline, and his daughter, Lee. 


@@@@@


doc= 94893


McCrum, Michael William (1924-2005), classicist, headmaster, and college head, was born at 3 Ashburton Road, Alverstoke, Hampshire, on 23 May 1924, the third of the four sons of Captain Cecil Robert McCrum (1892-1976), naval officer, and his wife, Ivy Hilda Constance (1891-1990), daughter of William Nicholson, fruit farmer and sugar planter. He won scholarships from Horris Hill, Newbury, to Sherborne School in Dorset (1937-42), where he was head of school and a member of the first fifteen, and from Sherborne to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. Naval service delayed his arrival at Corpus until 1946. Having enlisted as an ordinary seaman, he was commissioned as a sub-lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in December 1943. He served on Arctic convoys and off Sicily in 1943, and subsequently in the Far East on the aircraft carrier HMS 'Victorious', which was subjected to kamikaze attacks in 1945. He observed VJ-day gratefully thereafter. 
At Corpus (1946-8) McCrum gained a double first in the classical tripos (with distinction in part two) and played rugby for the LX Club. In 1948 he was appointed assistant master at Rugby School, where he took charge of part of the classical sixth and found time to play rugby for Warwickshire. Lasting consequences of his time there were a love of teaching and his marriage on 6 September 1952 to Christine Mary Kathleen fforde, the 23-year-old daughter of the head master, Sir Arthur Frederic Brownlow fforde (whose entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' McCrum later wrote). They had three sons and a daughter, and the closeness of the bond between them was central to their official, as to their private, lives. 
In 1950 McCrum returned as a fellow to Corpus with a view to becoming tutor, responsible for the admission and wellbeing of students. From 1951 to 1962 he was both tutor and director of classical studies. Appointed university lecturer (1952-62), he dealt in detail with the Athenian constitution. In 1961 he and his Corpus colleague A. G. Woodhead published 'Select Documents of the Principates of the Flavian Emperors, including the Year of Revolution, AD' 68-96. As tutor, he loomed large in the lives of undergraduates, taking a close interest in them and entertaining them with apparent relish. He urged Corpus to respond to problems identified by a university committee on which he sat and arising from the growing numbers of research students, for whom colleges made limited provision, and of academics holding university posts who had no college affiliation. In 1962 an attractive graduate campus was established at Leckhampton House and eleven new fellows were elected on a single day. 
In 1962 McCrum was invited to become headmaster of Tonbridge School. He was immediately seen to be 'a vastly energetic headmaster' ('The Tonbridgian', 1963). Tall and upright, he was a commanding presence -- more of 'a personage than a person' as Vikram Seth supposed, until he was invited to lunch ('Two Lives', 9). He had a formidable knowledge of boys and supported their activities tirelessly, but did not seek their good opinion. He doubled as housemaster of School House, recognition on his part that he still had school business to learn. He was remembered for his 'insatiable desire for constructive activity' and for his readiness to submit 'practically everything' to 'methodical scrutiny' ('The Tonbridgian', 1970). He stressed, and raised, academic standards, and modified curriculum and timetable. He made a point of tidiness and punctuality (a fetish, some thought, of the latter), but permitted informal clothes in the evenings, visits to the cinema, and pub meals for prefects. He abolished practices he thought outmoded, including fagging and beating by boys. A committed worshipper and regular preacher, but aware of the challenge of securing a response from boys, he modified services and required chapel attendance just once on Sundays. The cadet corps became voluntary. By 1967 'The Tonbridgian' was writing: 'Never have there been so many changes in so short a time.' One view was that during his eight years as headmaster he had transformed 'a good public school in Kent [into] one of the top schools in the United Kingdom' ('The Tonbridgian', 1970). The process was variously remembered, some judging that a determined headmaster had imposed his views, others that he had wanted nothing so much as to engage the common room in collegial review. 
McCrum was pressed to become head master of Eton College, where his predecessor's time had been cut short, in 1970. He quickly demonstrated 'exceptional ability to master issues and to make decisions' (Card, 268). He dealt firmly, but consistently, with matters of discipline, retaining his right to administer corporal punishment, which had brought criticism upon his predecessor. He made a sustained attempt to improve academic standards, and adjusted entry procedures to reduce what could be considered an academic tail. Aware that implementing changes at Eton would prove complex, he made effective use of its apparatus of committees, though he did not always succeed in disarming criticism or resistance. Beating by boys and personal fagging were abolished, and more relaxed dress was permitted out of school hours, as was occasional weekend leave for senior boys. McCrum visited in his turn questions about the Eton curriculum originally raised by the public schools commission in the 1860s, and modified arrangements in the lower school, reserving a prominent place for Latin and Greek, but dismantling classical divisions, in which English and divinity had also been taught, and making extended time available for artistic subjects. Senior boys were given a choice between weekday chapel services and assemblies intended to promote open enquiry. McCrum made time to serve as chairman of the Headmasters' Conference in 1974, and was particularly keen to open Eton to a wider world. He brought large numbers of visitors to the school (the McCrums viewed the end of an Eton half as the closing of their hotel). As at Tonbridge, he strongly supported community service, and introduced junior scholarships that brought boys from maintained primary schools, via preparatory schools, to Eton. In the opinion of one historian of Eton he had brought to 'the basic management of Eton... greater skill than any Head Master since Dr Warre in his prime' (Card, 283). 
In 1980 McCrum returned to Corpus as master, and held that office until 1994. In 1982 he persuaded the college to admit women as students and fellows, and he admitted twice as many new fellows as any one of his predecessors. A building programme and appeal were launched to accommodate expanding numbers. He resumed an active part in the counsels of the university, and in 1987 became vice-chancellor, the last college head to take the two-year turn that had been customary. He stressed the importance of a measure of financial independence for the university, and the Cambridge Foundation was established in his time. In demand as a governor, he maintained his involvement with schools, and chaired both the Governing Bodies Association (1989-94) and the Oxford and Cambridge Schools Examination Board (1981-7). He also became the first chairman of the Cathedrals Fabric Commission (1991-9), and in 1996 was appointed CBE for his work in that capacity, his contribution to education, curiously, going unremarked. 
McCrum had run the institutions entrusted to him with conspicuous efficiency, but he had never been content merely to run them. Committed to them as places of learning, communities, and Christian foundations, he had taken up with enthusiasm the task of refitting them for changing, and challenging, times. Two late published works pointed to convictions and attitudes that had shaped a lifetime: 'Thomas Arnold, Head Master: a Reassessment' (1989) and 'The Man Jesus: Fact and Legend' (1999). He was tried late in life by Parkinson's disease and cancer of the prostate, but was determined not to be diminished by them. He died suddenly of cardiac arrest at his home, 32 Clarendon Street, Cambridge, on 16 February 2005. He was buried in the churchyard of St Andrew and St Mary at Grantchester, and was survived by his wife, Christine, and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94894


Miall, (Rowland) Leonard (1914-2005), broadcaster and television executive, was born on 6 November 1914 at 73 Corringham Road, Golders Green, London, the elder son of Rowland Miall (1879-1955), scientific instrument maker, and his wife, Sara Grace, 'nee' Dixon (1885-1975). He was a scholar at Bootham School, York, and went on first to Freiburg University, where he studied German, and then to St John's College, Cambridge, where he read economics and law. In 1936 he was president of the Union and editor of the 'Cambridge Review'. In a profile of Miall, 'Granta' predicted that he would end up in the BBC. 
After lecturing in the United States and serving for two years as secretary of British-American Associates, in 1939 Miall joined the BBC's newly formed German Service as its first talks producer. His colleagues then included Hugh Greene, the future director-general of the BBC, Patrick Gordon Walker, the future foreign secretary, and Marius Goring, the actor. There were tensions over what should be broadcast to Germany in wartime: the BBC sought editorial independence, while the government's black propaganda units sought control. Miall honed his diplomatic skills during those years. In 1942 he was seconded to the political warfare executive and sent to the United States, first as director of news in San Francisco and then as head of the office in New York. His affection for America never ceased. After returning to Europe in 1944, he worked as personal assistant to the deputy director-general of the political warfare executive and then, briefly, in the psychological warfare division of the Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Force in Luxembourg. On 18 January 1941 he had married Lorna Barbara Rackham (1916-1974), the 24-year-old daughter of George John Rackham, mechanical engineer. They had three sons and one daughter. 
Miall rejoined the BBC in 1945 and, after a brief spell as special correspondent in Czechoslovakia, became the corporation's Washington correspondent. He was a skilled broadcaster, reporting on American affairs with authority. He knew the powerful people in Washington, and he was on good terms with opinion formers like Edward R. Murrow and James Reston. He had a gift for spotting the importance of a story. Never was this more true than in 1947, when he heard of General George Marshall's speech at Harvard on reconstruction in war-ravaged Europe. Americans were sympathetic to Europe's plight, Marshall said, and he urged the European nations to set up a concerted plan. Because Ernest Bevin, the British foreign secretary, heard Miall's broadcast, diplomatic action followed swiftly and the Marshall plan was born. Years later Dean Acheson, by then the secretary of state, said: 'It was a good thing that Leonard did not lose his voice that night' (private information). 
In 1954 Miall returned to London and was appointed head of the quaintly named television talks, a department which under his leadership went on to be responsible for such programmes as 'Panorama', 'Tonight', 'Monitor', 'Zoo Quest', 'Gallery', 'The Sky at Night', 'Face to Face', and many other documentaries and programmes ranging from science to gardening. It was a heady time for television and for those who worked in the shabby offices in Lime Grove studios, London. Miall was in charge of a group of talented people who went on to command the heights in broadcasting, Huw Wheldon, David Attenborough, Donald Baverstock, and Alasdair Milne among them. On screen the reporters -- who included Richard Dimbleby, James Mossman, Robert Kee, and Alan Whicker -- showed craftsmanship of the highest order. Miall encouraged them with a friendly nod usually; a gentle admonition occasionally. Egos were pushed to one side, pressure from Broadcasting House as well as the political parties was fielded deftly. But it was too good to last. 
One Friday morning in 1962 (the year after he was appointed assistant controller, current affairs and talks, and appointed OBE) Miall was summoned by the director-general, Hugh Greene, his wartime colleague, and told that he would be replaced by his deputy, Grace Wyndham Goldie, fourteen years his senior. Greene offered him a post in Scotland, but such was the affection in which Miall was held in the television service that a job was created for him within forty-eight hours. By the Monday morning Miall had an office in Television Centre as special assistant to the director of television (Kenneth Adam), with the task of planning the start of BBC2, then three years away. So well did he buckle down to this administrative job that within a year he was promoted to assistant controller, programme services. 
In 1966 the BBC showed its wisdom by sending Miall back to New York as its American representative. For the next four years he was a fine ambassador for the BBC and for Britain. He had always cared for the United States, he had many friends in the television networks there and in Washington, and he entertained stylishly, but modestly. Back in London, Miall spent the last three years of his BBC career as controller of overseas and foreign relations, a roving job that took him around the world, advising foreign broadcasters on what the BBC was all about. Because he was such a likeable person with a natural charm, he opened many doors and made new friends. 
With the exception of war service Leonard Miall's entire working life was spent in the BBC and even after his formal retirement in 1974 he continued to work for the corporation part-time as its research historian. He prepared the material for three of Asa Briggs's books about the BBC, and in 1994 he published 'Inside the BBC', a book of profiles of twenty-five personalities from Lord Reith to Sir Robin Day. These were short but witty essays, reflecting the urbanity of the author. He continued to write, because it was his hobby, and his name was often seen under some of the obituaries in 'The Independent'. 
Of middling height, slightly stooped, Miall had a visual resemblance to Alastair Sim, and his stories were illuminated by his genuine enjoyment in telling them. His first wife, Lorna, having died in 1974, on 10 October 1975 he married Sarah Greenaway (Sally) Bicknell ['see below']. He died at his home, Maryfield Cottage, High Street, Taplow, Buckinghamshire, on 24 February 2005, of bronchopneumonia and cerebral vascular disease. 
Miall's second wife, Sarah Greenaway Miall (1918-2010), rally driver and novelist, was born on 18 December 1918 at New Hall, Romford, Essex, the daughter of (George Easlemont) Gordon Leith (1885-1965), a South African architect who had served as a captain in the Royal Field Artillery (but was recovering from a gas attack on the Western Front), and his wife, Ethel Mary, 'nee' Cox (1888-1974). After the war her father worked with the War Graves Commission in France before returning to South Africa with his young family; Sally spent the majority of her childhood in Johannesburg. In 1934 she returned to England with her mother and two sisters, and was enrolled at Roedean School in Brighton, from where she went to Newnham College, Cambridge, where she read English and made lifelong friends. On 26 July 1940 she married a fellow student, Nigel Bicknell (1918-1990), who by then was a pilot in the Volunteer Reserve. He subsequently flew reconnaissance missions over occupied Europe (Sally meanwhile working during the war at Bletchley Park) then, via a posting as air attache in Washington soon after the war, joined the Foreign Service, serving in Istanbul and Athens. 
While bringing up their four sons, Sally Bicknell indulged her love of fast driving, winning the Ladies cup in the Acropolis rally in 1956, in a Fiat 600. She also began writing the first of a series of novels (mostly published under the name Sally Bicknell) which included 'The Midwinter Violins' (1973), 'The Summer of the Warehouse' (1979), and 'Follow that Uncle!' (1980). She and Nigel Bicknell were divorced in 1975, and later the same year she married Leonard Miall. For many years she served as secretary to the London committee of the British School at Athens, based in Gordon Square, London, but with yearly trips to Athens. After her husband's death she continued to live at Maryfield Cottage in Taplow until shortly before her death on 6 October 2010 at Austenwood Nursing Home in Gerrards Cross, of cancer of the colon. She was survived by three of her four sons and by her four step-children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94895


Millar, George Reid (1910-2005), special operations officer, author, and farmer, was born on 19 September 1910 at Boghall, Baldernock, Stirlingshire, the younger son (there was no daughter) of Thomas Andrew Millar (died 1921/2), architect, and his wife, Mary Reid, 'nee' Morton (died 'c'.1938). As a small boy he shared his cot with the family Airedale, which had to be put down in 1917 as there was no meat to spare for it; this did not make him pro-German. He went from Loretto School, which he rather disliked, to St John's College, Cambridge, where he read architecture and enjoyed himself. He tried work as an architect, between 1930 and 1932, but soon gave it up for journalism. The 'Glasgow Herald' sent him to investigate the wreck of the 'Lusitania', which led to a lifelong fascination with the sea. In 1934 he moved on to the 'Daily Telegraph', and once scooped the 'Daily Express', which captured him with a larger salary. He was unusually good-looking, and made his first marriage on 2 December 1937 to Annette Rose Forsyth, the 25-year-old daughter of Brigadier-General Clifton Inglis Stockwell, and the former wife of Michael Noel Forsyth; she abandoned her first husband for him. She joined him in Paris when he became one of the 'Express''s Paris correspondents shortly before the outbreak of war in 1939. By June 1940 he was the only one left, and made a hazardous escape from the advancing German forces by motor car south-westwards, managing to get out to England just in time. She had been driving an ambulance at the front, and escaped separately. 
Millar at once threw up his profession to join the army, and was soon commissioned into the rifle brigade and sent to north Africa. In the confused fighting round Gazala in June 1942 his platoon got separated from the 1st battalion and he was taken prisoner, lightly wounded. He was packed off to a prisoner-of-war camp in southern Italy, where he soon ran a black market in food with the local peasantry. When this was discovered he was moved to a punishment camp near Genoa, from which he was abruptly transferred to Germany in September 1943. He escaped from the train, made friends with some French forced labourers, got into France, stumbled on a British escape line, and crossed the Pyrenees with difficulty. On the way he met a Special Operations Executive (SOE) organizer, Richard Heslop, who refused to recruit him, but mentioned his name to his SOE commander. SOE interviewed and recruited him when he reached London. During his escape, which earned him a military cross, he had been buoyed up by thoughts of rejoining his wife; she had not waited for him. 
Millar plunged into SOE training and, on the rebound, into a new love affair, with Isabel Beatriz Hardwell, the wife of Charles George Hardwell, and daughter of Montagu Bentley Talbot Paske-Smith, diplomat, and his Spanish wife. He was parachuted into eastern France on the night of 1-2 June 1944, a few days before the Normandy landings, to set up a new sabotage circuit called Chancellor; his personal codename was Emile. He went to work in the Ourcq valley, north of Besancon, where Georges Molle, the leading local poacher, proved a tower of strength to him. From a very late start, he was able to assemble groups of saboteurs devoted to him, whom he made skilled at their tasks and kept supplied with explosives. They disrupted traffic on the local railway, which was of some strategic importance to the Germans, and made a substantial distraction of German effort away from the main fighting fronts, at a price in casualties. His powers of leadership and sheer charm were such that, fifty years later, elderly women who had worked for him as teenage couriers would lay hand on heart and cry 'Ah! Emile!' if his codename was mentioned. He was appointed to the DSO by the British and to the Legion d'honneur by the French, who also awarded him a Croix de Guerre. 
After the liberation of France Millar put an account of his escape into a book, 'Horned Pigeon' (1946), and of his SOE adventures into another, 'Maquis' (1945). He wrote them fast, but well, and secured clearance for their publication. The latter sold extensively: it gives a matchless account of how to live hour by hour, never knowing whether you will see the next through. De Gaulle told him in a private interview that his was the best account of life in the maquis, though he could not say so in public. 
Millar divorced his first wife, and on 11 May 1946 married Isabel as soon as she was free of her first husband. After a protracted honeymoon sailing round the Mediterranean, they leased a farm of 1500 acres in west Dorset, where he settled down to breed cattle, hunt, shoot, and write. The best of several travel books were 'Isabel and the Sea' (1948), on their honeymoon, and 'Oyster River' (1963), on SOE's sea link between Cornwall and Brittany. He also wrote 'Road to Resistance' (1979), a memoir of his war years. In 1989 Isabel emerged unconscious from a road accident, from which she died in 1990 without ever having recognized him again. He gave up the farm, and moved to Uploders Place, a house near Bridport, where Venetia Ross-Skinner looked after him as he went blind and old age crept up on his still undaunted spirit. He died at Warmwell House, Dorchester, on 15 January 2005, of bronchopneumonia. Venetia Ross-Skinner arranged an annual prize in his memory at Bridport literary festival. He had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94898


Mogotsi, Pearl Cynthia Connor- (1924-2005), actress and theatrical agent, was born Pearl Cynthia Nunez in Diego Martin, Trinidad, on 13 May 1924, the ninth of twelve children of Albert Antonio Nunez, a headmaster, and his wife, Georgina Agnes, 'nee' Fitt, a teacher. Her father was of Portuguese and African descent; her mother 'was a white woman with red hair but she had some Carib in her' ('The Guardian'). She had 'a lovely, magical, folklore-based childhood', but 'I was terribly rebellious', she later recalled ('The Independent'). In Trinidad her greatest influence was Beryl McBurnie, a woman dedicated to promoting the culture and arts of the island and the founder of the Little Carib Theatre, where Pearl Nunez gained her first acting experience. 
Soon after the Second World War Pearl Nunez travelled to London, where she enrolled at King's College to study law. In London, on 26 June 1948, she married the popular Trinidadian folk-singer, actor, and broadcaster Edric Esclus Connor (1913-1968), whom she had met in Trinidad. He was looked upon as a father figure in Britain's post-war black community. After her marriage Pearl Connor gave up her law studies in order to assist in the management of her husband's career, and also to bring up their two children, Geraldine Connor, later a noted ethnomusicologist and composer, and Peter. From 1956 until 1976 she ran the Edric Connor Agency, which later became known as the Afro-Asian Caribbean Agency: 'the need of the people [on our books] always remained our first priority', she later said: 'We struggled along for years because the pay for artistes was not a lot. We didn't have named artistes on our books, we didn't have people with great reputations, we were building reputations. And that was our pioneering work. We were breaking stones and it was very tough. (Pines, 36)' The Jamaican actor Lloyd Reckord, who arrived in Britain in the early 1950s, described her as a guardian angel to all young black actors in Britain: 'Her house was always a home for people like us. And she just worked continually, pushing black actors, quarrelling with the powers-that-be, arguing 'Why can't black actors get this sort of part?', and generally working for us. (ibid., 53)' Meanwhile Pearl Connor studied at the Rose Bruford Training College of Speech and Drama and worked as a broadcaster for BBC radio, making appearances on their Caribbean Service. She also acted in BBC radio plays, including 'The Barren One' (1958), 'My People and Your People' (1959), and Jan Carew's 'The Riverman' (1968). There were occasional appearances on the stage, including in Barry Reckord's 'You in Your Small Corner' at the Royal Court in 1960, and in such films as Lindsay Anderson's 'O Lucky Man!' (1973). In 1961 she helped launch the Negro Theatre Workshop at the Lyric Theatre in London with a production of 'A Wreath for Udomo', written by the black South African Peter Abrahams. The company also presented Wole Soyinka's 'The Road' (1965), staged at the Theatre Royal, Stratford East, for the Commonwealth Arts Festival, and 'The Dark Disciples' (1966), a jazz version of the 'St Luke passion', which was chosen to represent Britain at the first World Festival of Black and African Arts in Senegal. 'The Dark Disciples' was also produced for BBC television in 1966. 
Edric Connor died in 1968, and on 26 March 1971 Pearl married, in London, Joseph Kolie (Joe) Mogotsi (1924-2011), the South African lead singer of the Manhattan Brothers. Together they planned and organized tours throughout the world for black South African singers, dancers, musicians, and actors. In 1977 she represented Trinidad and Tobago at the second World Festival of Black and African Arts in Lagos, Nigeria. In 1995 she opened the twelfth International Book Fair of Radical, Black and Third World Books in London, and took part in 'A Brighter Sun: a Celebration of the Life and Work of Sam Selvon' at the Royal Festival Hall. In 2003 she introduced a screening of Edric Connor's 1960 film 'Carnival Fantastique' -- which had been thought lost -- at the National Film Theatre. Occasionally she was called upon to contribute to television and radio documentaries, including BBC2's 'Black and White in Colour' (1992), BBC Radio 2's 'Salutations' (a profile of Edric Connor; 1993), 'Alex Pascall's Caribbean Folk Music' (1995), and two productions in the BBC's 1998 'Windrush' season, 'Their Long Voyage Home' (Radio 2) and 'Black Firsts: Edric Connor' (BBC2). She was also seen in Channel 4's 'Songs From the Golden City' (1997), the story of Joe Mogotsi and the Manhattan Brothers. 
In 1972 the government of Trinidad and Tobago awarded Pearl Connor-Mogotsi the Humming Bird silver medal for 'outstanding services to the immigrant community in the United Kingdom', and in 1992, in Britain, she received the national black women's achievement award. She died in Johannesburg, South Africa, on 11 February 2005, and was survived by her husband Joe and the two children of her first marriage. Her funeral service was held in London at St Martin's Church, Kensal Green, on 26 February. On 13 October 2007 family, friends, and colleagues paid tribute to her with a celebration of her life and career at the church hall, Church of the Ascension, Wembley Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 94899


Moorey, (Peter) Roger Stuart (1937-2004), archaeologist and museum curator, was born on 30 May 1937 at 64 Hazelwood Road, Bush Hill Park, Middlesex, the elder child of Stuart (Sam) Moorey (1906-1951), deputy head of Tottenham grammar school and a teacher of history and rugby, and his wife, Freda Delanoy, 'nee' Harris (1909-1947). His mother died when he was nine; his father remarried but died soon afterwards, leaving him at the age of twelve with a sister and a baby half-sister. He became an avid reader from an early age, with an interest in archaeology. This was exemplified in his habit of mummifying his sister's dolls, burying them, and drawing a map so that they could be located again. After attending (as a boarder) Mill Hill School, where he was inspired by a talk given by the archaeologist Leonard Woolley, he was conscripted for national service, which he served in Cyprus with the army intelligence corps between 1956 and 1958. From this experience came habits of punctuality, extreme self-discipline manifested in brilliantly polished shoes, and a strong sense of public service. 
From 1958 to 1961 Moorey read modern history (defined as beginning in AD 285) at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, gaining a first-class degree, and was active in the university's Archaeological Society. In 1961 he became assistant keeper at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, which was flourishing under the keepership of Robert Hamilton. There his duties spanned the ancient Near East from Egypt to Iran, allowing him to follow the advice of Hamilton: to avoid narrow specialization, and to be flexible in the face of upheavals which shut off access to Middle Eastern countries from time to time. At that time the Ashmolean could still augment its acquisitions both from excavations in the Middle East and from dealers and generous donors. He set to work on the museum's many unpublished collections, beginning with a doctoral thesis on Luristan bronzes which resulted in his 'Catalogue of the Ancient Persian Bronzes in the Ashmolean Museum' (1971). This gave him an interest in the development of the horse harness -- enhanced by meetings with Mary Littauer and J. H. Crouwel -- in the development of bronze technology, and technological progress in warfare. He continued by salvaging information from chaotic records of old excavations at Kish, conducted by an Oxford-Chicago expedition in central Iraq. Long after his book 'Kish Excavations, 1923-1933' appeared (in 1978) he encouraged a wide range of scholars to work on material from Kish. Another major achievement was to complete the cataloguing of the Ashmolean's fine collection of cylinder and stamp seals, taking up the work of Briggs Buchanan. Three volumes were published to a high standard. 
For one season in 1963 Moorey joined the excavations of the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem under Kathleen Kenyon, but was treated in hospital for a bad attack of hepatitis. His participation gave him a formative, long-lasting interest in biblical archaeology which eventually resulted in his revision (1987) of Kenyon's last book, 'The Bible and Recent Archaeology' (1978); it was preceded by his Ashmolean Museum booklet 'Archaeology, Artefacts and the Bible' (1969), and followed much later by 'A Century of Biblical Archaeology' (1991), a work of intellectual history. Kenyon was principal of St Hugh's College, Oxford, from 1962 to 1973, so they were university colleagues for eleven years. 
In 1975, 1977, and 1981 Moorey joined the excavations of Nicholas Postgate at Abu Salabikh in southern Iraq, where he pursued an interest in the early dynastic period, including its manifestations at Kish, and links with Egypt when the kingdoms of upper and lower Egypt were first united. In 1982 he produced an invaluable revision of Leonard Woolley's work on discoveries at Ur, from the same area of Iraq. Early experiences in detecting forgeries in Luristan metalwork and in Chalcolithic pottery, including objects bought by the Ashmolean, gave him a keen awareness of the potential of archaeological science, enhanced by an early friendship with Michael Tite, who later became professor of archaeological science at Oxford. This resulted in his magnum opus, 'Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries' (1994, rev. 1999), an invaluable compilation, like his others, of careful synthesis avoiding theoretical interpretations. He was exceptionally neat and well organized in his work. 
In 1983 Moorey became keeper of the Ashmolean, and remained there until retirement in 2002, resisting an attempt to lure him to a professorship in the USA, and refusing to put his name forward for the directorship of the museum. Focused on research and teaching, he did not instigate exhibitions nor take much interest in museum gallery display. He was elected a fellow of Wolfson College in 1976, and became vice-regent (2002-4). His last work, on terracotta figurines in the Ashmolean, gave rise to the Schweich lectures delivered in 2001 at the British Academy and published two years later as 'Idols of the People'. After retirement he had hoped to make a study of warfare in the ancient Near East. 
Moorey encouraged and maintained contact with a wide range of scholars, and was both a conscientious and an inspirational teacher. He was a genuinely modest man, generous with his wide-ranging knowledge, pragmatic, and unsentimental. Always tactful, courteous, and conciliatory, he enjoyed teaching research students and undergraduates. As a scholar he was mistrustful of ancient texts which he regarded as less reliable sources of information than material remains. Keen to engage a wider public, he was an accessible writer and lecturer who dealt patiently with the queries of specialists and lunatics alike. Elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1977, he handled a heavy load of administrative duties, serving on numerous committees in Oxford and London, including the council of the British School of Archaeology in Iraq. He was also vice-chairman of the council of the British Institute for the Archaeology and History of Jordan in Amman, and president of the British School of Archaeology in Jerusalem, managing to remain on good terms with colleagues in Israel as well as in Arab countries. Editorial commitments included co-editing a Festschrift in honour of Kathleen Kenyon; and for eighteen years editing the journal 'Levant', which he founded and which was published by the British School in Jerusalem. Moorey's academic reputation was worldwide. In 1989 he received the Schimmel prize from the Israel Museum for contributions to biblical archaeology, followed by an award in 1993 from the Biblical Archaeology Society for 'A Century of Biblical Archaeology', the James R. Wiseman book award from the Archaeological Institute of America in 1996 for his book 'Materials and Industries', and the Gertrude Bell medal for outstanding services to Mesopotamian archaeology from the British School of Archaeology in Iraq (2003). These international recognitions of his scholarship, along with a Festschrift edited by three of his students, were honours graciously but lightly received, for he was not driven by personal ambition. He enjoyed conversation and good food, but remained intensely private, lived alone, and never married. He was utterly dedicated to his work and to the Ashmolean Museum. He died of cancer in the Churchill Hospital, Oxford, on 23 December 2004, and was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 11 January 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 94912


Plaschkes, Otto (1929-2005), film producer, was born on 13 September 1929 in Grinzing, a suburb of Vienna, the second child and elder son of Jewish parents, Heinrich Plaschkes (1899-1970), butcher, and his wife, Gertrude, 'nee' Grosz (1901-1964). His father was born in Bratislava and his mother in Budapest. Plaschkes always suspected that his mother may have added a year to his age to facilitate his escape to Britain from the invading Nazis by the 'Kindertransport'. His parents also managed to escape, and they were reunited in Salisbury, where his father established a sausage-casing business. At Bishop Wordsworth's School the English master, William Golding, allegedly based the character of Piggy in 'Lord of the Flies' upon the young Plaschkes. After reading history at Peterhouse, Cambridge, he did his national service with the Royal Army Service Corps, before taking a diploma in education at Wadham College, Oxford. 
Plaschkes discovered cinema through the Cambridge Film Society, and in 1955 Sir Michael Balcon agreed to employ him as a runner at Ealing Studios, where he embraced his employer's vision of an indigenous British cinema. When Ealing closed, Plaschkes worked his way up the production ladder at other studios, through a series of uncredited jobs as assistant director. In 1961, with an Australian, Jim Jeffreys, he set up Jimar Pictures (Pty) Ltd to produce television commercials. Plaschkes persuaded the Children's Film Foundation to allow him to produce a one-hour film in Australia, 'Bungala Boys' (1961), and in order to secure a passage there Jeffreys persuaded P&O Lines to commission them to make a documentary about life on its England-Australia liner. 'Bungala Boys' was a baptism of fire, for the production ran out of money, and Plaschkes had to work for his ticket home. Nevertheless, the film won a special award at the Venice film festival. 
After working as production assistant on David Lean's acclaimed 'Lawrence of Arabia' (1962) and as production manager for 'Tarzan's Three Challenges' (1963) Plaschkes was engaged to advise Robert Goldston, the American co-producer of 'The Uncle' (1964). They co-produced three feature films together: 'Georgy Girl' (1966), 'The Bofors Gun' (1968), and 'A Separate Peace' (1972). 'Georgy Girl', which starred James Mason and Alan Bates, with Lynn Redgrave as the eponymous Georgy, was a 'swinging London' fairy tale, intermittently accompanied by a popular, relentlessly up-tempo title song, sung by the Australian pop group the Seekers. The film grossed over $13 million worldwide, and garnered four Academy award (or Oscar) nominations. 'The Bofors Gun' was a commercial failure, although Ian Holm won a BAFTA award as best supporting actor. The Paramount-backed 'A Separate Peace', filmed in America, also failed to match the success of 'Georgy Girl'. Ely Landau then engaged Plaschkes as the executive producer for four of his American Film Theatre productions, which were designed to introduce London and New York stage plays to a wider American audience: 'The Homecoming' (directed by Peter Hall), 'Butley' (directed by Harold Pinter), 'Galileo' (directed by Joseph Losey), and 'In Celebration' (directed by Lindsay Anderson). On 9 May 1975 Plaschkes married Louise Stein, a 36-year-old art gallery assistant, and daughter of Barnet Glickler, architect. They had one daughter. 
As cinema audiences declined, Plaschkes sought, along with other members of the Association of Independent Producers, to persuade the government to assign all the revenues from the British Film Fund to the National Film Finance Corporation, but to no avail. However, in 1976 he was appointed to the National Film Development Fund to advise the National Film Finance Corporation on which scripts appeared to be the best projects in which to invest development money. He returned to Vienna to work as line producer on Elliott Kastner's 'A Little Night Music' (1977) and then, back in England, persuaded the Thames Television subsidiary Euston Films and the National Film Finance Corporation to back 'The Sailor's Return' (1978) which, in his view, 'celebrated the English character in its best and worst form' (Downs, 17). In 1980 he worked again for Ely Landau and his second wife, Edie, to produce 'Hopscotch', a cloak-and-dagger comedy starring Walter Matthau and Glenda Jackson. 
Plaschkes and the American producer Sy Weintraub planned to produce six Sherlock Holmes films, starring Ian Richardson as Holmes. But Weintraub reduced this to two -- 'The Hound of the Baskervilles' and 'Sign of Four' (both 1983) -- when he discovered that the British rights to the Conan Doyle stories were already in the public domain, thus allowing Granada Television to produce its own rival series. Plaschkes next began to produce the offbeat 'Shadey', backed by Channel 4's Film Four International, in which Anthony Sher played a transsexual car repairer able to transmit telepathic images. But the production had to be postponed when Ely Landau, who had had a stroke, suddenly asked Plaschkes to take over the production of 'The Holcroft Covenant' (1985), directed by John Frankenheimer and starring Michael Caine. Plaschkes finally completed 'Shadey' in 1985. 
Menachem Golan and Yoram Globus appointed Plaschkes as head of creative affairs when their Cannon Film Company took over EMI. 'The way to make a project happen', asserted Golan, 'is to excite the lovely Mr. Otto Plaschkes, who will excite me' (Walker, 'Icons in the Fire', 47). But Plaschkes only managed to authorize two co-productions with Channel 4 Television, 'Business as Usual' and 'The Kitchen Toto', and to produce 'In Search of Hanna', a documentary in which he interviewed Golan about the making of 'Hanna's War'. Between 1986 and 1988 Plaschkes acted as chief executive of the British Film and Television Producers' Association, after which he produced 'Doggin' Around' (1994), directed by Desmond Davis, for the BBC's 'Screen One' series. 
Intellectually a pessimist, but temperamentally an optimist, Plaschkes was highly regarded by his creative colleagues and fellow producers. An Austrian by birth, he always struggled to make authentically British films, although he often had to rely on American money to keep his career afloat. He died from a heart attack on 14 February 2005 at University College Hospital, Camden, London, after attending a screening of 'As It Is in Heaven', a Swedish film which had been nominated for an Academy award as the best foreign-language film. He was survived by his wife, Louise, and their daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 94916


Rothschild, Dame Miriam Louisa (1908-2005), naturalist, entomologist, and conservationist, was born on 5 August 1908 at Ashton Wold, Ashton, near Oundle, Northamptonshire, the eldest daughter of (Nathaniel) Charles Rothschild (1877-1923), merchant, banker, and conservationist, and his wife, Rozsika (1870-1940), third daughter of Colonel Alfred von Wertheimstein, a landowner and army officer from Nagyvarad, Austria-Hungary. Her three siblings included the zoologist Victor Rothschild and the musical patron Nica de Koenigswarter. Miriam was taught at home by her father (who disapproved of examinations), and by governesses. Her father was immensely keen on natural history, and from an early age she helped him with his butterfly collecting. He was among the first to realize how important it is to preserve the habitat if a species is to survive. He founded the Society for the Promotion of Nature Reserves in 1912, and, after contacting the secretaries of all known natural history societies in England and Wales, in 1915 issued a list of sites worthy of protection. He was an expert on fleas and travelled widely, collecting specimens. He was the first to describe 'Xenopsylla cheopsis', later found to be the vector for bubonic plague. After the First World War he contracted a type of influenza, encephalitis lethargica, which left him with frequent attacks of severe depression. In the midst of one of these, he committed suicide. Miriam was only fifteen at the time. His work on setting up nature reserves had been making good progress, but when he died the impetus went. Miriam Rothschild later, in 1946, wrote a leader article in 'Nature', pointing out that of her father's list of 174 sites worthy of protection in England, only 150 had been re-selected by the Nature Reserves Investigation Committee in 1945. Later still she published 'Rothschild's Reserves' (1997), co-written with Peter Marren. 
Another important influence was her uncle Lionel Walter Rothschild, second Baron Rothschild. The family frequently stayed at Tring Park, in Hertfordshire, where he had set up a natural history museum. He organized the collection worldwide of a range of animals. The museum had a vast collection of preserved animals. 'Novitates Zoologicae', the museum's journal, was published from 1894 to 1939. Miriam Rothschild was a co-editor for the last three years. She learnt a great deal from her uncle, and published 'Dear Lord Rothschild' (1983) in his memory. 
Rothschild initially thought of being a writer, and attended classes in literature at Bedford College, University of London. She soon decided, however, that she wanted to be a zoologist, and enrolled for evening classes in biology at Chelsea Polytechnic. At Whitsun 1931 her group went to the Marine Biological Association laboratories in Plymouth. When she was dissecting 'Nucula', a bivalve mollusc, she found the larval stage of a trematode flatworm that her tutor, Marie Lebour, had not seen before. As a consequence Rothschild decided to undertake research on trematodes. Her research centred on the parasites of 'Hydrobia ulvae', a gastropod snail abundant on tidal mud and salt marshes. From 1932 to 1935 she examined over 2700 specimens. Besides detailed observations of the behaviour and morphology of the parasites, she worked out their life cycles, partly by studying the local bird population. Her research was done mainly at Plymouth, but she also worked at the zoological station in Naples, where she was awarded a place at the London University research table. 
In the late 1930s Miriam Rothschild worked with several organizations dedicated to helping Jewish children escape from Germany and Austria. Many of the children were given a safe refuge at Ashton Wold. When the Second World War broke out in September 1939 scientists were in reserved occupations so could continue with their research. In 1940 the Marine Laboratory in Plymouth was bombed and the main casualties were the aquarium and Rothschild's laboratory. Her jars of specimens, slides, and notebooks -- seven years' work -- were damaged or destroyed. She had already applied for a position with the War Office, so after three days she left Plymouth. She subsequently worked as a code-breaker at Bletchley, using her knowledge of German. Meanwhile her home in Ashton was used by the Red Cross as a convalescent hospital for military personnel. Among those billeted there was Captain George Lane, formerly Lanyi (1915-2010), a Hungarian-born but naturalized British writer and journalist. When war was declared he joined the British army and won the MC for his bravery. He and Miriam Rothschild were married on 14 August 1943. They had two daughters, (Mary) Rozsika (1945-2010) ['see 'Parker, (Mary) Rozsika], later an art historian, and Charlotte ('b'. 1951), and a son, Charles ('b'. 1948), and they also adopted at birth another daughter, Johanna ('b'. 1951). They separated in 1954 and were divorced in 1957. Miriam Rothschild also adopted the two children, Jane and Benjamin, of her friend Gay Fischer, following the latter's death in 1955. 
After the war Rothschild managed the farm at Ashton. She was concerned for the welfare of the farmworkers and introduced tractors with cabs before this was a legal requirement. She was also concerned about the unnecessary suffering of farm animals. Many of her ideas for improving the wellbeing of animals were later accepted. She was increasingly interested in conservation and realized that there were relatively few different species of wildflowers. She decided to convert her lawns into wildflower meadows, and successfully managed some of her hay meadows so that they produced marketable quantities of wildflower seeds. One mixture she developed was called 'farmer's nightmare'. She arranged for many roadside verges to be sown with wildflowers and gave packets of seeds to local schools. In 1952 the family moved to Elsfield Manor, near Oxford, for the sake of the children's education, though Miriam Rothschild was still responsible for the farm and the estate at Ashton Wold (and moved back there permanently in 1970). The move to Oxford enabled her to embark on her research on aposematic insects, especially butterflies and moths. These are insects with warning colourations or markings to repel or warn predators. She pioneered research in ecological biochemistry. She showed that several insects can sequestrate and store cardiac glycosides, such as digitalin, from their food plants. Ragwort, 'Senecio jacobaea', contains pyrrolizidine alkaloids which harm cattle. Caterpillars of the cinnabar moth, 'Tyria jacobaeae', feed on ragwort and sequestrate and store the alkaloids. Their conspicuous colouring warns predators. With a range of laboratory experiments and field observations, starting in 1958, Rothschild and her collaborators published numerous papers in the field of chemical ecology. J. B. Harborne, in his preface to 'Introduction to Ecological Biochemistry' (4th edn, 1993), wrote that 'by her own pioneering experiments with aposematic insects and equally her encouragements of other scientists' Rothschild had 'contributed more than anyone else to this new subject'. 
Rothschild retained her interest in fleas throughout her life. In the early 1950s she decided to catalogue the vast collection of fleas that her father had given to the Natural History Museum. Working with G. H. E. Hopkins she published, in six volumes, 'An Illustrated Catalogue of the Rothschild Collection of Fleas (Siphonaptera) in the British Museum (Natural History)' (1953-1983). With Theresa Clay she published 'Fleas, Flukes, and Cuckoos: a Study of Bird Parasites' (1952), a volume in the 'Collins New Naturalist' series. This was thoroughly researched and entertaining. In the early 1960s, when myxomatosis spread among the rabbit population in Britain, Rothschild thought that the disease was spread by fleas, rather than by mosquitoes as in Australia. She followed this up, and found that the reproductive cycle of the rabbit flea was linked to hormones from the newly born rabbits. This was the first example of the reproductive cycle of a parasitic insect being controlled by the reproductive cycle of the host. With her co-researchers she investigated the jumping mechanism of a flea, discovered the chemical involved in the flea's leap, and worked out the mechanism involved. She demonstrated this at the Royal Society on 10 May 1973. Later still, in collaboration with Yosef Schlein and Susumo Ho, she published 'A Colour Atlas of Insect Tissues via the Flea' (1986). This included 200 of her photographs of flea tissues. 
From her first publication in 1932 to her last in 2005 Rothschild had over 300 publications to her name, ranging from first-class scientific research to entertaining articles about her pets. She believed that art, literature, and natural history were linked, and 'Butterfly Cooing Like a Dove' (1991) was a pioneering attempt to combine her observations and experience as a biologist with paintings and quotations from literature, mainly of butterflies and birds. She was always aware that she was part of the Rothschild dynasty and wrote about the family history, especially the women members, and about the Rothschild gardens. Latterly she wrote several introductions for books on subjects she was interested in. 
Rothschild was the first woman to be a trustee of the British Museum (Natural History), a position she held from 1967 to 1974. She was visiting professor at the Royal Free Hospital, London, where she lectured to first-year medical students. She was the first woman to be president of the Royal Entomological Society and was one of the eight members of the Entomological Club, founded in 1826. She served on the councils, or as vice-president or patron, of several scientific societies, for example the British Dragonfly Society. In 1996 she opened on her estate the first dragonfly museum in Britain. In 1985 she was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Her brother Victor was already a fellow, making them the first brother and sister to be fellows. She was awarded eight honorary degrees, by Oxford, Cambridge, and the Open University among others. She was appointed CBE in 1982 and DBE in 2000. She received many other awards in the various fields in which she worked, including the Victoria medal of honour of the Royal Horticultural Society (1991) and the Wigglesworth gold medal of the Royal Entomological Society (1982). She often helped with unpopular causes, and set up the Schizophrenia Research Fund in 1962 as her sister Elizabeth had had the condition. She was also involved in 1963 with the Wolfenden report, which looked at the legal situation regarding homosexuality. 
Miriam Rothschild, who was a vegetarian, had a very strong empathy with her pets and with the wild animals she befriended. (Princess Alice, duchess of Gloucester, when invited to lunch was startled to find a tame fox sitting on the chair next to her.) She was very hospitable and cared about her employees on the Ashton estate. She believed in thanking everyone who helped her, whether in a minor or major capacity, and was a great encourager. Even in her nineties she had an excellent memory and worked immensely hard. She died on 20 January 2005 at her home (and birthplace), Ashton Wold, Northamptonshire, from heart failure. A private funeral took place on 21 January. A memorial service was held on 7 April 2005 at the Liberal Jewish Synagogue, St John's Wood, London. She was survived by a son and three daughters, two children having predeceased her. With funding from the Lisbet Rausing Charitable Trust, a Miriam Rothschild chair of conservation biology was endowed at the University of Cambridge in 2006. 


@@@@@


doc= 94920


Walker, George Patrick Leonard (1926-2005), geologist and vulcanologist, was born on 2 March 1926 at 24 Cecil Road, Harlesden, Middlesex, the son of Leonard Thomas Richard Walker, dynamo tester, and later farmer, and his wife, Eveline Frances, 'nee' McConkey. Brought up in London and then Northern Ireland, he became fascinated as a teenager by geology and the minerals in the lavas of Antrim. He was educated at Wallace High School, Lisburn. Following BSc and MSc degrees in geology at Queen's University, Belfast, from 1948 he studied zeolite mineralogy in ancient basalt lava sequences for his PhD degree at Leeds University, eventually awarded in 1956. He was appointed an assistant lecturer at Imperial College, London, in 1951, becoming lecturer in 1954 and reader in 1964. On 22 March 1958 he married Hazel Rosemary Smith, a 28-year-old nursery nurse, and daughter of Walter Smith, farmer. They had a daughter, Alison, and a son, Leonard. 
Walker used his knowledge of zeolites brilliantly in his seminal studies of the geology of eastern Iceland, where he displayed his flair as a field geologist, and his ability to make critical observations and make fundamental inferences about volcanic processes. He mapped the lavas and zeolite zones, and the geological structure of a large part of the east coast of Iceland, showing that the distribution of the zeolite minerals was systematically related to the depth of burial of the lavas. From these observations he inferred the processes that formed Iceland. This work was one of the first studies to gather geological evidence for sea-floor spreading at the inception of the theory of plate tectonics. His research revolutionized understanding of the geology of Iceland and in 1980 Walker was one of the few foreign citizens to be awarded the Icelandic order of the Falcon, conferred by the president of Iceland. He also received an honorary doctorate from the University of Iceland in 1988. 
In the late 1960s and through the 1970s Walker increasingly focused on volcanic eruptions and geological studies of young active volcanoes. He combined supreme observational skills with a remarkable ability to integrate apparently unconnected observations into coherent conceptual models that gave powerful new insights into how volcanoes worked. He adopted a quantitative approach of gathering prodigious quantities of systematic data, and using his imaginative powers and intuition to extract major advances in understanding. His work was the foundation of much later understanding in vulcanology. He played a major role in turning vulcanology from a qualitative and descriptive enterprise to a robust and quantitative science. Among his many achievements in this period were finding the controls on lava flow emplacement, elucidating the relationships between the geology of pyroclastic deposits and the explosive eruptions that formed them, advancing understanding of what controls the morphology of volcanoes, and establishing new ways to assess volcanic hazards. 
In 1978 Walker took up a Captain James Cook research fellowship of the Royal Society of New Zealand, based at the University of Auckland. There he devoted his energy to studying the young explosive vulcanism of the North Island, centred on Lake Taupo, which he recognized as a volcano of remarkable violence. In 1981 he was appointed as the first Gordon Macdonald chair in vulcanology at the University of Hawaii, where he continued his highly innovative research, focusing on the evolution of basaltic volcanoes and the dynamics of basalt lava flows. He retired in 1996 and returned to the UK to live in Gloucester, but continued his research as a visiting professor at Bristol University. His achievements were recognized by many awards, including election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1975, an honorary fellowship of the Royal Society of New Zealand in 1987, the Thorarinsson medal (the highest award in vulcanology) in 1989, and the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society of London in 1995. 
Walker was a brilliant teacher and devoted much of his time to encouraging and nurturing young scientists. His first love was for field geology and he was inspirational when showing students how to read the rocks on field classes, or training graduate students how to extract the secrets of nature by simple systematic observations and logical deduction. He was supremely fit and could see off most students in marches across Scottish mountains or to volcanoes in exotic and remote places. An extended line of exhausted but still enthusiastic students or colleagues as the sun set was a common feature of his field trips. In Hawaii he gave countless presentations to schools and community groups. He helped and encouraged many scientists from the developing world, where most active volcanoes are located. He inspired thousands of people, from primary school children to eminent professors. 
Walker never sought the limelight. He was at his happiest in the field in remote parts of the world. He was devoted to geology and much of his work was done on a shoestring budget, sometimes also at his own expense. His contributions to science were seminal and far-reaching, and he was remembered with admiration and great affection by everyone who crossed his path. He was a devoted husband and father. He died on 17 January 2005 at Woodstock Nursing Home, 35 Upton Lane, Barnwood, Gloucester. He was survived by his wife, Hazel, and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94921


Warner, Sir Jean-Pierre Frank Eugene (1924-2005), barrister and judge, was born at 39 Holland Park, Kensington, London, on 24 September 1924, the elder of two sons of Frank Cloudesley ffolliot Warner, silk and textile manufacturer, and his wife, Louise Marie Blanche, 'nee' Gouet, a Frenchwoman. On his father's death in 1928 Warner's mother returned to France, taking her two sons with her; Warner received his early education in France. In 1938 he was sent to Harrow School but, after the outbreak of the Second World War and to avoid cross-channel travelling, he returned to school in France, where he remained until the fall of France in 1940 when, with his mother and brother, he escaped to England and resumed his education at Harrow. 
From Harrow, Warner went to Trinity College, Cambridge. After four terms he left to join the rifle brigade, into which he was commissioned. Demobilized in 1947 with the rank of acting major and after service with Lord Mountbatten's staff in the Far East, he returned to Trinity and took a first in law in 1948. He was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1950 and on 2 September the same year, at Lincoln's Inn chapel, he married Sylvia Frances Goodale, the 23-year-old daughter of Ernest William Goodale, like Warner's father a textile manufacturer; they had two daughters. Warner had joined the highly respected chancery chambers of J. H. Stamp, and quickly established a successful practice in the fields of trust and fiscal law. In 1961 he was appointed junior counsel to the registrar of restrictive trading agreements, the official entrusted with the administration and enforcement of the 'Restrictive Trade Practices Act' of 1956, a major legislative innovation in what was, for the United Kingdom, a relatively new and undeveloped field of competition law. In 1964 Warner progressed to the post of junior counsel to the Treasury ('Treasury devil') on the chancery side, which involved responsibility for advising the government on a wide range of chancery and fiscal legal issues. He was appointed queen's counsel in November 1972. Despite the pressure of work at the bar, Warner found time to sit as a Conservative councillor in the borough of Kensington from 1959 to 1968 (between 1963 and 1965 he chaired its general purposes committee). He was also a non-executive director of the family firm of silk fabric manufacturers between 1952 and 1970, being elected as a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Weavers in 1952. He was a noted oenophile (chevalier du tastevin, 1952; commandeur, 1960; member, Confrerie St Etienne d'Alsace, 1981). 
In 1972, when the United Kingdom signed the treaty of accession to the European Communities, Warner was nominated as the first British advocate-general of the Court of Justice of the European Communities (the ECJ), a post he held from 1973 until 1981. He was exceptionally well qualified for this post since he was bilingual in English and French, the latter being the ECJ's 'working language' (as advocate-general he would read through the French translations of his opinions and correct them where necessary). He also had, unusually for a British lawyer at that time, a specialist knowledge of competition law, which then formed part of the staple diet of the ECJ. Finally, his position as Treasury junior had enabled him to observe the work of government particularly closely, again a real advantage as a member of the ECJ. 
As advocate-general, Warner's responsibility was to deliver in open court an independent opinion on the merits of the cases assigned to him. An advocate-general's opinions provided important assistance to the judges hearing the case. By the 1970s, when Warner joined the ECJ, its case law had already begun to accumulate and Warner's experience at the English bar stood him in good stead in analysing it and, where necessary, drawing inspiration from the principles enunciated in the national courts of the member states in an eclectic and synthetic process which, especially in that period, characterized the development of EC law. Warner's contribution was not confined to proceeding down already opened avenues, however. In one case he persuaded the ECJ to take what was then the revolutionary step of declining to answer a reference made by a national court for a preliminary ruling on the ground that there was no genuine dispute before the referring court. In another it was Warner's influence that led the ECJ to give careful consideration to the principles underlying the different rules in the member states regarding the confidentiality of lawyer-client communications, which led to the ultimate establishment in EC law of principles similar to the English concept of legal professional privilege. 
Warner returned to London in March 1981, having been appointed a judge of the chancery division of the High Court of Justice. A condition of his appointment at the ECJ was that he satisfied national requirements for appointment to the highest judicial office (in the United Kingdom, the House of Lords) and, as he had served with distinction as a member of the supreme court of the European Communities, many colleagues regretted that he was appointed only as a judge of first instance. After eight years' absence from London, appointment to a first instance post was not, in any event, Warner's metier and, dogged as he was by worsening health, it is doubtful whether, conscientiously though he performed his judicial duties, he enjoyed them as greatly as he had his time at the ECJ. 
With Warner's appointment to the High Court bench in 1981 came a knighthood and, in 1982, appointment as a judge of the UK restrictive practices court. In 1985 he was elected treasurer of Lincoln's Inn, of which he had been a bencher since the relatively early age of forty-two. In 1994 he retired from the High Court. In 1998 he was awarded the grand cross, order of Merit, of Luxembourg, the country where the ECJ had its seat. The United Kingdom failed to give him similar public recognition. However, three British universities, Exeter, Leicester, and Edinburgh, conferred on him honorary doctorates, which reflected also his work as vice-president and then president of the UK Association for European Law between 1975 and 1989. 
Warner (known to his friends as J.-P.) lived latterly in Kensington, London. He died at the Royal Marsden Hospital, Chelsea, on 1 February 2005. The building of the ECJ in Luxembourg was constructed with a lining of asbestos material, and this may have been the origin of the 'industrial disease of mesothelioma' recorded, following an inquest, as the cause of his death. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. A memorial service was held at Lincoln's Inn chapel on 18 May 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 94923


Weschke, Karl Martin (1925-2005), artist, was born on 7 June 1925 in Taubenpreskeln, near Gera, Thuringia, Germany, the second of three children, by different fathers, of Else Emma Weschke. He met his father, Heinrich Hermann Hanke ('b'. 1905), only once, in 1936. On his marriage certificates he listed Hanke's occupation as politician or political activist, but in his Buchenwald concentration camp record Hanke was listed as a merchant. Hanke may have died at Buchenwald during the Second World War. He was certainly dead by 1947. 
Else, whom Weschke described as a woman of loose morals, abandoned her son to an orphanage in 1927, but reclaimed him in 1932. She enrolled him in the local 'Volkschule', but two years later they moved to Gera, where Else found a job as an ice cream vendor, with Weschke pulling the carts. He spent his spare time drawing the fine buildings. He left school in 1940 and found an apprenticeship with an ornamental blacksmith. However, his mother insisted that he take up a post with a state insurance office, first in Gera, then in Gotha. Bored by this work, and imbued with the spirit of the Third Reich, in 1942 he volunteered for 'Arbeitsdienst' (labour service) followed by service, behind the lines, in the Luftwaffe. Then, in 1945, tired of inaction, he volunteered to be a paratrooper and was thrown into the defence of 's-Hertogenbosch, where he was captured by the Canadians and dispatched to Britain as a prisoner of war. 
Shunted around the country from camp to camp, by the summer of 1947 Weschke found himself at camp 180 in Radwinter, near Saffron Walden. There he came under the kindly care of Charles Stambrook (formerly Karl Sternberg), a Jewish refugee. Camp 180 was relatively open and prisoners were allowed out two nights a week to study. Weschke enrolled with the Cambridge University extramural board to study 'Wesen der Sprache der Kunst' ('the nature and language of art'), a course presented by Rudolph Wallfried at St John's College. Weschke's mind was opened to a world of European culture and, in particular, his German heritage, of which he had little prior knowledge. Another important contact at Radwinter was the Quaker Bessie Midgley, a member of the Fry family, who held open house to German prisoners and introduced him to Tom Driberg. Weschke was then transferred to Wilton Park where he was re-educated in political matters. In his spare time he was taken by Driberg to see exhibitions in London. 
On 12 July 1948, soon after his release, Weschke married Alison Frances de Vere (1927-2001), a student at the Royal Academy, whom he had met through Driberg. He registered for the sculpture course at St Martin's School of Art but abandoned it after one term and took up painting, picking up the craft as he went along. While at St Martin's he met the painter Dorothy Mead, who introduced him to members of the Borough Group, followers of David Bomberg, with whom he felt a certain affinity. To hone his drawing skills he observed the dance classes of Vera Volkova in Covent Garden and sketched rapidly from life. He also spent many hours looking at the collections of the Tate and National galleries. A trip to Spain in 1953 left a lasting impression. 
Although they were to remain lifelong friends, in 1950 Weschke and de Vere parted company. In 1954 he travelled to Sweden with a new partner, Lore Grage, a German national, with whom he fathered his first child, Rachel ('b'. 1955). In Sweden he painted and drew the landscape as a dark brooding presence, influenced not only by the German expressionist heritage with which he had come to identify but by the paintings of Goya and Velazquez. Still classed as an alien, he was helped to return to Britain by de Vere and Driberg. After a brief sojourn in Scotland, in 1955 he moved to Zennor in Cornwall, where he was joined temporarily by Lore. However, without a permit she had to return to Germany, taking Rachel with her. Lore and Weschke agreed that Weschke would have no further contact with his daughter. In 1956 he fathered a second child, Benjamin (Ben), this time with de Vere. They subsequently divorced, in 1958. 
Weschke had come to Cornwall with the help of the painter Bryan Wynter. Wynter found him a place to rent, Tregerthen Cottages, where D. H. Lawrence had once resided. Weschke soon became part of the community of artists identified with St Ives, although he always remained on its fringes. He developed close friendships with Roger Hilton and the Scottish poet W. S. Graham, both of whom regarded themselves, like Weschke, as outsiders in Cornwall. At this time his paintings bore some stylistic community with those of the St Ives artists. He painted abstracted landscapes and figure subjects with a thick impasto influenced by the then fashionable Nicolas de Stael, but his palette of colours was significantly different, being sombre and limited in tonal variation. Unlike most of his colleagues he did not confine himself to landscape but tackled major themes relating to religion and history. On the recommendation of Bryan Robertson his 'Deposition Triptych' (1958-9) was purchased by the Art Gallery of New South Wales from his exhibition at the Woodstock Gallery. 
A second son, Lucas, was born in 1958, to Jan Green. In 1960 Weschke moved to a house on Cape Cornwall, where, with the exception of a few years in Gloucestershire, he spent the rest of his life. It was a one-storey, former tin mine engine house with views over the moors and cliffs and down to the Atlantic Ocean. Remote and subject to the full force of Atlantic storms, it was an appropriate dwelling for a painter of expressive landscapes and figure paintings. Two years later he and Jan split up and, on 24 December 1963, he had a brief marriage to Marie-Liese Norma Cynthia (Liese) Dennis (1939-2005), a fashion model. In spite of his turbulent private life his painting career was beginning to go well, with exhibitions at Matthiessens Gallery and the Grosvenor Gallery and inclusion in a number of important group exhibitions, such as 'British Painting in the Sixties' (1963) at the Tate and Whitechapel art galleries. After separation from Liese (they were divorced in 1968) his relationship with Jan was rekindled and a fourth child, Lore, was born in 1966. Within two years the relationship encountered difficulties and, with his career put on hold, he moved to Gloucestershire, where he began a relationship with Madeleine Frye. 
The female nude had by then become a central motif in Weschke's paintings, frequently depicted in distressing situations with mythological overtones. Sometimes the nude was shown molested by a dog modelled on a borzoi, named Dankoff, that Weschke owned. Nearly always the theme was suggested by a common-day event Weschke had witnessed. Vulnerability, violation, and isolation were the themes of his work, painted in his characteristic ochre and earth colours, sometimes punctuated by a claret red or sombre blue. In 'Study for the Women of Berlin' (1969-70), painted at the height of the Vietnam war, Weschke brought all these themes together. In 1971 he held a solo exhibition at the Bear Lane Gallery, Oxford, and a further show in Plymouth, Bristol, Leeds, and Glasgow. That same year, with Madeleine, he moved back to Cape Cornwall. Lucas and Lore came to live with them. In 1972 Madeleine bore him a fifth child, Rachel, named after his lost first-born. Within months, however, the relationship foundered and they separated. 
Weschke's career seemed to have reached a high point when he was offered a one-man show at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in 1974, but the exhibition was greeted by critical silence, largely, he maintained, on account of hostility towards its new director, Jasia Reichardt, whose appointment had aroused controversy. Apart from inclusion in occasional group exhibitions, for five years his career entered the doldrums. In 1980, however, he was invited to hold a solo exhibition at Kettle's Yard Gallery, Cambridge. Earlier that year the Arts Council had purchased 'The Meeting' (1974) and following the Kettle's Yard show the Tate Gallery acquired 'Body on the Beach' (1977). Weschke's art, with its sombre palette and undertones of violence, represented his existentialist outlook on life. The landscape was that of the moors viewed from his studio window; the women depicted were, more often than not, his partners. There was also an erotic side to his imagination that emerged in various studies of the female nude, often cloaked in mythology, such as in 'Leda and the Swan' (1985-6). 
Around this time Weschke began a relationship with Petronilla Spencer-Silver, then working at the Contemporary Art Society, which was to endure for the rest of his life. In 1988 Television South West made a documentary about him, 'Memory of Sweetness'. The following year he made drawings for an animated film, 'Psyche and Eros' (1994), directed by de Vere. Success now followed success as the Tate Gallery acquired three further paintings and he was shortlisted for the Jerwood painting prize (1995). Sales generated the ability to travel and Weschke went to Egypt in 1990, 1992, and 1997. The trips had a direct impact on his art, not only in his choice of subjects, which now included Egyptian temples, the pyramids, and the Nile landscape, but also in the brightening of his palette, in particular by the introduction of cobalt blue, a colour that earlier in his career he had not been able to afford. Even when painting the familiar nude theme back in a Cornish setting his treatment was marked by the experience of Egypt. There was a new boldness to his vision and a sense of liberation, of having left the oppressiveness of his early life behind. The publication in 1998 of 'Karl Weschke: Portrait of a Painter' by Jeremy Lewison, shortly after Weschke underwent a heart bypass operation, provided a further stimulus to his reputation. He became the subject of a German documentary film, 'Karl Weschke: Ein deutscher Maler in Cornwall', and was invited to hold a retrospective exhibition at the Kunstsammlung Gera, his first show in Germany. The broadcast of this documentary on German television led to contact from his first-born child, Rachel, with whom he was ultimately reunited. 
Weschke remained a German citizen throughout his life and was finally recognized in his native Germany by the award of the order of merit by the Federal Republic of Germany in 2003. On 12 October the same year he married Petronilla. The enjoyment of such recognition was short-lived, however. In 2004, the year of his retrospective exhibition at Tate St Ives, he was diagnosed with cancer of the brain. He died at St Julia's Hospice, Hayle, on 20 February 2005 and was cremated at Penmount crematorium, Truro, on 28 February. His long-standing friend, David Cornwell (known as John le Carre) paid tribute to him at a celebratory memorial meeting held on 15 March 2005. 


@@@@@


doc= 94925


Williams, Sir Glanmor (1920-2005), historian, was born on 5 May 1920 at 3 Cross Francis Street, Dowlais, Glamorgan, the only son of Daniel Williams (died 1957), a haulier in a coalmine, later a clerk, and his wife, Ceinwen, 'nee' Evans (died 1970). In spite of the family's straitened economic circumstances during the depression his parents plied him with books and planted within him a pugnacious desire to make something of himself. Among his fondest memories of his upbringing were the warmth, altruism, and bravery of working-class people in Dowlais, and these values deeply affected his own moral and intellectual development. A devout Baptist chapel-goer throughout his life (his father was a deacon in a Baptist chapel), he became so immersed in nonconformist culture that at one stage he aspired to becoming a Baptist minister. At the age of eight he enthralled an audience at Calfaria Chapel on Dowlais Top by reciting Welsh prose and poetry for an hour and a half. 
Educated at Cyfarthfa Castle Grammar School, formerly the home of the tyrannical Crawshay family, Williams swiftly developed a profound understanding of the privations suffered by the Welsh working class and of the democratic socialism that underpinned its community life. At the age of seventeen he won a scholarship to study history and Welsh at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, where, inspired by the proverbial 'Aber spirit' and by the tuition of E. A. Lewis, a well-regarded economic historian, he graduated with first-class honours in history and Welsh. Lewis's untimely death, however, robbed him of a suitable supervisor for his graduate research and he was also mortified by his failure, on medical grounds, to join the armed forces. In 1942 he was appointed to teach history and Welsh at Merthyr Intermediate School, where he spent his leisure hours researching for an MA thesis on the Welsh renaissance scholar Bishop Richard Davies. 
Williams was still impelled by a strong desire to succeed in academe, and his fortunes took a turn for the better when he was appointed to a temporary lectureship in history at the University College of Wales, Swansea, in 1945. He was to spend the rest of his life living in this 'ugly-lovely' town. During his student days he had met (Margaret) Fay Davies, two years his junior, a native of Cardiff and a fellow historian. Then working as a secondary school teacher, she married Williams on 6 April 1946. They had a son and a daughter. Williams swiftly earned tenure and was raised to a senior lectureship in 1952. Five years later, amid some hurtful controversy, triggered by supporters of a rival candidate, he was appointed to the chair of history at Swansea, a post he held until his retirement in 1982. 
Over the course of Williams's career no Welsh historian -- not even Sir John Edward Lloyd -- exercised a greater influence on the study of the history of Wales and in transforming it into a respectable and fruitful discipline than he did. Always busy and energetic as a writer, an entrepreneur, and a talent-spotter, Williams enticed high-quality teachers and researchers to his department, where Welsh history was taught within a broad academic and intellectual framework. He radiated an infectious sense of enjoyment in the classroom and was famously generous with his time and advice. His scholarly reputation was enormously enhanced when he published his ground-breaking book 'The Welsh Church from Conquest to Reformation' (1962), a magisterial volume that at the time of his death remained unsurpassed in breadth and scope. His achievement was all the more remarkable given that, by training and choice, he was an early modern historian. But he had realized that he could not possibly write a convincing account of the protestant Reformation in Wales without having first assessed the condition of the Welsh church in the middle ages. His 'Welsh Reformation Essays' (1967) further bolstered his reputation, but administrative chores and public duties prevented him from bringing his long-promised work on the Reformation to a successful conclusion. When 'Wales and the Reformation' was eventually published in 1997 there was less originality in it than would have been the case had he completed it much earlier, but it was nevertheless respectfully received as an elegant analysis of how the Welsh embarked on a path that made them a protestant, and eventually nonconformist, people. He cared passionately about the cultural heritage of Wales, and in works such as 'Religion, Language and Nationality in Wales' (1979) and 'The Welsh and their Religion' (1991) he showed how the native tongue, a strong sense of spirituality, and a keen sense of nationhood had served as an active leaven in the lump. 
In other ways too Williams was a strikingly successful mover and shaker. He persuaded the University of Wales Board of Celtic Studies to sponsor a series of monographs entitled 'Studies in Welsh History', which, under his joint editorship from 1977 onwards, produced a rich crop of works by young scholars. Just as important was the multi-volume 'History of Wales', an authoritative, standard work, published from 1981 onwards under his general editorship. His own 'Recovery, Reorientation and Reformation: Wales, c.1415-1642' (1987) was one of the highlights of this series. Williams also transformed the prospects of the long-standing but incomplete 'Glamorgan County History'. First conceived in 1931, this project had only one volume to its name when he agreed to become general editor in 1960. His colleagues feared that he had taken leave of his senses, but he was absolutely certain that writing and editing works associated with regional and local history was a perfectly legitimate activity. Once more he pursued the undertaking with conspicuous success. By the time of the centenary of the founding of Glamorgan county council in 1989 six bulky volumes had been guided through the press. Each of these initiatives was a striking example of how a persuasive, single-minded individual was able to bring a sense of purpose and unity to the mission of Welsh historians. 
A productive and wide-ranging scholar, Williams also wrote in Welsh. Indeed, scarcely a year went by without a Welsh-language publication or review appearing under his name. His Welsh-language biography of Richard Davies, published in 1953, was awarded the Ellis Griffith prize by the University of Wales. A highly readable, abbreviated, Welsh-language version of 'The Welsh Church from Conquest to Reformation' was published in 1968, and 'Grym tafodau tan' (1984), a compendium of sparkling essays devoted to preachers, poets, and prose writers who had exercised the 'power of tongues of fire', was rewarded with a Welsh Arts Council prize for literature. At the age of eighty-two he produced another collection of beautifully written essays on religion and politics in 'Cymru a'r gorffennol: cor o leisiau' (2000). Even though he claimed that speaking or writing in Welsh never came easily to him, and even though he made no secret of his Britishness -- he once said that he was 'too British for many a Welsh-speaking Welshman and too Welsh for an English-speaking one' ('The Independent', 28 Feb 2005) -- he was an ardent devolutionist and supporter of Welsh culture. 
The prolific Williams would surely have published even more had he not played such an active part in the public life of Wales. As president, vice-president, or chairman, he served on virtually every institution of cultural importance in Wales. Aware of his reputation for wisdom and equanimity, public bodies jostled for his services and by serving them Williams deepened his own knowledge of the architectural, archaeological, historical, and cultural heritage of Wales. Among other posts he was chairman of the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales from 1986 to 1990 (and a member since 1962), chairman of the Ancient Monuments Board (Wales) from 1983 to 1995, and a member of the Welsh Arts Council from 1978 to 1981. He was one of three appointees to a commission (1963-5) that produced the celebrated Hughes Parry report on the legal status of the Welsh language, and when he became chairman of the Broadcasting Council for Wales and a governor of the BBC (1965-71) he valiantly defended Welsh interests within this highly London-centric institution. Never did any historian in Wales exert more influence on public affairs. His distinction as a scholar and public servant was widely recognized. Honorary fellowships were conferred upon him by Swansea, Aberystwyth, and Carmarthen; the University of Wales made him a DLitt in 1963 and an honorary LLD in 1998; and in 1991 he was presented with the coveted medal of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion. Elected a fellow of the Royal Historical Society in 1954, he served as its vice-president from 1979 to 1983. In 1970 the Society of Antiquaries elected him a fellow, as did the British Academy in 1986. He was appointed CBE in 1981 and in 1995 he was raised to a knighthood 'for services to the history, culture and heritage of Wales'. It gave him great joy, too, to be made a freeman of the borough of Merthyr Tudful in 2002. 
Physically Glanmor Williams was a tiny man. Barely five feet tall, he was adept at turning his smallness to advantage. Never one to indulge in airs and graces, he preferred to be known as Glan and as the quintessential 'little boy from Dowlais'. A deeply humanitarian figure, his warmth and generosity were proverbial, and those who met him were instantly struck by his cheery greeting, high-pitched chuckle, and words of encouragement. Blessed with a lively sense of fun, he was a splendid raconteur and mimic. The Christian religion and classical music played a large part in his life and he was an active walker on hills and coastline. But few realized that this distinguished remembrancer, even when he was at the height of his career, was often assailed by bouts of depression and insecurity. Nevertheless his commitment to the cause of Welsh history remained undimmed to the end. Following a short illness he died of heart failure at Morriston Hospital, Swansea, on 24 February 2005, and was cremated at Swansea crematorium, where hundreds of his friends, colleagues, and admirers assembled to pay their tribute. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 94926


Wright, Sir Edward Maitland (1906-2005), mathematician, was born on 13 February 1906 at Park Side House, Farnley, near Leeds, the son of Maitland Turner Wright (died 1943), soap manufacturer, and his wife, Kate, 'nee' Owen (died 1954), music teacher. When he was three his father's business (manufacturing Wright's Washall soap) failed; his parents separated, and he moved south with his mother. She worked at boarding schools, where he was able to study for free, with a reduction in his mother's salary. He worked as a teacher from the early age of fourteen, though he was sacked at the age of sixteen for being too young for his post. He was able to find another post, at Chard grammar school in Somerset, where he taught from 1923 to 1926. Until the age of fourteen he knew no mathematics beyond elementary arithmetic, but on being exposed to algebra fell in love with mathematics, which he taught himself to degree level. It was then possible to study for an external degree from the University of London without attending lectures, which, having a full-time teaching job, he was unable to do. He obtained his first degree in this way. On being told by a colleague that a London degree was only equivalent to scholarship standard at Oxford or Cambridge, he investigated the Oxford and Cambridge scholarships available. He was then twenty, and found that he was too old for all except one scholarship, at Jesus College, Oxford, which was unrestricted in subject or age. He successfully applied for this, and took up his scholarship in 1926 to study mathematics. 
Wright's years at Oxford were happy and successful. He achieved firsts in mathematical moderations in 1927 and mathematics in 1929, and won the junior mathematical scholarship in 1928 and a senior studentship in 1929. He was then a research student of G. H. Hardy at Christ Church, Oxford, where he took his DPhil and was a junior research fellow from 1930 to 1933; during this time he spent a year in Gottingen and a year as a lecturer at King's College, London. He spent 1933-5 at Christ Church as a lecturer. At Oxford he met (Elizabeth) Phyllis Harris (died 1987), a student of English at St Hilda's College, cox of the Oxford women's eight, and daughter of Harry Percy Harris, mining engineer. They married on 15 August 1934, when she was twenty-seven. They had one son, John. 
In 1935, at the unusually early age of twenty-nine, Wright became professor of mathematics at Aberdeen University. While at Christ Church he had learned to fly with the university air squadron (though he never learned to drive). His year in Gottingen convinced him that war was coming. This was a belief he shared with his Christ Church colleague F. A. Lindemann, later Lord Cherwell and Churchill's scientific adviser, and Lindemann's pupil R. V. Jones, who became prominent in scientific and technical intelligence. As a result of his connection with Lindemann he was seconded to work as principal scientific officer with the Air Ministry, working in intelligence, from 1943 to 1945, having previously served as a flight lieutenant in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve (1941-3). After the war he returned to Aberdeen, where he remained until his retirement in 1976. Having served as vice-principal in 1961-2, he became principal and vice-chancellor of the university, from 1962 until 1976. As principal he oversaw a significant expansion of student numbers and facilities and (despite a reputation for working on mathematical problems during meetings) an effective and respected committee chairman. When offered a post in Oxford he turned it down, preferring to remain in Aberdeen. The Edward Wright Building on Dunbar Street was later named in his honour. 
Wright's mathematical papers were principally on number theory (including the theory of partitions, the representation of integers as sums of squares of integers, or generalizations of this such as Waring's problem, and the Erdos-Selberg elementary proof of the prime number theorem), combinatorial theory (including enumeration problems for labelled and unlabelled graphs), and complex analysis. But the greatest impact of his work was through his book with G. H. Hardy, 'An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers' (1938), always referred to as 'Hardy and Wright'. This book was widely praised by number theory specialists for its excellent exposition, very broad range, and good judgement in the selection of material. Its continuing sales, through five editions (the last in 1979), was testimony to the great use made of it by mathematicians generally, as a textbook and as a work of reference. 
Wright was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1937, and received various honorary degrees and academic prizes and distinctions. He was knighted in 1977. He lived in retirement in Aberdeen until after his wife's death in 1987, and then in Reading. He died at the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, on 2 February 2005, of septicaemia caused by a urinary tract infection. He was survived by his son, John, also a distinguished mathematician. 


@@@@@


doc= 94928


Ziman, John Michael (1925-2005), physicist and philosopher of science, was born into a cultured Jewish family at 21 Rustat Road, Cambridge, on 16 May 1925, the elder son and eldest of three children of Solomon Netheim Ziman and his wife, Nellie Frances, 'nee' Gaster. His father, who was born of Ashkenazi parents who had emigrated to New Zealand, was a Rhodes scholar, joined the Indian Civil Service, and rose to be secretary of the government of Bombay; his mother came from an English Sephardi tradition, well-to-do and crossed with a brilliant and strongly intellectual Romanian line. He was taken to New Zealand as a baby and was educated at Hamilton high school and Victoria University College, Wellington, where he graduated with first-class honours in physics. In 1947 he moved to Balliol College, Oxford, obtaining a first-class degree in mathematics in 1949 and a DPhil in theoretical physics in 1952. His first paper, on antiferromagnetism, published in 1951, began 'Some recent experiments', heralding what would become a theme of his research in physics, namely the close connection of theory to observations on real materials. On 14 September 1951, at Exmoor register office, he married Rosemary Milnes Dixon (died 2001), a thirty-year-old schoolteacher, of Brushford, Somerset, daughter of Robert Stanley Dixon, architect. They adopted two sons and two daughters. 
After switching to the theory of the conduction of heat and electricity in solids, Ziman moved to Cambridge in 1954 as a lecturer and (from 1957) fellow of King's College. His research was summarized in his treatise 'Electrons and Phonons' (1960), which became a classic text. His interests shifted to more subtle aspects of solid metals, in which the quantum behaviour of electrons plays a central part. This phase of his scientific life led to his textbook 'Principles of the Theory of Solids' (1965). Overlapping with the work on solid metals was the research for which he was perhaps best known: the application of quantum mechanics to conduction in liquid metals. The first of two innovations was to treat the atomic nuclei together with their inner electrons, as structural units, weakly scattering the outer electrons that move nearly freely through the material. The second was to incorporate the fact that the random positions of the atoms were not independent but possessed statistical correlations. In this way he explained a wide variety of experimental data. His research was recognized by his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1967. 
In 1964 Ziman moved to Bristol University, initially as professor of theoretical physics, becoming Melville Wills professor of physics in 1969, then Henry Overton Wills professor of physics and director of the H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory from 1976. Immediately after his move to Bristol he began to build up the theoretical physics group there. His gentle inclusiveness and abundant personal hospitality created a near-perfect working environment within the friendly and successful larger physics department, leading to developments not only in metal physics but also theories of liquid state structure and surfaces, geometry of waves and quantum chaos, and high-energy physics. His research in Bristol took a more formal turn, prompted by the realization that there were liquid metals, and, later, disordered alloys, for which the scattering was not weak. His work involved the study of waves interacting with disordered arrangements of spherical scattering objects, for which a wider literature already existed in acoustics and optics. The move towards formalism led in 1969 to another textbook, 'Elements of Advanced Quantum Theory'. His gift for lucidly conveying complex phenomena was shown in his observation that the image of quantum theory as a pyramid 'is misleading if it calls to mind a uniformly sloping edifice up which one may laboriously clamber... quantum theory is much more like a 'ziggurat', with sudden high cliffs to be surmounted before one can move freely on the next plane of abstraction. (p. v)' Ziman's final contribution to theoretical physics was his book 'Models of Disorder: the Theoretical Physics of Homogenously Disordered Systems' (1979). Its philosophy, diametrically opposed to that of idealized perfect crystals explained in 'Principles of the Theory of Solids', was based on the observation that 'Condensed-matter physics has expanded in recent years and shifted its centre of interest to encompass a whole new range of materials and phenomena... steel and glass, earth and water' (p. ix). The book ended with a valediction for his career as a physicist: 'I... take the opportunity of a natural break to announce that this is, as far as I am concerned, THE END' (p. 491). 
In Cambridge Ziman had already been drawn into what would become his second career, based on the realization that the key to understanding how science works lay as much in sociology as in philosophy. With the first of his half-dozen books exploring this theme, 'Public Knowledge: an Essay concerning the Social Dimension of Science' (1968), he became established as a leading figure in the emerging field of 'science studies', exceptional for being able to speak with first-hand authority as a practising scientist. This sustained effort was later summarized by Peter Lipton under four themes: 'The first theme is 'naturalism'... According to Ziman, science should itself be studied empirically, with priority given to causal rather than logical analysis. The second theme may be called... 'socialism'. As Ziman shows, any account of science that relies on the model of the lone heroic scientist is doomed to failure, because science is by its nature a social process. The third theme is 'evolutionary epistemology': Scientific models are imperfect maps... Ziman exploits a biological analogy with natural selection to illuminate the way in which these maps evolve. The last of Ziman's themes... is the emergence of 'post-academic science'... roughly the difference between blue-sky research and work strongly constrained by interests of funding bodies, public and private. (Lipton, 108-10)' In 1982 Ziman left Bristol to pursue these interests as a visiting professor in the department of social and economic studies at Imperial College, London. He also had a private reason for moving: to begin life with his second cousin, fellow scientist, and intellectual soulmate Joan Henriette Solomon, the daughter of Abraham Sigismund Diamond, lawyer. They eventually married on 27 October 2002, at the West London Synagogue, after Rosemary Ziman's death. 
Ziman's interest in science as a social phenomenon was practical as well as theoretical: he was an active member of the Council for Science and Society (of which he was chairman, 1976-90), the Science Policy Support Group, the working party on science and the media set up by the British Association for the Advancement of Science, and the Bodmer committee of the Royal Society, which reported in 1985. Several books on how to teach the social aspects of science followed, including 'Teaching and Learning about Science and Society' (1980) and 'An Introduction to Science Studies' (1984). His passionate advocacy of scientific freedom, which included visiting Moscow to support the Jewish refuseniks, resulted in his book with Paul Sieghart and John Humphrey, 'The World of Science and the Rule of Law' (1986), which connected the norms of academic science with the legal principles of human rights. He was also involved in the Achievement Project of the Renaissance Trust, which focused on Western economic growth and technological innovation since 1500 and was based in Oxford in the 1990s. His final book was 'Real Science' (2000). He lived latterly at Oakley, near Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire. He died of heart failure, following complications after an infection of the heart valves, at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 2 January 2005. He was survived by his wife, Joan, and by three of his four adopted children, one son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 94932


Ballinger, (Violet) Margaret Livingstone (1894-1980), university teacher and politician in South Africa, was born at 4 Waverley Terrace, Glasgow, on 11 January 1894, the third of four children born to John Hodgson (1860-1927), a commercial traveller, and his wife, Lillias Robertson, 'nee' Burt (1863-1927). Little is known about her parents or her early childhood. In 1896 or 1897 her father became a citizen of the Orange Free State republic. During the South African War (1899-1902) he fought in the Irish brigade for the Boers. Only in 1904 did his family join him in South Africa, where they settled in Port Elizabeth. Here Margaret Hodgson completed her high school education at the Holy Rosary convent in 1910. After preparing for the intermediate examination of the University of the Cape of Good Hope at the Huguenot College, Wellington, she enrolled in 1912 at the Rhodes University College in Grahamstown for a BA degree. Her first-class pass earned her the Queen Victoria scholarship to further her studies at Somerville College, Oxford, in 1914. After gaining second-class honours in modern history, she returned to South Africa in 1917 to lecture at Rhodes University College, and from 1920 at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. 
Hodgson grew up in a politically conscious home supportive of liberalism. It was, however, her association with the well-known liberal historian W. M. Macmillan, first as a student at Rhodes and then as a colleague at the University of the Witwatersrand, that had the strongest influence on her political ideas and approach. Like Macmillan she believed that segregation was impracticable in South Africa because of the inextricable intertwining of black and white interests. Apart from that, she believed that segregation, and later apartheid, simply meant the unjust domination of the black majority by the white minority and that enforced segregation led to racial tension and hatred. She argued that blacks should be systematically involved in all aspects of society, without being subjected to forced integration, and insisted that the colour-blind qualified franchise of Cape Province be extended to the rest of South Africa. 
Hodgson believed that liberals should not just be intellectually involved in South Africa's problems but should take a clear political position, and use political action to enforce reform. As a result she was seen as too radical by the majority of white South African liberals, who contended that the solution to South Africa's racial problems was to be found in non-political, scientific anthropological studies. Her stance isolated her from the South African Institute of Race Relations, the flagship of South African liberalism. The abrasiveness of her husband, William George Ballinger (1892-1974), a trade unionist, whom she married on 12 September 1934, contributed to her estrangement from her fellow liberals. William, however, became a loyal partner in their efforts to encourage black economic development. One example of this was a project to make black communities less dependent on exploitative white-managed markets by directly linking co-operatives in the townships to agricultural produce in the British protectorates. As part of their research into the socio-economic and administrative conditions of the protectorates they published two pamphlets, 'Indirect Rule in Southern Africa: Basutoland' (1931) and 'Britain in Southern Africa: Bechuanaland Protectorate' (1932). Very little, however, came of these plans. 
Margaret Ballinger became isolated and marginalized; her married status gave the university, concerned about her political profile, the opportunity to terminate her appointment in 1935. Depressed, she contemplated emigration, but the 'Representation of Natives Act' of 1936, which placed Cape blacks on a separate voters' roll with the right to elect white representatives to parliament, provided her with an opportunity to propagate her ideals of a just South Africa. Ballinger had vehemently opposed the act, but realized that a segregationist institution could be used to undermine segregation. Her opposition to racism and her efforts at grassroots level to improve the position of blacks earned Ballinger their respect and led to her election as a native representative in 1937. She was subsequently re-elected until the abolition of the system in 1960. 
During the twenty-three years she sat in parliament for the Eastern Cape electoral circle Ballinger gained an international reputation as a remarkable and brilliant parliamentarian, a hard-working representative of her constituents, and a firm opponent of all forms of political and racial intolerance. She also attempted to change the racial prejudice of whites. For her, South Africa's salvation was to transform itself through a gradual constitutional process into a just and democratic society. Uncompromising militancy could only lead to violence, with blacks as the victims. She only demanded changes that she believed whites could deliver. Under General J. C. Smuts's United Party government, with its pragmatic attitude towards segregation, Ballinger did much to alleviate the hardships of individual blacks in their daily struggle to survive the injustices of a racist society. She played a leading role in ensuring that more money was budgeted for black education and for wage increases on the state-owned railways, and she secured the rights of blacks to qualify for pensions. These activities, despite the growing suspicion of her moderation by black militants in the 1940s, earned her much respect in the black community and she was given the praise names Nozizwe ('mother of the nation') and Tembeka ('she who can be trusted'). 
The political atmosphere, however, changed radically in 1948 with the advent of the National Party government and the introduction of apartheid. This went hand in hand with draconian security legislation to suppress any opposition. Ballinger was trapped between black African and Afrikaner nationalism, to both of which she was unacceptable. While to black militants she was part of the system of white oppression, to the National Party she was a dangerous leftist, a closet communist, and an agitator encouraging black resistance to apartheid. Young radical whites regarded her stance on a qualified franchise with the focus purely on parliamentary politics as anachronistic and too conservative. Her leadership of the South African Liberal Party, founded in 1953, was an unhappy experience and she resigned in 1956. 
In the apartheid years Ballinger distinguished herself as a champion of liberal democratic rights, and served as parliament's conscience on black affairs. From 1948 she was the only member of the house of assembly to oppose all security legislation unambiguously. (She was supported by William Ballinger, who was a native representative in the senate from 1948.) In her the premier, H. F. Verwoerd, found his intellectual equal and she managed to counter his racial theories and dreams with facts and logic. The result was bitter antagonism between them. Her opposition to apartheid was an important factor in the National Party government's decision to abolish the system of native representation in 1959. In 1965 Ballinger returned to active politics when she became chairperson of the Liberal Party in the Cape province, after the party had been crippled by the banning and intimidation of its leadership. She retained this post until the party voluntarily disbanded in 1968, when multiracial political parties were prohibited. In 1969 her history of native representation was published as 'From Union to Apartheid: a Trek to Isolation'. 
Ballinger retired to Cape Town, where she died at 503 Grosvenor Square, Duke Road, Rondebosch, on 7 February 1980. She was cremated at Maitland crematorium, Cape Town, on 12 February. Her marriage was childless. Short and stockily built, she was aloof and assertive, with a tendency to be overbearing, with a superior attitude. She was a formidable personality and her integrity, steadfastness, and tenacity made her an indefatigable defender of individual liberty. In the darkest days of apartheid she kept the ideal of a democratic and just South Africa alive. 


@@@@@


doc= 94934


Taylor, Rayner (1747-1825), composer, organist, and singer, was born in the parish of St Anne, Soho, London, on 27 November 1747, the son of William Taylor and his wife, Susan or Susanna, 'nee' Petit. He received a thorough musical education as a chorister at the Chapel Royal under Bernard Gates and James Nares, singing at the funeral of George II and the marriage and coronation of George III. Taylor later related that at Handel's funeral (20 April 1759) his hat fell into the composer's grave and was buried with him. 
A song by Taylor was performed at Marylebone Gardens in June 1764 and he worked there in the summer as a composer, singer, and organist until 1768. He spent a few months in the choir of Chichester Cathedral from autumn 1767, but was back at Marylebone by the following May. Taylor had settled in Edinburgh by June 1769 as a music teacher and harpsichordist at the Theatre Royal. By this time he was married and in July he sang with his wife and the castrato Giusto Ferdinando Tenducci in a performance of Thomas Arne's English opera 'Artaxerxes'. Mr and Mrs Taylor spent only the theatre season of 1769-70 in Edinburgh, where her singing but not her acting was praised. At their benefit in April 1770 the Taylors performed his little comic opera 'Capochio and Dorinna', to a libretto adapted from Pietro Metastasio, and Alexander Reinagle, his thirteen-year-old pupil, played a harpsichord sonata. 
Taylor had moved to Chelmsford, Essex, by 24 January 1772 as a teacher of music and from that September he was also the organist at the parish church. He organized and performed in the annual races week concerts, for which he employed instrumentalists and singers from London and in which in the early years he was joined as a soloist by his wife. Taylor continued to write songs, including 'Chelmer's Banks' for a play put on by local amateurs, but he also composed three large-scale anthems that were published in the 'Cathedral Magazine' (1775-7). His music for the burletta 'Buxom Joan', with a libretto by a Chelmsford shopkeeper, Thomas Willett, was performed at the Haymarket Theatre, London, in 1778 and by the Norwich Company in various East Anglian theatres. Taylor's 'Six Sonatas' for harpsichord with violin and 'Six Divertimentos Adapted for Young Practioners' were published by joint subscription in 1781, and the large number of female subscribers substantiates the 'enormous round of teaching' that he remembered many years later (Carr, 162). He was still organist at Chelmsford in January 1784, but by September the town had a new organist and Taylor was working in London. 
Taylor's musical piece 'The Fortune Tellers' was performed at Sadler's Wells in April 1784, and his burletta 'Circe and Ulysses' at the Royal Circus that July. The following summer he became musical director at Sadler's Wells and for seven seasons he composed and compiled music for entertainments, topical spectaculars, and harlequinades. Particularly successful were 'The Gates of Calais' (1786), based on William Hogarth's painting, and 'Champ de Mars' (1790), an optimistic response to the French Revolution. In 1790 Taylor failed for the second time to obtain an organist's post in a City church, losing on both occasions to a less skilful woman. He appears to have left Sadler's Wells during the summer of 1791, when the theatre had financial problems and was undergoing a change of management, and that summer he worked as organist and song composer at the Apollo Pleasure Gardens. 
Taylor decided to emigrate with his family to America and was there by September 1792, when he gave a concert in Richmond, Virginia, with his pupil Miss Huntley. He worked briefly in Baltimore and Annapolis, where he included 'Capochio and Dorinna' in a concert, before settling in Philadelphia in 1793. There he remained for the rest of his life as composer, singer, teacher of music, and organist at St Peter's and later St Paul's episcopal churches. Alexander Reinagle had become musical director of the new theatre in Chestnut Street and Taylor assisted him in composing, arranging, and orchestrating music for shows imported from London and for new musical works. In December 1799 he collaborated with Reinagle on a monody on the death of George Washington. His comic afterpiece 'Buxom Joan' was successfully revived in 1801, but his most ambitious theatre piece was the 'grand romantick drama', 'The AEthiop' (1814; Yellin, 'Music for 'The AEthiop'', 249). Many of Taylor's songs were published in the United States. He became a naturalized American citizen in October 1809, having married Mary Shocor on 6 September of that year; their infant son, Rayner, lived for only fourteen months. Taylor continued to sing in concerts, pleasure gardens, and clubs, mainly performing lighter pieces of his own composition. He died in Philadelphia on 17 August 1825 and was buried in St Peter's churchyard there. Rayner Taylor was a skilful and versatile composer and an outstanding organist, described by Alexander Reinagle as the equal of the great C. P. E. Bach. 


