@@@@@


doc= 7511


Dent, Arthur (1552/3-1603), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was born at Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, son of William Dent. William's brother John was a London merchant whose widow married Sir Julius Caesar. Having matriculated as a pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, in November 1571, Dent graduated BA in 1576 and proceeded MA in 1579. He was ordained deacon at Peterborough in March 1577 and priest, by John Aylmer, bishop of London, the following May, when he gave his age as twenty-four. 
Immediately engaged as curate by George Withers, rector of Danbury, Essex, and archdeacon of Colchester, Dent was in the curious position of being protected by one of Aylmer's officials while subject to the unfriendly authority of another, John Walker, archdeacon of Essex. He was cited before Walker for refusing to church women in December 1577, and for conducting an irregular marriage in May 1578, but both charges seem to have been dropped. He received Aylmer's licence to preach throughout London diocese in October 1579. 
On 17 December 1580 Aylmer instituted Dent to the rectory of South Shoebury, Essex, on the presentation of Robert, second Lord Rich, who had been showing increasing sympathy towards radical preachers since the mid-1570s. Yet when Rich and Aylmer clashed during the following months over quasi-congregational meetings at Rochford Hall, orchestrated by Robert Wright, Dent appears to have been unsympathetic towards his patron's proceedings. 
Thus the evidence for Dent's involvement in the politico-religious agitation of the 1580s is conflicting. During Aylmer's visitation of 1583 he produced his preaching licence and was not further troubled. Yet in March 1584 he was one of seven preachers, including George Gifford, whom Aylmer interviewed about Whitgift's demand for unqualified subscription to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Given fourteen days to deliberate, Dent was one of twenty-seven Essex ministers who petitioned the privy council for protection. In July 1584 he was again before Archdeacon Walker on charges of ritual nonconformity, and it was later claimed that he had been 'sundry times troubled for omitting the cross and the surplice' (Peel, 2.164). Yet he escaped prosecution during the visitation of 1586, is not found among those Essex clergy suspended during Aylmer's 'last visitation and since for the surplice' (ibid., 2.261), and was appointed one of six commissioners to oversee exercises for the instruction of the less able clergy in Rochford deanery. Not until 1589 did his persistent failure to wear the surplice receive attention at an episcopal visitation, but again that charge, and the lesser one of omitting weekday services, appears to have been dropped after a routine period of excommunication. 
Altogether, once Whitgift had been forced to moderate his original demand for unqualified subscription, Dent was not singled out, like Gifford, as one of the 'ringleaders' against whom further measures were to be taken. Yet a ringleader in some sense Dent certainly was: he was involved in discussions about the 'Book of Discipline' (1585-7), and was nominated one of seven Essex delegates to the proposed provincial synod designed to follow the setting up of 'presbytery in episcopacy' during the winter of 1586-7. 
Aylmer's leniency was no doubt dictated in part by the belligerent support which Dent could expect from his patron, but also, perhaps, by the fact that Dent's temperament was essentially eirenic. His ability to edify rural congregations was legendary, and, like many who abandoned political for pastoral courses after 1590, he translated this skill into print, becoming one of the most popular protestant authors of his generation. His 'Sermon of Repentance', preached at Leigh in March 1582, was reprinted at least twenty-two times up to 1638. Dent's third published work, 'The Plaine-Mans Pathway to Heaven' (1601) -- 'wherein every man may clearly see whether he shall be saved or damned' -- was dedicated to Julius Caesar and enjoyed unparalleled success. Reaching a twenty-fifth edition by 1640, it thus became one of the most frequently reprinted English books of its time. A forty-first edition appeared as late as 1831. It profoundly influenced John Bunyan and also Richard Baxter, who recast it in 1674 as 'The Poor Man's Family Book', abandoning Dent's homely dialogue for connected prose. 
Dent's fourth work, 'The Ruine of Rome, or, An Exposition upon the Whole Revelation', was with the printer when its author succumbed to fever, dying within three days, on about 10 January 1603. His will, dated 7 January, is thus a brief document which left everything to his wife, Margery, 'for the education of all my children' (DL/C/359, fol. 389'r'). Ezekiel Culverwell, one of its witnesses, saw 'The Ruine of Rome' through the press, adding a dedicatory epistle to Robert, third Lord Rich. Although his reference to his 'near conjunction' with his 'late brother' led to the erroneous assumption that Margery Dent was Culverwell's sister, it is possible that the first Mrs Culverwell (died 'c'.1597), otherwise unidentifiable, was the sister of Dent. 
Culverwell extolled Dent's 'diligence, yea extreme and unwearied pains in his ministry publicly, privately, at home and abroad for four and twenty years at least'. 'The Ruine of Rome' appeared only days before Elizabeth's death in 1603, reached a tenth edition by 1656, and seems to have found favour with the eighteenth-century evangelical movement: it was reprinted five more times between 1798 and 1841. Seven posthumous works bearing Dent's name were in print by the end of 1614, some perhaps representing spurious attempts by unscrupulous printers to profit from his popularity. 
In 1979 Dent was paid the curious tribute of providing the name of the anti-hero -- just as his most influential work informed the title -- of Douglas Adams's 'The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7512


Dent, Edward John (1790-1853), chronometer maker, was born on 19 August 1790 in Portugal Street, Westminster, the elder of two sons of John Dent ('b'. 1767), an officer of the East India Company, and his first wife, Elizabeth, formerly Chapman (died 1793), of Bedford. The younger son, William (1792-1858), became a printer's clerk, working in London and Bedford before returning to Islington where he died. 
Edward Dent was apprenticed in 1804 to his grandfather John Wright Dent, a tallow chandler. Lodgings were to be provided for him under this agreement and he lived with his cousin Richard Rippon (1767-1835), watchmaker, of 46 King Street, Westminster. Dent became fascinated by the craft of watchmaking and in 1807 persuaded his grandfather to turn him over for the remainder of his apprenticeship to Edward Gaudin, watchmaker in Clerkenwell. At the end of his term Dent returned to live in Rippon's house, by then 43 King Street. He was employed by several of the leading watchmakers, acquiring from Barraud & Son a good knowledge of chronometers. He began making these for himself and in 1829 his no. 114 won the Royal Observatory's premium award. 
In September 1830 Dent entered into partnership with John Roger Arnold, then one of the foremost chronometer makers. Arnold had a small factory at Chigwell, Essex, but he and his foreman were elderly and Dent offered both new ideas and proven business ability. Dent was made free of the Clockmakers' Company in 1831 and he moved into Arnold's house at 84 Strand. At this time one cause of error in timekeepers arose from extremes of temperature acting on the metals composing the balance springs. The properties of these various metals, and how magnetism affected them, were poorly understood. Arnold and Dent, probably with Richard Rippon's son, Frederick William Rippon (1808-1860), experimented with glass balance springs, though these did not live up to their early promise. Dent also experimented with mercury-filled clock pendulums (another temperature-compensating device) and lectured on this subject to the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting at Newcastle in 1838. By that time Dent's own reputation was assured. He was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society, an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1833, and in 1838 Arnold and Dent received the royal warrant. 
During 1837-9 Dent, urged on by the astronomer royal, George Biddell Airy, began estimating the longitudes of certain observatories by sending groups of chronometers, set to Greenwich time, to compare with local time there. Such journeys, by sea and in the rough land transport of the period, challenged the best chronometers, but their successful outcome was a valuable advertisement. Dent sent chronometers to Paris -- their journey vividly described in the 'Nautical Magazine' of 1838 and subsequently as a publicity booklet; to Scotland (Sir Thomas Brisbane's observatory at Makerstoun, and Edinburgh); to Dublin and Armagh; to Oxford, Bedford (Admiral Smyth's observatory), and Cambridge; to Portsmouth and Hamburg; and to New York. It is not clear how many of these expeditions Dent accompanied. He had agents in many ports and was a frequent visitor to the continent. 
Relations with Arnold deteriorated from 1838 and the partnership ended in 1840. Dent went to live at The Mall, Kensington, but he also bought 82 Strand, where he installed a roof-top observatory, a temperature-controlled chronometer testing room, and fully equipped workshop. Frederick Rippon accompanied him, and he traded from 1 October 1840 as E. J. Dent, London, obtaining the royal warrant in 1841. Fortunately Airy and Captain Beaufort, the hydrographer, continued to pass Dent a share of the jobs formerly sent to Arnold and Dent, and after Arnold's death in 1843 he secured the entire business. 
Dent continued to experiment with balance springs and filed his most important patent in 1842, though it was worded loosely enough for him to continue to develop his ideas in subsequent months. As with Dent's other patents, a similar patent was applied for in Paris. In 1843 Dent was asked to send chronometers to ascertain the difference in longitude between the observatories of Altona, near Hamburg, and Pulkovo, in Ukraine. In view of their satisfactory performance, the Russian emperor awarded him a gold medal and the title of chronometer maker to his imperial majesty. He also provided regulator clocks for observatories at Pulkovo, Geneva, Turin, and Venice. 
At the late age of fifty-two Dent married, on 1 July 1843, Elizabeth Rippon, formerly Davis (1789-1865), the widow of his cousin Richard Rippon. Her two sons Frederick and Richard Edward Rippon (1817-1856) were also watchmakers, Frederick being employed by Dent. Both subsequently took the name of Dent. Elizabeth also had two daughters, Mary Elizabeth (1813-1892), married to Thomas Buckney, and Amelia Lydia Sophia (1814-1881), married to Henry Gardner. At about the time of his marriage Dent became involved in the manufacture of the dipleidoscope and two other instruments, the aneroid barometer and the marine compass, whose mechanisms bore similarities to those of watchwork. The dipleidoscope, the idea of his watchmaker friend P. M. Bloxham and patented in 1843, was based on the principle of double reflection. It consisted basically of a prism, though larger models had a small telescope and compass, and it enabled the meridian passage of the sun to be timed with great accuracy. Thus it could be used to set a watch, or if the time were known, to calculate the longitude. 
The aneroid barometer was invented in France by Lucien Vidie, but was dismissed by French scientists as unworkable. Vidie went to London, where an example was constructed and tested, and patented in 1844. Vidie called on Dent as a possible maker, but found Dent unwell and in pessimistic mood. He did, however, allow Vidie to hang three aneroids in his shop window where they were seen and bought by a naval officer who tested them and returned to order thirty more. From this first sale, the aneroid gained in popularity, helped by its small size, portability, and cheapness (Dent sold 6 in. diameter aneroids for 3 guineas). It is unclear whether those bearing Dent's name had mechanisms made in Vidie's workshop in Paris or were built entirely in London. 
Dent's improvements to the marine compass, patented in 1844 and 1850, consisted in suspending the card on a vertical needle carried at both ends in jewelled bearings, and in weighting the card in such a way as to prevent it from ceaselessly oscillating with the ship's motion. 
Dent had recently begun to take an interest in turret clocks when in 1843 tenders were invited for a chiming clock for the newly built Royal Exchange. He submitted the lowest tender and it was accepted in August that year. Dent went to examine turret clocks in France and Belgium, acquired a factory at Somerset Wharf, off the Strand, and purchased the necessary machine tools. Airy contributed ideas for the clock's design but Dent had to put these into practice and he was particularly exercised over the choice of metal for the wheels and the method of cutting the teeth. These difficulties were overcome, however, and Airy declared the clockwork satisfactory on 31 August 1844. Dent already had another shop at 33 Cockspur Street for the Westminster trade, run by his stepson Richard; now he rented 34 Royal Exchange, one of the tiny shops fronting the Exchange building. 
When the Palace of Westminster was to be rebuilt, following its destruction by fire in 1834, Dent applied to tender for the clock to be installed in the tower (now known as Big Ben). He was strongly supported by Airy but had to compete against Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy and John Whitehurst of Derby. Relations between these three rapidly soured, and in 1847 Dent withdrew his tender and departed to St Petersburg. After much deliberation between Airy, the architect Charles Barry, and various other officials and representatives of government, Dent agreed to retender and on 25 February 1852 his estimate was accepted. However, he died, at The Mall, Kensington, on 8 March 1853, and so Frederick Dent, who had inherited this part of the business, continued with the clock's construction. This was not to the liking of some of the officials concerned and legal advice was sought; Airy resigned from the committee overseeing the progress of the clock after conflicting with Edward Beckett Denison (later Baron Grimthorpe), a barrister known for his competence in horology, but eventually by 1859 the clock was installed and running. 
Edward John Dent had divided his business interests between Richard, who inherited the Cockspur Street premises but died, intestate, of a brain disease in 1856, and Frederick. Before he died on 25 April 1860, Frederick destroyed the will and codicils that Denison had drawn up for him, triggering a lengthy legal dispute which was won by his widow. Elizabeth Dent continued to trade, assisted by her sons-in-law, as E. Dent & Co. After her death the firm was controlled by members of the Buckney and Gardner families, descended from Frederick's two sisters, and employed other members of the extended Dent family. In 1968 the last Buckney emigrated, turning the business over to the managing director. In 1975 it became a subsidiary of Toye & Co. Ltd. 


@@@@@


doc= 7513


Dent, Peter (1628/9-1689), apothecary and naturalist, the son of Peter Dent of Cambridge, was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1649/50. He acquired properties in the parish of St Sepulchre, Cambridge, soon after 1650 and was in practice there by 1657. These properties, which he improved during his tenure, included a small leasehold shop at Bridge Street with adjoining house, warehouse, and other premises, and a separate leasehold garden behind the church, occupied by a house and two or three cottages. Dent's first wife, Katherine, died in 1659 giving birth to their second child, who died shortly afterwards. He married, within fifteen months, Elizabeth Pleys. She was buried on 2 March 1709. From these two marriages, thirteen children were baptized at St Sepulchre, including three named Peter, two of whom died in infancy. 
Dent obtained a Lambeth MB degree in 1678, probably on the strength of recommendations from his friends and patients; in the custom of the time, he practised both as apothecary and physician, and may have taken patients into his home for treatment. He obtained a Cambridge degree by incorporation in 1680. Through his interest in botany he became a member of John Ray's (1627-1705) circle of friends. He contributed to Ray's 'English Catalogues' of 1670 and 1677, and was singled out for mention in the introduction to the latter edition as having recorded nine plants not included in Ray's 'Catalogus plantarum circa Cantabrigiam nascentium' (1660). He also contributed to Ray's great 'Historia plantarum' (3 vols., 1686-1704). In its preface Ray expressed his obligation to Dent for many observations. In 1685 a second 'Appendix' to Ray's Cambridge catalogue appeared anonymously, its sixty plants having been principally communicated by Dent. Raven states that this appendix was not Ray's work, and was uncertain whether it was due to Dent (Raven, 122), but since Ray would not have sought the credit in these circumstances it is likely to have been Dent's work. 
Dent's observations on the structure of the trachea in the male of most ducks were credited by Ray in 'The Ornithology' (1678), where Ray described Dent as 'an ingenious observer' (Willughby and Ray, 'Ornithology', 9). It was the contemporary compliment and Raven remarked that this 'is a nice point to find noticed so early' (Raven, 317). Ray also acknowledged 'Dominus Petrus Dent' in his preface to Willughby's 'Historia piscium' (1686). In English, his acknowledgement reads 'Master Peter Dent communicated several observations concerning cartilaginous flat fish, especially of the uterus and eggs of rays, and fine sketches, first of the fish themselves, and then of their inner parts'. 
Dent died on 3 September 1689 and was buried two days later at the church of St Sepulchre, Cambridge. He was survived by his widow, at least two sons, Pierce (1663-1727) and William (1665-1694), and three daughters. Pierce Dent inherited his father's practice as apothecary, together with his property, and like his father was interested in botany and entomology, and a friend of Ray. He married Deborah Ewin in 1692 and they had seven children before she died in 1702. There were no children from his second marriage, to Bridgett, who survived him. 
Peter Dent (1637/8-1717) was probably a cousin; he joined Dent in Cambridge about 1663, and was admitted to Trinity College in 1671/2. By about 1691 he was described as a 'cook', meaning a catering contractor, probably to one of the Cambridge colleges. He was twice married, and had five children between 1671 and 1708, during which time he lived in one of Dent's houses. 


@@@@@


doc= 7514


Denton, Henry (c.1640-1681), Church of England clergyman and translator, was the second son of Thomas Denton (1612-1643), from an old Cumberland family living at Warnell Hall, Warnell Denton, south of Carlisle, and Lettis (died 1678), daughter of John Lougher, of Perton, Staffordshire, and Mary Fitton, maid of honour to Elizabeth I. On 24 June 1653 he matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, together with his elder brother Thomas ['see under 'Denton, John]. At Queen's he had as his chamber fellow, and perhaps tutor, William Lamplugh, afterwards archbishop of York. He graduated BA on 21 March 1656 and MA on 25 June 1659. He had also proved himself an accomplished violinist. In 1660 he became a fellow of Queen's College, succeeding to the rooms of his friend Joseph Williamson, who had left academic for political life. 
In autumn 1664, on the recommendation of Sir Heneage Finch, the Levant Company appointed Denton chaplain to the English ambassador in Constantinople, Sir Heneage's cousin Heneage Finch, earl of Winchilsea. Denton set out early in 1665, stopped to preach in Smyrna, and favourably impressed Winchilsea, who described him as 'a modest, ingenious person' ('Finch MSS', 389). In Constantinople, Denton is said to have mastered Arabic, Syriac, and Slavonic, and the Turkish-Latin grammar by the Polish interpreter Albert Bobowski (known as Ali Bey) which Denton brought back to Oxford (Bodl. Oxf., Hyde MS 43) suggests that he was well advanced in the study of Turkish. On his return to England after Winchilsea's recall late in 1668 Denton took up residence at Queen's College. In 1673, the year in which he seems to have married an Oxford woman whose surname was Ellis and with whom he had at least one son, baptized on 22 March 1681, the provost and fellows gave him the nearby living of Bletchingdon. 
Like his successors at the embassy in Constantinople, Thomas Smith (his friend and near contemporary at Queen's) and John Covel, Denton took an interest in the Greek Orthodox church when he was in the Levant. He befriended Joseph Georgirenes, archbishop of Samos, and their friendship continued when Georgirenes came to England in 1676 to have a liturgical work printed for his parishioners. Georgirenes soon became involved in the plan to build a church for the Greek colony in London. (The church in Soho Fields was to give its name to Greek Street.) Hoping to raise money for it, he wrote his 'Description of the Present State of Samos, Nicaria, Patmos, and Mount Athos' (1678). Dedicated to the duke of York (later James II) and strongly anti-Turkish and anti-Venetian, the text was translated into English by Denton, who added explanatory notes and an epistle to the reader emphasizing the points of agreement between the Greek church and the Church of England. 
Denton died at Bletchingdon on 18 August 1681 and was buried in the parish church two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 7515


Denton, James (d. 1533), dean of Lichfield, was educated at Eton College, before in 1486 going as a king's scholar to King's College, Cambridge, where he proceeded BA in 1489, and MA in 1492, becoming in due course a fellow in 1489 and bursar of the college in 1496/7 and 1498/1500. He subsequently studied canon law at Valence, where he earned a doctorate in that faculty. In 1505 he obtained licence to stand in the same degree at Cambridge. He became a royal chaplain, and was rewarded with various preferments, including a canonry at Windsor (1509), and prebends at Lichfield (1509), Salisbury (1510), and Lincoln (1514). He was also rector of several parishes, including St Olave's, Southwark. 
In 1514 Denton went to France as almoner with Mary, the sister of Henry VIII, on her marriage to Louis XII, and attended her in France until her husband's death and her own return to England. He afterwards acted as her chancellor, and in 1525 visited France on some mission about her dowry. She showed great anxiety to promote him, and informed Wolsey that he had done her much service. In 1520 he was one of the royal chaplains, 'clothed in damask and satin', at the Field of Cloth of Gold. In 1522 his contribution of $200 to the clerical subsidy-loan to the king attested both his loyalty and his wealth. In 1524 he formed part of a commission with Sir Ralph Egerton and Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, justice of the king's bench, to reform the government in the Irish pale on the cheap, and to settle Ireland's many internal disputes, particularly the feud between the earls of Ormond and Kildare. The commission worked diligently and apparently effectively to pacify the pale, and it replaced Ormond with Kildare as lord deputy. But their hopes of securing order without having to commit additional English resources proved vain, Kildare's personal ambitions and the chronically volatile situation in Ireland soon frustrating their ambitions. 
Denton's next public employment was as chancellor to the council of Princess Mary, which, on the analogy of the previous councils of Prince Edward, son of Edward IV, and of Prince Arthur, was established in 1526, immediately with a view to the superintendence of her education, but also with the wider object of governing her 'principality' and marches of Wales, and of repressing the chronic disorders of a disturbed district. The council usually sat at Ludlow, where Mary herself most often was, and Denton was one of the few permanent councillors in residence. He frequently also acted on commissions of the peace for the border counties. He retained his position in the Ludlow council until his death, and was also master of the College of St John the Evangelist in Ludlow town. In 1531 he proposed converting the Welsh lordships into English-style shires, a plan which Henry VIII found to be sensible although no action was taken until the 'Act of Union' in 1536 and subsequent related statutes. 
Denton's ecclesiastical preferments were numerous. From 1523 to his death he was archdeacon of Cleveland. On 7 January 1522 he became dean of Lichfield. He was a man of great liberality. At Lichfield he 'environed the fair old cross with eight fair arches of stone', and 'made a round vault over them for poor people to sit dry', at an expense of $160 ('Itinerary of John Leland', 2.100). He was also a benefactor of King's College and of St George's Chapel, Windsor. At Lichfield he increased the number of choristers and provided for their maintenance. Between 1517 and 1520 he built, furnished, and endowed a house at Windsor for the chantrists and choristers, situated on the north side of the collegiate church, at a cost of nearly $500. In his will, dated 1 August 1526 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1123, fols. 104-5), he further endowed them with property in Windsor, giving them the reversion of property there, and directing that its issues should be used to finance distributions of bread and clothes to the poor of the town. Denton was also concerned for the preservation of the muniments of King's College, and had them transcribed into at least one large volume, known as the 'Liber Denton'. Extracts from it survive in the Bodleian Library (Bodl. Oxf., MSS Ashmole 1124, fols. 47-82, and 1125, fols. 90-107). He was also generous to his servants, and especially in providing for the education of their sons. He died at Ludlow on 23 February 1533, and was buried in St Lawrence's Church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 7516


Denton, John (c.1626-1709), Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of Bradford, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. He was probably the son of John Denton ('fl'. 1613-1642) of Manningham in the same parish, a clothier, who held 18 acres of land at Lilliecroft, Manningham, in 1613, and who signed the protestation oath to maintain the king, parliament, and the protestant religion in Bradford parish on 28 March 1642. On 4 May 1646 Denton was admitted as a sizar to Clare College, Cambridge, where he studied under David Clarkson. He matriculated later that year, graduated BA in 1649, proceeded MA in 1653, and became a fellow of Clare. 
At Cambridge, Denton befriended John Tillotson, a subsequent archbishop of Canterbury, defending Tillotson's reputation in a letter to a friend, and tending him during a dangerous illness. They maintained a frequent correspondence thereafter, 'having contracted a most intimate friendship' ('Life of... Tillotson', 436). In 1653 Denton's degrees were incorporated at Oxford, but by the following year he was the rector of Oswaldkirk, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, the parish in which Tillotson shortly preached his first sermon. On 8 May 1654 he married Elizabeth ('bap'. 1622, died 1669), sister-in-law to the autobiographer Alice Thornton and eldest daughter of Robert Thornton of East Newton, Yorkshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Richard Darley of Buttercrambe. Their eldest son and heir, John, was baptized at Oswaldkirk on 5 September 1655. In November 1657 Denton was also described as vicar of Sherburn in the North Riding of Yorkshire. 
In 1662 Denton was ejected from Oswaldkirk for nonconformity; Edmund Calamy lauded him as 'a very pious Man and a profitable Preacher' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.818). After the death of his first wife he married about 1670 Elizabeth (died 1715), whose surname is unknown. The couple had four children, three of whose names are known -- John, Robert ('b'. 1676), and Ellen. On 16 May 1672 Denton was licensed as a presbyterian at Osgodby Grange in the North Riding of Yorkshire; he also applied, unsuccessfully, for a licence at East Newton, in the parish of Stonegrave. However, in June 1690 he was reordained in the Church of England by Thomas Barlow, bishop of Lincoln. Residing in East Newton by this time, he initially officiated as curate under Dr Thomas Comber, but was rector of Stonegrave by December 1690. In that year he began a volume, continued by his successors at Stonegrave, accounting for the yearly receipts and disbursements of the offertory. He was installed as prebendary of Husthwaite in York Minster on 1 December 1694 and was succeeded by his son Robert as rector of Stonegrave on 27 May 1700. Denton remained a close friend of the Thorntons, and on Alice Thornton's death in 1707 she bequeathed 'to my good brother Mr. John Denton' ('Autobiography of Mrs Alice Thornton', 338) $5 in her will, requesting that he preach her funeral sermon. He died on 14 January 1709, in his eighty-third year, and was buried in Stonegrave parish church two days later, where his monumental tablet remains. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 7517


Denton, Nathan (bap. 1635, d. 1720), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Bradfield in the parish of Ecclesfield, West Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Francis Denton, and baptized at Bradfield Chapel on 8 January 1635. From the grammar school at Worsborough he went to University College, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1654 and graduated BA in 1657. After university he returned to the corner of Yorkshire where he had been raised and where he was to spend most of the rest of his life. First he taught at the grammar school at Cawthorne, preaching alternately at Cawthorne and High Hoyland. He was ordained in 1658 at Hemsworth by the West Riding presbytery as minister of High Hoyland. From there he moved to Derwent chapel, Derbyshire, and early in 1660 to the perpetual curacy of Bolton upon Dearne in the West Riding (his predecessor was buried on 27 March 1660). At Bolton on 6 February 1662 he married Anne Burley (died 1715), with whom he had five children: Daniel, John, Hannah, Ruth, and Joseph. 
Denton was ejected from Bolton upon Dearne under the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662 but continued to live in the parish, except for two periods of about two years each during the enforcement of the 'Five Mile Act' (1665). For a year after his ejection he preached in the parish church of Hickleton, West Riding, where he was maintained as lecturer by Lady Jackson, sister of George Booth, Baron Delamer. Thomas Vincent (died 1667) of Barnborough Grange near Bolton upon Dearne offered Denton an Anglican living worth $100 p.a. but he refused this and all other offers of preferment, which Edmund Calamy noted he 'could not accept with Satisfaction to his Conscience, and declared he never yet repented his Nonconformity' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 2.950-51). In 1669 he was reported as again preaching at Hickleton, formerly at Jackson's house and now at another house. On 8 May 1672 he was licensed as a presbyterian to preach at the house of Silvanus Rich, near Penistone, West Riding. Under the 'Toleration Act' he was granted a certificate at the Barnsley sessions on 15 October 1689 to use his house at Bolton upon Dearne as a place of worship. From 1690 onwards he appears to have preached at various places in Yorkshire and Derbyshire, including to a presbyterian congregation at Great Houghton, a township in the parish of Darfield which lay adjacent to Bolton. From 1693 to 1720 he was in receipt of a grant from the Common Fund. 
Calamy, writing in August 1713 when Denton was in his eightieth year, says that he still preached sometimes at Great Houghton. To Calamy he was 'the picture of an old puritan', who led 'an unblameable life, and maintained his integrity' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 2.951). When he died in 1720 Denton had outlived all those who had been ejected with him fifty-eight years before. He was buried at Bolton upon Dearne on 12 or 13 October 1720. His eldest son, Daniel Denton (1663-1721), followed him in his ministry and connections and for twenty-eight years was chaplain to the Riches of Bull House, Penistone, and ministered to a congregation there. 


@@@@@


doc= 7518


Denton, Richard (1586-1662), Church of England clergyman and colonist, was born in Yorkshire. Nothing is known of his parents or of his life before he graduated BA from St Catharine's College, Cambridge, in 1623. Before 1626 he married Helen Windlbank, about whom nothing is known, and by 1631 was installed as curate of Coley Chapel, near Halifax. In the late 1630s Denton migrated to New England, staying briefly at Watertown, Massachusetts, before moving to Wethersfield, Connecticut. Dissension in that congregation led him to move on to the Connecticut town of Stamford in 1644. This was merely a stopping place, however, for Denton and a group of fellow Englishmen soon received a grant from the Dutch authorities in New Netherland to settle on Long Island, where they founded the town of Hempstead. This community of Englishmen stayed neutral during the First Anglo-Dutch War, and the New Netherland's director, Peter Stuyvesant, expressed his appreciation of Denton in a letter to the Hempstead magistrates in 1657. In that same year the Dutch ministers J. Megapolensis and S. Driius wrote to the classis of Amsterdam that Denton was 'sound in faith, of a friendly disposition, and beloved by all'. Denton had presbyterian convictions but the Dutch visitors reported that his congregation also included congregationalists, who absented themselves from the services when children of the parish were to be baptized. 
In 1659 Denton returned to England to claim a large legacy left him by a friend. He settled in Essex, where he lived until his death there in 1662. His son Daniel remained in the colonies and became a local official and author of 'A Brief Description of New York' (1670). 


@@@@@


doc= 7519


Denton, Thomas (bap. 1723, d. 1777), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Sebergham, Cumberland, and baptized in the parish church there on 2 December 1723, the fourth of five children of Isaac Denton (died 1739), yeoman, of Greenfoot in Sebergham and his wife, Matilda, 'nee' Stanwix (died 1762/3). He was educated by the Revd Joseph Relph (1712-1743) at the village school, and edited his master's poems, which were published by subscription in 1747. Denton matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 7 July 1740 and graduated BA on 4 March 1746, and MA in 1752. 
Denton was left a small amount of property by his father but had to make his own way in the world. He took holy orders, being ordained deacon by Bishop George Fleming of Carlisle on 15 March 1746 and priest by Fleming's successor, Bishop Richard Osbaldeston, at Rose Castle on 26 June 1747. Having served as curate at Irthington, Denton went on to become curate to the Revd Robert Graham at Arthuret near by. There he resumed his minor literary career by privately printing a local poem entitled 'Gariston'. In 1753, when Graham settled at Netherby on his family's estate, Denton became Graham's curate at St Giles's Church, Ashtead, Surrey. Here he became chaplain to Graham's aged and infirm relative Catharine, Lady Widdrington, last surviving joint heir to Charles Graham, third and last Viscount Preston (died 1739), who persuaded Graham to resign the rectory in Denton's favour. He was duly presented by the Hon. Thomas Howard (later fourteenth earl of Suffolk and seventh earl of Berkshire) of Ashtead Park on 7 November and instituted on 14 November 1754. In 1755 or 1756 he married a Mrs Ann Clubbe, a Yorkshire woman, who was companion to Lady Widdrington on her death in 1757, and received a legacy from her mistress. 
Denton continued to apply himself to literary studies. He edited a manual of meditations on central Christian themes entitled 'Religious retirement for one day in every month; freed from the peculiarities of the Romish superstition; and fitted for the use of protestants' (London, 1758). This was based on the work of the seventeenth-century English Catholic convert John Gother. 'If, in any one instance', Denton opined in the advertisement, 'a sinner is brought by them to serious reflection and amendment of life, he will think his trouble amply compensated'. He was also a minor poet in Spenserian vein though, as William Hutchinson tactfully put it, 'Fastidious criticism' might say it is 'correct even to coldness' (Hutchinson, 420). Denton brought out 'Immortality, or, The Consolation of Human Life: a Monody' (1754) and 'The House of Superstition: a Vision' (ten pages, 1762), prefixed to William Gilpin's 'Lives of the Reformers'. Both are poems in imitation of Spenser. Denton also compiled the supplemental volume to the first edition of the 'General Biographical Dictionary' (1761). 
Denton became corpulent and unwieldy in later life and died at Ashtead on 27 June 1777. He was buried in St Giles's Church on 1 July, leaving a widow and seven surviving children (three sons and four daughters). Thomas Howard gave the next presentation to Mrs Denton and by judicious management she turned the gift into a comfortable annuity. 


@@@@@


doc= 7520


Denton, Thomas (d. 1789), coiner, was born in the North Riding of Yorkshire and originally made a living as a tinman. He kept a bookseller's shop in York for about ten years and moved to London about 1780. There he is said to have made a copy of a 'speaking figure made by some foreigners' ('GM', 757), the precise nature of which remains unknown. Denton exhibited his mechanism about the country, and followed this by constructing a 'writing figure'. Apparently active as an amateur chemist, in 1784 Denton published 'Physical Amusements and Diverting Experiments', translated from the work in French by Giuseppe Pinetti de Wildalle, a book of elementary parlour magic. In addition he made pentagraphs and other mathematical instruments, and carried on the business of silver plating alongside his ownership of a bookshop in Holborn. He became associated with a well-known coiner, and was himself tried and convicted of possessing coining implements. He was hanged before Newgate prison, with his accomplice, John Jones, and two others on 1 July 1789. 


@@@@@


doc= 7521


Denton, William (bap. 1605, d. 1691), physician, born at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, and baptized at Hillesden on 14 April 1605, was the youngest son of Sir Thomas Denton (died 1633), a lawyer and landowner, and his wife, Susan Temple (died 1641). He matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1621, graduating BA (1624) and MA (1627). The Denton men had traditionally been lawyers, but William took up medicine, studying with Henry Ashworth in Oxford and taking his DM on 10 October 1634. In April 1636 he was appointed court physician to Charles I, and in 1639 was with the king and the army during the Scots war. The Dentons' large families over several generations brought William a wide range of kinship connections in the south midlands and in London. He fostered these from his house in Covent Garden, where he lived and entertained for much of his life. His reputation for wit and polite conversation at court, particularly among the ladies, brought him the nickname of 'speaker of the Parliament of Women' ('The Genealogist', 47). This and his position at court made him privy to a wide range of information, some of it sensitive. He married three times, but little is known of his first two wives, except that the second may have been Lady Muschamp of Yorkshire. His third wife, whom he married during the 1630s, was Catherine (died 1675), daughter of Bostock Fuller of Tandridge Court, Surrey; they had one daughter, Anne ('b'. 1640). She married George Nicholas, son of the king's secretary, Sir Edward Nicholas, in 1664. 
Denton attended the king throughout the civil war, but was quickly able to make his peace with parliament, compounding in December 1646 for $55. During the interregnum he practised in London and the surgeon Richard Wiseman often and respectfully mentioned his professional skills. At the Restoration, Sir Edward Nicholas and the earl of Ormond worked to restore him to the position of royal physician, which he duly achieved on 24 January 1661. He was elected an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians in 1664, and was at one point mentioned as a physician to the duke of York. 
Although William Denton was a respected physician with a large and diverse practice, his busy life covered a much wider range of activities. The trials and tribulations of his extended family meant that he spent much time sorting out their business affairs. He was close to his nephew Sir Ralph Verney (less than eight years younger than himself) and was devoted to Verney's wife, Mary. He corresponded with Verney more than once a week except when they were together in London or Buckinghamshire; the letters span more than fifty years, and are a great record of seventeenth-century male friendship. Denton played a vital part in securing the Verney estates while Sir Ralph was in self-imposed exile from 1643 to 1653, acted as foster parent to the Verney children when they were alone in England, and managed much of Verney's business. Like Verney he found himself assisting his own wider family affairs after his eldest brother, Sir Alexander Denton, died in prison in 1644 and his sister-in-law died the year after. Denton's role as trustee for the estates involved him in finding husbands for his nieces, and places for his nephews, all of which took up much of his time. With the early death of the young head of the next generation in 1658, many of the same problems ensued. 
These activities nevertheless left the energetic Denton time for wide reading especially in history, philosophy, and current affairs. The lists of books he sent the exiled Sir Ralph Verney in France give some indication of the range. After the Restoration, Denton wrote five treatises between 1664 and 1690. These reflected the Erastian and anti-papist protestant views he held as a member of the Church of England, and drew on a wide range of primarily historical material. He also published a translation of an Italian work of Pietro Sarpi, 'A Treatise of Matters Beneficiary' (1680), which he dedicated to Charles II. His final works, published in 1689 and 1690, wholeheartedly supported the revolution of 1688 and religious toleration. He passed his love of languages and learning on to his daughter Anne, whom Denton considered very like him, and whose godfather, Sir Ralph Verney, teased her as a bluestocking. 
Denton's wide range of interests was often practical as well as intellectual. He learned much of estate management, passing shrewd judgements on the land market and enclosure, and showing an up-to-date knowledge of trends in agricultural thinking when, for instance, advocating turning estates over to dairy farming. His lively commentaries on current events, court machinations, and social scandals are a vital strand of the seventeenth-century Verney correspondence. Denton died at his house in Covent Garden, London on 9 May 1691. His lifelong friend Sir Ralph Verney had hurried from the country to his bedside. Denton was buried at Hillesden, Buckinghamshire. His epitaph in Hillesden church captures his personality: 'He was blessed with that happy composition of Body and Mind that preserved him chearfull, easy and agreeable to the last, and endeared him to all that knew him'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7522


Denton, William (1815-1888), Church of England clergyman, born in March 1815 at Newport in the Isle of Wight, was the eldest son of James Denton of that town. He matriculated from Worcester College, Oxford, in 1841, graduating BA in 1844 and MA in 1848. Influenced by the Tractarian movement he was ordained deacon in 1844, as curate of St Andrew's, Bradfield, in Berkshire, where Thomas Stevens was rector, and priest in 1845, as curate of Barking. In 1847 he became curate of Shoreditch, and on 22 June 1848 married Jane, youngest daughter of William Hurst Ashpitel, architect, of Clapton Square. They had at least two sons. 
In 1850 Denton was presented to the vicarage of St Bartholomew, Little Moorfields, Cripplegate, a crown living, which he retained until his death. As the incumbent of an inner-London parish, he took up the cause of the poor whose homes were demolished to make way for new railways. His 'Observations on the displacement of the poor by metropolitan railways and other public improvements' (1861), which pointed out that railway companies chose routes through working-class areas because tenants there had fewer legal rights, and that the problems of overcrowding were increased by the tendency for housing adjoining railways to be turned over to warehouses, attracted considerable attention. On 28 February 1861 the earl of Derby presented a petition from Denton to the House of Lords, and the question was debated for two nights. He later gave evidence to the royal commission on the housing of the working classes (1884-5), advocating that industries should be moved out of city centres into suburbs, where workers could be rehoused in healthy surroundings. 
Denton had personal contacts with members of the Orthodox church in the Near East, and produced in 1862 'Servia and the Servians', one of the first well-informed books in English on Serbia. He subsequently produced an edition of Chedomil Miyatovic's 'Serbian Folklore' (1874) and a work on Montenegro (1877). His 'The Christians in Turkey' (1863), which alleged that British diplomats had carried out a conspiracy of silence about the sufferings of Christians under Ottoman rule, initially attracted little notice, but in 1876, when the 'Bulgarian atrocities' had aroused public outrage, the original edition sold out and a new and enlarged edition appeared. A third edition was reached in 1877, and was translated into German and Serbian. He was on the platform of the National Convention on the Eastern Question, chaired by the duke of Westminster and Lord Shaftesbury, at St James's Hall, London, in December 1876. In recognition of his campaigning on behalf of Balkan Christians he was created a knight commander of the Serbian order of St Saviour of Takhova, and awarded a grand cross of the order of St Saba. 
Apart from occasional sermons, Denton published commentaries on the gospels for Sundays and holy days (3 vols., 1861-3), the Lord's prayer (1864), the 'Epistles' (2 vols., 1869-71), and the 'Acts of the Apostles' (2 vols., 1874-6). In 1863 he published an edition based on the original manuscripts of the 'Sacra privata' of Thomas Wilson (1663-1755), bishop of Sodor and Man. His last work was a study of 'England in the fifteenth century' (1888). Denton died at his home, 22 Westbourne Square, Paddington, London, on 2 January 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 7523


D'Eon de Beaumont, Charles Genevieve Louis Auguste Andre Timothee, Chevalier D'Eon in the French nobility (1728-1810), diplomatist and transvestite, was born at the Hotel d'Uzes, Tonnerre, Burgundy, on 5 October 1728. He came of an old noble family, possibly of Breton origin, though, like much else about this extraordinary personage, his genealogical pretensions later gave rise to judicial proceedings. His father, Louis D'Eon de Beaumont (1695-1749), was a lawyer who became mayor of Tonnerre and a sub-delegate of the intendant of the generality of Paris; he married Francoise de Chavanson (died 1792) in 1723, and the couple also had a daughter. Charles's grandfather Louis D'Eon (1656-1720), styled 'ecuyer, avocat, bailli de Tanlay, St Vincent, Quincy, Molosmes, St Martin, etc', had also been the intendant's sub-delegate. Louis D'Eon had close links with the comte d'Argenson, intendant of Paris, sending him presents of game on his appointment as minister of war in 1743. The young D'Eon studied law at the College des Quatre-Nations in Paris, obtaining several degrees. At nineteen he was already a lawyer at the 'parlement'. His brilliance, as well as his family background, helped him to become secretary to Bertier de Sauvigny, intendant of Paris. He showed early signs of the prolific writer that he was to become. In 1753 he published an 'Essay historique sur les differentes situations de la France par rapport aux finances sous le regne de Louis XIV et sous la regence de M. le duc d'Orleans', which was praised by Controller-General Machault and by the historian President Henault. He became a friend of Malesherbes, who appointed him as a royal censor for history and literature in 1758. 
In a letter of 5 June 1774 to his brother-in-law, the Chevalier O'Gorman, D'Eon claimed that in 1755 he had attended a ball at Versailles disguised as a woman and, briefly revealing his masculinity, had seduced Madame de Pompadour. Having resumed his feminine role, he had then been the object of Louis XV's pressing attentions (F. Gaillardet and H. Gaillardet, 302-3). Although epicene in appearance, D'Eon was indisputably male. Moreover, his well-established court and country connections provide a more reliable explanation to the origins of his career than his alleged nocturnal and possibly transvestite activities. In 1755 he was already well known to Louis XV's cousin the prince de Conti, who was in charge of the king's private diplomatic system known as the 'secret du roi'. The 'secret' involved recruiting clandestine agents to work alongside unsuspecting official French diplomats, particularly in eastern Europe. That year D'Eon was probably recruited by Conti to accompany a Scots Jacobite, Alexander Peter Mackensie of Kildin, known as the Chevalier Douglas, on a secret mission to Russia aimed at establishing private lines of communication between Louis XV and the Empress Elizabeth. No written proof of D'Eon's presence on this mission, or of his having adopted female attire, has been found (Cox, 23). Douglas's mission was a success, and the empress asked Louis XV to accredit a minister to her court. Douglas was chosen, and from 4 August 1756 he was joined by D'Eon, now definitely in male attire, as embassy secretary, a position which he retained under the subsequent French ambassador, the marquis de l'Hopital, until 20 August 1760. When Russia adhered to the Franco-Austrian alliance against Prussia, Douglas unwittingly nullified a clause protecting France's ally Turkey from the warlike attentions of the Russians by accepting a secret agreement between the three powers to that effect. France ratified the treaty but not the secret agreement. D'Eon saved the situation, though not Douglas's position, in May 1757 by using his influence with the empress to set aside the secret agreement. D'Eon served Louis XV's clandestine intentions in 1759 when he persuaded Elizabeth and the Russian chancellor, Vorontsov, to withdraw an offer of mediation which the French foreign minister, the duc de Choiseul, had prevailed upon her to make, and to continue the war. 
D'Eon left Russia in 1760 to follow his natural calling as a soldier, and after his arrival at Versailles in October (bringing with him the empress's adherence to the anti-British maritime convention) he was granted a pension of 2000 livres. He asked the count of Broglie, who had succeeded Conti at the head of the 'secret', whether he could serve under his orders and those of his brother, the marechal de Broglie, in the forthcoming campaign. Choiseul, then minister of war, agreed to this request, and on 18 May 1761 D'Eon was transferred from his first regiment, the colonel-general dragoons, to the regiment d'Autichamp. He was present at the costly engagement of Villinghausen, where the marshal's army lost the advantage through the failure of the army under Soubise to lend it timely support. After Broglie's army crossed the Weser on 19 August 1761 D'Eon was sent with an order to a lieutenant-general, the count of Guerchy, who refused to execute it. D'Eon little knew the role Guerchy was later to play in his career, but he had become aware of the way French court factions and antagonisms had fatal repercussions on military operations. Guerchy, like Soubise, was part of the circle of Madame de Pompadour, whereas the Broglie brothers were not in favour with her. D'Eon was wounded in an engagement at Ulstrop, where a troop of cavalry passed over him, an event which may have had an effect on his mental state, though it did not prevent him from displaying courage and initiative at Einbeck and, in October, capturing a force of several hundred Prussians who had tried to sever French lines of communication at Osterwick. 
Brilliant as it had been, D'Eon's military career was brief. After the death of the Empress Elizabeth in January 1762 the comte de Broglie asked him for a memorandum on the state of the Russian court and wanted to send him back to St Petersburg, especially after the 'coup d'etat' which placed Catherine II on the throne on 9 July. The new minister of foreign affairs, the comte de Choiseul (later duc de Praslin), had other plans for the young dragoon, whom he had befriended in Vienna while D'Eon was recovering from a broken leg on his earlier return from Russia. Despite D'Eon's reluctance, he was appointed on 29 August 1762 secretary to the duc de Nivernais, who was sent to negotiate the peace in London. Louis XV ordered Tercier, the acolyte of Broglie in the 'secret', to pay the young man a gratuity of 1000 livres. It was a timely payment as he had already incurred considerable expenditure both in the army and in anticipation of returning to Russia. Although reckless financial extravagance was a charge to which D'Eon laid himself open over the years, it is worth noting that the French court acted on the principle that expected lavish expenditure should precede irregular and parsimonious reimbursement. 
In London, Nivernais was in no position to negotiate from strength, but he obtained the best terms he could for his country and was ably seconded by 'le petit D'Eon', who laboured assiduously on the paperwork and knew how to exploit situations and indiscretions. Much to Praslin's surprise, Nivernais even persuaded George III to allow D'Eon to take the English ratification of the treaty of Paris back to France, an unusual privilege for a foreigner. He delivered the instrument of ratification to the duke of Bedford in Paris on 26 February 1763. D'Eon was at the apogee of his career, earning the praise of Praslin and a verbal commendation from Louis XV at Versailles. Upon his return to London, Nivernais invested him, on 30 March, with the insignia of the royal and military order of St Louis. He was henceforth known as the Chevalier D'Eon. In addition he received a gratuity of 6000 livres. 
If 1763 was D'Eon's year of personal success, it also marked the beginning of his downfall. Louis XV was understandably angered by the humiliating terms of the treaty of Paris and he sought revenge against Britain. Through the agency of the 'secret' he began to gather information that would facilitate an eventual invasion of the British Isles. An officer called Carlet de la Roziere was sent over in June 1763 to reconnoitre the English coastline. Nivernais had left England in May at the end of his embassy. D'Eon, who had been made resident charge d'affaires on 17 April, was promoted in July to the rank of minister-plenipotentiary until the arrival of the next ambassador. The arrangement was convenient for Louis XV, and the chevalier, who had already worked for him in Russia, was now brought fully into the 'secret' by a letter of 3 June from the king. He was informed about La Roziere's mission and told that his secret correspondents would be Broglie and Tercier. Broglie also asked him to spy on the new ambassador, who turned out to be the insubordinate officer whom the chevalier had encountered before, the comte de Guerchy. For greater security, D'Eon was to move out of the embassy into lodgings with a cousin, D'Eon de Mouloize, who was sent over for the purpose, and with La Roziere. According to the chevalier, Madame de Pompadour discovered his role in the elusive chain of the 'secret'. The story is plausible. Choiseul and Praslin, supported by Madame de Pompadour and Guerchy, were opposed to the influence of the Broglie brothers and actively sought to neutralize the network of the 'secret'. 
D'Eon was caught between the factions. Moreover he lived on a lavish scale in London, entertaining Horace Walpole, David Hume, and others. His pension was still only 2000 livres, and he had never been adequately reimbursed for his earlier expenditure in Russia. Yet he bought fine clothes and collected books and rare manuscripts. Creditors began to press their demands on the chevalier, who pestered Praslin for payment of his debts but without success. He also wanted to retain the title of minister-plenipotentiary after Guerchy had taken up his post. From France, Nivernais, his only friend in the Choiseul circle, warned him that his conduct was unreasonable. With Guerchy's arrival on 16 October, D'Eon became unhinged. Praslin's reply to his request about his title was offensive, though understandable, and D'Eon's rejoinder to it was insulting. He soon picked a quarrel with Guerchy. The ambassador had brought with him D'Eon's letters of recall, but at the same time the chevalier received a private note from the king implying that the signature on the letters was only a clerk's manual and not his own, thus rendering them technically invalid. On 23 October D'Eon dined with Guerchy at the latter's residence, Monmouth House, in Soho Square, and subsequently claimed that the ambassador had tried to poison and kidnap him. Louis XV yielded to Praslin's demand to have him extradited, while at the same time sending word to him to go into hiding and to take good care of his secret papers. By this stage D'Eon had moved into 38 Brewer Street, where he was armed and barricaded himself in with his cousin. Although he had complied with an order to hand over official papers to Guerchy, he had kept back those relating to the 'secret', which, as Broglie pointed out to the king, he was prepared to defend at all costs. The papers which had not already been returned to the king through La Roziere were now carefully hidden in the recesses of his lodgings. 
The British government refused the request for his extradition. D'Eon was not prepared to return to France unless he had positive guarantees of freedom and safety from Praslin. In February he learned from the banker Thomas Walpole that payment of his French pension had been discontinued because of a new law suspending payment on all pensions granted after April 1759. As the king did nothing to help him, the chevalier took the outrageous step in March 1764 of publishing the correspondence between himself, Nivernais, Guerchy, Choiseul, and Praslin concerning his disputes with them. Horace Walpole wrote that the book 'had an immense circulation, and the attempts to suppress it at Paris, of course, served to make it more sought after' (Walpole, 3.393). The publication by J. Dixwell of the 'Lettres, memoires et negociations particulieres du Chevalier D'Eon, ministre plenipotentiaire aupres du roi de Grande-Bretagne' had made the French government a laughing stock. His official pension was stopped. However, it is worth noting that D'Eon had printed no documents relating to the 'secret'. He began to apply pressure on the king through Broglie, claiming that the opposition was offering him $40,000 for his remaining papers. He demanded redress against Guerchy by 22 April, otherwise he would be forced to clear his name by further revelations. Louis XV took the threat calmly, but arranged for him to receive a secret pension of 12,000 livres (paid in two half-yearly instalments and backdated to 1 April 1762) in exchange for the return of compromising documents. An intermediary, de Nort, returned to France without the papers, D'Eon having indicated that he wanted a further payment of 116,341 livres to clear all his debts. 
Following the publication of the 'Lettres, memoires et negociations' Guerchy sued D'Eon for libel, and the case was heard in the court of the king's bench on 3 July 1764. D'Eon did not present himself and was found guilty by default. Sentence was postponed until he could be brought to court. He was subsequently outlawed. He had disappeared, adopting female attire as a disguise. He hid himself at Byfleet, Surrey, in the house of an opposition MP, Humphrey Cotes, a friend of John Wilkes. On 12 February 1765, on the evidence of an adventurer called Treyssac de Vergy, originally an acolyte of Guerchy but now an ally of D'Eon, the French ambassador was indicted in the court of common pleas of having incited Treyssac to kill D'Eon. The case went through several stages. Guerchy's residence was stoned by a Wilkite mob. The ambassador was recalled, and the chief cause of D'Eon's agitation was removed. Broglie, who found the chevalier's reports on the British political scene extremely useful, urged the king to make another conciliatory gesture towards a man whose personal loyalty to the monarch had not wavered. Guerchy was replaced by Durand, a member of the 'secret', as minister-plenipotentiary, and in July 1766 Durand handed over to D'Eon a handwritten letter from the king bestowing upon him the pension of 12,000 livres, to be paid 'wherever he may be, except in time of war amongst my enemies and until such time as I think proper to appoint him to some post, the salary of which shall exceed the amount of this pension' (Louis XV to D'Eon, 1 April 1766, Boutaric, 1.350). The chevalier handed over some papers to Durand, but the threat remained that, under the pressure of his creditors, he might reluctantly be forced to sell the rest to the earl of Chatham or to others. 
However, D'Eon was still an outlaw, though no further proceedings had been taken against him in the English courts. In 1769 he left Brewer Street temporarily for Petty France, Westminster. The summer he spent at Staunton Harold, the seat of his friend the fifth Earl Ferrers, working on a massive treatise on public administration which was eventually published in thirteen volumes at Amsterdam in 1774 under the title of 'Les loisirs du Chevalier d'Eon'. His wide circle of friends, which now included Wilkes, enabled him to keep Louis XV informed about the British political scene. In 1772, for instance, he reported the claim that Bute and Mansfield were plotting to restore the Pretender on condition that he converted to Anglicanism. A year later Broglie was seeking information from him about the identity of Junius after an Englishman, probably Thomas Mante, had been presented as the pamphleteer at Versailles. Doubts were expressed at this time about D'Eon's sex, and wagers were made, although he himself professed to be indignant at the suggestion that he was not a man. Yet, according to a document cited by the duc de Broglie (2. 468-9), D'Eon had confided to Drouet, another agent of the 'secret', that he was in reality a woman. This admission was communicated by the comte de Broglie to Louis XV in July 1772. The chevalier's situation remained desperate because his secret royal pension was paid irregularly and his debts had not been expunged. His reports were accompanied by requests for money and reminders that he still held compromising documents, which he had entrusted to Lord Ferrers and Humphrey Cotes, partly for safekeeping and partly in pawn for advances of money. 
With Louis XV's death in May 1774 the 'secret du roi' came to an end, as the new king wished to conduct diplomacy through regular channels. D'Eon was offered a deal: the return of his papers and an undertaking to remain silent on the disputes with Praslin and the now deceased Guerchy in exchange for a confirmation of his pension and a safe-conduct to return to France. D'Eon held out for a reimbursement of debts amounting to 250,000 livres, public vindication of his past conduct, and the new post he had been promised by Louis XV. The king refused these terms, and his pension was stopped. With the approach of war, however, his services were even more in demand. During October and November 1775 an agreement was reached between him and Beaumarchais, whom Vergennes, the new minister of foreign affairs, had sent over to London for the purpose. In addition to handing over his papers, D'Eon was required to adopt female attire, though he was to be allowed to continue wearing the cross of the order of St Louis. Louis XVI would treat his debts as a capital sum invested towards a lifelong annuity of 12,000 livres to be paid in lieu of his pension. There was also a recognizance by Beaumarchais that D'Eon had contracted debts of unspecified 'plus fortes sommes' which Beaumarchais undertook to repay (F. Gaillardet and H. Gaillardet, 338; Boutaric, 2.445). The new 'chevaliere' was also to be paid a trousseau. It is likely that the requirement about female attire was viewed at Versailles as reasonable in the light of D'Eon's earlier admission as to his sex, and also as a means of controlling an unruly individual who had often provoked his opponents to duels. 
Sensing rightly that the slippery Beaumarchais would not honour all the financial agreements, D'Eon kept back some papers (of which, it now appears, he had made copies). The payment of the 'plus fortes sommes' gave rise to bitter disputes between the two. In August 1777 he returned to France. Upon presenting himself at Versailles in military uniform, he was promptly ordered to resume female dress. The chevalier found himself ill at ease in female garb, despite the services of Marie Antoinette's modiste, Mlle Bertin. His requests to be allowed to don his uniform and to serve in the war were turned down, and he was refused permission to return to London in 1778 to look after his financial interests after the death of Lord Ferrers. D'Eon settled on his family estates at Tonnerre. After a few months imprisonment at Dijon in 1779 for wearing his uniform in public, he again took up residence at Versailles before being finally allowed to return to England in November 1785. His unpaid landlord in Brewer Street was threatening to sell his library and collections. D'Eon was also pursuing the successive heirs of Lord Ferrers for $5000 which the earl had received from Beaumarchais on his behalf. He resumed his social life, dining frequently with Wilkes and his daughter; he stayed with the duke of Dorset at Knole and saw Lord Chancellor Loughborough (who had been his lawyer in 1763). James Boswell met 'Madame D'Eon' on 5 March 1786 and was shocked by her appearance: 'she appeared to me a man in woman's clothes, like Hecate on the stage' ('English Experiment', 48). The 'chevaliere' took to fencing as a source of revenue. On 9 April 1787 he appeared in an 'assault of arms' with Saint-Georges at Carlton House in the presence of the prince of Wales, his female dress adding panache to his dexterity. 
The collapse of the 'ancien regime' freed D'Eon from any bonds of loyalty to a system which had treated him badly, but it also had disastrous consequences for him. He may have celebrated the 14 July in 1790 but he also found that his annuity fell into arrears and was later stopped. He twice offered his military services to his country without success. He had to sell his collection of books and manuscripts (including those of Vauban) in 1791. A public subscription in the City of London provided him with $475, but by 1792 he had to sell his jewellery and plate. Several of his relatives were guillotined. After the deaths of his mother and sister, the estates at Tonnerre were confiscated, although he was not technically an emigre. 
In partnership with Mrs Bateman, an actress and female fencer, D'Eon gave displays of his skill at the Haymarket Theatre and at Ranelagh in 1793. Though sixty-five years old, the 'chevaliere' fenced 'as though in the vigour of youth' (Cox, 132). At Southampton on 26 August 1796 he was seriously wounded in the armpit during an assault of arms and was thereafter unable to fence. He had left his lodgings in Brewer Street in 1793 and was then living with Mrs Mary Cole, a native of Lorraine and the widow of a Royal Navy pump-maker, at 26 New Milman Street. She kept house for him for fourteen years believing him to be a woman. He spent five months in prison for debt in 1804. That year he signed a contract with Messrs Richardson for the publication of his memoirs, which were to be written by Thomas William Plummer. The work was never completed, though the material was assembled for it. He finally had to sell his cross of St Louis. D'Eon died peacefully on 21 May 1810 at 26 New Milman Street. A medical examination carried out by several doctors, including the surgeon Thomas Copeland, in the presence of Sir Sidney Smith and others, found that his male organs were 'in every respect perfectly formed' (F. Gaillardet and H. Gaillardet, 406). Mrs Cole 'did not recover from the shock for many hours' (Cox, 135). According to his wishes, D'Eon was buried, on 28 May, in the graveyard of St Pancras Old Church with, between his hands, a crucifix and a copy of the 'Imitation of Christ', 'which I have so badly imitated' (ibid., 136). His grave disappeared when the Midland Railway destroyed the churchyard. He had made a will but had not signed it, and administration of the estate was entrusted to Plummer. His belongings, including Richard Mead's collection of editions of Horace's works, were sold by Christies on 19 February 1813. Plummer retained many papers of D'Eon, including some relating to his role in the 'secret du roi', which were unfortunately dispersed in 1966. 
The Chevalier D'Eon's outrageous, though understandable, behaviour in 1763-4 and his extraordinary career as a transvestite have overshadowed his remarkable prowess as a soldier, his undoubted skills as a diplomat, informant, and secret agent, and his qualities as a scholar and writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 7524


Quincey, Thomas Penson De (1785-1859), essayist, was born in Manchester on 15 August 1785, the fourth of the eight children of Thomas Quincey (1753-1793), a textile importer from Lincolnshire, and his wife, Elizabeth Penson ('c'.1756-1846). A cultured man of liberal views, the elder Quincey was the author of a 'Short Tour in the Midland Counties of England' (1774), an opponent of the slave trade, and a founder member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. Thomas was probably born at his house in Cromford Court, Market Street Lane. 
The family moved after a few months to The Farm, in the rural district of Moss Side, where Thomas, a small and rather sickly child, suffered severely from ague and whooping cough. In 1791 the Quinceys moved to their newly built mansion, Greenhay, also in Moss Side. Thomas saw little thereafter of his father, who had contracted tuberculosis and sought to recover his health by living mainly in Jamaica (where he had business interests), in Madeira, and in Portugal, visiting England only occasionally. 
In his father's absence, Thomas's early life was dominated by his mother, a strict and somewhat austere disciplinarian, and by his eldest sister Elizabeth ('b'. 1783), with whom he formed an intense emotional bond. Her death, probably from meningitis, in the summer of 1792 affected him deeply, and in 'Suspiria de profundis' ('Blackwood's Magazine', 1845) he recalled, as a profound spiritual experience, his solitary visit a few days after her death to the room where her body lay. The following year his father returned home acutely ill and died on 18 July 1793. 
Thomas and his boisterous elder brother William ('b'. 1781/2) were sent to be tutored by Samuel Hall, curate of St Anne's Church, Manchester, the most active of five guardians appointed under Thomas Quincey's will. Thomas, an omnivorous reader, revealed a gift for classical studies. When his mother moved to North Parade, Bath, in 1796 he was transferred to Bath grammar school, where he made rapid progress in Latin and Greek, the headmaster (according to De Quincey's 'Confessions of an English Opium-Eater', 1821) telling a visitor that Thomas 'could harangue an Athenian mob, better than you or I could address an English one' ('Works', 2.14). 
At Bath Mrs Quincey, always fervently religious, entered the evangelical circle of Hannah More. She also changed the family name to De Quincey, an affectation which she soon abandoned but which her son always retained thereafter. (The question of upper- or lower-case 'd' was never settled: De Quincey himself wrote it in both ways and, although in old age he asserted that the 'd' should be lower-case and the name alphabetized under Q (Hogg, 220n.), the consensus has nearly always been the reverse on both points.) 
In autumn 1799 De Quincey was transferred for obscure reasons to Wingfield (Winkfield) School in Wiltshire, which he regarded as an inferior school. In this year he first read and was deeply impressed by the anonymous 'Lyrical Ballads' of Wordsworth and Coleridge. The summer of 1800 was spent as companion to the young Peter Howe Brown, Lord Westport, visiting London, Windsor (where he met George III), Dublin (where he was in the Irish House of Lords to witness the passing of the 'Act of Union'), and the co. Mayo estate of Westport's father, the earl of Altamont. On his return to England in September he visited Lady Susan Carbery at Laxton, Northamptonshire, and on 9 November 1800, despite his pleas for a return to the Bath grammar school, was enrolled at the Manchester grammar school, where his guardians expected him to stay for the three years required to qualify for a scholarship to Brasenose College, Oxford. 
A formerly excellent school then stagnating under the failing hand of its superannuated high master Charles Lawson, the Manchester grammar school increasingly stimulated De Quincey's sense of boredom and resentment. A visit to family friends at Liverpool in summer 1801 brought him into contact with the intellectual circle of William Roscoe, William Shepherd, and James Currie, the biographer of Burns. All were correspondents of Coleridge, and although in 'A literary novitiate' ('Tait's Magazine', February 1837) De Quincey was to travesty their politics as a snobbish pretence of radicalism and their literary taste as 'blind servility to the narrowest of conventional usages', he presumably learned much from them about the authors of 'Lyrical Ballads'. 
De Quincey's discontent with the Manchester grammar school continued to grow, and having failed to persuade his mother and guardians to allow him to transfer prematurely to Oxford, on 20 July 1802 he absconded from the school and walked to Chester, where he presented himself the following day at his mother's new residence, St John's Priory. Accepting this 'fait accompli', his mother and guardians granted him an allowance of 1 guinea a week, and he set off on an indefinite walking tour of north Wales, sleeping by turns at inns and cottages and in the open air. 
Tiring of these conditions and reluctant to return home, late in November De Quincey broke off communication with his family and travelled to London. For his experiences there no record survives apart from his own later 'Confessions of an English Opium-Eater', but surviving letters confirm the facts of a loss of contact with his guardians and a return some months later. According to 'Confessions', De Quincey applied to moneylenders (prominent among them a certain Dell) hoping to borrow money against the $2600 he expected to inherit under his father's will upon coming of age. During the ensuing delays he spent his remaining funds and became destitute, living in the streets by day and sleeping at night in an unfurnished house in Greek Street, Soho, made available by an attorney, one Brunell or Brown, who acted for Dell. It was during this period of destitution that De Quincey later claimed to have been innocently protected and comforted by the young prostitute celebrated in 'Confessions' as 'Anne of Oxford-street'. 
After failing to obtain the expected loan, De Quincey effected a reconciliation with his mother and returned to Chester, apparently in March 1803. Later the same month he was sent to stay with family friends at Everton, near Liverpool, where he remained until 3 August. While there he kept a diary which notes his sexual encounters with local prostitutes, offers scathing observations on the trivialities of provincial life, details his extensive literary interests (including enthusiasm for Gothic fiction and the poetry of Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Southey), and states his aspiration to write poetic drama. 
The diary also contains drafts of a letter, sent on 31 May, to William Wordsworth, in which De Quincey introduces himself as a worshipper of nature, expresses his 'admiration and love' for the 'Lyrical Ballads' and 'earnestly and humbly' begs for Wordsworth's friendship. Wordsworth's cautious but encouraging reply, written at Grasmere on 29 July, pointed out that 'My friendship it is not in my power to give: this... is the gift of time and circumstance' ('The Letters of William and Dorothy Wordsworth: the Early Years, 1787-1805', ed. E. De Selincourt, rev. C. L. Shaver, 1967, 400-01), but invited the young man to visit him at Grasmere. 
In December 1803 De Quincey entered Worcester College, Oxford. He made few friends and in March 1804 moved from the college to lodgings at the nearby village of Littlemore. He read widely, though not within the syllabus, and resumed his study of German (begun, he claimed, during his period of wandering in Wales). He continued to correspond with Wordsworth. 
It was during a visit to London in the autumn of 1804, according to his own account in 'Confessions', that De Quincey first took opium, initially as a remedy for toothache but afterwards for the sake of the 'abyss of divine enjoyment... suddenly revealed' by ingestion of the drug. Cheaply and legally available from any druggist's shop, opium became a repeated occasional pleasure for De Quincey, who would indulge in it while exploring the city or attending the opera during his frequent visits to London. On one such visit early in 1805 he met Charles and Mary Lamb, but took offence at Charles Lamb's mockery of Coleridge's 'Rime of the Ancient Mariner' and failed to pursue the relationship. 
Correspondence with Wordsworth continued sporadically, and in the summer of 1805 De Quincey visited Coniston in the Lake District, intending to make his way to Grasmere and call on Wordsworth, but was too nervous to make the approach. A year later, again at Coniston, he once more failed to make a planned visit to the poet, but spent his twenty-first birthday (15 August 1806) in drawing up a document (now in the Wordsworth Library, Grasmere) on 'the constituents of Happiness', listing (among other desiderata) 'A capacity of thinking -- i.e., of abstraction and reverie... Books... some great intellectual project' and 'the education of a child'. On his coming of age he received the expected patrimony of $2600, of which $600 was at once swallowed by debts contracted since his entrance at Oxford. 
In July 1807 De Quincey, then visiting his mother at Wrington, Somerset, obtained an introduction to Coleridge. A friendship immediately developed, and in October De Quincey, aware of Coleridge's financial difficulties, offered (through the mediation of Joseph Cottle) a gift of $300, which Coleridge accepted as a 'loan'. Later the same month De Quincey escorted Coleridge's wife, Sara, and their children, who were returning to their home at Keswick, as far as Grasmere, where he at last met William, Dorothy, and Mary Wordsworth. He stayed at Grasmere for two nights before travelling north with Wordsworth to Penrith and Keswick, where he was introduced to Robert Southey. 
De Quincey returned to Oxford and set himself to study intensively for his degree examinations, contending for honours and offering the whole corpus of Greek tragedy as his field of study. Having performed brilliantly in the first day's examination, he suffered a loss of nerve and failed to present himself for the second and final day, 16 May 1808, instead fleeing to London. 
In October 1808 De Quincey rejoined the Wordsworths, now at Allan Bank, Grasmere, where Coleridge was also visiting. Wordsworth was drafting his pamphlet criticizing the convention of Cintra, and in February De Quincey travelled to London to see the pamphlet through the press. This arrangement caused some resentment on the part of Coleridge, who seems to have felt his collaborative relationship with Wordsworth threatened. 
On 21 October 1809 De Quincey moved into the Grasmere cottage formerly rented by the Wordsworths, later known as Dove Cottage. He remained on good terms with the Wordsworth family and developed friendships with neighbours, among them the poets Charles Lloyd and John Wilson (later famous as Christopher North of 'Blackwood's Magazine'). His time was spent in studying German literature, reading political economy, and planning an ambitious philosophical work. There were annual visits lasting several months to London and to his mother, now at Westhay in Somerset. In 1814 and 1815 De Quincey was in Edinburgh with John Wilson and was introduced to several of the city's leading literary figures, including J. G. Lockhart, Sir William Hamilton, and James Hogg (the Ettrick Shepherd). 
De Quincey, however, was overspending his meagre income. In June 1812 he had entered the Middle Temple with the intention of reading for the bar; he kept terms until the early 1820s but failed to pursue his legal studies. The death of three-year-old Catherine, his favourite among the Wordsworth children, on 11 June 1812, plunged him into depression. He returned to Grasmere in late June and later claimed ('Society of the lakes', 'Tait's Magazine', Aug 1840) that there he 'often passed the night upon [Catherine's] grave'. His opium use, hitherto sporadic, became daily, and within a year he was fully addicted. 
By 1814 De Quincey was also conducting a love affair with Margaret (1796-1837), the eighteen-year-old daughter of John Simpson, a 'statesman' (independent farmer) of The Nab, a small farmhouse on the shores of Rydal Water. Their son William was born on 15 November 1816, and on 15 February 1817 the couple were married at Grasmere church. The relationship, together with De Quincey's increasingly obvious opium addiction, did much to sour his relationship with the Wordsworth family. The marriage was none the less a happy one, and there were eventually seven more children: Margaret ('b'. 1817), Horatio ('b'. 1820), Francis John ('b'. 1823), Florence and Paul Frederick (both 'b'. 1827), Julius ('b'. 1829, who died in infancy), and Emily ('b'. 1833). 
As the general election of 1818 approached, the tory ascendancy of the Lowther family in Westmorland was threatened by the popular whig candidate Henry Brougham. Wordsworth, sympathetic to the tory cause, proved willing to recommend to the election committee a pamphlet by De Quincey, 'Close Comments upon a Straggling Speech', attacking Brougham's speech at Kendal on 23 March. The anonymous pamphlet's effective polemic marked De Quincey out as a possible editor for the 'Westmorland Gazette', a weekly paper established in May 1818 to support the tory interest. When the first editor failed to satisfy the proprietors and was dismissed after seven issues the post was offered to De Quincey, who produced his first issue on 11 July. 
De Quincey was on the whole a successful editor who increased his paper's circulation. His readership included the educated gentry of the district, and besides combative political leaders and general news he was able to include articles on political economy and German philosophy as well as more sensational material on murder trials and breach of promise cases. He was unreliable, however, in meeting deadlines; he lived 18 miles from the press; and May 1818 and June 1819 are the dates subsequently assigned in his 'Confessions' to the 'Pains of Opium' with their hideous nightmares. The paper was often saved from disaster by its subeditor, John Kilner. Late in June 1819 the proprietors were warning De Quincey of their dissatisfaction with the lack of 'regular communication between the Editor and the Printer', and on 5 November he resigned the editorship to Kilner. 
Despite a regular allowance from his mother De Quincey was again in debt. John Wilson, now associated with the recently established 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine', was pressing him to write for it, and in December 1820 De Quincey travelled to Edinburgh expecting to become a regular contributor. He began work on several essays, including an 'Opium article' which may have been an early draft of the 'Confessions'. Soon, however, he quarrelled with the proprietor and editor, William Blackwood, over the magazine's editorial policy and in January returned to the Lake District having published only one item, 'The Sport of Fortune' (a translation from Schiller), in the magazine. 
After spending the spring with his family at Fox Ghyll, Rydal, De Quincey visited London in June 1821 with a letter of introduction from Thomas Noon Talfourd to Taylor and Hessey, publishers of the 'London Magazine'. Engaged as a contributor, he took lodgings over the premises of the German bookseller R. H. Bohte at 4 York Street (now Tavistock Street), Covent Garden, and early in August resumed work on 'Confessions of an English Opium-Eater', an account of his early life and opium addiction. Despite persecution by creditors he finished the work in time for it to appear in the September and October numbers of the magazine. A highly selective memoir tracing its author's progress from innocent waif to seasoned addict, 'Confessions' impressed its readers equally by the pathos of its account of 'Anne of Oxford-street' and by the intricate orientalism of the opium nightmares it recounted: 'I was stared at, hooted at, grinned at, chattered at, by monkeys, by paroquets, by cockatoos. I ran into pagodas: and was fixed, for centuries, at the summit, or in secret rooms; I was the idol; I was the priest; I was worshipped; I was sacrificed... I was buried, for a thousand years, in stone coffins, with mummies and sphynxes, in narrow chambers at the heart of eternal pyramids. I was kissed, with cancerous kisses, by crocodiles; and laid, confounded with all unutterable slimy things, amongst reeds and Nilotic mud. ('Works', 2.71)' It was an immediate critical success, attracting nationwide attention. Republished in book form in 1822, 'Confessions' went through seven British and at least nine American editions during De Quincey's lifetime and remained in print into the twenty-first century. 
De Quincey was now a leading contributor to a monthly magazine of modest circulation but high and generally admired literary standards. His fellow contributors included Lamb (with whom he now formed a warm friendship), Hazlitt, Hood, T. N. Talfourd, B. W. Proctor, Thomas Carlyle, H. F. Cary, John Clare, and Allan Cunningham. By the end of 1822 De Quincey was close enough to the editorial circle to draft an article outlining the magazine's policy for the following year, and between 1821 and 1826 the 'London Magazine' published more than twenty of his essays, including notable translations from German writers (in particular 'Jean Paul' Richter and Kant), articles on political economy, the 'Letters to a young man whose education has been neglected', and a miscellaneous series of 'Notes from the pocket-book of a late opium-eater' which included short essays on Malthus and on suicide, and his most famous critical essay, 'On the knocking at the gate in Macbeth', which appeared in 1823. 
De Quincey produced few contributions to the magazine in 1824 and the year was a difficult one for him. He was now sufficiently well known to be brutally attacked in the first (July) issue of a satirical magazine, 'John Bull', as one of the 'Humbugs of the Age'. The article, by William Maginn, a regular contributor to 'Blackwood's', mocked his physical appearance, publicized the illegitimate birth of his first child, and claimed that De Quincey had married his household servant. De Quincey considered challenging the author to a duel but thought better of it. A possible flight to Boulogne to escape creditors is indicated by a letter of 26 October in which De Quincey states that he has just returned from a visit to this favourite refuge of English debtors. 
In 1825, having reviewed the German pseudo- 'Waverley' novel 'Walladmor', a fake concocted to satisfy demand at the Leipzig book fair for a new novel by Scott, De Quincey produced a witty, parodic translation of the novel for publication by Taylor and Hessey. It was among his last pieces of work for them, for the 'London Magazine' was failing and De Quincey was in any case becoming unhappy at the exigencies of spending alternate periods in London, far from his family, and in Westmorland, where he lost contact with his editors and found it difficult to write. 
During summer 1825 De Quincey's wife and children were evicted, in his absence, from their rented house, Fox Ghyll. They moved in with Margaret's parents at The Nab. The farm was already heavily mortgaged to the Rydal estate, and De Quincey, despite his own continuing debts, tried to save the property by taking over the mortgage. This precarious arrangement held until 1829. For unknown reasons, but perhaps partly because of financial complications involving The Nab, De Quincey seems to have written and published nothing between January 1825 and the end of 1826. In October of that year, however, he travelled to Edinburgh, where he resumed contact with John Wilson and began writing for 'Blackwood's', to which he was to remain a prominent contributor until 1849. 
De Quincey's work for 'Blackwood's', which includes much of his most original and admired writing, initially took the form of translations from the German. His 'Gallery of the German prose classics' opened in November 1826 and January 1827 with an abridged translation of Lessing's 'Laokoon', the first version of that important aesthetic treatise to appear in English. The February 1827 'Blackwood's' continued the 'Gallery' with 'The last days of Kant' and also contained the first essay 'On murder considered as one of the fine arts', a complex exercise in sinister irony to which he was to return in 1839 and 1854 and which has remained, after 'Confessions', his most famous work. 
In July 1827 De Quincey began to supplement his income by regular work for the tory 'Edinburgh Saturday Post' (from May 1828 the 'Edinburgh Evening Post'). His position at the 'Post', held for about a year, has never been entirely clarified, but it was evidently a senior post with staff responsibilities, since he not only contributed reviews and compiled news reports from the national papers, but also wrote regular political editorials. When for a few weeks, early in 1829, he returned to the 'Post' for a second stint, he apparently edited the newspaper himself. De Quincey's contributions take a decidedly 'metropolitan' line, at times subtly satirizing what he sees as the Edinburgh provincialism of his colleagues and audience. They also develop his theory of British politics, whereby whig and tory represent two permanent principles from whose conflict and balance good government emerges. 
In November 1827 De Quincey met Thomas Carlyle, a tense encounter since De Quincey had given Carlyle's translation of Goethe's 'Wilhelm Meister' a hostile review in 1824. The two men, however, soon formed a friendship, and by the end of 1828 Carlyle was proposing that De Quincey join him at Craigenputtoch to form a 'bog school' to rival the 'lake school' of poets. Instead, De Quincey retreated to Rydal in the spring of 1829, and though his articles continued to appear in 'Blackwood's' they were mostly pieces written during the previous year and little new work was done until June 1830, when De Quincey returned to Edinburgh, where he lodged in John Wilson's house. There he began to concoct new 'Blackwood's' articles, including 'Kant in his miscellaneous essays' and 'Bentley'. At the end of the year threats of suicide from the lonely and exhausted Margaret, isolated at The Nab with six children, persuaded De Quincey to end his divided existence and unite his family in Edinburgh, initially at 7 Great King Street, where Margaret and the children joined him in December 1830. Although De Quincey remained nominal owner of The Nab until September 1833 and continued to rent Dove Cottage until 1835, the family henceforth lived together in Edinburgh. 
With the prospect of parliamentary reform, De Quincey's political journalism was welcomed by the tory 'Blackwood's', but debts were constantly accumulating and on 2 October 1831 he was briefly imprisoned for debt in the Canongate toll-booth, being released the same day on grounds of ill health. Henceforth the threat of imprisonment for debt hung constantly over him and his existence became a complex and fugitive one. He was a frequent denizen in the Holyrood debtors' sanctuary; false addresses and assumed names were regular features of his daily life. His articles were often delivered clandestinely to editors by his children, who became expert at avoiding pursuit by creditors. Continued writing, however, was a necessity and April 1832 saw publication of his only original novel, 'Klosterheim, or, The Masque', a Gothic romance set in Germany during the Thirty Years' War, followed in the October and November 'Blackwood's' by the first two episodes of 'The Caesars', a brilliantly stylish and humorous recasting of material from Suetonius and the 'Augustan History'. 
During 1833 the firm of Blackwood came increasingly into the hands of William Blackwood's son Alexander, who was far less tolerant than his father of De Quincey's irregularities and inability to meet deadlines. Friction between author and editor led De Quincey to turn to the liberal 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine' as a market for his work. A few miscellaneous pieces ('Kant on the age of the earth', 'Mrs Hannah More', and others) were followed, far more significantly, by 'Sketches of life and manners; from the autobiography of an English opium-eater', which began to appear in February 1834. Collectively these recollections, which were to appear sporadically under varying titles until 1839, constitute one of the great nineteenth-century autobiographies. At times frustratingly digressive, they none the less offer an incomparably detailed, thoughtful, and imaginative account of a late eighteenth-century childhood, an upper-class English adolescence, and rich encounters with the literary world of the early nineteenth century. The circulation of 'Tait's Magazine' soared as the series became known. 
When Coleridge died in July 1834 it was natural that De Quincey, already well embarked on reminiscence, should turn his long relationship with his fellow opium addict to account, and in September 'Tait's' published the first instalment of a four-part series, 'Samuel Taylor Coleridge'. The first paper opened memorably with the revelation that Coleridge was a 'plagiary', most notably in 'Biographia literaria', where several pages of literal translation from Schelling had been claimed by Coleridge as original work. De Quincey presented this and other instances of 'barefaced plagiarism' as amiable eccentricities on the part of Coleridge, who 'spun daily and at all hours, for mere amusement of his own activities, and from the loom of his own magical brain, theories more gorgeous by far [than] Schelling... could have emulated in his dreams'. Despite this genial tone, the essay and its sequels, published in November, December, and January, which revealed details about Coleridge's opium addiction and the failure of his marriage, aroused intense indignation among Coleridge's family and friends. The poet's daughter Sara declared herself 'much hurt' and his son Hartley, with Southey's encouragement, stated his intention of giving De Quincey a beating. None the less subsequent scholarship has on the whole vindicated De Quincey's account, which remains an essential source for Coleridge's biography. Through the late summer and autumn of 1834, as he completed the essays on Coleridge, De Quincey witnessed the rapid decline and painful death from chloroleukaemia of his eldest son, William, who died on 25 November. 
Financial troubles continued as usual, hardly mitigated by a small inheritance from his maternal uncle Thomas Penson, and by May 1836 De Quincey and his family were living in the debtors' sanctuary at Holyrood. Autobiographical essays continued to appear sporadically in 'Tait's', and in July 1837 De Quincey resumed contribution to 'Blackwood's' with 'Revolt of the Tartars', an oriental fantasy loosely based on historical sources. A pattern was thus established whereby autobiographical pieces appeared in 'Tait's' while political articles and miscellaneous essays, often ornately written and involving a vein of fantasy, went to 'Blackwood's' -- a situation which continued until 1841. His position as contributor simultaneously to both the tory 'Blackwood's' and the Liberal 'Tait's' was remarkable for the period and made both proprietors uneasy. De Quincey's range of interests and his need for money, however, dictated it, and his reputation as a writer now gave him the power to bring editors, however grudgingly, into line. In addition, articles on Pope, Schiller, Shakespeare, and Goethe were contributed to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. None is notable, and the Goethe article is strikingly inadequate, being based solely on Goethe's early autobiography, 'Dichtung und Wahrheit'. The poor quality of the 'Encyclopaedia' pieces may reflect the fact that for much of 1837 Margaret De Quincey was ill with typhus, from which she died on 7 August. De Quincey, a notably affectionate husband, was profoundly saddened by her death and when in 1839 his autobiographical reminiscences reached his Grasmere years, his treatment of Wordsworth was shot through with bitterness at what he believed to have been Wordsworth's snobbish disapproval of his relationship with her. 
In January 1840 De Quincey's eldest daughter, Margaret, now twenty-two, began to take charge of her father's affairs and moved the family to Mavis Bush Cottage, Lasswade, 7 miles from Edinburgh. Under Margaret's management the family finances improved and there were no further prosecutions for debt. From this time De Quincey also developed increasingly close friendships with members of both Edinburgh and Glasgow universities. In 1841 he came to know John Pringle Nichol, professor of astronomy at Glasgow, and visited him at the Glasgow observatory. From the conversation of Nichol and others, scientific imagery began increasingly to enter De Quincey's works. Meanwhile, although his historical and political essays continued to appear in 'Blackwood's', De Quincey quarrelled with Tait over the latter's mode of editing his articles and between February 1841 and September 1845 contributed nothing to 'Tait's Magazine'. In 1842 his second son, Horatio, a lieutenant in the British army, died near Canton (Guangzhou), China, probably of fever. 
The mid-1840s produced a group of important works. 'The Logic of Political Economy', an exposition of Ricardian economics, was published as a separate volume by Blackwood in 1844 and won an admiring review from John Stuart Mill; in 1845 an essay 'On Wordsworth's poetry' appeared in 'Tait's'; and 'Blackwood's' published 'Coleridge and opium-eating' and 'Suspiria de profundis', a 'sequel' to 'Confessions of an English Opium-Eater'; and 'System of the heavens as revealed by Lord Rosse's telescopes', a speculative essay inspired by Nichol's work on the nebulae, appeared in 'Tait's' in 1846. 'Suspiria de profundis', to which he attributed great importance and which he claimed had cost him 'seven months of severe labour' (Japp, 'Life', 253-4), is a sequence of visionary prose poems on themes of time, memory, and suffering. It centres partly on painful childhood memories (notably of Elizabeth's death in 1792) and partly on psychologically charged symbols (such as the palimpsest, a multi-layered text which De Quincey uses as a figure for the processes of memory). In 'Suspiria de profundis' De Quincey calls such evocative images 'involutes': images which carry emotion and meaning folded within them, to be explicated only by efforts of reflection and introspection. 
Dissatisfied, however, with the share of 'Blackwood's Magazine' made available for 'Suspiria', and irritated by editorial interventions, De Quincey terminated the series abruptly in July 1845, 'Tait's' becoming his main outlet until 1849 when one more major essay, 'The English mail-coach', appeared in 'Blackwood's'. Blending grim humour, horror, and suspense with political vision and nostalgic reminiscence, and written in intricately ornate prose, the work has generally been regarded as one of his finest and most characteristic achievements. 
Early in 1850 De Quincey introduced himself to James Hogg, editor and publisher of a cheap and poorly regarded magazine, 'The Instructor'. The move, though its motives remain obscure, is likely to have been prompted by long-standing discontent with the editing of both Blackwood and Tait. Hogg now became De Quincey's principal publisher. Between 1850 and 1858 'The Instructor' (known from 1856 as 'Titan') published more than thirty articles on an immense range of topics, and from 1852 Hogg became the publisher of the first British collected edition of De Quincey's writings. 
Despite his substantial reputation in Britain and, still more, in the United States as a periodical writer, by 1850 no attempt had been made to retrieve and reprint De Quincey's very numerous essays, and he himself dismissed the task as impossible. In 1850, however, the firm of Ticknor and Fields of Boston, Massachusetts, undertook a collected edition ('De Quincey's Writings') with De Quincey's agreement, salvaging whatever they could find from files of periodicals to which he had contributed, and also drawing (in the case of 'Confessions' and perhaps other works) on unauthorized American reprints. 
The Boston edition, which eventually extended to twenty-two volumes, lacked systematic arrangement and was textually inaccurate. It provided the opportunity, however, for Hogg to propose that De Quincey take it as the basis for a revised edition of his writings. Work on such an edition, under the title 'Selections Grave and Gay, from Writings Published and Unpublished by Thomas De Quincey', began in 1852, and the last years of De Quincey's life were spent mainly on its preparation, sometimes at Lasswade and sometimes in lodgings at 42 Lothian Street, Edinburgh. Hogg patiently coaxed De Quincey through volume after volume, and a formidable amount of work was done in stylistic revision and expansion of a large selection (perhaps three-quarters) of his previously published output. 
The most important recasting concerned 'Confessions of an English Opium-Eater', which was enlarged to more than twice its previous length, mainly by the elaboration of its early pages dealing with De Quincey's childhood. De Quincey himself seems to have regarded the revision partly as a practical necessity to turn the 'Confessions' into a volume of uniform size with the rest of the edition and partly as an opportunity to supplement the earlier short text with explanatory and commentarial material; there is no evidence that he intended it to replace the original text, as it had first reached book form in 1822, and that version was still in print both in Britain and America. In the event, the enlarged version soon became the only text available, eclipsing the shorter, livelier, and more accessible 1822 version for a century thereafter. 
Late in October 1859, in the course of revising the fourteenth and final volume of 'Selections Grave and Gay', De Quincey (who had for some years suffered intermittently from erysipelas, purpurea, and arthritis) became seriously ill, though apart from persistent 'fever' his symptoms are not recorded. He remained bedridden and over the next six weeks became steadily weaker, experiencing some mental confusion at times. He died peacefully in the presence of his daughters Margaret and Emily at 42 Lothian Street on 8 December 1859 and was buried five days later in St Cuthbert's churchyard, a short distance from Prince's Street. A large ornamental headstone marks his grave. 
During his lifetime and subsequently, De Quincey was best-known for 'Confessions of an English Opium-Eater', which gave him both a reputation and a pseudonym which he continued to exploit. Throughout the nineteenth century the work was viewed as having medical authority as a case history, and De Quincey was widely read in British and American medical circles. Highly regarded by the American reading public, he was extravagantly praised by Edgar Allan Poe, who emulated his treatment of the macabre and grotesque in his own fiction and drew on his presentation of crime and mystery in his detective stories. The translation of 'Confessions' with extracts from 'Suspiria de profundis' by Baudelaire in 'Les paradis artificiels' stimulated interest in his work in France during the later nineteenth century and De Quincey became a significant figure for the 'symbolistes' and subsequently the surrealists. Thus during the twentieth century his reputation consistently stood higher in France than in Britain. 
The appearance of an enlarged collected edition, 'De Quincey's Writings', edited by David Masson (14 vols., 1889-90), supplemented by A. H. Japp's editions 'De Quincey Memorials' and 'Posthumous Works' (both 2 vols., 1891), reaffirmed De Quincey's importance at the end of the nineteenth century. Both underrepresented De Quincey's humour, fiction, and political writing; Japp's texts were unreliable, often silently revised, and chosen to emphasize the veins of religious speculation and visionary fantasy in De Quincey's work. They helped to establish De Quincey as a stylistic model for elaborate prose, and where contemporaries had valued him as a polymath and philosopher, he was regarded between the 1890s and 1920s as important chiefly for his style, selections from his essays being routinely reprinted as school texts. Wilde, Chesterton, and Kenneth Grahame all admired his work and show clear signs of his influence. Virginia Woolf wrote three essays on De Quincey and read his works during her composition of 'To the Lighthouse'. 
After 1920, however, De Quincey began to lose favour as part of a general critical rejection of elaborate nineteenth-century prose. Two biographies, Horace A. Eaton's massive documentary 'Thomas De Quincey' and Edward Sackville-West's lighter, more populist 'A Flame in Sunlight' (both 1936), failed to rekindle interest. De Quincey was generally neglected by the English-speaking world until the 1960s, when a renewal of interest in the literary presentation of mind-altering drugs led to the reissuing of 'Confessions' in its original, terse form. Literary reassessment followed, with a gradual acceleration in the publication of biographical and critical monographs and articles. By the end of the twentieth century a new and comprehensive edition of his works was in progress. 
De Quincey's work has been influential in many fields. Pre-eminently he is regarded as the prototype of the writer as visionary drug user. His fiction and his essays 'On murder considered as one of the fine arts' have proved formative influences on modern crime-writing, both documentary and fictional. His translations and his essays on Kant, as well as many incidental passages of commentary scattered throughout his works, make him an important figure (alongside Coleridge and Henry Crabb Robinson) in the dissemination of German literature and Kantian philosophy in nineteenth-century Britain. His essays in autobiography and his speculations about the nature of memory, transmitted initially by Baudelaire, had important European repercussions and contributed to the thinking of both Freud and Proust. In Britain and America his biographical accounts of Wordsworth and Coleridge, together with his commentary on their writings, helped to shape the reception of these poets in the later nineteenth century and to establish them as the dominant figures in what came to be seen as Romanticism, while his development of their insights and attitudes in his own work led him to be viewed as in some respects their heir. This is to some extent, however, a misconception, in that De Quincey's scepticism and inclination to the comic and the grotesque align him more fundamentally with the German Romantics, and in particular with 'Jean Paul' Richter, from whom his aesthetic of contrast, incongruity, and sentimental pathos is avowedly derived. 
De Quincey remains hard to classify, partly because of his immense range of subject matter and the variety of genres in which he wrote. Moreover, although he wrote almost exclusively for periodicals and so seems most readily approached as an essayist, the length and elaboration of many of his works entirely contradict the usual associations of the essay with the brief and the tentative. His highly finished exercises in non-fictional prose derive their effectiveness precisely from their ability to evade generic boundaries and offer the reader the unexpected. 


@@@@@


doc= 7525


Derby, Alfred Thomas (1821-1873), watercolour painter, was born on 21 January 1821 in London, the eldest son among the eight children of William Derby (1786-1847), watercolourist. He was educated at Mr Wyand's school in Hampstead Road, London. After studying at the Royal Academy Schools he painted portraits and scenes from the novels of Walter Scott. In 1838 his father had a stroke, and until his father's death he helped him to carry on producing watercolour copies of paintings by Landseer and others, including Landseer's 'Return from the Highlands'. After that he continued to paint watercolours, mainly producing copies, including a copy of Gainsborough's portrait of the Hon. Mrs Thomas Graham. He exhibited twenty-two pictures, mainly portraits, at the Royal Academy between 1848 and 1872, and also exhibited at the British Institution and the Suffolk Street Gallery. 
For almost thirty years Derby lived in Osnaburgh Street, Regent's Park, until in the late 1860s he moved to Hammersmith. He died on 19 April 1873 at his home, 11 Hammersmith Terrace, London, after a long illness; he left a widow, Maria, but no children. His collection of drawings from portraits was sold at Christies on 23 February 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 7526


Derby, William (1786-1847), watercolour and miniature painter, was born on 10 January 1786 in Birmingham and studied drawing with the landscape painter Joseph Barber. In 1808 he settled in London, where he painted portraits in oil and watercolour, and miniatures. He also made watercolour copies of paintings by other artists. In 1825 he took over the copying of images for Edmund Lodge's 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages of Great Britain' from William Hilton; these were completed in 1834. He was then commissioned by the earl of Derby, whose portrait he painted in 1837, to make a series of watercolour drawings of the portraits of his ancestors from the reign of Henry VII onward, which were scattered around the country. William Derby exhibited forty-nine paintings, mainly portraits, at the Royal Academy between 1811 and 1837, and also exhibited at the Society of British Artists. 
In 1838 Derby was disabled by a stroke and was only able to carry on his work with the help of his son Alfred Thomas Derby (1821-1873). One of the best of his drawings from this period was a watercolour copy of Edwin Landseer's 'Return from the Highlands'. Derby died on 1 January 1847 at his residence in Osnaburgh Street, Regent's Park, London, leaving a widow and eight children. Two of his daughters, Emma Maria and Caroline, were miniature painters, winning several prizes from the Society of Arts. Two of his watercolours, 'A Fisherman' (1834) and 'A Man Holding a Book', are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, and his paintings are also in the National Portrait Gallery, the British Museum, and the Wallace Collection, London. Six of his miniatures were lent to the South Kensington Museum Exhibition in 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 7527


Derham, Samuel (1652x5-1689), physician, the son of William Derham of Weston, near Chipping Campden, Gloucestershire, was born, probably at Weston, between 1652 and 1655. In Michaelmas term 1672 he entered Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he pursued a long academic career which included disputations on topics as diverse as the role of the imagination in causing disease and the nature of scurvy. He graduated BA on 13 June 1676, MA on 3 May 1679, BM on 9 February 1681, and DM on 18 January 1687. 
Although there are no extant records to show that Derham practised medicine before his final qualification, it is likely that he had begun to do so, for in 1685 he published 'Hydrologia philosophica, or, An account of Ilmington waters in Warwick-shire, with directions for drinking of the same'. Dedicated to William Lenthall of Haseley, the work gave an account of the waters at Ilmington and recommended them for a variety of scrofulous complaints. Derham's recommendation and the investment of Lord Capell, the local landowner, made the spa a place of significant resort in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. 
In his book Derham exhibited strong support for experimental philosophy and considerable familiarity with chemical and iatrochemical developments in medicine. He was not, however, to develop his medical career, for he was struck down by smallpox and died at his house in Oxford on 26 August 1689. He was buried in his parish of residence, at the church of St Michael-at-the-Northgate, Oxford, on the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 7528


Derham, William (1657-1735), Church of England clergyman and natural philosopher, was born at Stoulton, near Worcester, on 26 November 1657. His father's name was Thomas, but no other information is available about his parents. He went to school at Blockley, Gloucestershire, and was admitted to Trinity College, Oxford, as a servitor on 14 May 1675; he graduated BA on 28 January 1679. Dr Ralph Bathurst, president of Trinity, recommended him to Dr Seth Ward, bishop of Salisbury, who in turn recommended him as chaplain to dowager Lady Catherine Grey of Werke. He was ordained deacon by Dr Henry Compton, bishop of London, on 29 May 1681 and priest by Seth Ward on 9 July 1682. That same month he was presented with the living of Wargrave, Berkshire, by Richard Neville, son-in-law to Lady Grey. He received his MA degree from Trinity on 4 July 1683. He took out a licence to marry Isabella Darrell ('bap'. 1655) of Kingsclere on 17 January 1684, but nothing more is known about this union. 
Derham left Wargrave in 1689 when he became rector at Upminster, Essex, at $200 a year. For the rest of his life he lived at High House, a two-storeyed house 100 yards from the church. As a widower he married Anna Scott ('b'. 'c'.1675) of Woolstan Hall, Chigwell, on 2 June 1699. They had five children: Anna (1700-1710), Elizabeth (1701-1780), William (1702-1757), Thomas (1704-1738), and Jane (1709-1735); William Derham became president of St John's College, Oxford. On the accession of George I in 1714 Derham became chaplain to the prince of Wales, the future George II, who procured a canonry of Windsor for him in 1716, which obliged him to spend part of the year at Windsor. Derham always sailed a middle course in religion and did not play a part in the theological controversies of his times. The University of Oxford awarded him his degree of DD by diploma in June 1730. 
Apart from his parochial duties Derham was also an amateur scientist interested in nature, mathematics, and philosophy. In 1696 he published 'The Artificial Clockmaker: a Treatise of Watch and Clock-Work', which included a short history of horology. The treatise was translated into German (1708) and French (1731). Derham knew many of the leading scientists of his time, among them Isaac Newton and the astronomer Edmond Halley, and was himself elected to the Royal Society on 3 February 1703. He contributed thirty-eight articles to the society's 'Philosophical Transactions' on a wide range of subjects, including meteorology, natural history (examples are the migration of birds, death-watch beetles, and wasps), and, in later years, astronomy. In one of these, published in 1733, he expressed an opposite view to that of Halley on the nature of nebulous objects. An example of Derham's practical scientific work can still be seen in the sundial, for which he did the calculations, attached to the Lincoln chapel of St George's Chapel in Windsor Castle. He was also interested in medicine and seems to have acted as a physician to his family and parishioners. He frequently asked Hans Sloane for medical advice. 
In 1711 and 1712 Derham delivered the Boyle lectures at St Mary-le-Bow, London, in the spirit of Boyle's intention to refute anti-Christian philosophies by using natural history to promote and prove a natural theology. The lectures were subsequently published as 'Physico-Theology, or, A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God from his Works of Creation' (1713). The book became a popular work on natural theology and was reprinted frequently (12th edn, 1754) and translated into several languages, among them Italian (1719), French (1726), and Dutch (1728). In 1715 he published another book on the same lines, his 'Astro-Theology' (14th edn, 1777), which was also translated into several languages. He edited various books, among them Eleazer Albin's 'Natural History of English Insects' (1724) and Robert Hooke's 'Philosophical Experiments and Observations' (1726). He also edited works by his friend John Ray: his 'Synopsis methodica avium et piscum' (1713), later editions of his 'Wisdom of God' (1714), and the 'Three Physico-Theological Discourses' (1713, 1721, and 1732), a book on the same subject as Derham's own Boyle lectures. He published some of Ray's correspondence as 'Philosophical Letters' in 1718, and wrote a short biography that was published posthumously by George Scott, Derham's nephew-in-law, in 'The Select Remains of the Learned John Ray' (1760). 
According to the editors of the 'Biographia Britannica', who claimed to have received their information from his son William, Derham was a fairly tall, strong, healthy, and amiable man. He died on 5 April 1735 at his home, High House, in Upminster. He was buried at Upminster church; no memorial marks his grave. On 8 July of that same year probate was granted to his widow, to whom Derham left the remainder of his estate after bequeathing $1000 each to three of his children (Thomas had apparently already received his part of the inheritance). His books, instruments, and papers were left to his son William. 


@@@@@


doc= 7529


Derham, William (1702-1757), college head, was born at Upminster, Essex, on 5 October 1702, the eldest son of William Derham (1657-1735), canon of Windsor, and his wife, Anna Scott ('b'. 'c'.1675). He entered Merchant Taylors' School in 1714 and proceeded to St John's College, Oxford, in 1721, where he was elected a fellow in 1724. He graduated BA in 1725 and MA in 1729. He was junior proctor of the university in 1736, elected Whyte's professor of moral philosophy on 7 February 1737, and graduated BD the same year. He was ordained and made a DD in 1742, and in 1748 was elected president of St John's, where his income was supplemented by $120 p.a. as rector of Hanborough. His term of office was uneventful. He spent his leisure in making a neat transcript of the college's earlier records, which perhaps indicates a taste for antiquarian research. He died on 17 July 1757, and was buried in the college chapel, where his epitaph credits him with most of the virtues. He did not marry and bequeathed all of his estate to his mother. 


@@@@@


doc= 7530


Dering, Edward (c.1540-1576), Church of England clergyman and evangelical preacher, was the third son of John Dering of Surrenden Dering, Kent, and of Margaret, daughter of John Brent of Charing in the same county. 
The Derings were an ancient family, predating the conquest. The seventeenth-century MP and antiquary Sir Edward Dering, first baronet (1598-1644), was a great-nephew of Dering, and named for him. Dering entered Christ's College, Cambridge, and commenced BA in 1560, and MA in 1563. He took his BTh in 1568 and was expected to proceed to the doctorate. He was a fellow of Christ's from 1560 to 1570, and ordained deacon by Bishop Cox of Ely in 1561. There is no record of his ordination to the priesthood. 
Dering laid the foundations for a notable ecclesiastical career. He gained a reputation as a Greek scholar -- 'the greatest learned man (so thought) in England', Archbishop Parker later caustically recalled (Bruce and Perowne, 410) -- and he was chosen to make the Greek oration on the occasion of Queen Elizabeth's visit to the university in 1564. In 1566 he was proctor, and in 1567 Lady Margaret preacher. Dering spent time in Archbishop Parker's household, perhaps as a chaplain, and in 1567 Parker collated him to the rectory of Pluckley, which included his family seat of Surrenden Dering. He was non-resident, and it is not clear that his curate was licensed to preach. Later a different and perhaps converted Dering would condemn the life which he himself had led: 'While they are clothed in scarlet, ther flockes perishe for colde; and while they fare deliciouslie, ther people are faint with a most miserable hunger' (BL, Lansdowne MS 12, fols. 190-191'v'). Meanwhile, Dering was chaplain to England's premier nobleman, Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, and held another chaplaincy in the Tower of London. The greater preferments which might have followed were not altogether absent from his mind. He told Burghley that he was well known in Cambridge, in London, and at court. He was disappointed when Parker passed him over for the profitable peculiar of Bocking in Essex: 'If my necessarie wants were supplyed, I wold not desire great things...; if that had byn bestowed upon me, it should not have bene unwillinglie accepted' (BL, Stowe MS 743/1, fols. 1-2). 
That was in 1570, a year which seems to have been marked by a moral climacteric, which may have been connected with the radical presbyterian lectures delivered by Thomas Cartwright in the spring of that year, or with some deterioration in his own health, or with the downfall of his master, the duke of Norfolk. In 1572 Dering would write to the duke as he awaited execution, regretting that his 'high calling' had caused him to bridle his words in taking him to task for his wicked servants, popish friends, and 'your adulterous woman'. (Was this Mary, queen of Scots?) 'Why should I have tarried in your Lordship's house except these things had bin amended?' (Dering, 'Certaine godly and comfortable letters', 'Workes', 1597, sigs. D3-E2'v'). At the very end, Dering wrote to Norfolk as to his 'Christian brother'. Dering's tongue was not bridled when he read the book to the Kentish magnate Henry Neville, sixth Lord Abergavenny, whom he described as 'a lothesome example... an evell man'; 'I love you in the Lorde and therfore I speak so playne' (Kent Archives Office, MS Dering C1/2). In March 1570 he resigned Pluckley and decided to unbridle his tongue to none other than William Cecil, Lord Burghley, and to Archbishop Parker. Burghley was charged with maladministration of the university of which he was chancellor. Parker was reprimanded for the lax administration of his province and for the religious condition of Kent, in which only two parishes out of six hundred enjoyed adequate instruction. He was also rebuked for swearing, and for allowing his sons and retainers to wear 'monstrous great breeches' (BL, Stowe MS 743/1, fols. 1-2). 
As if this was not to burn bridges enough, Dering took the queen herself to task in the most outspoken Lenten sermon she ever heard. This should have presented a decisive career opportunity. Instead, Dering held Elizabeth personally responsible for the deplorable state of the ministry of her church: 'And yet you in the meane while that all these whordoms are committed, you at whose hands God will require it, you sit still and are carelesse, let men doe as they list. It toucheth not belike your common wealth, and therfore you are so well contented to let all alone. ('Derings Workes', 27)' No Elizabethan sermon was more often reprinted, with sixteen editions by the year of Elizabeth's death, 1603, sponsored, it appears, by John Field. As for its repercussions, Dering later told the queen that it was 'a great many yeeres..., and they have passed exceeding slowlie' since he first heard how much she misliked him ('Derings Workes', sigs. *1-3). What did he expect? 
Clearly Dering was now some kind of puritan, if he had not been one before, and Christ's was a college which bred puritans, but it may be asked, what kind of puritan? In 1568, in a book written in defence of Bishop John Jewel and against the Catholic Thomas Harding, he wrote: 'Our service is good and godly, everie tittle grounded on holie scriptures' (Dering, 'A Sparing Restraint', pt 1.5). He claimed to have always been a conformist, and he told Burghley: 'I have never broken the peace of the Churche, nether for cappe nor surplesse, for archbyshop nor byshop.' He was critical of Cartwright for standing 'so stiffly' on indifferent matters. But he defended the nonconformist conscience. There was a proverb that the man who had been struck with the sword was afraid of the scabbard. Burghley was told: 'I would yow had seene the horror of sinne; I am sure yow woold also be afrayde of the shadow' (BL, Lansdowne MS 12, fols. 190-191'v'). Ceremonies and ecclesiastical dignities were shadows of the sin and corruption which were eating out the heart of the church. But Dering's own puritanism was a limitless concern with the substance of sin and with its remedy, preaching of the gospel. He was unique in insisting, in an unpublished treatise, 'Of the viseble Church, how it may be known' (CKS, MS Dering U 350, C1/2), written by Archbishop Parker's commission against Nicholas Sander's 'De visibili monarchia ecclesiae', that preaching was an essential mark of the church. The preacher was nothing less than 'the minister by whom the people doe beleeve' (Edward Dering and John More, 'A briefe and necessarie catechisme', 'Derings Workes', sig. A3). This conviction enforced the jettisoning of worldly learning, and Dering condemned so-called preachers who 'use the pulpit like a philosopher's chaire' (Dering, 'XXVII lectures or readinges upon part of the epistle written to the Hebrues', ibid., sig. T5'v'). Parker thought that such sentiments contained 'too much childishness' (Bruce and Perowne, 409-10). 
Dering might have defined himself as a mere Christian, but he could not escape the ecclesiastical storm which struck in the early 1570s, with Cartwrightian presbyterianism popularized in the 'Admonition to the Parliament' published by John Field and Thomas Wilcox. Dering was compromised when he visited Field and Wilcox in prison. But Bishop Edwin Sandys of London either still approved of Dering or found it expedient to seem to, and in 1572, the year of the 'Admonition', he appointed him reader of the divinity lecture in St Paul's Cathedral. At about the same time Dering secured (nominally from the crown) the prebend of Chardstock in Salisbury Cathedral. At St Paul's he delivered a celebrated course of lectures on the epistle to the 'Hebrews' and enjoyed a huge reputation; not only with those whom in a dedicatory epistle he called 'the godly in London' but also with such patrons as Henry Killigrew and Catherine his wife, Burghley's sister-in-law, and the earl of Leicester. But the most popular preacher of the day was not popular with the queen. There followed a curious series of judicial charades, one of them conducted in Star Chamber, in which bishops and privy councillors vied with each other in trying not to seem to be Dering's accusers. Burghley and Sandys fell out over Dering. On 28 June 1573 the privy council ruled that Dering could continue his lectures, but a month later ordered him to 'surcease'. Eventually, according to Dering himself, he was 'forbidden to preach any more openly' in her majesty's dominions (Dering, 'A sermon preached before the queenes maiestie', 'Derings Workes', sig. *). Yet a full year later Archbishop Parker was told that the queen 'disliked Deering's reading' (Bruce and Perowne, 476). In February 1575 there was a plan for Dering to succeed Thomas Sampson as the Clothworkers' lecturer at Whittington College, but it seems to have failed. 
Through all these almost comic proceedings, Dering dealt with the burning issue of hierarchy like a vegetarian who occasionally eats meat. Jocular words spoken at a dinner party about Parker being the last archbishop of Canterbury were uttered 'merrily', although much was made of them. Dering declared that he loved the bishops as brethren and honoured them as elders, but confessed that he would not have chosen to be a bishop himself. His chequered, but for the most part protected, career is striking evidence of the powerlessness of the bishops, and even of the queen, to suppress a preacher who enjoyed the support of the great and the good in court, country, and city. 
In 1572 Dering married Anne Locke (nee Vaughan, later Prowse), a wealthy city widow who, of all the many female friends of the Scottish reformer John Knox, had most equally matched the latter in intellect. Dering's letter of proposal to this 'good possession' (Dering to Mrs Locke, n.d., Kent Archives Office, MS Dering C1/2) is surely the earliest surviving document of its kind to have been penned by a clergyman of the Church of England. To Mrs Locke, Dering must have seemed to be Knox reborn, a point which also occurred to John Field, who later stretched propriety in obtaining from Dering's widow and sending to the printer works by both Knox and Dering. But Anne Dering had to share her husband with many other ladies who depended on him for spiritual sustenance, among them Mrs Killigrew and the formidable Kentish matriarch and religious depressive Mrs Mary Honywood. Fourteen spiritual letters from Dering to women friends survive, notable examples of a distinct literary and religious genre, and about 1590 most of them were printed by Richard Schilders in Middelburg as 'Certaine Godly and Verie Comfortable Letters, Full of Christian Consolation'. The women responded with reciprocal ministrations to a man who was by now in the late stages of pulmonary tuberculosis. He told Mrs Killigrew: 'I weigh not all the world a feather, and with as glad a minde I spit blood (I trust) as cleare spittle. To those that love God all things are for the best. He hath a hard hart that beleeveth not this. (Dering, 'Certaine godly and comfortable letters', 'Derings Workes', sig. C4)' Dering died on 26 June 1576 at Thobie Priory in Essex, in a stylized deathbed scene, surrounded by preachers and others who recorded his last words. 
Dering's affecting and early death helped to make him a living legend, a mirror of exemplary godliness and evangelical ardour. He was one of the first godly divines to have his collected works posthumously published. It is possible to infer from a letter to his widow that John Field was primarily responsible. The works consisted of set-piece sermons, including the sermon before the queen, the lectures on 'Hebrews', collections of prayers and of letters, and a catechism, jointly written with his Christ's contemporary John More, the 'apostle' of Norwich, which achieved as a separate publication and in two versions at least forty-two editions. The almost clandestine 1590 Schilders edition of the 'Workes' was succeeded by the more respectable and enlarged London editions of 1597 and 1614, an indication of how far the religious spirit of Elizabethan puritanism came to be accommodated within the Jacobean church. Dering's engraved portrait appeared in Henry Holland's 'Heroologia Anglica' (1620) and Thomas Fuller included his deathbed speeches in 'Abel redevivus' (1652). 


@@@@@


doc= 7531


Dering, Sir Edward, first baronet (1598-1644), antiquary and religious controversialist, was born on 28 January 1598, and baptized on 9 February, the eldest son of Sir Anthony Dering (1557/8-1636), landowner and JP, of Surrenden Dering in Pluckley, Kent, and his second wife, Frances (1577-1657), daughter of Robert Bell. He was born in the Tower of London, where his father may have been acting as deputy for his mother's stepfather, who was lieutenant of the Tower. Dering was apparently educated at Westminster School, and was a fellow-commoner of Magdalene College, Cambridge, from January 1615 to September 1617 (typically for one of his social station, he did not proceed to a degree); he was admitted to the Middle Temple on 23 October 1617. He paid a very brief visit to Calais and Gravelines in 1620 and he visited a cousin in Ireland in 1621. 
Dering's father enjoyed the patronage of his relative Edward, first Lord Wotton, and it may have been through friendship with the Wottons that Edward was introduced to the court: in January 1619, suggestively close to his twenty-first birthday, he was, as he recorded in one of his notebooks, 'knighted at Newmarket through the meanes and favor of the Marquesse of Buckingham' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Gough Kent 20, p. 4). His first marriage, on 25 November 1619, to Elizabeth (1602-1622), daughter of a Kentish neighbour, Sir Nicholas Tufton, the future first earl of Thanet, may have strengthened his links with the court. Certainly Dering's second marriage, following his first wife's early death, to Anne Ashburnham (1604/5-1628), is evidence both of his continued ambition and of his success in attaching himself directly to the circle around the duke of Buckingham. In the following year Dering paid the artist George Cottington (or Cuddington) $25 to undertake two full-length and two three-quarter length portraits of himself, Elizabeth, and Anne, and of his brother Henry; at the same time Dering's father commissioned from Cottington a portrait of his grandson, Anthony, the son of Edward's first marriage. Cottington's portraits are lost and are thought to have been destroyed in a fire at Surrenden Dering in 1952, though photographic records remain. Dering's marriage to Anne Ashburnham took place on 1 January 1625 in Buckingham's lodgings at Whitehall; Anne's mother was a destitute widow, but she was related to the duke, and Dering accepted Anne without any marriage portion on the understanding that her mother would use her connections to his advantage. In May 1625 Dering travelled to Boulogne in the company of Buckingham's mother and elder brother, presumably in the hope of meeting Charles I's queen, whom the favourite was escorting from France, although Dering returned to England before the queen set sail. 
In 1625 Dering was returned to parliament as a member for the Cinque Port of Hythe in Kent -- Buckingham had become lord warden of the Cinque Ports in 1624 and, although Dering was not Buckingham's nominee, his connections with the favourite were invoked on his behalf in the election; the backing of Buckingham and of other courtiers was obtained for Dering's unsuccessful attempts to find a parliamentary seat in 1626 and in 1628. On 1 February 1627 Dering became the fifth baronet to be created by Charles I, something in which his mother-in-law claimed to have been instrumental. It was also in early 1627 that Dering took the oath of a gentleman-extraordinary of the king's privy chamber. This was not a position of great importance, although it gave him access at court. The only office of potential profit that Dering obtained was the lieutenancy of Dover Castle in Kent, effectively the post of local deputy to the lord warden of the Cinque Ports, which had been held by a Dering in the early sixteenth century. Sir Edward enjoyed Buckingham's support in his efforts to gain the lieutenancy, although the favourite was killed while Dering was negotiating for the post and he had to pay the existing holder in order to obtain the office, which he finally entered in March 1629. In practice the lieutenancy proved both frustrating and unprofitable; although Dering continued to enjoy the support of courtiers, in particular the earl of Dorset after Buckingham's death, he was to claim in 1635 that he 'was never gratified or benefitted by anie of the greate friends and kindred' of Anne Ashburnham's mother, as had been promised at the time of his marriage (TNA: PRO, C2/Charles I/D.31/40). In 1634-5 he left the lieutenancy; although he remained active in local government until 1640, he wrote in the mid-1630s that 'the circumference which a Statesman must fill, is a larger Orbe then my ambition doth stretch unto... so (beside proteccion generally due to all subjectes) I have no neede of the State' (Folger Shakespeare Library, V.b.307, p. 71). Dering's court connections fade into the background in the later 1630s; he declined a summons to attend the king at York during the first bishops' war and his name does not feature among the extraordinary gentlemen of the privy chamber listed in the household establishment of 1641, perhaps as a result of this. 
Dering's motivation for the pursuit of office was probably in part financial: when he declared that he had 'no neede of the State', he added the rider that 'my fortunes are not now to make' (Folger Shakespeare Library, V.b.307, p. 71). Although his father had already transferred some of the family estate to him, he had been over $1400 in debt in midsummer 1629, just after assuming the lieutenancy of Dover Castle. Following his second wife's death in 1628 he had again sought a profitable marriage, albeit this time by the more conventional means of courting a wealthy widow. The possibility of increasing his income from office may therefore have been important for Dering in 1628-9. Indeed, it is less clear why he felt that his finances were more secure in the mid-1630s. When he did remarry, on 16 July 1629, it was to Unton Gibbes (died 1676) ['see 'Dering, Unton], the daughter of a Warwickshire gentry family, who brought a portion of $2000, but he appears to have inherited a debt of some $3000 on his father's death in 1636, and net sales of land in 1636-8 were necessary in order to reduce his debts to just over $1000 by May 1638, although this situation did not prevent him rebuilding the family seat. 
Even in the later 1620s, while pursuing his court career, Dering took his duties as a magistrate and as a militia officer seriously. His court connections had enabled him to succeed his father as a JP in 1626 while retaining his father's precedence on the bench. Dering became notorious in Kent for his zeal in response to the commissions issued in 1630-31 to compound for failure to take up knighthood and he was said to have ensured the success of ship money in the county, probably as a result of his contributions at the initial rating meeting. Yet Dering was not undiscriminating in the implementation of central initiatives in the localities: for example, he appears to have connived at the Cinque Ports' petition for exemption from the knighthood compositions. Indeed, in his conduct as a magistrate and as lieutenant of Dover Castle there are signs of religious preoccupations which would also be evident in his later career as a member of the Long Parliament and the hope of promoting them may even have played a part in his pursuit of office. His anti-Catholicism is apparent in his activity as a JP while, as lieutenant, he sought to tighten the regulation of Roman Catholics passing to and from the continent. However, Sir Roger Twysden recalled that Dering had once wondered whether a 'Puritane' (by which Dering probably meant separatist) was more likely to be saved than a 'papist' (BL, Stowe MS 184, fol. 10), and Dering's opposition to separatism is also evident both in his conduct as a JP and in his denunciation of separatists at Dover in his capacity as lieutenant. 
Another concern apparent in Dering's later career, his antiquarian interests, was also present in the later 1620s, and also interacted with his connections at court. It was by Buckingham's 'especiall favor' that Dering obtained in 1627 a warrant authorizing him to consult public records without paying any fees (CKS, U.1107, Z.3). It may have been envisaged that Dering would apply his antiquarian researches to political questions on Buckingham's behalf, in the way that, for example, Sir Robert Cotton had done on behalf of the earl of Northampton earlier in the century. Dering's extensive collections and compilations of records were concerned, however, with the more limited spheres of his county and his family. In 1638 Dering formed an association with three other antiquaries (William Dugdale, Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir Thomas Shirley), called Antiquitas Rediviva; the members were to collect 'all memorable notes for historicall illustration of this kingdome', but 'especially' those concerning the four counties in which they resided (Larking, 'Antiquaries', 5). However, the only connected historical writings to survive from the 1630s are drafts of the preface to, and of some early entries in, a history of the Dering family. Dugdale described Dering as 'an excellent Antiquarye' (Wright, 373); in recognizing the importance of mastering Old English, Dering was in tune with leading scholars of his generation. Yet he also adjusted names on documents in his collection in order to support his claims for the antiquity and importance of his family; Dering may have seen himself as reconstructing what must once have existed, for he alleged that an antiquary employed by his father had stolen many family records. 
Dering had other interests in the mid-1630s: apart from his rebuilding of Surrenden Dering, he interested himself in garden design and he apparently remained interested in drama (he had earlier produced a shortened version of Shakespeare's 'Henry IV' for private performance). However, according to his son Sir Edward Dering, Dering 'wholly addicted himself' to 'the study of Divinity' from the late 1630s onward (CKS, U.1107, Z.3). He became involved in 1639-40 in controversy with the Carmelite Thomas Doughty (Father Simon Stock), at least in part as a result of attempts to convert Roman Catholic acquaintances, one of them a recent convert. Two of Dering's polemical works were later published ('The Foure Cardinall-Vertues of a Carmelite-Fryar', 1641; 'A Discourse of Proper Sacrifice', 1644). Dering made some use of his knowledge of English history to expose the novelty of papist doctrines, although this was far from being the principal source for his arguments, in which the church fathers figured largely. He appears to have come to believe, in the course of his theological researches, that Church of England divines such as Peter Heylyn and John Pocklington were expounding views that were indistinguishable from popery, especially on the sacrament of the eucharist; the publication with official sanction of 'Libelling Pamphlets against true Religion' would become a major plank of Dering's argument against the ecclesiastical hierarchy in the Long Parliament (Dering, 'Speeches', 13). 
Dering wrote, with regard to the Short Parliament election in the spring of 1640, that 'in times so desperate I would contribute no help to any privy councillor or deputy lieutenant' (Jessup, 2). There can be little doubt that Dering's perception of popish tendencies in the church contributed to this conviction and fed, in turn, into his dogged pursuit of one of the seats for Kent in both of the 1640 elections, unsuccessfully in the spring but successfully in the election for the Long Parliament. In the spring he pursued the parliamentary seat despite warnings that his opposition to the privy councillor Sir Henry Vane was badly taken at court; his wife was able to remind him that his candidature for the Long Parliament had been 'only assumed for God's Glory' (CKS, U.350, C.2/82). 
Dering's election to the Long Parliament opened the most conspicuous phase of his career; as Dering himself later put it, his first speech, which presented the petition of a deprived Kentish minister and denounced Archbishop Laud as the 'Center' of 'our miseries' (Dering, 'Speeches', 11), 'did beget me... many new friends' (ibid., 162). His speech on 23 November 1640 complaining of the authorization of crypto-popish publications was followed by his nomination to the chair of a subcommittee (later a committee in its own right) to deal with ministers' grievances and the licensing of books. Numerous manuscript copies of his early speeches survive, and some were published as 'separates', before Dering produced his own editions. Even a hostile contemporary admired Dering's oratory and he appears by May 1641 to have become an important member of the Commons. In addition to his speeches on ecclesiastical matters he made several procedural motions, including an important and successful one in May 1641 for a committee to determine what matters should be brought to a conclusion before the recess. It is not surprising, therefore, that Sir Arthur Hesilrige placed the root and branch bill for the abolition of episcopacy in Dering's hands on 27 May 1641, prompting Dering to introduce the bill. 
However, the alliance between Dering and the leading supporters of root and branch proved short-lived. On 21 June, Dering launched a scheme to replace the existing bishops with a new structure under which the ecclesiastical affairs of each shire would be managed by a presbytery, in each of which a 'moderatour' or 'President' would be established (Bodl. Oxf., Rawlinson MS D1099, fol. 80'v'; BL, Harley MS 5047, fol. 30). Although he was almost certainly propounding the 'constant presidents' whom he would describe as bishops when he published the speech in 1642, contemporary diarists did not interpret the speech as a plea for episcopacy, and Dering would claim in 1642 that his intention had been to encourage the 'rooters' and the would-be reformers of episcopacy to coalesce around a model of what would replace the existing hierarchy. However, if this was his intention, he was unsuccessful; the question of what would replace the existing hierarchy was postponed in favour of a plan to put ecclesiastical government into the hands of interim commissioners. 
Dering left the Commons in early August and did not return until after the recess. The reasons for this absence may well not have been political: attendance at Westminster kept him away from his estates, from his library, and from his wife, to whom he complained that he might not have patience to sit the session out as early as May 1641. What is certain is that after the recess Dering adopted an openly partisan position. On 21 October 1641 he impugned the force of the orders that the Commons had issued on religious matters prior to the recess. He was aware of feeling in Kent on this issue, but he probably realized that his speech would touch a raw nerve in some quarters: Henry Marten suggested that Dering should withdraw while the offence given by his remarks was considered. In November, Dering attacked the content of the grand remonstrance and, indeed, the very principle of a document addressed by the Commons to the people rather than to the king. Furthermore, in January 1642 he took the step of publishing a collection of his speeches in the Long Parliament, in vindication of his own conduct, but also as a condemnation of the factionalism of others. While bemoaning others' partisanship, he depicted his opponents in the blackest of terms: he alleged that one member of the Commons had told him privately that he wished to 'bring the Lords down into our House' (Dering, 'Speeches', 166). Dering spoke as the voice of 'moderation' (ibid.), but his political tactics were far from moderate. The result was, on 2 February 1642, the condemnation of Dering's published speeches, which were ordered by the Commons to be burnt by the common hangman, and his own expulsion from the Commons; on a division he was sent to the Tower, where he remained until discharged on his own petition on 11 February. 
Dering's opposition to the grand remonstrance brought him into line with future royalists such as John Colepeper, Edward Hyde, and Lucius Cary, Viscount Falkland, with whom he had disagreed on ecclesiastical matters before the recess, but his views on episcopacy still did not accord with theirs. By January 1642 Dering was certainly using the word 'bishop' to describe the 'constant presidents' he favoured, and he had slightly softened some of the presbyterian aspects of his proposals; his views on the relative roles of the laity and of the clergy in determining religious matters had shifted somewhat in favour of the clergy. However, he was still propounding the extirpation of the existing bishops and their replacement by county-based sees in which bishops would be assisted by presbyteries. According to one critic, Dering was no better than a presbyterian. Indeed, Dering may have felt himself to be isolated in the Commons: he was nominated to barely any committees in November and December 1641. This may explain his decision to make an appeal to opinion outside the house by publishing his speeches, thus doing exactly what he had condemned in the grand remonstrance. 
The part that Dering took in the drafting of the Kentish petition of March 1642 perhaps reflects a realization that to have an impact politically he would have to identify more closely with the more conservative defenders of episcopacy. He now became involved with a petition that asked, not that episcopacy should be uprooted and replanted, but merely that it should be 'preserved'. The petition's assertive defence of the prayer book -- 'celebrious by the Piety of holy Bishops and Martyrs who composed it' -- contrasts with Dering's sponsorship in late 1641 of a petition which, while defending the prayer book, had entertained its 'severe Reformation' (Woods, 141-2; Larking, 'Proceedings', 61). Contemporaries described the March 1642 petition as Dering's, although they probably exaggerated his importance in its making on account of his existing notoriety. None the less his involvement with this petition identified him with the royalist side of (and, indeed, exacerbated) the paper war being conducted between the king and his advisers on the one hand, and the two houses at Westminster on the other. Furthermore, by linking together the question of ecclesiastical government and the dispute over control of the militia, the petition reflects a process (first apparent in Dering's condemnation of the Commons' orders on religious questions) by which, in order to defend his ecclesiastical ideals, Dering adopted constitutional positions at variance with the majority in the Commons. It was on these constitutional positions, rather than on ecclesiastical matters, that the Commons dwelt in the impeachment drawn up against Dering in April 1642. 
Dering was, therefore, as contemporaries argued, inconsistent. Yet underlying his shifting proposals for church government was surely his desire to see proper order restored to the church as soon as possible: he had written in May 1641 of 'the necessity of composing the state and church in those things wherein [the Commons] had (upon just groundes) disjoynted them' (Larking, 'Proceedings', 47). In part this 'necessity of composing' resulted from the radicalism apparent both in London and in Kent following the collapse of ecclesiastical authority in 1640-41. However, Dering did show throughout his career a concern for a uniform church with a set liturgy: as has been seen, he had opposed separatism in Kent prior to 1640 and he had also seen the Church of England's 'devout and pious' liturgy as a point in its favour when combating popery (CKS, U.2479, Z.1); in 1640 he removed attacks on the liturgy from the Kentish petition against episcopacy before presenting it to the Commons; though he supported, in 1641, reform of the prayer book, he could still, in his 'Collection of Speeches', praise Laud's 'intent of publike uniformity', while accepting that 'in the way of his pursuit thereof he was extreamely faulty' (p. 4). The retention of a set liturgy was more important to Dering than the precise nature of ecclesiastical government; no form of government had a 'jure divino' claim, he argued, and, in proposing the root and branch bill, he argued that it was necessary because the hierarchy was incapable of reform (not because it was essential, on principle, to return the church to a primitive state) -- indeed, his later claim that his chief purpose in introducing the bill was to expedite the bill against the bishops' secular jurisdiction may have some foundation. 
By early 1642 Dering appears to have had little confidence in the parliamentary leaders' ability to establish a speedy settlement in the church, or even in the sincerity of their professions on the matter, studiedly moderate though these were in late 1641 and early 1642. In forming this judgement he may have been influenced by his involvement in the unsuccessful attempt to condemn Henry Burton's radical 'Protestation Protested', which was reportedly blocked in committee by a number of leading supporters of root and branch. In contrast, Dering was aware that his views were finding a ready ear at court, through the agency of one of his Ashburnham relatives; a copy of his collected speeches was given to the king, who was reported to have smiled at the preface and conclusion of the work. In such a context the king's efforts in late 1641 and early 1642 to claim the middle ground by dissociating himself from the religious policies of the 1630s must have seemed convincing to Dering. Dering could see no grounds for the fear of popish plotting which both energized and held together the parliamentary leadership in late 1641 and early 1642: as the Commons took measures to defend themselves in January 1642, following the attempted arrest of the five members, Dering complained that they had voted a guard 'against no enemy'; he thought that the king intended 'to pursue the five gentlemen in a legal way' (Larking, 'Proceedings', 69, xliii). 
Following the affair of the Kentish petition in March 1642, Dering was summoned before the Commons but slipped away and returned to Kent. Unsurprisingly after his role in the March petition, he was placed by the king on the commission of array for Kent, and his later claim that his move toward active royalism was reluctant may be called into question by reports that he had undertaken a 'circuit' to raise support for it (N. Payne, 'A True Relation of a Brave Exploit Performed by Captain Richard Dawks', 1642, 7). Both Dering and his eldest son were with the king when the royal standard was raised at Nottingham. None the less, Dering sought a rapprochement with the two houses at Westminster in October 1642: a 'Mr P.' (who may have been Pym, but was perhaps Purefoy) was said to be 'much joyed' by Dering's approaches (CKS, U.350, C.2/99), but the existence of earlier votes of delinquency against Dering was deemed to necessitate some formal submission from him, and perhaps he baulked at making this. None the less, it was apparently only in July 1643 that Dering was commissioned to raise a regiment for the king and, if a later account is to be trusted, he resigned his commission the following November. Military activity may have been less uncongenial to him than has been supposed, as there are signs that he had been an enthusiastic militia officer in the 1620s, and he had his portrait painted in armour against a military background, probably in the 1630s; but allegations that he encouraged a royalist drive towards Kent, promising a rising in the county in response, should probably be treated with caution. 
The circumstances of Dering's final defection from royalism at the beginning of 1644 are confused. He was widely reported to be among the royalists besieged from December 1643 to January 1644 in Arundel Castle, but he escaped before the castle fell and appears to have returned to the court at Oxford. Newsletters reported that articles were being drawn up against him there, but Dering himself alleged that he was thought at Oxford to be the least likely person to defect. What is certain is that Dering had contacts who gave him advance notice of the declaration of both kingdoms; on 7 February he became the first person to petition the Commons at Westminster for a pardon according to its terms. 
Dering's petition exists in two somewhat differing printed versions, one of them published with some additional remarks at the behest of the Kent county committee, which insisted that Dering produce it to 'satisfie the vulger' whom he had 'misled' (BL, Stowe MS 184, fol. 73). The explanations of Dering's decision to make his peace with the parliament which these publications contained related partly to recent events: he claimed, for example, that he was scandalized by the king's attempt to assemble a parliament at Oxford; he also pointed to the 'cessation' in September 1643 between the king and the Irish rebels, explaining that the popish plot was now 'explicited unto me' (Dering, 'Declaration', 8, 9). Experience of religious services at Oxford may explain the complaints that he subjoined to the petition, which are not anticipated in his earlier writings, about the excessive use of music in church services, although the very general terms in which he denounced the royalist clergy's love of 'externall pomp' (ibid., 11) contrast somewhat with his more discriminating treatment of ceremonial matters in 1642; Dering's tone in 1644 was probably somewhat adapted to his parliamentarian audience. Yet continuity with his earlier views is definitely apparent in his complaint against the continuing attachment of some clergy around the king to hierarchy. In 1641 Dering had found that he had common ground with the 'rooters' in his desire to remove the existing hierarchy, but that this common ground was insufficient to sustain agreement on how the church should be rebuilt; by the end of 1643 he had discovered, it appears, that the common ground of support for liturgy and episcopacy (broadly understood) was insufficient to enable him to live in the royalist camp. 
Yet Dering's writings in 1644 were not simply a denunciation of the royalists. There was a warning for the houses at Westminster that if the conflict were continued it might end in military tyranny. Dering's insistence that the king should return to London, but that this should be arranged in a way that would be honourable to the king, may also have contained an implied call for greater moderation at Westminster. Indeed, hostile observers said that Dering had left Oxford simply because the king had refused to give him office. They were probably right that Dering's departure from Oxford is not to be explained simply in ideological terms. As on previous occasions in his career, separation from his wife and family may have been a factor in his behaviour, especially as Dering was already in pain from an 'imposthume in his head' (possibly a brain tumour), which proved fatal on 22 June 1644 ('Diaries', 109). 
Dering had spent the preceding months in conflict with the county committee over the sequestration of his estate. According to tradition he died in extreme poverty on a farmhouse on his estate; his correspondence in his last months certainly alleges poverty, but is dated from Surrenden Dering, and presumably he died there. He appears to have died intestate (although his widow alleged that a will had been concealed); he was buried in St Nicholas's Church, Pluckley. His fine was finally fixed by the Commons on 27 July and his heir, Edward, was able to obtain the remission of the fine and the discharge of the estate in the following month. Edward was a child of Dering's second marriage, a son of Elizabeth Tufton's having died in 1634. However, Dering's third marriage, to Unton Gibbes, had been one of great mutual affection (he once called her 'my most comfortable Numpes' (Larking, 'Proceedings', 55); Dering had settled on her a life interest in the family seat and made generous provision for the sons born of his marriage to her. 
Dering's final defection to the protection of the parliament ensured that he was harshly treated by royalist writers: Clarendon called him 'a man of levity and vanity' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.314). The incumbent at Pluckley, during a dispute with Dering in the 1630s, allegedly called him 'the proudest man in the world' (CKS, U.350, Q.1). Yet such judgements, especially those made in the light of Dering's 'defections' in 1641-2 and 1644, should not obscure the extent of Dering's reputation in mid-1641; in May he wrote to his wife of being shaken by the hand by 'many... whom I knew not; many said to one another 'There goes Sir Edward Dering'' (Larking, 'Proceedings', 47-8). Furthermore, even at the end of his career some parliamentarian writers thought it worth trying to rehabilitate his reputation, in order to claim the defection of a man of 'singular Wit and Learning', as evidence of the frustration felt by the 'moderate partie about the King' ('Mercurius Anglicus', 1, 31 Jan-7 Feb 1644, 5; 'A Declaration wherein is Full Satisfaction Given Concerning Sir Edward Deering', 1644, sig. A2'v'). 
Recent writers have emphasized Dering's connections with Kentish opinion, seeing him as driven by 'service to the county and its desire for moderation' (A. Everitt, 'The Community of Kent and the Great Rebellion, 1640-60', 1966, 207; cf. Hirst). Yet what is perhaps most striking about Dering's career is the range of his connections and interests; thanks to his concern to record (and often to justify) his own life, and the survival of so many of his papers, it is possible to trace not only Dering's relationships with the gentry and clergy of Kent, but also how those relationships intermeshed with his theological and antiquarian researches, and with his links to the court. Dering's career -- eccentric though its particular course may have been -- can therefore provide useful insights into the world of the early and mid-seventeenth-century political elite. 


@@@@@


doc= 7532


Dering, Heneage (1665-1750), dean of Ripon and Latin poet, was born in St Bride's parish, London, on 7 February 1665 and baptized on 14 February, the eldest of four sons and five daughters of Christopher Dering (1625-1693), barrister of the Inner Temple, of Wickins in Charing parish, Kent, and Elizabeth (died 1724), daughter and heir of Thomas Spackman of Wiltshire. Heneage was named after his father's friend and patron, Heneage Finch, later earl of Nottingham, who was also his godfather; from 1673 Christopher Dering acted as Finch's secretary. He was educated at St Edward's Grammar School in St Albans (1674-8), where he was taught by Charles James, a former pupil of Richard Busby at Westminster School. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1678, and as a pensioner to Clare College, Cambridge, in 1680, leaving in 1682 without taking a degree. In February 1683 his father bought him a set of chambers in Figtree Court, Inner Temple, for $140, and Heneage was called to the bar in 1689 (Inderwick, 260) or 1690 (Dering, 338). In 1691 he became secretary to John Sharp, chaplain to Heneage Finch, on his promotion to the archbishopric of York, and in 1692 took up residence at Bishopthorpe Palace. 
Early in 1701 Dering decided to take holy orders and, with this object in mind, he was created LLD of Clare College, 'per literas regias', in January 1701. On 9 February he was appointed Sharp's chaplain on being ordained deacon in Bishopthorpe Chapel, and was ordained priest on 20 July. Preferment after preferment now followed through Sharp's patronage. He was archdeacon of the East Riding (1702-50) and a canon of York Minster, holding the prebend of Grindal from 1705 and the richer one of Fridaythorpe from 1708. He was instituted to the rich rectory of Scrayingham, East Riding, where he rebuilt the parsonage house for the resident curates, in 1704, and to the deanery of Ripon on 3 March 1711. In June 1712 Sharp appointed him master of the hospitals of St Mary Magdalene and St John the Baptist in Ripon. Since, on his father's death, he had inherited the manor of Wickins, and the family estates in Westwell, Kent, he had become one of the wealthiest clergymen in England. He married, at Bishopthorpe Chapel on 9 January 1712, Anne Sharp ('bap'. 1691), eldest daughter of Archbishop Sharp and his wife, Elizabeth Palmer, whom he had known all her life. Their eldest son, John (1715-1774), became rector of Hilgay, Norfolk, and prebendary and subdean of Ripon; Heneage was born and died in 1718; the third son, also Heneage (1719-1802), was successively vicar of Tadcaster, West Riding, and of Burley on the Hill, Rutland, perpetual curate of Wye, Kent, rector of Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, and finally prebendary of Canterbury. Two of their five daughters, Elizabeth (1713-1777) and Mary (1721-1798), married, respectively, Charles Elsley of Patrick Brompton, North Riding, and Dr John Sharp, archdeacon of Northumberland. Anne (1716-1780), Philadelphia (1723-1806), and Judith (1730-1813) did not marry. 
Dering was conscientious in performing his duties as dean and, though installed by proxy, he came to Ripon a few months later and thereafter resided continually at the deanery with only brief absences on ecclesiastical or family business. Punctilious in his care for the church, he was solicitous in securing the best vicars-choral for the choir and ensuring the welfare of his clergy and parishes. He regularly conducted visitations of his archdeaconry and arranged for confirmations to be held in Ripon in 1723 and 1737. He also ensured that the church registers, which had fallen into some neglect, were properly made up. He made additions to the deanery and alterations to the minster: the font was moved to make room for a new ecclesiastical court (1722), a clock was erected (1723), the surviving fragments of medieval glass from the east window were restored (1724), and the monument to the last wakeman of Ripon, Hugh Ripley (1637), which had been defaced during the civil war, was repaired (1730). He agreed to give Edward Harley, earl of Oxford, a fifteenth-century miscellany manuscript from Dean Anthony Higgin's collection in the minster library and received in exchange a number of valuable printed books. 
Dering published two poems in Latin hexameters. The first, 'Reliquiae Eboracenses' (1743), was a ninety-five page history of Yorkshire under Roman rule, which was originally intended to cover the period of Saxon and Danish rule as well. An English translation in heroic couplets was made by the York printer Thomas Gent 'for his private amusement' in the winter of 1760-61 or 1761-2 and survives interleaved in a copy of the Latin text in York Minster Library. Gent proposed to issue his translation in eight or so sheets if he succeeded in attracting a hundred subscribers. The proposal evidently failed but Gent produced a few copies in octavo in 104 pages on his usual coarse paper, without title-page or introduction, but with over fifty crude woodcuts. Dering's other publication was a slender folio entitled 'De senectute' (1746). While the 'Reliquiae' is a fragment of pseudo-historical epic, ostensibly the later work is purely fanciful and is the lament of one of a pair of oak trees in Studley Royal Park about their approaching doom of being felled. This poem may have been an oblique criticism of the drastic remodelling of the park carried out by the Aislabies. 
Dering lived to a great old age and even in 1739, eleven years before his death, he remarked that he was the oldest member of the York chapter and the oldest dean and archdeacon in the northern province. He died at the deanery on 8 April 1750 and on 14 April was buried at the east end of the north choir aisle in Ripon Minster, where a marble wall tablet was placed in his memory. His widow was buried beside him on 19 November 1771. 


@@@@@


doc= 7533


Dering, Richard (c.1580-1630), organist and composer, was the illegitimate son of Henry Dering of Liss, Hampshire, and, according to one source, of Lady Elizabeth Grey, sister of Henry Grey, earl of Kent (1547-1614) (BL, Add. MS 5534). He was educated at Christ Church, Oxford, where he supplicated for the degree of BMus on 26 April 1610 stating that he had studied music for ten years. This is at odds with Anthony Wood's statement that Dering 'was bred up in Italy where he obtained the name of a most admirable musician' (Wood, fol. 41'v'-42). However, it seems likely that Dering did indeed visit Italy in his early adulthood, for a 'Mr Dering' -- very likely the composer -- is noted as being present in Rome, having visited Venice and 'now gone to see more of Italy', in a letter from Sir Dudley Carleton (the king's envoy in Venice) to Sir John Harrington (TNA: PRO, SP 99/10, no. 62; 26 June 1612). He probably converted to Catholicism about this time and by 1617 he was organist to the English nuns of the convent of the Blessed Virgin Mary at Brussels. While he was in the Low Countries he published two sets of motets: 'Cantiones sacrae quinque vocum' and 'Cantica sacra... senis vocibus' (P. Phalese, Antwerp, 1617 and 1618 respectively); and two sets of canzonettas: 'Canzonette a tre voci' and 'Canzonette a quattro voci' (both P. Phalese, Antwerp, 1620). 
In 1625 Dering returned to England and by 22 December was listed among the 'lutes, viols and voices' at the English court; he was paid a salary of $40 per annum. When he was later succeeded by Giles Tomkins, his place was described as 'for the virginals with the voices in ordinary'. Dering also became organist to Queen Henrietta Maria and in a warrant of 23 October 1626 he is listed as one of eleven musicians who had served the queen from the previous 25 March. His salary for this appointment was $120 per annum. 
Dering's English music, none of which was published in his lifetime, consists of anthems (full and verse) for the Anglican church, fantasias and dances for viols, two madrigals, and the 'City Cries' and 'Country Cries' for voices and viols which incorporate popular melodies of the time. His Italianate works, nearly all of which were published, include Catholic church music (Latin motets) and Italian canzonettas and madrigals. These all include a part for continuo instruments and show a complete assimilation of the techniques of contemporary Italian 'concertato' music (which he probably studied during his travels in Italy or from printed Italian music circulating in the Low Countries). A number of his small-scale motets may have been written during his time in Brussels, but most were probably composed in England specifically for Queen Henrietta Maria's Roman Catholic services in her private chapel. One large collection of Catholic liturgical organ music often associated with him (Christ Church, Oxford, MS 89) may not be his work. 
Dering died, unmarried, and was buried at St Mary Savoy, London, on 22 March 1630. His motets remained popular after his death and appear in manuscripts throughout the civil war, Commonwealth, and Restoration periods. Thomas Mace reports that, in the days before the civil war, after he and his friends had finished playing consort music, they 'did 'Conclude All', with some 'Vocal Musick', to the 'Organ', or (for want of 'That') to the 'Theorboe'... 'viz.' 'Mr Deering's' 'Gloria patri' and other of 'His Latin Songs'... 'Wonderfully Rare, Sublime' and 'Divine', beyond all Expression' (Mace, 235). Anthony Wood (Wood, s.v. 'Hingston') records that the motets were popular with Oliver Cromwell, and their appeal was such that John Playford published a substantial number of them in his two books of 'Cantica sacra' (1662 and 1674). The diarist Samuel Pepys noted that on Saturday 22 November 1662 on 'meeting Mr. Playford, he did give me his Latin Songs of Mr Deerings, which he lately printed' (Pepys, 3.263) and on Sunday 10 May 1668 he notes that he taught Mary Mercer to sing 'Canite Jehovae', presumably Dering's setting (ibid., 9.194). Dering is important in the history of seventeenth-century English music as one of the first pre-Commonwealth composers to show a commitment to the Italianate 'stile nuovo'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7534


Dermody, Thomas (1775-1802), poet, was born at Ennis, co. Clare, on 15 January 1775, the eldest of the three sons of Nicholas Dermody, himself the sixth son of a wealthy farmer. Nicholas Dermody was a bright but alcoholic rural schoolmaster, and Dermody revealed himself to be his father's son, showing a precocious talent for drinking, poetry, and scholarship. A child prodigy, he learned Latin and Greek from the age of four, and was employed as classical assistant in his father's school at the age of nine. 
At the age of fifteen, inspired by his reading of 'Tom Jones', Dermody resolved to seek his fortune, and ran away to Dublin. Penniless on arrival, he initially accepted employment from a bookstall keeper, who discovered him reading Anacreon. Word about his poetic gifts and classical ability soon spread, and he won the patronage of various civic dignitaries and aristocrats, including Henry Grattan, Lady Moira, who convened a well-known literary salon, and the translator and anthologist Charlotte Brooke. In 1792 a small volume of his poems was published at the expense of one of his patrons, the Revd Gilbert Austin. Dermody went on to publish two more volumes, some critical essays, and, inspired by events in France in 1793, a pamphlet on the revolution. 
Increasingly concerned about Dermody's behaviour, defiantly articulated in his poetic declarations such as 'I am vicious because I like it', his patrons consigned him for a brief spell to the guardianship of a priest in Killeigh, but to little avail. Dermody remained a committed and unrepentant drinker, pawning his clothes, being collared by the watch, and increasingly resembling a vagrant. His patrons finally abandoned him to his fate when he refused a scholarship at Trinity College, Dublin. 
Having nearly been press-ganged into the army on two previous occasions, Dermody had little choice but to enlist voluntarily in the 108th regiment as a private, and, benefiting from the strict regime, obtained a commission in the wagon corps, having served with distinction in France. Later wounded and living on half pay in London, Dermody however quickly returned to drinking, finally dying in poverty in a hovel near Sydenham, Kent, on 15 July 1802, aged twenty-seven. He was buried in Lewisham churchyard which contains a monument to his memory. James Grant Raymond published a biography in 1807, containing all of Dermody's poems. Dermody's allusive, occasionally brilliant satiric verse has often been reprinted and anthologized, even well into the twentieth century. For instance, two of his most famous poems, 'An Ode to Myself' and 'John Baynam's Epitaph' appeared in the 'Field Day Anthology of Irish Writing' (1991). 


@@@@@


doc= 7535


Dermott, Laurence (1720-1791), freemason, was born in Ireland but further details of his place of birth and parentage are unknown. He was initiated into the masons in Dublin in 1740, and went to London about 1750. He was elected grand secretary of the 'Antient' masons in 1752. Little is known of Dermott's life apart from his masonic activities. He is thought to have been in the employment of a master painter shortly after his arrival in London and later to have set himself up as a wine merchant in the City of London. He married, presumably before June 1770 when he drew up his will, naming his wife, Elizabeth Dermott, as the sole beneficiary. In 1756 he published 'Ahiman Rezon, or, A Help to a Brother', an influential law book the format of which was copied by other lodges. In 1771 the duke of Atholl appointed him deputy grand master of the Antient masons, an office he held until December 1787. He died in June 1791 at Mile End Old Town, London, where he was living at that time. His place of burial remains unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 7536


Derrick, Samuel (1724-1769), author, was born in Dublin; his family had held land near Carlow, but had lost it as a result of the disturbances of the seventeenth century. Derrick was apprenticed to a linen draper, but fled to London to become an actor, at which he was unsuccessful. He therefore turned his hand to writing, publishing a number of works, notably 'The dramatic censor; being remarks upon the conduct, characters, and catastrophe of our most celebrated plays' (1752); 'A Voyage to the Moon' (1753), translated from the work by Cyrano de Bergerac; 'The Battle of Lora' (1762), attributed to Ossian; and an edition of Dryden, 'Works, with a Life and Notes' (1760). He also published a collection of his letters, entitled 'Letters Written from Leverpoole, Chester, Corke...' (1767), in two volumes, with his portrait included as a frontispiece. His association with the theatre continued in spite of his acting failures, and he contributed the prologue to a production of 'The Miser' performed on 17 December 1756 as a benefit for raising money for 'friendless and deserted boys for the Sea'. On a number of occasions since the early nineteenth century Derrick has been wrongly identified as the author of 'A General View of the Stage' (1759), a work published by a Mr Wilkes. The true author of this work, the Dublin-based Thomas Wilkes (died 1786), was known to Derrick, who also praised Wilkes's writing on the theatre in his 'Poetical Dictionary' (1761). A comparison of 'View of the Stage' and Derrick's own 'Remarks upon the Tragedy of Venice Preserved' (1752) shows that sections of the earlier work were used by Wilkes. 
For a time in the 1750s or 1760s Derrick lived with the actress Jane Lessingham (1738/9-1783) as his wife, although she was already married. He was acquainted with both Samuel Johnson and James Boswell, whose opinion of him was somewhat ambivalent. Johnson, while having 'a kindness' for him, on being asked which was the finer poet, Derrick or Christopher Smart, replied that there was 'no settling the point of precedency between a louse and a flea' (Boswell, 272, 1214). Boswell, though an associate of Derrick during his first trip to London in 1760, later turned against this 'little blackguard pimping dog' (28 March 1763, 'Boswell's London Journal, 1762-3', ed. F. A. Pottle, 1950). 
In January 1763 Derrick succeeded James Collet (Jacques Colet) as master of ceremonies at Bath and Tunbridge Wells, an appointment which Johnson attributed less to his social skills than to his being a 'literary man' (Boswell, 327). Some have suggested that his appointment was originally intended as a joke, and 'The New Bath Guide' for 1798 reports that Derrick kept the position 'notwithstanding great opposition'. Certainly his reputation suffered during the nostalgic reminiscences which followed the death in 1761 of Bath's greatest master, Beau Nash, compared to whom Derrick was 'so small and pusillanimous in his appearance, that it was next to impossible for him to command respect' ('The Original Bath Guide', 1811, 97). To others, by the very nature of his position he embodied the triviality of Bath society, being a 'puny monarch' in Tobias Smollett's 'Humphrey Clinker' (1771, letter of 6 May), and 'an insignificant puppy' to the Cornish visitor John Penrose. None the less, as 'The New Bath Guide' for 1766 suggests, Derrick did enjoy popularity among the company, if never that of Nash in his prime; Penrose's criticism, for example, followed a benefit ball which raised $150 for the master, while more impressionable visitors looked favourably on a man described by Smollett's Lydia Melford as 'so sweet, so fine, so civil, and polite, that in our country he might pass for the prince of Wales' (letter of 26 April). Derrick lost or squandered an inheritance in 1755, and died in Bath on 28 March 1769. A compilation entitled 'Derrick's Jests, or, The Wits Chronicle' was published soon after. 


@@@@@


doc= 7537


Derricke, John (fl. 1578-1581), author, was probably a follower of Sir Henry Sidney. It is possible but unlikely that he was the Mr Derricke who, in 1557, was employed to make the great seal for Ireland by direction of Mr Secretary Sir John Bourne. It is more plausible that he was the John Derick appointed as a collector of the custom duty on wine imported into Ireland on 11 November 1569 when Sir Henry Sidney was granted the right to collect such revenue after an act of the Irish parliament (October 1569). It is likely that Derricke remained in Ireland from that date until 1578 when Sir Henry Sidney finally returned to England. He signed the dedication of his 'Image of Irelande' (1581) to Sir Philip Sidney at Dublin on 16 June 1578. 
Derricke's profession is not known for certain. 'The Image of Irelande' contains twelve plates which he advertises as 'Made and devised by him'. This may mean he was an engraver, or possibly he simply drew the originals. It is most likely that the plates were made in London after Derricke's return, possibly by the author and his family as they are similar in style, four being signed 'FD' and two 'ID'. These six designs are probably the finest woodcuts made in a sixteenth-century English book. 
Derricke's work, a mixture of verse and prose, is a staunch defence of Henry Sidney's deputyship, detailing his military triumphs against the native Irish. The book was published by John Day, the most important publisher of illustrated books in the second half of the sixteenth century. It is likely that Derricke witnessed many of the scenes he depicted, further indicating his work's value. It consists of three parts: the first and second detail the evils of the Irish wood kerne; an apparently appended third section narrates the fate of the rebel Rory Oge O'More. 'The Image of Irelande' is one of the most valuable records of Elizabethan Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 7538


Ryck, William de (1635-1697x9), history painter, was born in Antwerp, where he was a pupil of Erasmus Quellinus. He trained as a goldsmith, and was still in Antwerp in 1684. According to Vertue a 'Print [a large sheet] the Story of St. Catherine. several figures. the Judges of the lawes pronouncing sentence against her. -- designd painted and 'Engraved' [ a sort of scrach'd etching. Touch'd up ] by Will De Rijck [was] dedicated to Ferdinand Van Beughem Bishop of Antwerp. (Vertue, 'Note Books', 4.20)' He took up painting when in England where he had arrived by 1688. Two paintings signed by de Ryck and dated 1688 are known to have been painted in England. Waterhouse reproduced examples of portraits by de Ryck and noted that he painted 'in a style like that of Riley' (Waterhouse, 237). His only known recorded work was 'Tarquin and Lucretia'. De Ryck died in London between 1697 and 1699. He had a daughter, Catharina, who also became a painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 7539


Desaguliers, John Theophilus (1683-1744), natural philosopher and engineer, was born on 12 March 1683 at La Rochelle, France, the only surviving child of Jean Desaguliers (1644-1699), minister and schoolmaster, and Marguerite Thomas la Chapelle ('c'.1640-1722). His parents were French Huguenots who emigrated separately; Jean Desaguliers was exiled in 1682, ordained as an Anglican minister by Henry Compton, bishop of London, in November of that year, and sent to Guernsey. Following his son's birth and baptism -- as Jean Theophile, in the Protestant Temple of La Rochelle on 17 March 1683 -- his wife escaped with their son to join him in Guernsey. The family moved to London in about 1690. Two years later Jean Desaguliers became an Anglican lecteur at the Swallow Street French Chapel, and opened a French school in Islington, Middlesex, in October 1696. Desaguliers was a pupil in this school until his father's death, and was then taught by William Saunders at Bishop Vesey's grammar school, Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1705. He graduated bachelor of arts in 1709 and lectured on natural philosophy at Hart Hall, Oxford, from 1710 to 1712, when he proceeded MA. In 1719 he received the Oxford degrees of bachelor and doctor of laws, and these were incorporated at Cambridge in 1726. 
In 1712 Desaguliers moved back to London, where he lived for the rest of his life. On 14 October 1712 he married Joanna Pudsey (1690x95-1753), daughter of William and Anne Pudsey of Kidlington, near Oxford. They had four sons and three daughters, for most of whom they acquired aristocratic godparents, but only two children survived beyond infancy: John Theophilus (1718-1751) graduated from Oxford, became a clergyman, and died childless, while Thomas Desaguliers (1721-1780) led a distinguished scientific military career. From 1715 Desaguliers advertised lectures at his home in Channel Row, where the family lived until about 1739, when the construction of Westminster Bridge -- on which Desaguliers had advised -- resulted in the demolition of their house. Desaguliers then moved his home and his classes to Bedford Coffee House, Covent Garden, a popular venue for whig lecturers of natural philosophy. 
Desaguliers took deacon's orders in Fulham in June 1710 and priest's orders at Ely House, Holborn, in December 1717. In 1716 he was appointed chaplain to James Brydges (later the first duke of Chandos) who became his most valuable patron and made him rector of Stanmore Parva, Middlesex, in 1719; between 1717 and 1738 Desaguliers acquired two further livings (running consecutively in Bridgeham, Norfolk, and Little Warley, Essex) from George I and George II, and two more chaplaincies (to Frederick, prince of Wales, and to a military regiment). These appointments testify less to Desaguliers's religious commitment than to his skill at acquiring sources of income. His major interests were scientific rather than theological, and his failure to fulfil his clerical duties exacerbated the decline in his profitable relationship with Chandos. Scanty evidence of his faith survives: a sermon he preached before the king in 1717 based on his own entrepreneurial misfortunes, and his physicotheological preface to 'The Religious Philosopher' (1718-19), John Chamberlayne's translation from the Dutch of Bernard Nieuwentyt or Nieuwentijt. 
The protege of Isaac Newton, Desaguliers rapidly became well known in elite metropolitan circles and was adept at cultivating aristocratic patronage. One example of his diplomatic expertise is 'The Newtonian System' of 1728, a long allegorical poem written for the accession of George II, which helped to ensure the continuation of his royal support. Flatteringly dedicating it to Queen Caroline, for whom he had already performed experiments, Desaguliers deftly wove together praise for Newton's genius, English liberty, and royal splendour by comparing Newtonian astronomical certitude with Hanoverian stability. In addition, Desaguliers's social mobility was greatly facilitated by his prominent role as an innovative freemason. He is remembered as one of the founders of modern freemasonry and was closely involved in establishing the grand lodge of England in 1717, and most probably assisted James Anderson in writing 'The Constitutions of the Free-masons' (1723). Desaguliers belonged to several lodges including the influential and prestigious Lodge IV that initially met at the Rummer and Grapes inn close to his home in Channel Row. He became grand master in 1719, was deputy grand master three times, and remained involved in masonic activities for the rest of his life. Like other members of London society, many fellows of the Royal Society were masons during this period. Desaguliers and his peers doubtless arranged many valuable acquaintanceships during meetings: in 1737, for example, he presided over the ceremony in which Prince Frederick was initiated as a freemason. 
Desaguliers had many foreign contacts, and often travelled on masonic and scientific business: for instance, in 1721, while on a visit to Edinburgh to repair the city's water supply, he was welcomed at a masonic lodge. In 1731 he visited several cities in the Netherlands and officiated at the initiation of Francis, duke of Lorraine, as a mason; and in 1735, on his only return to France, he attended the opening of a lodge in Paris. However, the significance of his masonic allegiances for the promulgation of scientific ideas or for religious and political subversion is debatable. William Hogarth, also a freemason, is judged to have portrayed Desaguliers three times: in the background of a conversation piece packed with Newtonian references showing John Conduitt's town house, and in two satirical caricatures with masonic implications (as a pedantic preacher and as an old woman riding a donkey). In Hogarth's unflattering representations, confirmed by more conventional portraits, Desaguliers appears stocky and myopic. 
Through his lectures, books, and activities at the Royal Society, Desaguliers contributed to the international consolidation of Newtonian natural philosophy and its establishment as a vital component of English polite culture. Fluent in English, French, and Latin, he facilitated English familiarity with continental innovations through his translations, lectures, and books; conversely, by publishing in French, travelling to Europe, and maintaining international contacts, he helped to spread Newtonian ideas abroad. Enmeshed in a metropolitan network of instrument makers, natural philosophers, and experimental engineers, Desaguliers utilized his patronage relationships -- particularly with Chandos -- to gain financial backing for his technological innovations. Formerly appraised mainly for his role in developing and promoting Newton's ideas, Desaguliers is now also interpreted as a key figure in the rise of science as a public enterprise during the first half of the eighteenth century. By demonstrating the valuable contribution natural philosophy could make to England's material and commercial welfare, he helped to forge a mutually profitable alliance between Newtonian philosophy, public benefit, and private gain that facilitated the nation's future scientific, industrial, and economic transformation. 
At Oxford, Desaguliers had attended John Keill's university course, on which his own lectures in Oxford and London were at first closely modelled. Soon after coming to London in 1712 he entered the competitive commercial world of popular lecturing. Benefiting from the death of Francis Hauksbee the elder in 1713, Desaguliers ran courses for Hauksbee's widow and -- perhaps with Keill's backing -- gradually took over Hauksbee's role as Newton's experimental assistant. Desaguliers was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1714, and from 1716 to 1743 filled Hauksbee's former post as curator of experiments. For several years he received Godfrey Copley's benefaction of $100, and was later awarded the society's annual Copley medal three times (1734, 1736, and 1741). The fact that his salary ranged between $30 and $50 a year according to the number of experiments and lectures he produced is reflected in his prolific output of over fifty papers in the society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. These covered a huge variety of topics, most importantly optics, mechanics, and electricity, and relied on his great skill as an experimental demonstrator. This practical approach underpinned his theoretical work and his popular success, as well as his entrepreneurial engineering projects. 
Before Newton's death in 1727, most of Desaguliers's activities at the Royal Society were dedicated to defending contested items of Newtonian doctrine in mechanics and optics. For example, he replicated older experiments and devised new ones to demonstrate the existence of a vacuum dispersed throughout apparently solid matter, a central tenet of Newtonian theory. His explanations of how he repeated some of Newton's optical experiments were designed specifically to refute French and Italian criticisms that Newton had left insufficient instructions to permit verification of his results. In 1727 he published four articles to counter important French claims that Newton had incorrectly described the shape of the earth. Other papers of this period described how he tested air resistance by dropping balls in St Paul's Cathedral, melted substances with a lens, and analysed perpetual motion machines. 
Desaguliers was greatly influenced by Stephen Hales's 'Vegetable Staticks' of 1727, a study of plant respiration informed by the lengthy suggestions Newton had articulated as queries in his 'Opticks'. Having immediately welcomed this book in a laudatory review, in subsequent papers Desaguliers developed some of Hales's practical devices and explored the implications his conjectures raised about the repulsive and attractive properties of particles of matter. Spread over about fifteen years, Desaguliers's studies of elasticity (expansion and compression) and evaporation offered important contributions to the continuing eighteenth-century debate about whether repulsive phenomena were best accommodated within a Newtonian framework by corpuscles -- as Desaguliers tried unsuccessfully to show -- or by an aether, or subtle fluid, the solution favoured by English natural philosophers after about 1740. 
Desaguliers's most radical conjecture about repulsive particles was to relate the elasticity of fluids and vapours to electricity. Although he had investigated electricity since at least 1716, when Stephen Gray came to live with him at Westminster for three years and assist at his lectures, Desaguliers started performing and describing experiments at the Royal Society only after Gray's death in 1736. Electricity was rapidly becoming the most exciting topic in natural philosophy, and Desaguliers studied and demonstrated phenomena such as conduction, discharge, and attraction and repulsion. Drawing on French research, he revised existing terminology and suggested that air consists of permanently electrified attractive and repulsive particles. His short 'Dissertation Concerning Electricity' (1742), comprising accounts of twenty-nine experiments and his theoretical suggestions, won a prize offered by the Bordeaux Academy. 
Outside the Royal Society, Desaguliers continued his commercial lecturing activities. These were extremely influential among the international community of natural philosophers as well as at a less scholarly level. Like that of other lecturers, his success owed much to his dramatic performances with instruments intended for demonstration rather than experimental research; many of these instruments he designed himself, including working models of engineering equipment he had invented and a planetarium, a mechanical device for displaying the movement of the planets round the sun, which he claimed was more accurate than elaborate orreries. In London men and women came to hear Desaguliers's frequent lectures at Channel Row, where his house must have been crammed with instruments, teaching materials, student boarders, and new inventions such as model engines and an 8 foot wide centrifugal bellows. Advertising his ability to lecture in three languages, Desaguliers went on lecturing tours to provincial cities like Bath and visited the Netherlands twice during the 1730s. In addition, he entertained members of the royal family with philosophical experiments at Hampton Court and at Kew, where Prince Frederick had a room full of Desaguliers's instruments. In 1734 he boasted that he was embarking on his 121st course, and that, of the dozen or so other experimental lecturers in the world, eight had been his students. These included William 'sGravesande, who subsequently became a prominent professor interpreting and teaching Newtonian natural philosophy at Leiden, and Stephen Demainbray, a popular international lecturer who later worked for George III. 
Desaguliers reached still wider audiences by publishing his lectures, some versions appearing in French as well as English. His earlier publications, such as his 'Physico-Mechanical Lectures' (1717) and a couple of syllabuses of the 1720s, were abstracts designed primarily as advertising material. Paul Dawson compiled 'Lectures on Experimental Philosophy' (1719) from notes, opportunistically placing Desaguliers's name on the title page, but Desaguliers ensured that a critical preface was included. The first volume of his own far more substantial 'Course of Experimental Philosophy' did not appear until 1734; there was a further delay of ten years before the appearance of the second volume, reportedly because Desaguliers was grappling with the international 'vis viva' debate between Leibnizians and Newtonians about the mathematical relationship between the force and velocity of a moving object. The two volumes contain twelve separate lectures, many of them on mechanical topics, and each carrying detailed annotations for further study. Aiming at a wide market, Desaguliers deliberately avoided mathematical explanations. In a characteristically chauvinistic assault on Rene Descartes's 'philosophical Romance', he stressed that it was through Newton's experimental and observational approach that 'we owe the routing of this Army of Goths and Vandals in the Philosophical World' (preface, 'Course of Experimental Philosophy', 1734). With their fine illustrations these books -- particularly the second -- visually demonstrate the inseparability of Desaguliers's theoretical and experimental work at the Royal Society from the many schemes of practical engineering in which he was involved. As well as standard philosophical apparatus such as air-pumps, thermometers, and magnets, he built and described working models of technical inventions, including a watermill, steam engines, and carts. To explain physical principles he often used non-technical examples familiar to his popular audiences; for example, he showed labelled drawings of fairground performers displaying feats of strength. 
In addition to his own writing and teaching, Desaguliers was involved in other publishing projects. For instance, he contributed pieces on topics such as the reflecting telescope and Hadley's quadrant. As a fluent linguist, in the early stages of his career he earned money through translations, though some arguments with publishers and authors did ensue. His choice of texts reflects his own interests, and sometimes he added Newtonian editorial notes. His translations from French included a detailed practical book on military fortification (1711), an instruction manual for building better chimneys (1715), a text on hydrostatics and water fountains (1718), and a short account of mechanical automata and wind instruments (1742). From Latin he co-translated, with George Sewell, Archibald Pitcairne's pro-Newtonian iatro-mechanical physiology (1715) and in 1720 translated 'sGravesande's 'Physices elementa mathematica' as 'Mathematical Elements of Natural Philosophy', thus influentially importing Dutch versions of Newtonian ideas into England. 
Desaguliers was obsessed with experimentation. When some of his spectacular water rockets unfortunately exploded underneath a passing barge and nearly sank it, he immediately converted this disastrous experience into underwater trials of gunpowder. Constantly spending beyond his means, he sought ways to supplement his income by using his skills in natural philosophy to solve practical problems. For example, in collaboration with the instrument maker William Vream, he focused on the ventilation and heating deficiencies plaguing buildings, ships, and mines, and redesigned chimneys, bellows, and air heaters. Relying on his international connections with other engineers, he built new types of water-wheels and steam engines that could more efficiently drain water from mines or supply ornamental fountains. He constructed improved versions of other devices, including a pyrometer, a barometer, a crane, and various pumps. 
In the competitive and financially unstable environment of early eighteenth-century London, Desaguliers became involved in patent disputes, forged temporary alliances with other entrepreneurs, denounced fraudsters, and used his social connections to win profitable contracts. Most importantly, between 1716 and about 1740, he was embroiled in an increasingly stormy patronage relationship with Chandos, initially visiting the latter's Middlesex estate every week. In exchange for clerical sinecures, Chandos deployed Desaguliers's technological expertise to improve his own property and involved him in numerous financial ventures, such as soap manufacture, ore refinement, and mine development. Desaguliers reported many of the inventions he developed for Chandos in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. He showed the fellows experiments on working models to explain his innovations, and discussed the difficulties he had encountered in schemes to measure depth at sea, purify the air, or install piped water systems. 
Desaguliers had long suffered from gout every winter, and died after several months of severe illness at his home in the Bedford Coffee House on 29 February 1744; he was buried on 6 March in the Savoy Chapel, London. Mainly on the basis of a satirical verse by James Cawthorn in his poem 'The Vanity of Human Enjoyments', some biographers have claimed that Desaguliers died impoverished, but this seems unlikely since he made a will in favour of his elder son shortly before his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 7540


Desaguliers, Thomas (1721-1780), army officer and military engineer, was born on 5 January 1721, and baptized on 20 January at St Margaret's, Westminster, the fourth (but second surviving) son of John Theophilus Desaguliers (1683-1744), natural philosopher and engineer, and his wife, Joanna Pudsey (1690x95-1753). Pursuing his father's interest in the military applications of advances in mechanics, he entered the regiment of Royal Artillery as a cadet on 1 January 1740, and was promoted second lieutenant on 1 September 1741, first lieutenant on 1 February 1742, captain-lieutenant on 3 April 1743, and captain on 1 January 1745. He first saw service in Flanders in 1744, when he joined the Royal Artillery train under Colonel William Belford, and spent most of the period, until the close of the War of the Austrian Succession in 1748, on continental Europe. He was present at the battle of Fontenoy, as well as many minor engagements. On 18 March 1746 at St George, Mayfair, he married Mary Blackwood ('bap'. 23 June 1727), daughter of John Blackwood of Charlton, Kent, and his wife, Anne Shovel, the daughter of the naval officer, Sir Cloudsley Shovel. They had three children: Mary Catherine (died 1814), who married Thomas Cartwright of Aynho, Northamptonshire, and second Sir Stephen Cotterel, master of the ceremonies; Anne (1748-1801), who married Robert Shuttleworth of Gawthorpe, Lancashire; and Frederick ('bap'. 1749), who was killed in North America 'c'.1775. 
Desaguliers was made chief firemaster at Woolwich on 1 April 1748, a post which he held for thirty-two years, until his death in 1780. The chief firemaster was the superintendent of Woolwich arsenal, and Desaguliers was the first scientific maker of cannon and the first regular investigator into the powers of gunnery in the English army. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 5 February 1757, and in 1761 was summoned from his experiments and manufactures to take command of the siege train and the force of artillerymen intended to accompany the expedition to the island of Belleisle, off the west coast of France. This was the first opportunity for testing on a large scale the improvements made in siege artillery since the days of Marlborough, and Desaguliers was able to put his ideas into practice. General Studholme Hodgson was in command, with generals Crauford, William Howe, John Burgoyne, and Guy Carleton under him, and when Desaguliers arrived at Belleisle on 12 April with the temporary rank of brigadier-general, one unsuccessful attempt had already been made to disembark. Desaguliers at once volunteered to reconnoitre, and, by putting some of his heavy guns into ship's boats, managed to cover the landing of the army. The island soon submitted, and General Hodgson directed Desaguliers to form the siege of the citadel. The manuscript journal which he kept during the siege of all his operations forms the basis of the account given of the siege by Francis Duncan in his 'History of the Royal Regiment of Artillery'. Desaguliers got thirty guns and thirty mortars into battery, fired seventeen thousand shot and twelve thousand shells into the citadel, had great difficulties to contend with owing to the flooding of the trenches, and was wounded five days before the capitulation of the fortress on 7 June. 
On his return to England Desaguliers was promoted colonel on 19 February 1762, and made colonel-commandant of a battalion of the Royal Artillery on 10 March the same year. He devoted himself for the rest of his life to his work at Woolwich. His work there was most valuable; he invented a method of firing small shot from mortars, and made the earliest experiments with rockets. Desaguliers's instrument was for many years in use at the royal gun factories for examining and verifying the bores of cannon. In recognition of his scientific work he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1780, being the first officer of Royal Artillery who won that distinction. He was promoted major-general on 25 May 1772, and lieutenant-general on 29 August 1777, and died at Woolwich on 1 March 1780. His daughter Mary Catherine Cotterel was his sole executor and residuary legatee. 


@@@@@


doc= 7541


Des Barres, Joseph Frederick Wallet (1721-1824), hydrographer and colonial official, was born in November 1721, either in Basel, Switzerland, or in Paris, the eldest child of Joseph-Leonard Vallet des Barres, a Huguenot, and his wife, Anne-Catherine, 'nee' Cuvier. He was baptized Joseph-Frederic Vallet and was educated at Basel under the Bernouillis. In 1752 or 1753, under the patronage of William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, he entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. In February 1756 he was commissioned lieutenant in the Royal Americans (62nd, later 60th foot), and that March embarked for North America. In 1758 he served as an assistant engineer at the siege of Louisbourg, Cape Breton Island, where he impressed his superior officers. He prepared a chart of the St Lawrence River, which was used by James Wolfe. He served as an assistant engineer in the 1759 and 1760 campaigns and worked on the Halifax defences in 1761. In 1762 he was an assistant engineer at the recapture of St John's, and after the French surrender he surveyed in Newfoundland with James Cook. 
Recommended by the commanding officer of the Royal Navy in North America, from 1764 to 1773 Des Barres, with a small team and risking drowning, painstakingly surveyed the coast of Nova Scotia and beyond. He returned to England in 1774, and for several years prepared his and other charts and views for publication. His 'The Atlantic Neptune, Published for the Use of the Royal Navy of Great Britain' (1774-84) comprised charts and views of Nova Scotia, New England, the Gulf of St Lawrence including Cape Breton and Prince Edward Island, and the coast south of New York. Largely accurate and aesthetically pleasing, these continued to be standard works well into the nineteenth century. Des Barres had a protracted dispute with the Admiralty over payment for the 'Atlantic Neptune'. His other publications included 'Nautical Remarks and Observations on the Coasts and Harbours of Nova Scotia' (1778). 
Des Barres acquired by grant and purchase much land in the maritime colonies, becoming one of their largest landowners. He was promoted captain in September 1775 and major in March 1783. In August 1784 he was appointed lieutenant-governor of Cape Breton, where he arrived in January 1785. He encouraged immigration and economic development, including coalmining and whaling, and founded and planned the colony's capital, Sydney. However, he quarrelled with the military commander and others, largely over supplies. In November 1786 Thomas Townshend, Viscount Sydney, the home secretary, recalled Des Barres, and in 1787 the latter handed over to his successor, left Cape Breton, and returned to England. Following the appointment in 1794 of his friend William Windham as secretary at war, the government paid most of the expenses he claimed for the 'Atlantic Neptune' and Cape Breton. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel in March 1794 and colonel in January 1798. He pressed for another colonial appointment and in May 1804, aged eighty-two, was appointed lieutenant-governor of Prince Edward Island, where he arrived in July 1805. Though hampered by the legislature's unwillingness to provide revenue, he built roads and public buildings and improved defence, but became involved in local political disputes, being associated with James Bardin Palmer and his 'loyal electors' against the rival 'old party'. Pressed by the landed proprietors, in August 1812 Henry, third Earl Bathurst, the colonial secretary, recalled Des Barres. 
Des Barres moved to Amherst, Nova Scotia, and in 1817 to Halifax. He had six children with a mistress, Mary Cannon, whom he met in 1764 and whom in 1776 he made agent for his estates. Later they were estranged, and in 1809, alleging she had 'fraudulently and corruptly betrayed [his] trust and confidence' ('DCB', 196), he sued her in the court of chancery in Halifax, but the case was still undecided when he died. He also had eleven children with Martha Williams of Shrewsbury, whom he may have married. He was a man of ability and vision, but pushy, selfish, and callous. His greatest achievement was the 'Atlantic Neptune'. He died, aged 102, on 27 October 1824 at Halifax, Nova Scotia, and was buried there. 


@@@@@


doc= 7542


Disbrowe, John (bap. 1608, d. 1680), parliamentarian army officer and politician, was baptized at Eltisley, Cambridgeshire, on 13 November 1608, the second son of James Disbrowe (1582-1638) and his wife, Elizabeth Marshall (died 1628/9). His brother was Samuel Desborough [Disbrowe], politician and administrator. Their father was a gentleman and owner of the advowson of Eltisley, where the family had lived for at least three generations, and at the time of John's birth was living in the parsonage house. 
Although he did not attend either English university or any of the London inns of court, Disbrowe is said to have practised as an attorney, and combined this with farming an estate worth $70 per annum settled on him by his father. On 23 June 1636 he married Jane Cromwell ('bap'. 1606, died 1656). She was the sister of Oliver Cromwell, who at that time enjoyed no more than local importance, but on the outbreak of the civil war Disbrowe was among the earliest members of his brother-in-law's troop of horse, a unit of the parliamentarian army of the earl of Essex. Disbrowe was quartermaster or adjutant, receiving from as early as September 1642 sums from the treasurer-at-war to pay the soldiers. 
From April 1643 Disbrowe captained his own troop of horse in Cromwell's regiment. An ordinance of 2 May 1643 named Disbrowe among prominent soldiers of the eastern association empowered to sequester the goods of royalists. It is likely that the high reputation of the regiment for military efficiency and godly commitment attracted recruits from beyond the immediate confines of East Anglia: the minister and commentator Richard Baxter noted that to his knowledge Disbrowe and his men never once fell back before the enemy. After the New Model Army was established Disbrowe became major of the first horse regiment, that of Sir Thomas Fairfax, when Edward Whalley was promoted to command a regiment of his own. On 14 June 1645 Disbrowe saw action at Naseby, where his regiment led the final charge, and his troop was prominent at the battle of Langport on 10 July. On 8 August, Disbrowe was dispatched by Fairfax to quell troublesome 'clubmen' at Shaftesbury: leading a charge at Hambledon Hill with spectacular success, he captured their ringleader and took 300 prisoners. From December 1645 he was quartered in Oxfordshire, first taking part in the siege of Oxford, and negotiating the surrender of Woodstock House to parliament on 26 April 1646. 
During May 1647 Disbrowe acted as an intermediary between parliament and his regiment, when parliament had resolved on plans to reduce the size of the army and ship certain units to Ireland. He was among the officers chosen to present the grievances of the whole army to parliamentary commissioners. At Saffron Walden church on 16 May, Disbrowe reported to the council of officers that six days earlier, after representing the parliamentary plans to the troops of his regiment, they had convinced him that some of their grievances were 'very sober things' ('Works', 1.50). He pressed the council of officers to ask the regiment to confirm that these discontents were widespread, evidently in the conviction that they were, and a paper emanating from the regiment confirmed his view. On 2 July, Disbrowe was one of the army officers that met with commissioners of parliament at High Wycombe; at the council of war at Reading the following week he was clearly pressing for the army not to delay in its march on London. Fairfax appointed him to meet with the agitators, representatives of the rank and file, to complete proposals for settling a peace. During the army's advance to the capital Disbrowe was involved in a surprise raid on troops of the presbyterian Robert Pye, at Deptford, and in August he drilled a thousand cavalry in Hyde Park. There is no doubt that he was an Independent in politics, sharing the impatience of many in the New Model with repeated attempts at a compromise settlement with the king. In May 1648 he suppressed a royalist insurrection at Bury St Edmunds, and was among the besieging party at the protracted siege of Colchester. On 15 September, Fairfax appointed Disbrowe governor of Yarmouth, a commission which took him from the centre of events during the political crisis of the winter of 1648-9, and removed him temporarily from a field regiment. 
In September 1649, during the first year of the new republic, Disbrowe was given command of what had been the horse regiment of Oliver Cromwell, assigned to guard the western counties of England. This marked the beginning of Disbrowe's association with the west of England, which persisted for most of the 1650s, and confirmed his closeness to his brother-in-law, the lord general. Disbrowe wrote to Cromwell in September 1650, reminding him of the need for those in public life to heed the voice of God: 'Sir, high places are slippery, except God establisheth our goings; he hath been very faithful to us, and I trust will still do us good himself, help us to trust in him, and then, I am sure, we shall not be ashamed' (Firth and Davies, 1.205). Late in 1649 he quelled a mutiny at Plymouth garrison, but he also gave the charge to the grand jury at the Devon quarter sessions, an indication that he would not confine himself to the military sphere. Disbrowe attempted a reform of public life in the counties of his charge from his first tour, and demonstrated a willingness to work closely and in detail with the justices of the peace and other agents of the traditional structure of local government. By August 1650 he had been given the title major-general. His regiment marched north to participate in the battle of Worcester in September 1651, but moved quickly back to the south-west, in time for the escaping Charles Stuart to pass close to him incognito at Shaftesbury in October. His appointment to the Hale commission on law reform in January 1652 acknowledged the range of his interests in public affairs as well as his original calling, though he himself was no radical reformer. He supported a policy of leniency towards former royalists, enshrined in the Rump's act of oblivion (February 1652), and that summer supported Cromwell in cautioning the army officers against precipitate action against parliament when the pace of reform seemed to have grown slack. After the Rump Parliament was expelled in exasperation by Cromwell in April 1653, Disbrowe defended his own volte-face. His comment on his earlier support for the Rump against the army officers was 'if ever he drolled [i.e. jested] in his life, he had drolled then' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 1.356). 
Further civil and military commissions now fell to Disbrowe. He was among the appointees to Cromwell's first council of state (29 April 1653), having apparently rejected offers to become general of the army in Scotland. On 5 July he was co-opted to sit in the nominated assembly, and he played an active role in its proceedings. On 28 July he was made a commissioner for the admiralty and navy, and by September he had replaced Edmund Prideaux, attorney-general, as 'custos rotulorum' of Devon. He retained this distinction until 1660. He sat on a parliamentary committee charged with reforming the law, but was no more radical in his outlook there than on the Hale commission, and became identified with the socially conservative element in the house. Nevertheless he continued in office as a judge of probate during this administration, having been appointed in the last month of the Rump's sitting. He came third in the ballot for sixteen places on the new council of state on 1 November; on 3 December was approved by the house as one of the generals-at-sea, and retained his place as an admiralty commissioner. The growing gulf between the radicals and their critics had become unbridgeable, however, and on 12 December he used his prominence in the house on behalf of the conservative majority to play a leading part in the dissolution of the nominated assembly. He was among those who signed the warrant to the lord mayor of London to proclaim Cromwell lord protector. Nearly a year later, on 10 November 1654, he reminded MPs in the first protectorate parliament that the lord protector could have kept all power to himself, and that they should reflect on that before tampering with the 'Instrument of government'. 
As a relative and close associate of Cromwell's, Disbrowe rose even further in standing during the protectorate, and by 1658 it was reported that public office brought him an annual income of over $6000. On 24 April 1654 he was granted the office of constable of St Briavel's hundred, in the Forest of Dean, which confirmed his policing authority there: during the time of the nominated assembly he had tried to advance the interests of Gloucestershire tobacco planters on the other side of the Severn from the forest. In elections to the first protectorate parliament, which met in September 1654, he was returned for Cambridgeshire, and for two seats in the west country, Somerset and Totnes: he chose to sit for his native county. In October he and William Penn quelled unrest among seamen at Portsmouth, Disbrowe having kept the naval offices bestowed upon him before the protectorate was established. He never served at sea, however, and his contribution to the navy lay in the areas of discipline and logistics. He was the principal organizer of supply to the ill-fated western design, a naval expedition to the West Indies which sailed in December 1654. Even before it left England its leader, Robert Venables, quarrelled with Disbrowe over inadequate supplies, and when it failed disastrously Venables ensured that the general-at-sea received his share of the blame. 
In January 1655 Disbrowe's interventions in parliament were all strongly in support of the lord protector and his executive, and he kept a close eye on home intelligence matters. When, in March, the rebellion in the west country known as Penruddock's rising broke out, Disbrowe was the natural choice to be commissioned to suppress it. A few days later he was also given wide powers of policing in the Isle of Ely in his home region. During this tour of the west he again worked closely with local government. These developments, and Disbrowe's interest in compiling lists of those disaffected to the government, provided a blueprint for what in the summer of that year became the expedient of rule by major-generals. Disbrowe received the first commission of its type on 28 May 1655, gaining the widest civil and military authority in the counties of Gloucester, Somerset, Wiltshire, Dorset, Devon, and Cornwall. He reformed the militia, galvanized justices of the peace into implementing legislation on offences that were abominable to the godly, and did what he could to reform juries. He intervened in the affairs of the corporations of Bristol, Tewkesbury, Gloucester, and Tiverton to remove councillors considered hostile. 
Despite his purges of boroughs Disbrowe's style was, overall, not particularly confrontational; he preferred to work with sympathetic figures among the gentry, the 'honest people in every county' (Thurloe, 5.303). He was able to intervene to settle disputes among the clergy, and to support congregations -- notably that of the Baptists in Exeter. His sympathies towards protestant minorities seem to have been generally recognized. Although he was expected by some to release the Quakers imprisoned at Launceston he found himself unable to comply because their demeanour, and particularly that of George Fox, convinced him that they would not live peaceably. His reports to John Thurloe reveal his concern to receive the proper authorization for his actions. Nevertheless, despite his sometimes tentative approach to his task, a measure of his achievement is the surviving volume, preserved in the British Library, of names of about 5000 individuals who came to his attention for a variety of negative reasons during his tour of duty. 
Like the other major-generals, Disbrowe worked hard to ensure that candidates sympathetic to the government were successful in the parliamentary elections of 1656. He himself was returned for Somerset, Gloucester, King's Lynn, and Bridgwater, choosing to sit for the county. During the protracted debates on the Quaker James Nayler he took a consistent, moderate line, agreeing that his offence was blasphemy, but aware of the constitutional implications for the secular authority of entering the hazardous territory of theological nuances. He opposed the death penalty for Nayler, 'for life is precious' ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 1.39). There is little doubt that Disbrowe was voicing the views of the lord protector on Nayler, but the brothers-in-law by no means spoke with one voice. It was fitting that on Christmas day 1656 Disbrowe, as the pioneer of the major-generals' regime, should promote the continuation of the decimation tax on royalists: 'I have a short bill to offer you, for continuance of a tax upon some people, for the maintenance of the militia' (ibid., 1.230). But to Cromwell's scorn, the bill was rejected and the expedient fell. This was an indication that Disbrowe still kept open channels to the leading army officers, as well as to the Cromwellian household. 
A frequent speaker in the second Cromwellian parliament, Disbrowe remained silent in the house during the debates on the 'Humble Petition and Advice' that would have bestowed the crown on the protector. It is clear that he opposed this development. He and Charles Fleetwood, his fellow grandee in the army, confronted Cromwell, who was attracted to the kingship, with their view that its promoters were royalist fellow-travellers. In one account of this exchange Disbrowe is reported to have viewed it as a watershed in his relations with Cromwell: 'though he was resolved never to act against him, yet he would not act for him after that time' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 2.24). It seems likely that Disbrowe's intervention contributed significantly to Cromwell's eventual rejection of the crown, but his loyalties to the protector and to the basic principles of the protectorate ran deep, and he accepted a place in the new second chamber on 11 December 1657 without demur. At the opening of the second session of the parliament on 18 January 1658 Disbrowe carried the sword ahead of the protector in the solemn procession. On 25 March 1658 he married Anne Everard, his first wife, Jane Cromwell, having died in 1656. 
There were a number of reports that Disbrowe was discussing future constitutional options with army colleagues during 1658, but, on the death of Oliver Cromwell, Disbrowe was at least superficially an enthusiast for the rule of his nephew Richard Cromwell. But his feud with Edward Montagu was ominous. Disbrowe and Montagu, a naval administrator and devotee of the protectorate, had been on opposing sides during the kingship debates, and now openly clashed in council, when Disbrowe alleged a plot by Montagu to have him kidnapped. By 6 April 1659 the officers had grown impatient of the lack of attention in parliament to issues regarding army pay, and, on 18 April, Disbrowe rather brutally told his nephew to step down or be removed from power. On 7 May, Disbrowe was named to the committee of safety, and on 13 May, when the Rump Parliament was recalled, he secured a place on the new council of state. In July his military commission was confirmed in parliament, but only after he had expressed scepticism about its supposed superiority to one bestowed by the army itself, and by 5 October strains between the leading army officers and parliament were evident. Disbrowe had been proposed as lieutenant-general of horse by the regiment of John Lambert, and remained of the view that the Rump Parliament had nothing more to offer. On 8 November he sought finance for an army-run regime from the City of London. Before parliament was restored again on 26 December 1659 he proposed a new select senate of sixty to exercise a veto on a new assembly. He nevertheless preferred the Rump to a restored monarchy, and on 29 December wrote a letter of apology to the speaker for his disobedience. 
The tide now began to run strongly against the Wallingford House group of disaffected senior officers, and on 9 January 1660 Disbrowe and other leading officers were confined to their country houses. By March he and Charles Fleetwood were objects of popular derision. He accepted the order of the council of state to remain quiescent, but that summer it was inconceivable that prominent republicans would simply be left alone by the restored monarchy, and in May he was arrested and brought to London while making his way through Essex to take ship. Humiliated by the jeers of youths on his way to be interrogated, he was nevertheless treated relatively well because of his critical attitude towards the restored Rump. In the 'Act of Indemnity and Oblivion' of 13 June 1660 he was disqualified from public office for life. He was imprisoned briefly in the Tower of London for allegedly plotting the death of the king and the queen mother, and escaped to Holland. Thereafter he was never absent from the nervous government's list of alleged plotters, though it is unlikely there was any determined purpose in his meetings with old comrades-in-arms. On 9 April 1665 a proclamation was issued demanding his return to England on pain of being declared a traitor, and on his return, by 13 July, he was imprisoned in Dover Castle, and then in the Tower. Released on 23 February 1667, he was seen walking in London on 17 April by Samuel Pepys, who observed that Disbrowe 'looks well, and just as he used to do heretofore' (Pepys, 8.169). He lived afterwards quietly at Hackney, where he and other former army officers attended the Independent conventicle of John Owen. He died, probably at Hackney, in 1680. By his will, made on 26 March 1678 and proved on 20 September 1680, he left lands in Cambridgeshire (including the manor of Eltisley), Essex, and Lincolnshire. 
There is a contrast between Disbrowe's conscientious, effective, and generally conciliatory style as a police officer in the provinces and his demeanour during the crisis of 1659-60 when he was pugnacious, perhaps quarrelsome, and seemed reluctant to consider the drift of political events, even when warned by subtler colleagues, such as Bulstrode Whitelocke. He was a soldier with the soldier's simple belief in military strength and security. Attacks on him in the popular press as 'a perfect clown' ('The Mystery of the Good Old Cause Briefly Unfolded', 8) had begun as early as 1654, intensified on the eve of the Restoration, and persisted both in cheap lampoons and more sophisticated literary works such as Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras'. But though he could certainly be blunt in his manner, his royalist critics, in social and political sneers, exaggerated his supposed rusticity, and doubtless dwelt on his shortcomings because of his kinship ties and personal affinity with Oliver Cromwell. His many cogent letters to John Thurloe during 1655-6 reveal a man convinced of the importance of completing not only reforms but simple administrative tasks; his speeches in parliament, one who appreciated the virtues of strong government tempered by reconciliation for those willing to conform. 


@@@@@


doc= 7543


Desborough, Samuel (1619-1690), politician and administrator, was born in November 1619 at Eltisley, Cambridgeshire, probably at the Old House, built in 1612 on the site of the rectory for his father, James Desborough, or Disbrowe (1582-1638), landowner and lord of the manor of Eltisley, and his wife, Elizabeth Marshall (died 1628/9). Samuel seems not to have attended university or the inns of court. He developed strongly puritan religious views, and it was probably these which led him to emigrate to America. 
After arriving at New Haven in July 1639, Desborough was one of the founders of Guilford, Connecticut. Despite his youth, he was named as one of the seven pillars of the Independent church there on 19 April 1643. On 27 October 1646 he was chosen magistrate for Guilford for the following year, and he became a leading figure in the settlement. In October 1649 he was chosen as one of the arbitrators in a boundary dispute between New Haven and Totoket. At an unknown date he married Dorothy (died 1654), daughter of Henry Whitfield of Ockley, Surrey, the first minister of Guilford, who too had emigrated to New Haven in 1639. The couple had at least one daughter, Sarah, who died in March 1649, and a son, James, who married Abigail Marsh of St Albans, Hertfordshire, on 9 March 1679, was admitted to the Royal College of Physicians in 1688, and died at Stepney Causeway between November 1690 and January 1691. 
Desborough was still at Guilford early in November 1650, but returned to England soon afterwards, accompanied by his wife, children, and father-in-law. He quickly obtained state employment, perhaps through the influence of his brother John Disbrowe or of George Fenwick, a fellow settler in Connecticut who had returned in 1645; both were then colonels in the parliamentary army. About 20 September 1651, before the completion of the conquest of Scotland, it was reported that there had been a 'great dispute between the officers and Comm[issioner] Desborow about the ships taken at Dundee. He claimed them in the right of the state, which they denied, and went on in the sale of them' (Firth, 'Scotland and the Commonwealth', 16). The following month, Desborough accompanied troops to arrest relations of the governor of Bass Island, who were threatened with the sequestration of their estates should the governor continue recalcitrant. By June 1652 Desborough had been made a parliamentary commissioner in Scotland; on 4 June he and his five fellow commissioners issued an order which named themselves and three others as visitors of the universities and schools in Scotland, and promised 'in convenient time, to alter and abolish all such lawes in the same, as shall be found inconsistent with the Government of the Commonwealth of England' (ibid., 44-5). Under an order of 11 November 1652, which placed the revenues of Scotland under military authority, Desborough served as one of the three commissioners for sequestrations, sitting at Leith, a post he continued to hold under the protectorate. His wife having died of smallpox in 1654, in the following year Desborough married Rose, 'nee' Hobson (1616/17-1699), widow of Samuel Penoyer, merchant of London. 
During the protectorate Desborough was also an MP. In 1654 he was returned to Cromwell's parliament at Westminster, in which he sat for Edinburgh. During the elections of 1656 Lord Broghill reported that 'I shall engage the interest I have in Mid-Lothian for Mr Disborough'; on 30 August Monck reported his election for that seat (Thurloe, 'State papers', 5.295). Desborough became increasingly prominent in the administration of Scotland. On 30 March 1655 instructions were issued by Cromwell to nine persons, including Desborough, 'appointed his Highness's Council in Scotland, for the government of that nation' ('CSP dom.', '1655', 108). Also in 1655 Desborough was appointed keeper of the great seal of Scotland. The seal appears not to have arrived for many months, for a letter from Broghill dated 25 June 1656 specified that he was now to discontinue the practice of signing his name to orders issued under its authority, and should use the seal instead. The warrant of authority formally vesting the office in him was dated even later, on 16 September 1657. Desborough continued to hold this office during the brief government of Richard Cromwell. 
Meanwhile, early in 1656 a new Scottish version of the court of exchequer was set up to deal with forfeited estates, and Desborough was named as one of the presiding judges. But despite its narrowly defined jurisdiction, the court's activities aroused resentment, and by September 1657 Desborough was warning against efforts to expand the authority of what was widely seen as an executive instrument of foreign rule. Revenue commissioners, he thought, should pursue cases through the ordinary civil courts, despite the probability that these might be swayed by pressure from powerful Scottish vested interests. In May 1658 the court of sessions, renamed the commission for the administration of justice, was ordered to set aside time for issues arising from forfeited properties, and as a means to strengthen the authority of the court, Desborough was ordered to sit with the judges. In July 1658 he became their president and sat as chancellor, 'haiffing his mace borne befoir him' (Nicoll, 218). 
Desborough's moderation must have met with the approval of George Monck, and they collaborated in efforts to have government sympathizers elected to Richard's parliament at the end of 1658, underestimating the determination of the duke of Argyll to frustrate this goal. Elected for the shire of Edinburgh, Desborough wrote to Monck that, though ill, he intended to make the long journey soon after the new year. Little is known of Desborough's political stance in 1659, but in spring 1660, with the Restoration increasingly certain, he grasped at the opportunity offered by the declaration of Breda and promised unswerving loyalty to Charles II: 'I do lay hold of and accept of his majesties grace favour and pardon in the said declaration held forth' (BL, Egerton MS 2519, fol. 32). His submission was signed on 21 May and personally witnessed by Monck. 
Desborough obtained a full pardon, with restitution of goods and lands, on 12 December 1660. He retired to the manor of Elsworth, Cambridgeshire, purchased from Thomas Wendy in 1655 by trustees acting on his behalf, where he seems to have lived in complete obscurity, abstaining from politics. Pevsner suggests that the manor house there can be dated to the later seventeenth century and was probably built for Samuel Desborough. Desborough died at Elsworth on 10 December 1690 and was buried there. His will, proved on 16 April 1691, indicates great affection for his second wife, who was clearly not on good terms with her stepson James, and made elaborate provisions to ensure that she could enjoy her jointure and an income of $100 a year, measures apparently stemming from suspicion of his son's intentions. The young man, however, seems not to have long outlived his father. Rose died on 4 March 1699, aged eighty-two, and was buried next to her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 7544


Desenfans, Noel Joseph (1744-1807), art dealer, was born at Avesnes-sur-Helpe, near St Quentin, France, in December 1744. Educated at the universities of Douai and Paris, he published the Rousseauesque 'L'eleve de la nature' (1763), and a stage comedy. At Douai he met the future actor John Philip Kemble and Charles-Alexandre de Calonne, first minister of France in the 1780s and a noted collector. He settled in London as a language tutor in 1769; on 10 June 1776 he married Margaret Morris (1731-1813), a wealthy woman and sister to Sir John Morris, bt, of Clasemont, Glamorgan. 
Socially ambitious, financially secure, but inexperienced, Desenfans began picture dealing, and in 1784 he moved to a large house, 38 and 39 Charlotte Street, Portland Place (now demolished). He forged close links with Jean-Baptiste-Pierre Lebrun (1748-1813) of Paris, a remarkable connoisseur and dealer, with whom he worked for over thirty years, and whose example he followed of using his private house to display his personal collection, preferring to seem a gentleman-dealer. He lavishly entertained the world of art and literature but not high society. About 1776 Desenfans 'adopted' (informally) Peter Francis Bourgeois (1756-1811), who had been abandoned by his Swiss watchmaker father, and who, although an indifferent painter, by the 1780s assisted Desenfans in his business. 
Lebrun helped Desenfans to obtain major masterpieces such as Murillo's 'Flower Girl' ('c'.1670), Poussin's 'Triumph of David' ('c'.1631-3; both from the Calonne collection), and Watteau's 'Les plaisirs du bal' ('c'.1716-17), all now in Dulwich Picture Gallery, London. Lebrun's paintings were sold by Desenfans privately or at auction, with proceeds divided equally between them. Desenfans became well known, if not well liked, and in 1790 Prince Michael Poniatowski, brother of StanisLaw August, king of Poland, asked him to abandon commerce so as to 'promote the progress of the fine arts in Poland' (Taylor). The king's tastes are reflected in the purchases made by Desenfans; StanisLaw wished to found a Polish national gallery in Warsaw, and appointed Desenfans consul-general of Poland in London. 
There were rich pickings from the dispersal of French and Italian noble collections. Rembrandt's 'A Young Man, perhaps the Artist's Son Titus' (1663; possibly from the Calonne collection), Veronese's 'St Jerome and a Donor' ('c'.1580), Claude-Joseph Vernet's 'Italian Landscape' (1738; from the Calonne collection), Raphael's 'St Francis of Assisi' and 'St Anthony of Padua' (1540-45; from the Colonna altarpiece), and Rubens's 'Venus, Mars, and Cupid' ('c'.1636-8; both from the Orleans collection) were among the principal masterpieces Desenfans bought for the king and which are now at Dulwich. For in 1795 Poland was partitioned for the third time in twenty-two years, and StanisLaw abdicated. His death in 1798 extinguished any hope that Desenfans would be paid for the 180 paintings he had acquired for Poland, and three applications to the tsars for payment proved fruitless. Desenfans claimed to have spent $9000 on paintings for Poland between 1790 and 1795, and to have given up other valuable business. He wrote 'A Plan for Establishing a National Gallery' in 1799, proposing, unsuccessfully, that the British government should add his paintings to the British Museum's collection, as part of a more general campaign to establish a national gallery in London. 
In February and March 1802 Desenfans held an auction of the 'Polish' paintings at Skinner and Dyke, Berners Street, London, publishing a two-volume catalogue in which he extolled French connoisseurship and damned the mediocrity and jealousy of British dealers -- a foolish exercise which earned him lasting animosity. Many of the attributions were very optimistic and the sale was a failure. By 1803 Bourgeois seems to have taken over the running of Desenfans's affairs -- Desenfans now suffering from a nervous illness -- and added major works such as Guercino's 'Woman Taken in Adultery' ('c'.1621) to the collection, which he wished to preserve intact. Desenfans died at his home in London on 8 July 1807; by his will of 8 October 1803 he bequeathed his property jointly to his widow and Bourgeois, but his paintings to Bourgeois only. His remains, later moved to Dulwich, were housed in a mausoleum designed by Sir John Soane and erected behind his Charlotte Street house. Although the will does not require that the collection of 350 paintings be kept together, Bourgeois knew of his friend's wishes and in his own will of 20 December 1810 bequeathed it to Mrs Desenfans on condition that it went to Dulwich College after her death. Soane designed the Dulwich Picture Gallery and a mausoleum within, which houses the remains of Mr and Mrs Desenfans and Sir Francis Bourgeois. 


@@@@@


doc= 7545


Des Granges, David (bap. 1611, d. in or before 1672?), miniature painter, was baptized on 24 March 1611 at the French church in Threadneedle Street, in the City of London, and again at the church of St Anne Blackfriars. He was the first of five children of Samson Des Granges (died 1636) and his wife, Marie, 'nee' Bouvier, who had married, also at the French church, on 2 November 1609. Among the witnesses of David's baptism and the baptism of the second son, Francis (10 June 1613), were the maternal aunt Esther, a silkwoman to the queen, and George Heriot, the king's goldsmith and jeweller. The family continued to live in the parish of St Anne Blackfriars, close to the family of Isaac Oliver, Cornelius Jonson, and Anthony Van Dyck, until David's marriage at the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields, on 7 January 1636, to Judith Hoskins. Her family is not known but the name suggests a relationship with the household of John Hoskins, and hence with Samuel and Alexander Cooper, all miniaturists. David and Judith Des Granges had at least four children whose names are identifiable: David (died 1648), John (1643-1685/6), Mary ('b'. 1646), and Esther (died 1690). The family lived on Elm Street, Long Acre, in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, where David is documented until 1672 (Edmond, 'Limners and picturemakers', 123-4). In 1671 he petitioned the king for payment of money owed to him. In 1672, though three people with the name Degrange (John, Magdalen, and Katherine) were mentioned in Samuel Cooper's will, he himself was not, and was presumably dead. 
Des Granges's earliest miniatures date from the later 1620s and show a strong consciousness of the style and technical practice of both Peter Oliver and John Hoskins. Like Alexander Cooper he may have been taught by Peter Oliver. During the 1630s he seems to have worked in some sort of association, possibly arising out of a family relationship with Hoskins, helping in particular with the multiplication of Hoskins's images, after Van Dyck, of the king and the future Charles II (versions are in the Buccleuch collection, Scotland, the National Portrait Gallery, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London). This period culminates in the painting in 1640 of the so-called 'Allegory of the Marchese del Vasto', after the Titian then in the Royal Collection (now in the Musee du Louvre, Paris). Des Granges's miniature, which is in the collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum at Ham House in Surrey, would have been copied via an 'editio princeps' by Peter Oliver of 1629 (Royal Collection), which was borrowed from the Royal Collection in that year to be copied also by Richard Gibson, 'My Ld Chamberleine's Page' (the Gibson miniature is dated 1640 and is now at Welbeck Abbey in Nottinghamshire). 
At the outbreak of the civil wars Des Granges seems to have followed the court out of London. During the interregnum he was with Charles II in Scotland, producing batches of a Charles II likeness after Adriaen Hanneman (versions in the National Portrait Gallery and at Ham House), on which Nathaniel Thach also worked (versions of the Thach copy are in the Mauritshuis in The Hague and on loan at the Victoria and Albert Museum). It was this work that gave rise to Des Granges's petition to the king in 1671 for payment due, in which he claims, perhaps plausibly but in the language usual in such petitions, to be 'old and infirm, and his sight and his labour failing him... forced to rely on the charity of well-disposed persons' (Goulding, 29). The schedule to the same document specifies the distribution of thirteen miniatures: 'one to a French Marquess who came to Your Majesty at St Johnston's in 1651 pretending raising a troop of horse for Your Majesty; one to Mr Oudart... one to Mr Seymour... one to Lady Balcarris... one for Lady Annandale... one for Major Boswel... which Your Majesty gave with your own hands; one to Mr Harding, attendant upon Your majesty, given the same night; three to Sir James Erskine... One to my Lord of Newburgh; one to my Lady Tullibardin, and one to Mr Rainsford employed in a message to Your majesty on the 6th of July 1651. (ibid.)' The list shows how important the portrait miniature was in acquiring and maintaining the loyalty of those in the inner circle of the exiled king, at this time especially. A notice in the London periodical 'Mercurius Politicus' (426, 22-9 July 1658, 701) states that, after a period living outside England or in the country, Des Granges was resident in lodgings owned by an ironmonger, Palmer, near the Fountain tavern in the Strand. 
After the Restoration there is some fine, sophisticated work by Des Granges showing that he responded to the influence of the new court portraitists such as Jacob Huysmans ('Catherine of Braganza as a Shepherdess', formerly in the collection of Mrs Daphne Foskett) and some evidence (a so-called 'Brian Duppa' in the Victoria and Albert Museum) that he experimented with the red-brown hatching style associated with Samuel Cooper. This stylistic variability, and the existence of some poor-quality work that bears the DDG monogram, has led to the use of Des Granges's name as a portmanteau attribution, especially in the salerooms. That in turn has inflated the apparent size of his 'oeuvre' in miniature, which may well now distort our sense of the main field in which he was active. George Vertue saw an engraving by him: 'St. George on horseback -- after Raphael -- David des Granges Sculpsit 1628. I have before remarkt. this print. dedicated to Wm. Earl of Pembroke -- and afterwards done by L. Vorstermans, much like it' (Vertue, 'Note books', 4.194). He is also reputed to have been a painter in oils: the well-known large oil painting 'The Saltonstall Family' (Tate collection), a composition that defies the Renaissance science of perspective, is attributed to him. In 1658 William Sanderson, a court loyalist like Des Granges, citing the leading artists of the British school, referred to him alongside Robert Walker, Gilbert Soest, John Michael Wright, Sir Peter Lely, and John Hales (or Hayls) as 'rare Artizans' ('Graphice', 1658, 20), but no substantial or certain 'oeuvre' in oils survives on which to base any sense of his achievement in that medium. He was not mentioned by Sanderson among the miniaturists, nor as an engraver. 


@@@@@


doc= 7546


Des Maizeaux, Pierre (1672/3-1745), biographer and journalist, was born at Paillat in the Auvergne, France, the only child of Louis Des Maizeaux (died 1701), protestant pastor, and Marie Dumonteil (died 1726). In 1685, after his father was indicted for sedition for an incautious remark in a sermon about Louis XIV and the revocation of the edict of Nantes, the family fled to Switzerland. Des Maizeaux was educated at the lyceum in Bern (1690-95) and the academy in Geneva (1695-9), where he studied theology. He had an early reputation for independence of mind and left for England in 1699 before completing his studies, never to return. His father, who expected him to become a pastor, found his son's abandonment of a ministerial career hard to forgive. 
Des Maizeaux passed through the Netherlands where he made contacts in the book trade and met the great Huguenot religious philosopher Pierre Bayle. In England he at first made a living as a tutor and writer, but soon began to search for a secure patronage appointment, which constantly eluded him, although he obtained timely, if modest, help from Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of Shaftesbury, Joseph Addison, Lord Halifax, and Thomas Parker, lord chancellor. His legal position in England was secured when he was naturalized in 1708, and his finances improved enough for him to abandon tutoring when he gained an Irish pension, through Addison's patronage, in 1710. He lived in rented accommodation in London, mostly in or near Soho, near St Martin's Lane. 
In 1700 Des Maizeaux began to contribute articles and literary news on English books and their authors to French-language journals in the Netherlands and France. This became a staple for more than four decades through which he made a wide range of English writing and thought better known on the continent. He was an early theorist of the literary journal, and recognized its significance for realizing the ideal of the republic of letters. His friends and acquaintances in England included Hans Sloane, secretary of the Royal Society; the freethinkers John Toland and Anthony Collins, whose friendship and intellectual compatibility was significant; Richard Steele and Joseph Addison; Dr Richard Mead, celebrated physician and antiquarian book collector; the French booksellers in the Strand; and the Huguenot intellectuals who regularly met at the Rainbow Coffee House and later at Slaughter's in St Martin's Lane ['see 'Rainbow Coffee House group]. He befriended the Epicurean satirist and exile Charles de Saint-Evremond, then living in London, and jointly edited his works and wrote his biography ('OEuvres melees de Saint-Evremond', 2 vols., 1705, and 'Melanges curieux', 2 vols., 1706). 
Bayle, however, is the central figure in Des Maizeaux's literary career. Des Maizeaux won Bayle's respect and friendship while sending him material for the second edition of Bayle's 'Dictionnaire historique et critique' (3 vols., 1702) and defended the philosopher's reputation against slanderous attacks in England. His early journalism, including his critique of Cartesian proofs of God's existence and a draft criticism of Leibniz, was favourably received by Bayle. Des Maizeaux wrote two lives of Bayle, the first, 'The Life of Mr. Bayle' (1708), appeared soon after Bayle's death in 1706, while the other, 'La vie de l'auteur' (1730), is often viewed as his best biographical writing, notwithstanding its hagiographic treatment of its subject. He portrayed Bayle less as a systematic sceptic and more as a freethinker acutely aware of the limits of human reason. He collected and edited Bayle's correspondence twice. The first time his edition was appropriated by Prosper Marchand ('Lettres choisies de Mr. Bayle', 3 vols., 1714), which provoked a protracted literary quarrel between the rival claimants to Bayle's literary heritage; the second edition was 'Lettres de Bayle' (3 vols., 1729). He extended Bayle's historical-critical method to English lives, and published lives of two seventeenth-century latitudinarians, John Hales and William Chillingworth. The model was later adopted and extended in the 'General Dictionary Historical and Critical' (10 vols., 1734-41), with which he was associated and to which he contributed lives of Addison and materials for its life of Collins. Several of its other articles rely on his biographies. A set of rare lives in French that he had collected was published, but not as a collection, in Dutch periodicals. The most controversial was 'La vie de Spinose', which had previously circulated clandestinely in manuscript; its publication in 'Nouvelles litteraires' (10, 1719, 40-74) provoked strong critical reaction. His antiquarian interests were also reflected in his edition of a volume of rare sixteenth-century Latin love poetry by Jean Bonnefons, from a book he borrowed from the earl of Sunderland; it was published as 'Johannis Bonefonii Arverni carmina' (1720). 
Des Maizeaux edited two significant collections. The first, 'Collection of Several Pieces of John Locke' (1720), used materials largely supplied by his friend Anthony Collins. The second, 'Recueil de diverses pieces' (2 vols., 1720), includes Samuel Clarke's celebrated correspondence with Leibniz and Anthony Collins's dispute with Clarke on human liberty, as well as shorter pieces on the dispute between Newton and Leibniz on the discovery of the calculus and other Leibnizian material. Newton tried to delay or divert the publication of the correspondence on the calculus which, as he anticipated, reignited a dispute he did not wish to see revived. For his publication of 'Receuil', Des Maizeaux was made a fellow of the Royal Society (1720), an honour he highly valued. He also edited John Toland's posthumous papers, 'Collection of Several Pieces of Mr. John Toland' (2 vols., 1726), to which he added a biographical sketch. When Collins died, it was expected that Des Maizeaux would do the same for him, but he sold the manuscripts Collins had left him to Collins's widow, an action he regretted, but was unable to undo. 
Not all of Des Maizeaux's writings were well received. His 'Life of Boileau' (1712) provoked Warburton's witticism that Des Maizeaux seemed to believe that 'every Life must be a Book; and, what is worse, it seems a Book without a Life' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 5.546). He was attracted to individuals such as the latitudinarians and freethinkers with an adventurous cast of mind who challenged orthodoxy, but he became increasingly cautious about revealing much of himself, particularly when not writing anonymously. In his life of Hales he declared he would give no basis to the charges made against Bayle of writing obscenely or undermining religion. Lord Molesworth thought he would do better 'if he would imitate Monsr. Bayle more' (BL, Add. MS 4465, fol. 36, undated letter, John Toland to Molesworth). Nevertheless, the free examination of ideas and toleration are themes which inform his writing. Some 1300 letters from more than 200 correspondents sent to Des Maizeaux survive in the British Library. They include one from the young David Hume in 1739 soliciting Des Maizeaux's opinion of his philosophical writing. Collectively they illuminate the state of the republic of letters of which Des Maizeaux viewed himself a citizen. 
For much of his life Des Maizeaux was in financial need and poor health, both of which impeded his literary projects. Nevertheless, he was generous and provided money to his mother, to John Toland, and to Richard Steele. He was a rotund figure, and a French visitor to London in 1724 described him in appearance as 'un pauvre cancre' ('a poor wretch'; 'Journal et memoires de Matthieu Marais', 3.272). In the 1730s he was living with a common-law wife, Ann Brown, and her young daughter, of whom he was possibly the father. They married at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 2 February 1740 to facilitate the transfer of his pension in anticipation of his death, which took place on 11 July 1745. 


@@@@@


doc= 7547


Despagne, Jean (1591-1659), Reformed minister and theologian, was born in Mizoen, Dauphine, France, one of several children of Henri D'Espagne (died in or after 1626), protestant pastor there and subsequently at Bourg d'Oisans. His will placed the beginning of his ministerial career about 1611, but he seems to have been ordained in 1617. His first charge was at Orange in Dauphine, but in 1620 he became a pastor at The Hague. In 1629, however, he was excluded from every pulpit in the Netherlands, possibly in the wake of unproven but still damaging allegations of sexual immorality, possibly because, as a staunch Calvinist, he had spoken out too forcefully against Arminianism, or possibly because he had politically embarrassed the prince of Orange by an ill-timed denunciation of Louis XIII and Richelieu's campaign against the Huguenots at La Rochelle. 
Despagne went to England, where he had or soon found alternative patrons. He may already have formed a connection with Horace Vere, Lord Vere, commander of English forces in the Netherlands. Just before leaving The Hague he published a treatise on ecclesiastical ceremonial and its historical evolution into superstition, 'Traite des anciennes ceremonies' (1629), dedicated somewhat inappropriately to Charles I. In 1630 he wrote in French to Dudley Carleton, Viscount Dorchester (from 1626 to 1628 envoy to The Hague, but by this time secretary of state), requesting an introduction to the king and 'a little benefice or prebend of moderate revenue' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1625-49', 392) in order to fund books and research assistance for a major scholarly work. Perhaps this was 'Antiduello... the Lawfulnesse and Unlawfulnesse of Single Combats', published in 1632 both anonymously and under his name: this topical exploration of royal authority over duels exhibited a surprising knowledge of English history and probably rested on the services of a translator. More likely the subsidy was for a theological project, of which the first manifestation, 'Les erreurs populaires... qui concernent l'intelligence de la religion', appeared at The Hague in 1639: the English translation, 'Popular Errors' (1648), referred in its dedication to 'king Charles' to a command 'from the deceased king' (James I unless the date is actually February or March 1649, in which case the address is daringly royalist) for 'the Manuscript which was the first fruits of my Pen'. 
Despagne spent a year in the Netherlands from about 1636 and continued to publish at The Hague, but seems to have made England his home for most of the 1630s, becoming chaplain to Benjamin de Rohan, duc de Soubise, the Huguenot military leader in exile. His attractive preaching and effective writing, evident in 'La manducation du corps de Christ' (1640), an exposition of eucharistic doctrine which combined a reverence for the sacrament with orthodox Calvinist theology, won him the approval of Gilbert Primrose, one of the ministers of the French church in Threadneedle Street, London. However, Soubise's influence was insufficient to prevail against the hostile reaction of other members of the consistory and to secure Despagne a pastorate there. Following the duc's death in 1642, Despagne served briefly as pastor at the French church at Sandtoft, Lincolnshire. On his return to London the Threadneedle Street consistory complained to the House of Lords about his 'unauthorised' preaching, but the latter concluded on 21 January 1643 that his sermons delivered at the house of Lady Annandale (presumably Elizabeth Shaw, widow of John Murray, first earl of Annandale) were 'rather an Advantage than any Inconvenience' ('JHL', 5.566) and declined to silence him. 
As before Despagne had well-placed patrons. Within a few months he was preaching to a congregation at Durham House, the London residence of Philip Herbert, earl of Pembroke. It prospered, attracting the social and intellectual elite among French (and English) residents of Westminster who found it geographically convenient and personally congenial, but drew the enmity and envy of the divided and less financially favoured official City church. As early as December 1643 the Threadneedle Street consistory requested from their Amsterdam equivalent a copy of the 1629 proceedings against Despagne. Their reiterated complaints that he was splitting their congregation were finally formalized in 1646, when Despagne was formally pronounced schismatic and his adherents barred from attending communion at the City church. 
Apparently little affected, Despagne continued to publish. Works on the creed, the Lord's prayer, the ten commandments, and other cornerstones of Christian doctrine with dedications to Pembroke and (once) to the House of Lords appeared regularly from 1646, first in French and rapidly translated by others into English. Between May 1648 and June 1650 John Egerton, second earl of Bridgewater, heard him preach four sermons and twenty-four catechitical expositions, the latter clear elucidations of Calvin, on whom he was a recognized authority. His sermons took a robustly moderate political line. 'An Abridgement of a Sermon' (1648), preached on 12 September 1648, a fast day for the proposed treaty between king and parliament, stressed their mutual duties and mutual faults and exhorted 'both sides [to] endeavour to out-goe one another in benignitie, honour and pietie' in order to 'restore the Church to its lustre, to the Lawes their vigour, to the Common-weal an happy peace' (p. 21). In March 1648 parliament had employed him to translate into French the declaration of the houses in answer to the Scots' papers on addresses to the king. 
Pembroke's death on 23 January 1650 left the Durham House congregation secure: in his funeral sermon Despagne celebrated 'nostre Philippe', a reliable and responsive benefactor who had carefully left the church in the care of his son. That year he ordained his disciple Theodore Crespin to serve a secessionist wing of the French church at Canterbury, and in January 1651 he tried unsuccessfully to set up a colloquy with the churches at Sandtoft and Southampton rivalling the authority of that of London. Such controversial activities hampered attempts by the Westminster congregation to reach a compromise with their London co-religionists late the same year, but helped by members of the council of state and others Despagne's flock moved in 1653 to the chapel of the Savoy at Somerset House. This became their permanent home and the basis of the future conformist French church of London, using in time the translated liturgy of the prayer book. Early members such as Isaac de Caus (died 1648), the designer and architect, and Nicholas Briot (died 1646), the engraver, and later members such as the physicians Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne, Jean Colladon, and Theophilus de Garencieres point to a conservative political outlook, and the fact that the diarist John Evelyn worshipped there is suggestive. Yet Despagne retained favour under the protectorate and was in tune with its intellectual cutting edge. His 'Shibboleth ou reformation de quelques passages... de la Bible' (1653) was dedicated to Oliver Cromwell, and in April 1657 the council of state approved an augmentation of his salary. His 'Examen de XVII maximes judaiques' (1657) (dedicated to Edward Lawrence, son of John Lawrence, lawyer and sometime MP), 'Essay des merveilles de Dieu' (1657) (dedicated to John Holles, earl of Clare and son-in-law of Lord Vere), and 'The Joyfull Convert' (1658) reveal debate with Jewish scholars and an interest in cabbalism. 
This context both nurtured the continuing hostility of the Threadneedle Street church to Despagne and ensured his survival unscathed. The most devastating attack on him yet was mounted by 'Guillaume Herbert', sometimes identified as a scion of Pembroke's family but from his own remarks more probably not English, in 'Reponse aux questions de Mr Espagne, addressees a l'eglise francoise de Londres' (1657). Furious insults of the perceived schismatic and crypto-Catholic -- a wolf, fox, calumnist, 'Pape de Somerset' (p. 46), 'Romane ridicule' (p. 64) -- are accompanied by quotation from damagingly vivid testimonies in the 1629 adultery case supplied by the Amsterdam consistory. The synodical verdict of unproven should be, says Herbert, a source of shame and regret: Despagne is in effect a moral bankrupt. 
By November 1658 Despagne was ill and the Savoy elders asked their Threadneedle Street brothers to supply a substitute preacher. He died on 25 April 1659, aged sixty-eight, and was probably buried in the Savoy Chapel, as he had wished; Garencieres supplied an admiring epitaph there. Although Haag mentions a funeral sermon for his wife delivered on 31 October 1647, there is no trace of this or of a marriage; one of Herbert's complaints was that he was a hedonistic childless bachelor. In his will dated 13 April 1659 Despagne named as his heirs his two sisters in Dauphine, Suzanne and Magdalen, and their families. His executor, Henry Browne, oversaw at least one of the many subsequent editions of Despagne's works. In the preface to 'An Essay of the Wonders of God' (1662) Browne explained that he had frequented Despagne's chapel 'to be a partaker of those excellent Sermons and Doctrines of our Author, who was then followed by many of the Nobility, and the best of the Gentry, who rendered both to God and Ceasar their due'; as an ode by Garencieres in the same volume proclaimed, he was the 'Belle lumiere des Pasteurs'. 


@@@@@


doc= 7548


Despard, Edward Marcus (1751-1803), army officer and revolutionary, was born into a military family in Queen's county, Ireland, on 6 March 1751; the youngest of six sons of William Despard and his wife, Jane. John Despard (1743/4-1829) was his brother. He joined the army as an ensign in 1766 and was promoted lieutenant in 1772, while stationed in Jamaica. He was a skilled military engineer and, working closely with Horatio Nelson, particularly distinguished himself in an expedition to capture Fort San Juan from Spain in 1779. Promoted captain in 1780 he continued to work as an engineer until his appointment in 1781 as commandant, first of the island of Roatan, off the Honduran coast, and then of British possessions in the Gulf of Honduras. In 1782, having overseen the defence of Jamaica against France and Spain, Despard headed an expedition of Jamaican settlers, assisted by British artillery, to recapture Spanish-occupied Black River territory in south-western Jamaica. For this he received royal commendation and was made a colonel of provincials. 
In June 1786 Despard took up an appointment as superintendent of Honduras. Though he handled relations with the Spanish authorities well he was notably less adept as a civilian governor. His unswerving support for settlers displaced from territories recently ceded to Spain (many of whom he knew from San Juan and the Black River) led him into repeated conflict with the established British settler community, who complained repeatedly to London of his 'visible Spirit of Self-importance and uncontrollable Domination' (TNA: PRO, CO 123/6, 21 Feb 1788). Events culminated in his annulment (June 1789) of the colony's police and magistracy; Despard ruled by direct decree until, suspended on half pay, he was ordered to return to Britain, where he arrived in May 1790, accompanied by his African-Caribbean wife, Catherine, and their son James. 
Despard had to wait until October 1791 to learn that, while complaints against him were dismissed, he was not to be reinstated as superintendent of Honduras. In pursuit of compensation he grew increasingly irascible, while the combination of enforced idleness and grievance against authority led him to both the London Corresponding Society and the overtly revolutionary United Irishmen (UI). He quickly became an intimate of the leading United Irishman and French secret agent William Duckett and in 1797 was reported to be co-ordinator of a proposed rising in London planned to coincide with one in Ireland and a French landing there. In 1798 Despard was pivotal in negotiations between the United Irishmen and a broader conspiratorial group, the United Britons, to foment simultaneous English and Irish risings to assist a French invasion. When O'Connor and O'Coighley, the principal leaders of the conspiracy, were apprehended in February, while hiring a boat to take them to France, habeas corpus was suspended and further arrests followed. Despard's was predictably among them. 
Despard seems to have been aware that the revolutionary threat had been contained by the government when, in June 1799, he petitioned for his release in return for voluntary transportation. Among political prisoners at this time he seems to have received the harshest treatment -- 'more like a common vagabond than a gentleman or State Prisoner', complained his wife, Catherine (TNA: PRO, HO 42/43) -- and Sir Francis Burdett made Despard's case the centre of a campaign against the 'English Bastille'. 
When Despard was finally released, in March 1801, he returned to his family's Irish estate, apparently intending to take no further part in politics. However, in February 1802 he returned to London at the behest of the UI leader William Dowdall. After the collapse of the Irish rising of 1798 the United Irishmen had reconstituted itself as a small, centralized military body. Though Britain was now at peace with France food shortages and industrial unrest created a climate in which talk of revolution flourished. Despard now concentrated on enlisting the support of militant Irish labourers and guardsmen stationed in Windsor and London but intelligence sources also show him to have been in contact with Irish and French emissaries during the summer. Disaffected guardsmen tried to force the issue with a rising on 6 September but Despard restrained them, arguing that such action could be effective only if it coincided with an Irish rising and a French invasion; but then, on 16 November, Despard was arrested at the Oakly Arms, Lambeth, apparently planning a 'coup d'etat' to coincide with the opening of parliament later that month. 
The circumstances behind Despard's arrest have been variously interpreted. The popular contemporary view that he was himself victim of a government conspiracy can be safely dismissed. At his trial in February 1803, before a special commission of the lord chief justice and other judges, the prosecution simply claimed that he was a psychotic maverick who had enticed a small band of unfortunates into supporting a futile plot. The prosecution, however, was restricted in the evidence that it could use; aside from issues of legal admissibility, public confidence might have suffered if the full extent of any conspiracy was revealed. Nor was it in the state's interest to reveal more than was absolutely necessary of its intelligence sources; records from the latter implicate a significant number of London Jacobins in the conspiracy, of whom the motley dozen soldiers and workmen tried with Despard were far from typical. Leeds magistrates had been told as early as June that 'Major General Despot' would become 'commander in Chief of the Union' (Wells, 238-9). The United Irish and Britons maintained separate structures and it appears to have been Despard's task to co-ordinate them. The only incriminating evidence found at his arrest was a printed card calling for 'the independence of Great Britain and Ireland. An equalization of Civil, Political, and Religious Rights; [and] an ample Provision for the families of the Heroes who shall fall in the contest'. An oath of allegiance to the United Britons was appended ('Trial of Edward Marcus Despard', 64). Identical cards circulated in Lancashire and Yorkshire. Such points led Edward Thompson to argue, in 'The Making of the English Working Class' (1963), that Despard was the leader of a nationwide revolutionary conspiracy. However it has also been suggested that 'there was no general 'coup' planned for the opening of Parliament on 23rd November' (Elliott, 'Despard conspiracy', 57) and that Despard was a marginal figure in a rising actually intended for 1803. His arrest was simply an opportunist move by a government acting on fragmentary evidence. 
Despard's defence was circumspect, wishing perhaps not to incriminate others but also aware that the prosecution case was uneven. He enjoyed wide popularity and Nelson himself gave evidence as to his good character: 'no man could have shewn more zealous attachment to his Sovereign and his Country' ('Trial of Edward Marcus Despard', 174). Though finding him guilty the jury recommended mercy 'on account of his former services' ('BDMBR', 119). The government, however, was not inclined to clemency. Whatever the truth of the conspiracy an exemplary verdict had been secured and punishment was enacted accordingly. On 21 February 1803, having taken leave of his wife and refusing all religious consolation, Despard was drawn on a hurdle to the Surrey county gaol, Newington, where, before a crowd reportedly of 20,000, he delivered from the scaffold a speech that was loudly cheered. Along with six co-conspirators he was hanged and his corpse decapitated, whereupon the executioner held up the head, declaring: 'This is the head of a traitor' ('GM'). His widow received the remains, which on 1 March were buried in the churchyard by St Paul's Cathedral. Troops drafted into the area in anticipation of rioting were not needed. In his address from the scaffold Despard denied all charges of treason and claimed to be 'a friend to truth, to liberty, and to justice... to the poor and the oppressed' ('Full and Accurate Report', 74). How far his politics stemmed from intellectual conviction and how far from personal resentment remains a moot point but in a letter to James Mill in 1817 Francis Place described Despard as an 'extraordinary' man 'to whom I was indebted for some portion of the knowledge I possess and for whom I shall always maintain strong feelings of regard' (BL, Add. MS 35152, fol. 1). 


@@@@@


doc= 7549


Despard, John (1743/4-1829), army officer and colonial administrator, was born in Ireland and baptized on 4 August 1744 at St Peter and St Kevin in Dublin, the fifth of six sons of William and Jane Despard. He was the brother of Edward Marcus Despard. He began his military career at the age of sixteen as an ensign in the 12th foot during the Seven Years' War, when, at the battle of Warburg, the colours were shot from his hand. After service in the battle of Vellinghausen he was promoted lieutenant on 12 July 1762. Placed on half pay following the war, in 1767 he was appointed lieutenant in the 7th Royal Fusiliers. In 1773 he sailed with his regiment for Quebec, returned to England to recruit in 1774, and in May 1775 was sent from Quebec to the Canadian frontier at Fort St Johns, where he was later forced to surrender by insurgent Americans. In December 1776 he was exchanged and joined Sir William Howe in New York, where he was promoted captain on 25 March 1777. In October 1777 Despard served at the assault on Fort Montgomery, and in June 1778, as major, he organized Lord Rawdon's new loyalist corps, the Volunteers of Ireland. He then served as the army's deputy adjutant-general at the capture of Charles Town, South Carolina (1780), and acted in the same capacity with Lord Cornwallis's army in the south until the surrender at Yorktown. With the peace in 1783 he rejoined the fusiliers and had risen to the rank of lieutenant-colonel by 1791. 
On 6 March 1793 Despard married Harriot Anne (1772-1848), daughter of Thomas Hesketh and Jacintha Dalrymple, and the sister of Sir Thomas Dalrymple Hesketh, third baronet, of Rufford Hall, Lancashire. They had at least one daughter, Harriot Dorothea ('b'. 1795), who married Henry Francis Greville in 1816. Despard served as commander of the regiment at Quebec at some point during 1793 but in 1794 Prince Edward, commander of the forces in the Maritime provinces, ordered him to England where he again successfully recruited for the regiment. He returned to serve under the prince at Halifax, Nova Scotia, and was promoted to the rank of colonel on 21 June 1795. In 1799 he was appointed, as major-general (from 21 June 1798), to the military command of Dorset; and it was while there, in August 1799, that Edward, now duke of Kent, offered him the post of military commander and civil administrator of the colony of Cape Breton, which Despard accepted. 
The appointment to Cape Breton presented many challenges. The colony was governed through an executive council riven by power struggles. Despard's appointment was challenged by some council members, but he suppressed this faction by threatening to call out the militia. Turning to the development of the colony's potentially rich coal mines, he privatized them and improved wharf facilities so that production and shipments both increased. Since the colony had no house of assembly, taxes were not being collected. He persuaded the Treasury board to allow the collection of taxes by local ordinance, thereby giving the colony resources for internal improvements. With the concurrence of the home authorities he then organized an escheats court and seized large tracts of unoccupied properties, thus opening land to settlement. Shortly after, in August 1802, the first boatload of highland Scots sailing directly to Cape Breton found free land and assistance, which led to an eventual immigration of 25,000 highlanders to the island. Throughout Despard had to contend with political factions arguing for and against a house of assembly. The frustration of lacking the authority to decide this question and declining health, probably exacerbated by his brother's execution for treason, led to his departure in July 1807. 
The remainder of Despard's life was spent in semi-retirement in England. On 25 June 1808 he was appointed colonel of the 12th Royal Veteran battalion, colonel of the 5th West India regiment in 1809, and, on 4 June 1814, general. He died on 3 September 1829, in his eighty-sixth year, at Swan Hill, Oswestry, from 'ulcerated intestines' (Oswestry church records), which had plagued him for many years. He was buried on 9 September in St Oswald's churchyard, Oswestry. Despard was a distinguished, resourceful, and brave soldier who demonstrated surprising governing abilities, all undertaken with a 'mild and chearful... disposition' (William Woodfall to Adam Gordon, 25 July 1805, CO 217, vol. 123, fol. 175). 


@@@@@


doc= 7550


Despenser, Edward, first Lord Despenser (1336-1375), magnate and soldier, was born at Essendine, Rutland, on 24 March 1336, the son and heir of Sir Edward Despenser (died 1342) -- the second son of Hugh Despenser the younger (d. 1326) -- and his wife, Anne (died 1367), the daughter of William, Lord Ferrers of Groby. Henry Despenser was his brother. From his father, who died in 1342, Edward Despenser inherited substantial estates, including nine manors, mostly in the midlands, and in 1349 he succeeded his childless uncle, Hugh, second Lord Despenser (of the first creation), in the principal estates of the family. A profitable marriage was arranged, probably in 1346, between Despenser and Elizabeth (died 1409), granddaughter of Bartholomew Burghersh, the elder (died 1355), a wealthy magnate who was the king's chamberlain. Elizabeth was the sole heir of her father, the younger Bartholomew Burghersh, and his first wife, Cecily Weyland. This marriage, which took place before 2 August 1354, ultimately enabled Despenser, after his father-in-law's death in 1369, to acquire his wife's valuable estates, which comprised ten manors in Suffolk and half of the Welsh marcher lordship of Ewias Lacy. 
Throughout Edward Despenser's minority the greater part of his lands was administered by his kinsfolk and officials on his behalf. After dower had been assigned to Hugh's widow, Elizabeth, the residue of the Despenser estates was farmed, on 8 February 1350, to Bartholomew Burghersh, the elder, and the young heir, for the probably undervalued sum of $1000 a year. This custody was subsequently transferred to the Despenser heir and his mother, Lady Anne, on the same terms. Although he came of age in 1357, Edward Despenser did not have full possession of his family inheritance until after the death of the dowager, Elizabeth, in 1359. 
Despenser's military career began before his coming of age in March 1357. With his father-in-law, Lord Burghersh, he was in the retinue of the Black Prince on his first expedition to Gascony in 1355, and he fought at Poitiers on 19 September 1356, when the French king, John II, was captured. He was still in Gascony in March 1357, and he probably returned to London with the prince of Wales during the following month. He was summoned to parliament in December 1357. When Edward III invaded France for the last time in October 1359, Despenser was one of the English magnates who served with the king, and he was still in France two years later. In 1361 he was made a knight of the Garter and given the stall next to the king's in St George's Chapel, Windsor. Meanwhile the treaty of Bretigny, made in May 1360, had ended the most profitable phase of the French war. 
Although Despenser was one of the Irish landowners who were commanded in February 1362 to go to Ireland to assist the king's third son, Lionel, to restore order in that land, it seems unlikely that he left England again until 1368. He was present in London when Lionel was created duke of Clarence on 13 November 1362, and it was in his service that he later enlisted. Despenser was the most important of the followers who accompanied Duke Lionel on his journey to Milan to marry Violante Visconti in May 1368, and he remained in Italy for over four years. After Lionel died suddenly on 17 October 1368, Despenser believed that his patron's death had been brought about by poison, and in revenge he took service with the pope, Urban V, in his war against the Visconti of Milan. On 10 March 1370 the pope wrote to John of Gaunt commending Despenser, who had won a great reputation by his prowess in battles in Lombardy. Despenser's prolonged sojourn in Italy appears to be commemorated in the fresco of 'the church militant and triumphant' painted by Andrea da Firenze (Andrea Bonaiuti) and others in the Spanish chapel of Santa Maria Novella in Florence. This fresco depicts the meeting at Viterbo of Urban V and the emperor, Charles IV, on 17 October 1368; conspicuous in the group standing near the emperor is a knight of the Garter, clad in white, gold-embroidered garments. This figure, which portrays in profile a good-looking man with a short, reddish, pointed beard, has been identified as Edward, Lord Despenser, who was the only knight of the Garter in Italy at that time. If this identification is correct, he was the first Englishman to be portrayed in Italian art since Thomas Becket. 
Despenser's exploits in Italy made him a renowned hero of chivalry. Froissart, who knew him personally and benefited from his patronage, eulogizes him as the most handsome, most courteous, and most honourable knight of his time in England, and relates that it was at the request of John of Gaunt that Despenser returned home in the summer of 1372. He was constable of Gaunt's army in the great 'chevauchee' of 1373, when Gaunt marched across France from Calais to Bordeaux, losing half his troops on the way. The Breton expedition in the spring of 1375 was the last successful English undertaking in France in the late fourteenth century; Despenser, in company with Edmund of Langley, earl of Cambridge (afterwards duke of York), and Edmund Mortimer, earl of March, was attacking Quimperle when this campaign was cut short by the truce of Bruges. After his return home Despenser visited Cardiff in September 1375; he died a few weeks later at his manor of Llanblethian, near Cowbridge, on 11 November, aged thirty-nine. His effigy on his tomb in Tewkesbury Abbey shows him in full armour, kneeling in prayer. His death was followed by another prolonged minority, since his surviving son, Thomas Despenser, was only two years old when his father died. The Despensers were an unlucky family; if Edward Despenser's career had not been prematurely cut short, his knightly prowess might well have earned him promotion to an earldom, a rank merited by his great landed possessions and his prestige as a famous military hero. 


@@@@@


doc= 7551


Despenser, Henry (d. 1406), bishop of Norwich, was the fourth son of Sir Edward Despenser, killed at the siege of Vannes in 1342, and his wife, Anne (died 1367), daughter of William, Lord Ferrers of Groby. His father was the second son of Hugh Despenser the younger, the notorious favourite of Edward II. Although said by the pope on 2 August 1354 to be in his tenth year, Henry Despenser was obviously older than that; the papacy had consistent difficulty with his age. His nephew Thomas Despenser was briefly earl of Gloucester (1398-9). An aunt Isabella was married to Richard (II) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, but repudiated. Through his second marriage Fitzalan was the father of Archbishop Thomas Arundel. 
The future bishop's brother, Edward Despenser, Lord Despenser, petitioned the pope and secured for Henry Despenser a canonry with expectation (never made good) of a prebend in Salisbury Cathedral on 2 August 1354. On 20 January 1361 the pope gave him licence to acquire a cure of souls at the age of nineteen; he was admitted to the rectory of Bosworth, Leicestershire, on 22 December. He was a master at Oxford University by February 1361, when he was studying civil law, of which he was a bachelor and licentiate by the time of his promotion. He was ordained, even as a subdeacon, only on 17 December 1362. By 20 April 1364 he was archdeacon of Llandaff (the family had estates in south Wales), an office that the pope allowed him to keep with either a canonry in Lincoln Cathedral or the rectory of Elsworth, Cambridgeshire. 
By then Despenser was a long-term resident at the papal curia and actually took part in military activity on behalf of Urban V, presumably alongside his brother Edward against the city of Milan. On 8 August 1369 the see of Norwich fell vacant on the death of Thomas Percy, whose sister Margaret was married to Despenser's maternal cousin, William Ferrers. Although a licence to elect was granted promptly on 20 August, the ageing Edward III was consistently indecisive in nominating to bishoprics at this time, which allowed several families of the higher nobility to intrude their own kin. Encouraged by Henry's intimacy and that of Lord Despenser with the curia, and also by their own with the late bishop, the Despensers saw their chance. Nothing is known of any election or other manoeuvring, but on 3 April 1370 Henry Despenser was papally provided with a dispensation because (the pope understood) he was still only in his twenty-seventh year. He was consecrated at Rome on 20 April. It cannot be assumed that the English government had already been persuaded to agree, because although Despenser was able to return home and have Archbishop Simon Sudbury accept his profession of obedience on 4 June, his spiritualities were only given to him on 12 July and his temporalities as late as 14 August. 
Despenser took to his diocese and played no part in government. He never did impress some, especially the bitter monk-chronicler of St Albans, Thomas Walsingham (whose sole, brief, and admittedly unsuccessful period in broad administrative office was as prior of Wymondham in Despenser's diocese): immature, unlearned, lacking in discretion, undisciplined, arrogant, unmindful of making or keeping friends, was how Walsingham saw him. It is no real evidence to the contrary that on 9 May 1376 he was named by the Commons to be on an intercommuning committee with them from the Lords, which was composed strongly in favour of those leading the impeachment of several leading members of Edward III's court. After John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, had reacted furiously by singling out Bishop William Wykeham as a scapegoat and having his temporalities seized, Despenser was to the fore alongside Bishop William Courtenay in defending Wykeham in the convocation of Canterbury, and leading the opposition to any grant of a subsidy in February 1377. Thereafter he returned to diocesan administration. 
About June 1377 Despenser was involved in a riot in Bishop's Lynn, Norfolk, and even wounded, while trying to exert episcopal rights of lordship over the town by having a mace borne before him. Richard II's regency council was obliged to intervene. This was a well-established feud which was still violent and bitter in the middle of the next century, so the outburst should not be attributed unequivocally to Despenser's belligerent gesture. In April 1379 Despenser was appointed overseer of the will of Sir William Morley, and in such mundane diocesan duties he spent his time. However, in June and July 1381 he sprang into action to repress the widespread peasant agitation in his diocese, dashing back from Burley, Rutland, gathering forces, and leading them personally into a violent rout of the reluctant rebels at North Walsham. He hanged the leader, Geoffrey Lister, having (according to a swiftly developed legend) shriven him first. This vigour and severity was much admired in conservative circles, especially in contrast to the feeble response of the authorities to revolt in other counties. On the other hand, an abortive revolt in Norfolk in 1382 unsurprisingly had his death among its ambitions. 
All this had whetted Despenser's appetite and he offered, perhaps at Pope Urban VI's instigation, to lead a military expedition into Flanders, with the aim of putting pressure on France, against whom frontal attacks had been very unsuccessful in recent years. The Commons in parliament in October 1382 were very enthusiastic, especially because the bishop could have this declared a crusade by the pope against his schismatic opponents and thus shift most of the costs onto the clergy, the laity simply redirecting a previous subsidy. They rejected the Lords' support for John of Gaunt's alternative proposal to lead a campaign against France's Spanish allies, which the laity would have to underwrite. Besides, Despenser was a current hero, Gaunt decidedly was not. On 17 May 1383 the bishop crossed to Calais with an army of 8000 and enjoyed an initial success against a mixed force of Frenchmen and Flemings near Dunkirk on 25 May and the surrender of nearby towns. On 9 June he besieged Ypres. This proved disastrous and had to be abandoned on 8 August. Despenser's proposal to invade Picardy was opposed by his professional lieutenants, headed by the experienced Sir Hugh Calveley, who set up a separate campaign. The bishop still attempted his invasion, to no avail, and the appearance of a French army under Charles VI himself at the end of August forced a humiliating settlement at Gravelines in mid-September. 
On his return to England, Despenser found out that the greater the enthusiasm, the more bitter the recrimination; he was impeached in parliament on 28 October for his mishandling of the campaign, and suffered forfeiture of his temporalities, although with no loss of liberty or episcopal authority. It has to be supposed that many around the government were delighted that his unwanted interference had ended as a fiasco, and the Commons were too disappointed to defend him. John Wyclif and his followers used the fiasco repeatedly as a warning in their writings. Even now, though, there were some who blamed his lieutenants' disloyalty rather than his own performance. In July 1385 Richard II let the bishop accompany his own military campaign into Scotland, perhaps to alarm Bishop Thomas Rossy of Galloway, who had recently challenged any English bishop to dispute the matter of the papal schism with him by single combat, singling out Despenser, 'who takes such delight in deeds of arms' (Baxter, 219-20). It is worth noting, too, that it was Bishop Thomas Arundel who on 24 October 1385 secured the restitution of Despenser's temporalities. 
Despenser played no special role in the political crisis of 1386-8 and, perhaps despondently, confined himself to local business. For ten years he was one of the least mobile of contemporary diocesans. Apart from 1388, when he preferred his manor of Hoxne, Suffolk, he rarely left his palace in Norwich from 1385 to 1395, save to attend parliaments and convocations and, in some years, to spend part of October on a visitation. From 1395 he began to use South Elmham, Suffolk, as his main base and to travel around much more. 1397, as will appear, was an unusual year. In May and June 1399 Despenser moved around his diocese as never before, possibly more concerned on the king's behalf than his own. From 1390 he had conducted drawn-out litigation with Walter, Lord Hilton, in the court of chivalry. In 1399 he secured the recantation of a heretic, William Sawtre, perhaps none too gently, and is even said to have threatened him with burning when this punishment was not yet legal in England. 
From May 1397 to February 1398 Despenser resided entirely in his London inn. There are two possible reasons, perhaps both valid. Firstly, Richard II was conducting his coup against his political opponents. The king can hardly have looked to Despenser for political wisdom and authority, but the bishop's loyalty to him was to prove devoted. Secondly, Despenser had taken up from early in his episcopate an ancient dispute with the cathedral priory about the bishop's authority over them, their monastic life and estates, and, in defiance of the pope's directives, Richard II had just commanded that this be decided by the archbishop of Canterbury. In March 1398 Despenser was given almost all he wanted. 
In July 1399 Despenser reverted to type. His family were much in favour with Richard II, and he was one of the few to put up a show of defiance to Henry Bolingbroke's invasion. He was arrested at Berkeley Castle when refusing, unlike the duke of York (Richard's deputy in England), to come to terms. He was allowed to take his place in parliament in October 1399, staying at that time with Sir Robert Fulmer, and returned to his diocese at the end of November. Despite remaining at South Elmham from mid-December, he was implicated, perhaps through his nephew Thomas, in the abortive 'Epiphany plot' of 1400. He suffered no formal punishment, possibly because on 5 February 1400 he appointed John Derlington, archdeacon of Norwich, as his vicar-general at South Elmham and submitted himself to the custody of Archbishop Arundel, who seems to have shown him favour and affection over the years. He lived at Canterbury, playing effectually no part in administering his diocese until he was granted a pardon in parliament in February 1401. He was in London at that time, so may even have attended. It was perhaps through this unusual custody arrangement that Arundel had learned of the case of William Sawtre and brought it to convocation's notice in that month. Despenser did not attend but sent a written memorandum on 23 February. Sawtre, whom the bishop had held in prison, now became the show-piece demonstration that church and crown intended fully to utilize the capital punishment being brought in as a penalty against heretics and seditious preachers. 
Despenser returned once more to his diocese shortly after 19 March 1401. There is some evidence that he caught up on visitation duties (or perhaps rights and profits) during the rest of the year. Meantime, the monks of the cathedral had challenged his rights once more with the pope, and even secured a prohibition on Archbishop Arundel's hearing the case on the grounds that he was too friendly towards the bishop. The judge appointed by the pope indeed decided for them. Notwithstanding, Arundel took the bishop's side and cowed the monks into accepting his arbitration, which reverted to the verdict of 1398 in Despenser's favour. The monks decided to give up and make a composition with Despenser to enjoy their privileges. 
On 14 July 1402 Despenser was ordered to array his clergy against a possible invasion of the Suffolk coast. No doubt to his disappointment, this threat vanished. In 1403-4 the feud with Lynn flared up once more, but on 14 July 1404 the king told him to stay his litigation. In the previous month there were rumours in Flanders that he was to lead another campaign, but even though Henry IV faced a crisis on many fronts at that time, it is impossible to believe that he and Arundel would have let the bishop kick over the traces yet again. None the less, it is a striking illustration of the reputation the bishop had (quite accurately) acquired. He was now almost entirely resident at North Elmham, Norfolk, then switching in March 1405 to his palace in Norwich. All he did of note in his last years was to secure the recantation of one John Edward, a chaplain charged with heresy, on 12 April 1405. It was said shortly afterwards that there was considerable heresy in his diocese, but there is no sign that Despenser hunted it with any of the gusto one might expect of him. 
It is perhaps of note that Despenser, who now rarely travelled, took himself to Lynn via North Elmham in the second week of August 1406, returned to Norwich by the 21st, and then moved yet again to North Elmham on the very next day. Perhaps something had roused him to confront the Lynn corporation yet again, but the exertion proved too much. He died on 23 August 1406. It is a matter of regret that he was declared intestate, for his will, if he made one and was not caught out by his apparently sudden death, could have been fascinating. Predictably, he had failed to prepare a chantry chapel, but was accorded burial immediately before the high altar in the cathedral. The monks had had their quarrel with him, but they appreciated him at the end. It is greatly to be doubted whether he really had wanted to be a bishop, at least one confined to a diocesan role. There was something of the bovine about him, but clearly he was in no way wanting in courage and loyalty. Even those in authority with whom he came into contact seem to have recognized that there was nothing malignant about him, and tried to tame, not destroy, him. 


@@@@@


doc= 7552


Despenser, Sir Hugh (c.1223-1265), justiciar, was a middle-ranking baron who became a leading supporter of Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester, and the last holder of the office of justiciar of England re-established after the baronial seizure of power in 1258. He inherited his estates, which were mainly in Leicestershire, from his father, Hugh Despenser (died 1238), who was a hereditary officer of Earl Ranulf of Chester, and high in the favour of Henry III. In recognition of his father's faithful service, the king in February 1238 permitted Despenser to marry as his friends thought best for his advancement. His wardship was bestowed on his uncle Geoffrey Despenser, he was given respite of knighthood in July 1244, and in the following January he received two casks of wine for the feast to celebrate his knighthood. Other marks of royal goodwill included gifts of timber in 1247 and 1249, and of free warren on an estate in Rutland in 1253. 
From the late 1250s Despenser began to figure increasingly prominently in public affairs. In 1255 he was appointed constable of the royal castle at Horston, Derbyshire, for five years, and between April and September 1257 he was a member of the retinue of the king's brother Richard of Cornwall on his visit to Aachen for his coronation as king of the Romans. Next year he was included in the baronial twelve appointed to help draw up the provisions of Oxford, and under its terms he became a member of the committee of twelve chosen to represent the baronage at parliaments, and was reappointed constable of Horston Castle. He had been a friend of Simon de Montfort since at least 1256 when the two men undertook with others to arrange the politically sensitive marriage of Henry, son and heir of Edmund de Lacy, and on 1 January 1259 Montfort named him as an associate executor of his will, but this is not necessarily evidence of firm political loyalties. By early 1260 Despenser was married to Alina, daughter of Philip Basset, an influential magnate also involved in the Lacy covenant and a member of the parliamentary committee of twelve, who increasingly sided with the king. Moreover in August 1260 Despenser was one of the nobles summoned to London even though known supporters of Montfort were omitted, and the following month he was a member of the Lord Edward's household. His son and heir Hugh Despenser, the ill-starred favourite of Edward II, was born on 1 March 1261. 
For unexplained reasons Despenser never took up his duties as justice on the special eyre in Wiltshire, Oxfordshire, and Berkshire in November 1259. Nevertheless about 20 October 1260 a committee of five chosen by the royal council rejected the king's own nominee and chose instead Despenser to replace Hugh Bigod, the brother of the earl of Norfolk, as justiciar and keeper of the Tower of London, with an annual salary of 1000 marks. He thus became the chief administrative and judicial officer of the king, one of the appointments that caused Henry III to complain that the new baronial officials 'were wholly ignorant of their offices' (Treharne and Sanders no. 30, 215). Regardless of this Despenser discharged the omnicompetent duties of his predecessor and was particularly active trying cases on the special eyre in Sussex in the winter of 1260-61. Together with Philip Basset, his father-in-law, he was also retained as a member of the king's household in December 1260. About 12 June 1261 however, after Henry III had regained his authority, he was dismissed as justiciar and keeper of the Tower, despite his protests that he could not be removed against the wishes of the barons, and replaced by Basset. He was not among the king's tenants-in-chief summoned to London in October 1261, and in June 1262 he was deprived of Horston Castle. By then Despenser's family was irreconcilably divided. Basset sided with the king, but Despenser himself, his brother-in-law John fitz John (who was also the nephew of Hugh Bigod), his cousin John Despenser (son of his former guardian), and John's half-brother, Roger de St John (who was probably married to Hugh Despenser's sister), supported Simon de Montfort. 
When Montfort regained the ascendancy, Despenser was reappointed justiciar and keeper of the Tower, between 15 and 18 July 1263, on the usual salary, and later that year, between 23 September and 7 October, acted as regent during the king's visit to France. By the end of October, however, as disorder spread, he ceased to function as justiciar, although he seems to have kept control of the Tower. On 13 December 1263 he was one of the king's opponents who agreed to submit the baronial cause to the arbitration of Louis IX, but he rejected the king's abrogation of the provisions of Oxford. In March 1264, as keeper of the Tower, he led an angry crowd of Londoners who sacked Richard of Cornwall's manor of Isleworth, Middlesex, but in April he gave refuge in the Tower to the City's Jewish community which was being despoiled by, among others, John fitz John. At the battle of Lewes on 14 May 1264 Despenser fought in the front rank of the victorious rebel army, and forced his wounded father-in-law to surrender. No doubt it was at the request of his solicitous sons-in-law that Basset received a royal grant of venison and conies three weeks later. Despenser was also probably behind moves to secure the release of his cousin John, who had been captured fighting the king at Northampton. 
With Montfort's triumph Despenser became a leading figure in the new government. He resumed his duties as justiciar on the customary salary, and was promised a staff of a hundred knights or serjeants to distrain offenders against the church. Although not formally a member of the new ruling Council of Nine, which included Roger de St John, he participated in its discussions, attended parliaments, authorized writs, and witnessed numerous royal charters. He was present at Westminster on 3 November 1264, when Henry, prior of St Radegund, took up his duties as treasurer, and on 25 February 1265, when Thomas de Cantilupe was appointed chancellor, the king himself folding the writ. He was also in attendance at Hereford on 7 May 1265 when special arrangements were approved for Cantilupe's absence from court. 
Despenser was given a key role in co-ordinating the defences of the country to meet the threat of invasion by the king's supporters who had fled abroad. He assembled troops at London and ships at Sandwich, had custody at different times of the castles of Devizes, Oxford (later committed to Roger de St John), Orford, and Nottingham, and was given special responsibility for the defence of the coastline of East Anglia. As the threat of invasion passed he became increasingly active in the desperate search for a settlement with the king. On 11 and 15 September 1264 his name was included in panels to amend the new form of government, and on 24 September he went to France as a baronial envoy to inform the papal legate Guy Foulquois, cardinal-bishop of Sabina, that the barons were prepared to modify the 'Provisons of Oxford' if the king would promise to expel aliens and rule through natives. Despenser was among those who were excommunicated on 20 October when they refused to submit. 
Despenser profited considerably from his alliance with Montfort, despite the view of some that he was never fully rewarded for his support. In September 1264, eight years after the Lacy agreement, he was allowed to purchase the wardship on preferential terms. Robert de Pierpoint, who had been captured at Lewes, was kept in Despenser's prison until he undertook to pay a ransom of 700 marks, and Marmaduke Thweng, another of his prisoners, also had to be ransomed. Despenser, for his part, could be relied on to use his authority in favour of the Montfort family. On 30 June 1264 he headed a court that awarded vindictive damages of 10,000 marks, to be paid within ten days, against William (VI) de Briouze for allegedly ravaging one of the younger Simon de Montfort's manors, and on 18 November he was an obvious choice for the committee to adjudicate on the difficult problem of Eleanor de Montfort's dower. 
Leaving his wife in the Tower, Despenser accompanied Montfort on his last campaign in the marches in the summer of 1265, and with John fitz John and others tried unsuccessfully to resolve the dispute between the earl and his fellow triumvir Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester. The collapse of Montfort's power brought disaster for Despenser and most of his relatives. John Despenser was captured at Kenilworth, and in the battle of Evesham on 4 August 1265 Roger de St John was slain, and Despenser himself, having refused to flee, was killed, reportedly by the thrust of a dagger. With the king's permission, his body was buried, with that of Montfort, at the foot of the steps before the high altar of the abbey church, where his remains were reported to have performed miracles, curing blind and disabled people. His widow surrendered the Tower before seeking the protection of her father, who was given Despenser's lands for his services to the king. Alina married as her second husband, by October 1271, Roger (III) Bigod, earl of Norfolk, the brother of the man Despenser had replaced as justiciar in 1260. She died in 1281. 


@@@@@


doc= 7553


Despenser, Hugh, the elder, earl of Winchester (1261-1326), administrator and courtier, was the son of Sir Hugh Despenser, the justiciar who was killed at Evesham in 1265, and his wife, Alina, daughter of Philip Basset. Born on 1 March 1261, in May 1281 he was granted full administration of his father's forfeited lands, and in August received livery of his mother's lands, although he was not yet of age. In March 1282 he received the manor of Martley in Worcester as heir to his uncle John Despenser. Later in 1282 Despenser paid 1600 marks to William de Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1296), for his own marriage. In 1287 he was fined 2000 marks by the king for his marriage without licence to Isabel (died 1306), daughter of William de Beauchamp and widow of Payn Chaworth. Despenser might be said to have recovered this sum in 1306, when the king paid $2000 for the marriage of his only son, the younger Hugh Despenser, who became the husband of the king's eldest granddaughter, Eleanor de Clare, sister of the earl of Gloucester. 
In the reign of Edward I, Despenser made a career for himself through service both at home and abroad, where he was frequently employed on diplomatic missions. In 1287 he was with the king in Gascony, and in 1289 he went abroad with Roger (IV) Bigod, earl of Norfolk and marshal (died 1306). In June 1294 he was appointed constable of Odiham Castle, and at about the same time was named one of the king's envoys to the German king, Adolf of Nassau, and the archbishop of Cologne. Late in 1294 he served in Gascony, and in 1295 he was summoned for the first time to parliament. In 1296-7 Despenser again served as a diplomat, and was one of the king's proxies to the treaty sealed with the count of Flanders on 5 February 1297. A week later he was appointed justice of the forest south of Trent, and in June of that year was named as a member of the royal council. In the summer of 1300 he accompanied the king on his Scottish campaign, one of only three men of baronial status to do so, and in November he went on an embassy to Rome with the earl of Lincoln. He was one of the envoys sent to France to restore peace in April 1302. In January 1303 he was made keeper of all rivers in defence on this side of Trent (north, at this time), while he continued to serve as justice of the forest. In October 1305 he was sent to Clement V ('r'. 1305-14) at Lyons to treat with the pope both for a possible crusade and concerning relations between the kings of England and France. He obtained a bull absolving the king from the oaths that he had taken to his people in 1297 and later. Interspersed with these various diplomatic missions were periods of service with the king in Scotland in 1303, 1304, and 1306. Despenser was rewarded for his constant service by Edward I with the Oxfordshire manors of Kirtlington (1296) and Great Haselese (1301), and with numerous lesser favours such as permission to enclose 30 acres of forest on one estate, and a weekly market and annual fair for another. 
From the outset of Edward II's reign the elder Despenser was an ardent royalist. Indeed, even before the prince became king, as early as 1301, he referred to Despenser as 'one of our friends' (Johnstone, 102). It should not therefore be surprising to find that in the first year of the reign alone he appears in the charter rolls as a witness to some twenty-one of the thirty-eight acts enrolled there. At the coronation he carried part of the royal insignia. During the baronial crisis of 1308 Despenser was granted custody of Devizes, Marlborough, and Striguil castles, as well as of the town of Chepstow. In March 1308 he was again appointed a justice of the forest south of Trent, an appointment that was renewed for life in August 1309. In the later attacks on Piers Gaveston (died 1312) he stood virtually alone in defending the Gascon favourite. For this reason he had been one of the courtiers singled out at the Northampton parliament of October 1307 who were to be dismissed from the council. His support for Gaveston was undoubtedly an important cause of the king's growing reliance on Despenser, as well as of the personal animosity increasingly felt for him by Thomas of Lancaster and others of the king's antagonists, not to mention Queen Isabella, throughout the reign. 
Nevertheless, by November 1308 Despenser was back at court, as attested by his ubiquitous presence in the charter rolls throughout the rest of the second year of the reign, and indeed until the summer of 1314. In May 1313 he accompanied the king to France for the knighting of the sons of Philippe IV, a service for which he drew wages of 100's'. a day, and he again accompanied the king to his meeting with Philippe IV at Montreuil in December of the same year. By that time he was considered to be an enemy of Thomas of Lancaster who had emerged as the leader of the baronial opposition. In the period of Lancaster's ascendancy following Bannockburn, Despenser, who had been present at the disastrous battle, is seldom if ever found at court, although he continued to serve as justice of the forest and in other capacities. He was among those present at the burial of Gaveston at Kings Langley on 3 January 1315, but shortly afterward was removed from the council by the king's enemies. In July 1315 a commission was appointed to hear complaints regarding his conduct as keeper of the forest south of Trent. 
In the spring of 1316 Despenser once again became prominent at court and in the royal council, this time alongside his son and namesake. In 1317 he served with the king in Scotland. At this point, as record sources demonstrate even more clearly than earlier in the reign, he was at odds with the earl of Lancaster. Ironically, the appointment of the younger Despenser as chamberlain of the household was arranged in 1318 as part of the settlement between the king and Lancaster, and this appointment seems to have propelled the Despensers into the period of their greatest prominence. While the younger Despenser became ever more powerful at court and consolidated his territorial holdings in the Welsh march, his father continued his career of royal service. In 1320 he was sent to Gascony with Bartholomew Badlesmere (died 1322) in order to consider reforms there and to visit the curia. From there he travelled to Amiens to join the king. By the following year, however, animosity towards the Despensers had grown to such a degree among the marcher lords and their ally Lancaster that even the king was unable to prevent the outbreak of violence. 
On 4 May 1321 the ravaging of Despenser lands began. In August the baronial opposition met with the king in parliament and laid their charges against the Despensers, father and son. On 14 August the king capitulated to baronial demands for the exile of the Despensers, and on 20 August he pardoned those involved for their attacks on the royal favourites. The elder Despenser spent his exile in Bordeaux, within relatively close reach in the event of a recall. The king duly engineered this through a convocation held at Canterbury, which agreed on 1 December 1321 that the exile was invalid and should be annulled. A formal announcement to that effect was made on 1 January 1322, by which time a safe conduct had already been sent to Despenser. In the most effective military undertaking of his reign, in late 1321 and early 1322 Edward II routed the baronial opposition, the final blow being delivered at Boroughbridge on 16 March 1322. The earl of Hereford was killed in the battle, and the earl of Lancaster was executed six days later. Despenser is said to have been present at the latter's trial. 
The period from 1322 to 1326 saw the Despensers rise to an unprecedented level of wealth and power. On 10 May 1322 the father was elevated to the peerage as earl of Winchester. Along with centres of power in the midlands and Wiltshire, Despenser now also built up a substantial holding near London based on the manor of Kennington. He received numerous grants of lands recently forfeited by the king's enemies, by members of the Bohun, Badlesmere, Damory, Giffard, and other families. From the great Lacy lordship he acquired the manor of Denbigh. In all, his lands were valued at $3884 at his death. The elder Despenser may not have been as aggressively acquisitive as his son, but an accumulation of other men's property on this scale ensured that he came to share the hatred felt for the latter. Opposition to their regime became widespread and reached to the highest levels of English society, in the person of the queen. By 1326 the queen, who was in France on a diplomatic mission to her brother Charles IV, refused to return to England until the Despensers had been removed from the court. In the event she led an armed invasion in September of that year, and the king and his favourites were driven westward before her. On 26 October the garrison at Bristol capitulated to Queen Isabella, and the elder Despenser was forced to surrender. He was tried in a court of chivalry before William Trussell on the following day. He was denounced, and sentenced to death, for offences that included usurpation of royal power, depriving the church of its rights, and complicity in the illegal execution of Thomas of Lancaster. He was condemned to be drawn for treason, hanged for robbery, and decapitated for his crimes against the church, his head to be taken to Winchester, 'where you were earl against law and reason' (Stubbs, 1.317). 


@@@@@


doc= 7554


Despenser, Hugh, the younger, first Lord Despenser (d. 1326), administrator and royal favourite, was the son of Hugh Despenser the elder (1261-1326) and his wife, Isabel (died 1306), widow of Payn Chaworth and daughter of William de Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1296). His parents had married by 1287, and Hugh was old enough to be knighted by the prince of Wales on 22 May 1306. In the same year Edward I purchased his marriage for $2000 and arranged for him to wed Eleanor de Clare (died 1337), eldest daughter of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester (d. 1295), and the king's own granddaughter. At the outset of the reign of Edward II the younger Despenser does not seem to have possessed substantial property -- on 14 May 1309 Edward II granted him the manor of Sutton in Norfolk, formerly a templar property, in order to make up his income to $200 per annum. In the following year his father provided him with several manors in Cambridgeshire, Suffolk, and Essex from the inheritance of his own mother, Alina Basset. In 1313 he accompanied the king to France, and at this time he received the wardship and marriage of William Huntingfield, a grant that was contested unsuccessfully by Thomas of Lancaster (died 1322), and that may have been one source of their later enmity. His prospects were greatly enhanced by the death of his brother-in-law, Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester, at Bannockburn on 24 June 1314. But although the earl's widow, Matilda, received her dower lands in December, the division of the Clare lands among the earl's three sisters could not take place immediately as the widowed countess claimed to be pregnant. In May 1315, tired of waiting, Despenser seized Tonbridge Castle in Kent. The castle was held by the Clares of the archbishop of Canterbury, and, despite equivocation on Despenser's part, it had to be returned to the archbishop. Nevertheless, this episode seems to be indicative of the avaricious and violent tendencies that Despenser was later to demonstrate so frequently. 
Surprisingly, perhaps, the younger Despenser makes his first appearance as a witness in the charter rolls of Edward II only on 14 May 1316 (although as early as 17 July 1314 his father is specifically referred to therein as Hugh Despenser, senior), after which date he appears occasionally until February 1319. Thereafter he and the king were virtually inseparable until July 1321, when the Despensers, father and son, were sent into exile. In part Despenser's increased proximity to the king can be attributed to his appointment as chamberlain of the king's household at the York parliament of October 1318. The office of chamberlain was associated by contemporaries with Edward II's earlier favourite, Piers Gaveston, who had been executed by a coalition of barons in 1312. Certainly this office provided Despenser with ready access to the king, and, like Gaveston, Despenser would soon be accused of denying others, including the queen herself, access to the king. There seems to be far less basis for suspecting any homosexual relationship between the king and Despenser than had been the case with Gaveston, but there can be little doubt of Edward's growing confidence in and dependence upon his new favourite. In any case, by 1317 the younger Despenser had become an important magnate by virtue of his wife's inheritance. The apportionment had been long delayed, first by the rising of Llywelyn Bren in Glamorgan in 1316, and later by the need to find suitable husbands for Eleanor de Clare's younger sisters. Margaret, widow of Piers Gaveston, married Hugh Audley in April 1317, and Elizabeth, widow of John de Burgh, son of the earl of Ulster, married Roger Damory in May 1317. In November 1317 the settlement of the Clare lands was at last finalized, the Despenser share being valued at some $1500, the vast majority of which was located in Wales. Almost at once Despenser set about consolidating his hold over the Clare lands, and not only his own. Before Hugh Audley could obtain formal seisin of Gwynllwg, Despenser had already taken the homage and fealty of tenants there, and despite royal intervention on Audley's behalf, Despenser managed to hold on to this valuable parcel of land. Indeed, within a year he was able to obtain confirmation of his lordship in exchange for some less valuable manors elsewhere, and he was also confirmed in a life interest in the castle of Dryslwyn and the lordship of Cantref Mawr. 
Despenser's acquisitive tendencies soon led to war. Tensions in the kingdom mounted between 1318 and 1321, aided by the ignominious failure of the Scottish campaign of 1319, but largely fuelled by Despenser's activity in the Welsh march. A confrontation was occasioned by Despenser's entry into the dispute over the lordship of Gower, which William (VII) de Briouze was proposing to sell. In this he aroused the enmity of a broad coalition of marcher lords, including Humphrey (VII) de Bohun, earl of Hereford, Roger Mortimer of Wigmore, John (I) Mowbray, Maurice Berkeley, and Hugh Audley. In October 1320 Mowbray, the son-in-law of William de Briouze, entered Gower without royal licence and was challenged by Despenser. Hereford took the lead for the marcher lords, defending the custom of the marches, but Edward took Gower into his own hands in December. Despite injunctions from the king to abstain from illegal assemblies, the marchers and other disgruntled magnates, including the earl of Lancaster, met to weigh their options, and on 4 May 1321 they attacked the Despenser lands. On 8 May 1321 Newport fell, followed by Cardiff on the 9th, and Gower on the 13th. The devastation of the Despenser lands was thorough. In August the marchers met with the king in parliament in London and laid their charges against the Despensers. The catalogue of charges is reminiscent of those brought against Piers Gaveston earlier in the reign: encroaching on the royal power; denying access to the king except in their presence; replacing good officials with corrupt ones; misappropriating templar properties. The younger Despenser was even charged with murder, in the execution of Llwelyn Bren after his rebellion. On 14 August, having been advised by the earl of Pembroke that there was no alternative, Edward II agreed in parliament to the exile of the Despensers, and on 20 August he pardoned the barons for their attack on them. 
Rather than ending hostilities, the exile from England of the Despensers led to far greater bloodshed. While the younger Despenser tried his hand at piracy in the channel, attacking a Genoese ship, killing its crew and seizing its cargo, and attacking Southampton, the king opened an offensive against the baronial opposition by besieging Bartholomew Badlesmere's castle of Leeds in Kent. The marchers did not relieve it, and when it fell on 31 October the king had the garrison and its commander executed. Next he sought the recall of the Despensers through a convocation summoned to Canterbury in December. He obtained the answer he sought, and on 8 December he recalled the Despensers. Soon afterwards he set out for the Welsh march, supported by the earls of Pembroke, Arundel, Warenne, and Richmond, and a coalition of Welsh lords. This was perhaps the most successful military undertaking of Edward II's entire reign. In January and February 1322 many of the marchers surrendered. The rest retreated to join their ally the earl of Lancaster. As the king moved north, joined by Despenser at Lichfield on 2 March, the barons retreated before him, and on 16 March 1322 were defeated by royalist forces at Boroughbridge. Hereford was killed in the battle, and Lancaster was captured the next day. On 22 March he was executed, and many more were to follow. The baronial opposition was crushed, while royal power was correspondingly reasserted. 
The period between 1322 and 1326 saw Despenser's wealth, power, and influence reach their zenith. Both son and father were ubiquitous at court, as is apparent in the charter rolls, which also attest to their territorial aggrandizement during this period of confiscations, fines, and near anarchy at the local level. During these years -- and in this they acted as they had done before the crisis of 1321 -- the Despensers, and particularly the younger Hugh, built up a network of retainers who also served as royal officers, and by exploiting the potentialities of this 'double allegiance' they were able to exert tremendous influence across the realm. Their victims could have little hope of redress, when royal agents of justice were also agents of the Despensers. This revealed itself most clearly in the seizure and subsequent administration of lands forfeited by the king's opponents. The younger Despenser used a combination of royal favour, legal manipulation, and outright force to consolidate his holdings in Wales and the marches, so that by the time of his death his lands were valued at no less than $7000. The bullying tactics he employed against such vulnerable victims as Elizabeth Damory (widow of Roger Damory), Alice, countess of Lancaster (widow of Thomas, earl of Lancaster), and Mary, countess of Pembroke (widow of Aymer de Valence), are well documented. His lavish expenditures at Caerphilly Castle and Tewkesbury Abbey have left enduring monuments to his exalted stature during these years. Even so, the contrariants continued to seek redress against Despenser's aggressive policy of self-advancement, and with the continuing failure of English arms, both in Scotland and in Gascony, discontent with the royal government continued to grow. Despenser himself seems to have been aware of the hatred increasingly felt for him, since he complained to the pope that he was being threatened by black magic. 
Militarily the so-called War of St Sardos in 1323-5 may have been a minor affair, but for Edward II and the Despensers it turned out to have incalculable consequences. The king's inability or unwillingness to leave the country prevented a negotiated settlement to this conflict. In March 1325 he sent his wife, Isabella, sister of the French king, Charles IV, as his mediator. The author of the contemporary 'Vita Edwardi secundi' sagely remarked that 'she will not (so many think) return until Hugh Despenser is wholly removed from the king's side' ('Vita', 135). The settlement arranged by the queen called for Edward II to perform homage for English lands in France, but he was afterwards allowed to send his heir in his stead. However, neither the queen nor the prince returned to England following his performance of homage. In January 1326 Queen Isabella wrote to Bishop John Stratford (died 1348) saying that she would not return until the Despensers had been removed from the court. In May 1326 two legates arrived in England with a pair of papal letters for the younger Despenser. The first called on him to assist in reconciling the king and queen, while the second, more generally, asked that he seek to foster better relations. Essentially, the letters were calling for Despenser to step aside in order to facilitate Isabella's return. But Edward II had the legates arrested, and after he had interviewed them in Dover Castle, they left the country without publishing their letters. 
Despite elaborate preparations for defence of the realm on the king's behalf, the queen's invasion in September 1326 was virtually unopposed. The earl of Norfolk, Edward II's half-brother, was charged with the defence of the east coast, but he went over at once to the queen's side. His actions may have been prompted by a personal grievance against Despenser, who had coerced him into surrendering the lordship of Chepstow on very poor terms. But Norfolk's defection was representative of a much larger problem for Despenser and the king. As recent studies by Saul and Waugh have convincingly demonstrated, the Despenser administrative machine was widespread, but thinly rooted. The value of the sheriff's office, for instance, appears to have been insufficiently appreciated, and oaths of allegiance, when taken only as a means of obtaining access to crown patronage, did little to strengthen the Despensers' cause once it began to fail. The king and Despenser abandoned London on 2 October and headed west, towards Despenser's lands and the Welsh allies who had served Edward so well in 1321-2. Bristol fell to Isabella on 26 October, when king and favourite were at Cardiff. From there they travelled to Caerphilly, which was left in charge of Despenser's eldest son, Hugh. After moving west to Margam and then Neath, on 16 November the king and Despenser with a small entourage were taken prisoner near Neath, or perhaps Llantrisant, by Henry of Lancaster, earl of Leicester, and Rhys ap Howel, a marcher lord connected to the Bohun earls of Hereford. Despenser was taken to Hereford. Outside the city he was stripped and then reclothed with his arms reversed, and he was crowned with stinging nettles. Condemned to death as a traitor, on 24 November 1326 he was drawn on a hurdle to the gallows, and then hanged from a height of 50 feet. Still alive, he was cut down and eviscerated before finally being beheaded. His head was displayed on London Bridge; his quarters were sent to Bristol, Dover, York, and Newcastle. In December 1330 Eleanor de Clare received royal permission to collect her husband's bones and inter them in Tewkesbury Abbey. 
The younger Despenser was responsible for the remodelling of Tewkesbury Abbey church, work subsequently completed by his widow and their son Hugh. It has been convincingly argued that this building programme was meant to produce a grandiose family mausoleum that would glorify the house of Despenser. The younger Despenser is represented in stained glass in the north window of the west bay between Robert fitz Hamon (died 1107), founder of the abbey, and on the other side Gilbert de Clare, first earl of Gloucester (died 1230) in the Clare family, and Henry I's illegitimate son Robert, the first lord of Tewkesbury to bear the title earl of Gloucester. Even more impressive as a symbol of his aspirations is the depiction of Despenser among the lords of Tewkesbury in paradise, in the arch of the choir and sanctuary. 


@@@@@


doc= 7555


Despenser, Thomas, second Lord Despenser (1373-1400), nobleman, was the sole surviving son of Edward Despenser, first Lord Despenser (1336-1375), and his wife, Elizabeth Burghersh (died 1409). Born on 22 September 1373 he was two years old when his father died in 1375, and he remained in royal wardship until 1394. His marriage was granted on 16 April 1378 to Richard II's uncle Edmund of Langley, earl of Cambridge 
(afterwards duke of York; 1341-1402)
, whose only daughter, Constance ['see 'Despenser, Constance, Lady Despenser (c.1375-1416)], Despenser married before he was seven years old. As a royal ward he became one of the young king's personal friends and gained influence at court. He also had links with two of Richard II's opponents; at the age of fifteen he was serving with Richard (III) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (died 1397), who was admiral of England, and in 1391 he joined the king's youngest uncle, Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, on his unlucky crusade to Prussia, an expedition which got no further than the coast of Norway. 
The political power enjoyed by the house of York in the later years of Richard II's reign was a consequence of the king's affection for his cousin, Edmund of Langley's elder son, Edward, earl of Rutland ('c'.1373-1415). It was as Rutland's brother-in-law that Despenser joined the court party of young nobles whose support enabled Richard II to carry out his successful 'coup d'etat' in July 1397. When parliament met at Westminster on 21 September, Despenser was one of a group of eight courtier lords who appealed of treason the king's enemies, Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick. Despenser's reward was the title of earl of Gloucester (29 September); his great-grandmother Eleanor (died 1337), who married Hugh Despenser the younger, was the eldest sister and coheiress of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester (died 1314). He also received a large share of the forfeited estates of the vanquished. His spoils included Elmley Castle, six manors in Worcestershire, and the Welsh marcher lordship of Elfael, all formerly belonging to the earl of Warwick. He was granted for life the constableship of Gloucester Castle and the wardenship of the Forest of Dean. In the Shrewsbury parliament of January 1398, Despenser obtained the reversal of the judgements passed in 1321 and 1327 on his ancestors, the two Hugh Despensers. 
Despenser's gains gave him reason to uphold Richard II's autocracy during the last two years of his reign. He was one of the king's chief lieutenants when his second expedition to Ireland took place early in the summer of 1399, and he commanded the rearguard of the royal army. He was sent to treat with the Irish king of Leinster, Art Mor mac Murchadha, but he failed to bring him to terms; their meeting in a glen in Wicklow is depicted in one of the well-known illustrations to the manuscript of Jean Creton's chronicle of the deposition of Richard II. The outbreak of the revolution in England, which followed Henry Bolingbroke's landing at Ravenspur in Yorkshire late in June, compelled the king to abandon his Irish campaign. According to Adam Usk, after Richard disembarked at Pembroke on 22 July he sent Despenser to rally the men of Glamorgan on the king's behalf, but the inhabitants refused to obey the summons of their marcher lord. When the fallen king met Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland, at Conwy Castle, Despenser was one of the eight persons for whose safety Richard stipulated, but, like the rest of the king's former courtiers, he deserted once Richard's cause was lost. He was one of the seven commissioners appointed to pronounce the sentence of Richard II's deposition on 30 September 1399. In the first parliament of Henry IV's reign Despenser was one of five lords who had appealed the king's enemies of treason in 1397 now called upon to answer for their conduct two years earlier; Despenser denied that he had had any share in the responsibility for the death of the duke of Gloucester. He was punished by degradation from his earldom (3 November), the loss of the lands and offices granted to him in 1397, and a short spell of imprisonment in the Tower of London. He evidently contemplated withdrawing from English politics and going on a new crusading venture, either to Prussia or to Rhodes, and it would have been better for him if he had kept to that resolution. 
Early in January 1400 Despenser joined the earls of Kent, Huntingdon, and Salisbury in a bid to restore the deposed Richard II to the throne. Popular support for Henry IV soon made the attempted rising a fiasco, and, having narrowly escaped capture at Cirencester, Despenser fled to Glamorgan, where he took ship at Cardiff, intending to seek refuge abroad. Instead the captain of the ship took him to Bristol, where he was seized and afterwards summarily executed on 13 January. He was buried at Tewkesbury Abbey. His unpopularity is reflected in the rumour that he had poisoned the late duke of Gloucester's young son, Humphrey, who had died in August 1399, shortly after Despenser's return from Richard II's Irish expedition. 
Despenser had three children with his wife, Constance; his only son, Richard, born on 30 November 1396, married 'c'.1408 Eleanor Neville (died 'c'.1472), one of the four daughters of Ralph, first earl of Westmorland (died 1425), and his second wife, Joan Beaufort. Richard Despenser died childless possibly on 7 October 1413 (and certainly by 16 April 1414) while still a minor in royal wardship, and with his death the male line of his family was extinguished. Thomas Despenser's eventual heir was his posthumous child, Isabel (died 1439), born at Cardiff on 26 July 1400; she married first Richard Beauchamp (1396-1422), who was created earl of Worcester in 1421, and second his cousin, Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (1382-1439). 


@@@@@


doc= 7556


D'Este, Sir Augustus Frederick (1794-1848), peerage claimant, was born on 13 January 1794, the son of Augustus Frederick, duke of Sussex (1773-1843), and Lady Augusta Murray ('bap'. 1761, died 1830), second daughter of the fourth earl of Dunmore. Their marriage, which took place in Rome and was repeated in London in 1793, was declared invalid under the terms of the 'Royal Marriages Act', and the relationship ended late in 1801. Lady Augusta (who was deeply chagrined at her treatment by the royal family) brought up her son to think of himself as a prince and as a possible suitor for his cousin Princess Charlotte of Wales. Sussex brought actions against her to prevent her calling herself duchess of Sussex, and accepted the illegitimacy of Augustus and his sister Augusta Emma (later Lady Truro) with apparent equanimity. Augustus was sent to Harrow School in 1807, under the surname Douglas, but in 1809 Sussex claimed custody of his children, gave them the surname D'Este (a family name of the house of Brunswick), and placed his son at Winchester College. In practice the D'Este children appear to have continued living with their mother, who was given the title Lady D'Ameland. 
Like other royal bastards D'Este suffered from the uncertainty of his status: his mother had heightened his pretensions but could not make the world accept him. In 1812 he joined the 7th Royal Fusiliers as a lieutenant, and served with them in Jersey (where he annoyed his superiors); in 1814 he went with them to America, where as aide-de-camp to Sir John Lambert he participated in the ill-fated attack on New Orleans in January 1815. In 1817 he received the command of a troop in the 9th lancers, and in 1822 he was appointed major in the 4th Royal Irish Dragoons. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1824 and colonel in 1838, but his active career in the army had long since ended. 
In the winter of 1825 D'Este fell in love with the half-sister of Princess Victoria of Kent, Princess Feodora of Leiningen. Their romance had the assistance of a lady-in-waiting, but when it was discovered by the duchess of Kent, Sussex wrote 'purposely to insult, to torture and to outrage every sentiment of Honor, of moral principle and of integrity of his son' (Firth, 22), insisting that the inappropriate relationship end at once. Shortly afterwards D'Este suffered the first serious attack of a disease that dominated the rest of his life -- disseminated, or multiple, sclerosis. He kept a detailed account of his symptoms, which included numbness in his legs, unsteadiness in walking, problems with his eyes, general debility and weakness, twitching in his limbs, and, as the years passed, bouts of giddiness and increasing pain. He also recorded in detail the various cures and remedies that he sought at spas and seaside resorts throughout England and Europe; he tried baths, douching, massages, changes of air, electrical therapy, and constantly evolving prescriptions of drugs and exercise regimens. In March 1843, for example, 'I went to Brighton, where I took some Vapor-baths and was shampoo'd at Mahomets' (ibid., 35). The various cures had no effect on the progression of the disease, and he was increasingly confined to a wheelchair. 
D'Este's great preoccupation was with his status. From William IV (already hard pressed by his own extensive illegitimate family) he received in 1830 a knight commandership of the Royal Guelphic order, a civil-list pension, and the appointment of deputy ranger of St James's Park and Hyde Park. This was not enough to dissuade D'Este from pursuing his claim to a peerage, and in 1831, according to Greville, he 'filed a bill in chancery, into which he had put all his father's love letters, written thirty years ago, to perpetuate evidence' ('DNB'), having received a legal opinion that the 'Royal Marriages Act' did not apply abroad, and that in consequence his birth was legitimate. In 1834 he petitioned the duke of Cambridge to intercede with the king for recognition of his legitimacy, and on the duke of Sussex's death, in 1843, he made a claim to succeed to his father's honours. In neither attempt was he successful. 
D'Este was an active member of the Aborigines Protection Society, particularly interested in native Americans. In 1833 he gave material assistance to Maconse, an Ojibwa, stranded in Britain. When Peter Jones, the Mississauga missionary and leader, visited Britain in 1838 to argue for the title of his people to their lands in Upper Canada, D'Este was one of his patrons; it was possibly through his good offices (and those of his cousin Sir Charles Murray, the master of the queen's household) that Jones was granted an audience with Queen Victoria in September 1838. Jones visited D'Este again in 1845, finding him 'as kind and as much interested for the welfare of the Aborigines of our country as ever' but 'quite an invalid' and 'not able to walk without assistance' (Smith, 200). It was perhaps Jones who sent D'Este a 'Present of Indian Moccassins' in December 1846, which enabled him to walk without a steel bar to support his ankle (Firth, 54). D'Este offered thanks for this 'decided Improvement' in the last entry in the casebook of his condition. He lived for another two years, and died, unmarried, in London on 28 December 1848. He was buried next to his mother at St Laurence, on the Isle of Thanet. D'Este's record of his illness, written with some detachment and great powers of self-observation, is probably the 'earliest clinical account of disseminated sclerosis', albeit written by a layman (Firth, preface); the first pathological description dates from 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 7557


Dethick, Sir Gilbert (1499/1500-1584), herald and diplomat, was the grandson of Robert Derrick (died 1525) of the king's armoury at Greenwich, a German armourer brought to England by Erasmus Kyrkener, and Agatha, daughter of Matthis Leyendecker, a barber of Aachen. His grandparents had three sons, Derick, Gilbert, and Matthew. The latter two were made denizens by act of parliament in 1542-3, making the unlikely claim that their father had been born in England and was descended from the Dethicks of Dethick Hall, Derbyshire, whose arms they used. Matthew Dethick (died 1572) became an armourer at Greenwich; his brother Gilbert married the daughter of Leonard, a Dutch shoemaker at the sign of the Red Cock, St Martin's Lane, and had children who included Gilbert, the future herald, and Matthew, who was buried in York Minster in August 1583. 
The younger Gilbert Dethick became Hampnes pursuivant-extraordinary on 16 June 1536 and rose rapidly, becoming Rouge Croix pursuivant in December 1540, Richmond herald on Christmas day 1540, and Norroy king of arms by patent dated 16 August 1547. He accompanied Lord Protector Somerset on his expedition against the Scots the same year, and was nearly shot by the Scots at the siege of Musselburgh. In 1549 he was sent to demand the surrender of the rebels in Kent, Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk. There is a story that he stood at the 'tree of pardon' in Norwich and announced a free pardon to the rebels if they would disperse, and that he narrowly escaped being hanged by their leader, Robert Kett, although it has also been claimed that the herald concerned was York herald, not Dethick. Dethick became Garter king of arms on 20 April 1550 and was knighted on 14 April 1551. 
Dethick was popular with his sovereigns. Henry VIII gave him a house and an acre of land in Poplar, where his family remained for 200 years, and he regularly exchanged new year presents with Elizabeth I. He invested Philip II of Spain, consort of Queen Mary; Emanuele-Philiberto, duke of Savoy; Frederick II of Denmark; Adolphus, duke of Holstein; Charles IX of France; Francois, duke of Montmorency; Johann Casimir, the son of the elector palatine of the Rhine; the duke of Bavaria; the earl of Rutland; and Henry, Lord Scrope of Bolton, with the Garter, and assisted in the investitures of Henri II of France, of which he wrote an account (Harl. MS 1355, art. 6), and of Emperor Maximilian II at Vienna. The latter expedition, made with the earl of Sussex in 1568, was followed by a tour of Carinthia with Archduke Karl. Dethick proclaimed several declarations of peace and war and, because he knew German and Dutch, was also sent on diplomatic expeditions, fulfilling the role of an effective rather than of a purely ceremonial envoy. Henry VIII sent him several times to Denmark to claim ships, and he is alleged to have attended the diet of Regensburg in 1546. He was involved in negotiations for three marriages for Edward VI, with a Cleves princess, Mary, queen of Scots, and Elisabeth de Valois of France. In 1554 he went on an embassy to Flanders. 
When Dethick became Garter the heralds were still without a base, so from 1554 they met at Dethick's house in Poplar. In 1555 he secured the grant of a house occupied by Sir Richard Sackville in Derby Place, Sts Benet and Peter, from Queen Mary. Sackville left eleven years later, and the heralds moved into what became the College of Arms on 25 January 1565. Dethick complained that he was allotted only four rooms. As Garter he made over 140 grants of arms, and forty more in conjunction with the provincial kings of arms. Collections of his work survive at the British Library and Gonville and Caius College, particularly BL, Harley MS 5826, Add. MS 10110, and 'Dethickes guiftes' (his grants and confirmations, 1549-84), Add. MS 12454 (see too Harley MS 5847). He trained several heralds, including Nicholas Paddy, Lancaster, and Hugh Cotgrave, Richmond, who began their careers as his servants, and also his son William Dethick. Dethick was a sound genealogist and heraldist, and a member of the original Society of Antiquaries. 
A handsome man, Dethick married twice. His first wife was Alice, daughter of Leonard Peterson, a Dutchman. They had three sons: Nicholas (1539-1596), later Windsor herald; William (1543-1612); and Henry Dethick, who became chancellor of the diocese of Carlisle, and whose son Henry (1623-1707) became Richmond herald. Alice died on 13 January 1572, and Dethick was remarried; his new wife was Jane, daughter of Richard Duncomb of Moreton, Buckinghamshire, the widow of William Naylor. They had further children: Robert ('b'. 1561, died before 1583), godson to Elizabeth I; and Mary, to whom her father bequeathed $500, and who married Thomas Butler, barrister, of Orwell, Cambridgeshire. Dethick died in London on 3 October 1584 and was buried in the church of St Benet Paul's Wharf; he was survived by his second wife. He is commemorated on his son's memorial in St Paul's Cathedral, which states that he died aged eighty-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 7558


Dethick, Sir William (1543-1612), herald and antiquary, was the second son of Sir Gilbert Dethick (1499/1500-1584) and Alice Peterson (died 1572). The Latin poet Henry Dethick was a younger brother. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, and was later a member of Gray's Inn, but his principal education came from his father, who obtained for him the post of Rouge Croix pursuivant on 9 February 1567, and whom he accompanied to the Garter investitures of Charles IX (1564) and Emperor Maximilian (1568). He left the latter expedition to travel independently in Italy in order to increase his considerable knowledge of Roman antiquities. 
William Dethick became York herald by patent dated 24 March 1570. Displaying early signs of arrogance, probably fostered by his father's position, he made three grants of arms under his own seal. Eighteen months after his father died he succeeded him as Garter king of arms. He bribed the signet clerk to add a clause to his patent, dated 21 April 1586, allowing him to make visitations and grant arms, thus breaching the rights of Norroy, Ulster, and Clarenceux kings of arms. He then proceeded to abort Clarenceux's visitation of Lincolnshire, consequently earning a severe reprimand from Lord Burghley. He surrendered the patent, which was regranted without the new rights, but following Burghley's death in 1598 he produced a copy of the original one. He never interfered with visitations again, but continued to make grants himself, including one to William Shakespeare's father, which was criticized by his fellow herald Ralph Brooke for being too similar to Lord Mauley's. In 1595 Dethick was cited in Star Chamber for having granted George Rotheram the arms of Lord Grey of Ruthin on the basis of a false pedigree. He blamed this on Rotheram, but there were other charges of pedigree forgery too. 
Dethick's integrity as a genealogist was no worse than that of his contemporaries, at a time when the discipline of using original records to prove pedigrees was still in its infancy. John Anstis, in his account of the Order of the Garter, published in 1724, praised Dethick for his diligence. The old Society of Antiquaries, of which he was an active member, used to meet in his rooms; he himself contributed papers (printed by Hearne in 1771) on such subjects as mottes, epitaphs, and the antiquity of Christianity in England. None of his other writings, which survive in collections in the British Library, the College of Arms, and Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, have been printed. They include some fine heraldic manuscripts, notably 'A booke of the armes of the noblemen in Henry the Fifts tyme' (BL, Harley MS 1864), and works on such subjects as Germany and its principal families, and the Swiss grisons. 
More serious than bad pedigree work was Dethick's apparent support of the prospective marriage of the duke of Norfolk and Mary, queen of Scots, in 1571, demonstrated by his marshalling their arms together on a manuscript pedigree and in some stained glass. For this treasonous act he was suspended from office, but Queen Elizabeth forgave him, and in due course he oversaw Mary's funeral at Peterborough in 1587. In 1596 he accompanied the earl of Shrewsbury for the presentation of the Garter to Henri IV of France, who gave him 500 crowns. His account of his mission survives in BL, Add. MS 6298, fol. 280. In 1601, when the earl of Essex rebelled in London, Dethick accompanied Thomas Cecil, Lord Burghley, into the city to proclaim the earl a traitor and to persuade him to desist. Essex later claimed 'I saw no herald but that branded fellow, whom I took not for an herald'. To this, the answer was that 'an herald, though a wicked man, is nevertheless an herald' (Noble, 199-200). 
James I knighted Dethick on 13 May 1603. His popularity with the king was matched by his unpopularity with his fellow heralds, who presented many charges of his atrocious behaviour. In 1573 he attacked the Chester herald's wife, pushing her head into the fireplace with his boot, and pouring hot ashes, alcohol, and the contents of her chamber pot over her head, and was only prevented from killing her by his cousin Richard Dethick of Polstead, Suffolk. According to Brooke, he punched his own father (who cursed him for it), wounded his brother with a dagger at Windsor Castle, and beat and slandered many of his fellow heralds, writing, for example, of 'Clarentius the drunkard, Mr Wade the vainglorious, Chester the tavern haunter' and 'Richmond herald that should have been executed at Berwick' (Wagner, 201). He interrupted the funeral of Sir Henry Sidney at Penshurst by hitting the minister, and that of the countess of Sussex in Westminster Abbey by striking two people with his dagger, for which he was indicted at Newgate, though he escaped being charged because he knew the recorder and because one of the victims did not attend to present evidence. 
Responding to an allegation that Dethick had disparaged the Stuarts' right to the crown, James I gave William Segar, Somerset herald, a signet bill to be Garter. Remembering Dethick's good offices to his mother, Mary, queen of Scots, however, James I sent Dethick, still with his title of Garter, in August 1603 to place a pall of state on her tomb, and the next month he was sent, again as Garter, to invest the duke of Wurttemberg, for which he was rewarded richly. Dethick's enemies persisted, alleging irregularities in the investiture, and James I capitulated, allowing a warrant for Dethick's dismissal to pass the great seal on 1 January 1604. Dethick refused to yield, wearing his tabard defiantly at court that Christmas, but the marshal's court on 26 January 1605 confirmed the dismissal. He still refused to abandon his office, and sought redress from parliament and the court of common pleas, but finally the king persuaded him to give up his office in return for an annuity increased from $40 to $200 and exemption from all taxes. Once this was granted, he finally surrendered his office to Segar in December 1606. Even then his bad behaviour continued, and he was fined and sentenced to imprisonment by a church court for calling a clergyman 'a bald, rascally priest' and striking him (Noble, 201). 
Dethick wrote his will on 21 April 1612, and it was proved on 26 October that year. He was buried in St Paul's Cathedral. He had married Thomasine (whose burial took place on 18 July 1633 at Stepney), only daughter of Robert Young, citizen and fishmonger of London. They had three sons: George of Gray's Inn, to whom he left his house in Poplar; Gilbert, who became registrar of the court of chivalry (died 1639), and whose daughter Ann married John Watson, Bluemantle; and Henry (died 1639), to whom he left his papers, and who was the father of Henry Dethick, Richmond herald, and of Elizabeth, wife of Everard Exton, Rouge Dragon. 


@@@@@


doc= 7559


Detrosier, Rowland (1800?-1834), freethinking radical and popular lecturer, was born in London, the son of a Manchester merchant, Robert Norris, and a Frenchwoman named Detrosier. His parents abandoned him soon after his birth and he was adopted by a Swedenborgian tailor from Hulme in Manchester, Charles Barnes, who brought him up as his own son, naming him Rowley Barnes. Following only rudimentary education (at Sunday school and the Manchester Benevolent Vegetarian Institute) he began work in a warehouse at the age of nine. Aged twelve, he was apprenticed to a fustian cutter but six years later, in 1818, gave up this trade to work first at a cotton factory as a maker-up of twist, then at a throstle mill as a reeler and bookkeeper. Despite the ravages of a trade depression and the expense of a wife (whom he married when he was nineteen) and a growing family, he saved enough to buy books, pamphlets, and apparatus and taught himself grammar, rhetoric, French, Latin, mathematics, astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, and geology. However, by 1821 he was in severe distress and was saved only by the patronage of John Shuttleworth, a local Unitarian and radical, who secured work for him as a salesman and clerk at Benjamin Naylor's cotton-spinning factory. The upturn in his fortunes coincided with his parents' decision to reveal the truth about his upbringing, and Rowley Barnes became Rowland Detrosier. 
Shuttleworth's intervention opened up the opportunity for Detrosier to indulge in his passion for education. His great natural talents for speaking and writing had already been displayed at Hulme and Salford Swedenborgian Sunday schools, where he taught science from the age of sixteen. During the early 1820s he lectured widely across the north of England, and especially at Hulme and Salford Mechanics' Institutes, promoting independent working-class self-education to his artisanal audiences. The period 1824-6 also saw him briefly successful in partnership with Marshall, a manufacturing chemist. When the business failed, Detrosier was forced to return to his earlier career, this time as a clerk and buyer to a foreign house in the cotton-twist trade. 
Detrosier had been brought up in the Swedenborgian Chapel of the New Jerusalem but as a young man joined the strict vegetarian and teetotal Bible Christian movement of Joseph Brotherton. Recognizing his didactic talents, Brotherton sought Detrosier a position and installed him as minister in the recently raised Brinksway Chapel, near Stockport (ironically nicknamed the Beefsteak Chapel for its adherents' vegetarianism). The ground had been prepared by his earlier lecturing and Detrosier's following became enormous. Encouraged by this, he issued his first publication, 'A Form of Public Worship on the Principles of Pure Deism' (1827). In this work he proclaimed the utility of morality and the need for a society of universal benevolence. 
Detrosier owed his conversion to deism to the strong local presence of Richard Carlile's freethinking movement and it was in the course of debate with militant zetetics some time between 1820 and 1822 that he embraced Paineite radical politics. Although he quickly moved to the centre of working-class radical and republican politics, Detrosier did not become an atheist. Nevertheless, his Enlightenment deism was strong enough to lead Brotherton to eject him from his ministry at the Brinksway Chapel in September 1827. 
Detrosier returned to working-class education and accepted the presidency of the self-governing and self-financed New Mechanics' Institution, in Poole Street, Manchester, in March 1829. Although he was not an Owenite, Detrosier's help was sought by the fledgeling Owenite trade union movement under John Doherty and its 'Co-Operative Journal' records many of his lectures on science and morality in 1829-30. 
Detrosier's work at Poole Street also attracted the interest of Francis Place and members of the Place-Bentham circle. He was encouraged to take up lecturing as a full-time career, with a stipend collected for him by Place; and Shuttleworth arranged to have his lecture 'On the Necessity of an Extension of Moral and Political Instruction among the Working Classes' published in 1831, attracting attention from Lady Byron and Jeremy Bentham. Bentham sent letters and books, encouraging Detrosier in his new belief that moral progress must precede political progress and schooling him in the dangers of untutored democracy. Place chose Detrosier, a Lockean and now a convert to political economy, to serve as secretary of the National Political Union in October 1831, thus confirming his entry into middle-class radical politics. This new milieu secured Detrosier the friendship of John Stuart Mill and introductions to Carlyle, the Saint-Simonian Gustave d'Eichtal, George Birkbeck, and J. A. Roebuck. It also resulted in Detrosier being asked to appear before the factory commission in 1833. He assisted in the preparation of Southwood Smith's report. 
Although not a Saint-Simonian, Detrosier accompanied Gregorio Fontana and Gioacchino Prati on their English mission of 1834, as interpreter. This ensured his removal from his lectureship at the London Mechanics' Institution, where he had taught meteorology and pneumatics. A new benefactor, Robert Mordan, found him a position at the New Mechanical Hall of Science in Finsbury, and Detrosier supplemented this by paid writing. He caught a cold returning from his inaugural lecture at the New Stratford Institute, rapidly weakened, and died at his home, in Seymour Street, near Euston Road, London, on 23 November 1834, leaving his body to science. 
Detrosier was a child of the Enlightenment, valuing reason above demagoguery. Although he was drawn into ultra-radicalism, popular education and science, not politics, was his sphere, and deism, not atheism, his creed. 


@@@@@


doc= 7560


Deusdedit (d. 664), archbishop of Canterbury, succeeded Honorius in March 655, after a vacancy of almost eighteen months. A West Saxon, consecrated by Ithamar, bishop of Rochester, he was the first English holder of the see. His Latin name, like that of his immediate predecessor, was that of a recent pope. It was clearly an adopted one, and in this he followed the practice of other early native English bishops. According to Goscelin of Canterbury in the late eleventh century, followed by Thomas of Elmham in the early fifteenth, Deusdedit's English name was Frithona. 
Deusdedit consecrated Ithamar's successor, the South Saxon Damian, bishop of Rochester. He died on the same day, 14 July 664, as King Eorcenberht of Kent, probably as a result of an epidemic of plague. Little else is known about him. His episcopate seems to have coincided with a low point in Canterbury's influence, and it is not even certain that he was represented at the important Synod of Whitby, held to settle a uniform method for the calculation of Easter. Apart from Damian, Deusdedit seems to have consecrated few if any bishops; candidates for important sees such as Wine at Winchester and Wilfrid at York sought consecration abroad. At his death there remained only one English bishop who had been canonically ordained. Bede's statement that Theodore, who acceded to Canterbury in 669, was the first archbishop whom the whole English church consented to obey, clearly implies that Deusdedit's authority was limited. Such influence as he had was probably largely confined to Canterbury, where his successor Wigheard was drawn from his clergy, and to Canterbury's dependent see of Rochester. 
Deusdedit was buried with his predecessors in the 'porticus' of St Gregory in the abbey church of St Peter and St Paul, Canterbury (later St Augustine's). There are limited signs of a cult. He was commemorated on 15 July in the calendar of the Bosworth psalter (almost certainly produced at St Augustine's between 988 and 1022). His remains, and those of his five predecessors, were translated to new tombs at the east end of the new abbey church of St Augustine in 1091. Goscelin composed a life of Deusdedit based on Bede as part of the literature associated with the 1091 translations, and mass propers for the feast day were probably also compiled at this time. 


@@@@@


doc= 7561


Deutsch, Emanuel Oscar Menahem (1829-1873), Semitic scholar and orientalist, was born of Jewish parents in Neisse in Prussian Silesia on 28 October 1829, and at the age of six entered the local 'Gymnasium'. Two years later he was sent to study with his uncle, Rabbi David Deutsch of Mislowitz (1810-1873), a distinguished Talmudist and author of an annotated translation of the book of 'Habakkuk' (1837). A strong opponent of Reform Judaism, Rabbi Deutsch held his nephew to a rigorous schedule. Winter and summer he had to rise at 5 a.m. and his whole day was devoted to the study of Hebrew and Aramaic literature, except for half an hour for exercise and recreation. At thirteen he returned to Neisse, where, since he had attained the necessary standard for his final examination at the 'Gymnasium' before the prescribed period, the rules were relaxed in his favour, and he was allowed to matriculate at the University of Berlin at sixteen. Unable to secure a teaching position at a 'Gymnasium' or university without conversion to Christianity, Deutsch supported himself by giving lessons and later by contributing Jewish tales and poems to German magazines. 
In 1855 Deutsch was appointed, on the recommendation of the publishers Asher, first-class assistant in the library of the British Museum at a salary of $295 per annum. Seldom has the department of printed books acquired the services of so variously accomplished a man. A Hebrew scholar of the first rank, he was also an excellent classicist. In Berlin he had studied ancient Greece with Boeckh, Latin with Meineke, history with Ranke, while Von Hagen had taught him folklore and German mythology. Despite his impressive credentials, for fifteen years he was largely confined to helot's work as a cataloguer of books. His major professional achievement as a consultant on oriental culture at the British Museum was his important assistance to W. S. W. Vaux (1818-1885) in publishing in 1863 Phoenician inscriptions discovered on Carthaginian votive tablets in 1856-8 by Nathan Davis (1812-1882). Deciphering the Phoenician letters provided a standard of reference for determining inscriptions discovered thereafter. 
Deutsch gradually perfected his grasp of colloquial English and achieved a unique prose style, an English version of Heine's ironic blending of satire and lyricism. In 1861 he published an anonymous piece on the purported literary plagiarisms of Robert Bulwer-Lytton (Owen Meredith) in the 'Literary Gazette' (165.180-85). Throughout the early years of the decade his independent scholarship included learned articles in Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible' ('Targums', 'Samaritan Pentateuch'), Kitto's 'Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature' ('Lamentations', 'Phoenicia', 'Semitic languages'), and a long series of unsigned contributions to Chambers's 'Cyclopedia'. 
By 1867 Deutsch's growing self-confidence as a popular writer and speaker of English joined with his erudition in religious and cultural history to produce a great success: the famous essay on the 'Talmud', in the 'Quarterly Review' of October 1867 (123.246). This created an extraordinary sensation, as much by the vigour and richness of its language as by the novelty of its subject. It helped to correct the biased view of the 'Talmud' that many English readers of the previous generation had imbibed from Isaac D'Israeli's dismissive approach in 'The Genius of Judaism' (1833) and that was being promulgated even more strongly in the conversionist literature of the day. In the same year the British Museum was prepared to allow Deutsch to accompany the Abyssinian expedition, but he was discouraged from going by his friend the philologist Viscount Strangford (Percy Smythe), who thought this adventure would provide little if any archaeological results relevant to Deutsch's interest in the Middle East. His career at the British Museum, unsatisfactory in many ways, was coming into conflict with his reputation as a writer, lecturer, and epigraphist specializing in Semitic culture. 
Throughout the rest of the decade Deutsch was besieged with applications for lectures and articles; he delivered courses of lectures at the Royal Institution (in 1868), the Midland Institute, and elsewhere, and his excessive labours, joined to habitual neglect of ordinary precautions of health, undermined a naturally robust constitution. Among those with whom he dined was the prime minister, Gladstone, who in February 1869 wrote that he 'had much interesting conversation with Mr Deutsch on Phoenicia' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 7.29). Invited by Nubar Pasha to be present at the opening of the Suez Canal in the spring of 1869, he was unable to receive official leave from his cataloguing duties. He did, however, manage to arrange a two-month journey to Egypt, Lebanon, and Palestine in March and April that year, and explored antiquities near Sidon. At the request of George Grove (1820-1900), founder of the Palestine Exploration Fund, he called on Charles Warren (1840-1927), who was in charge of excavations in Jerusalem, and verified Phoenician stone-cutters' markings at the base of the outer wall of the Temple Mount. The distinguished archaeologist Charles Newton (1816-1894) praised the report Deutsch filed with the trustees at the British Museum, but it was mysteriously misplaced. The 'Talmud Man', as he was now called by the press and public, chafed under what he felt was contempt by his superiors for his new status as a public figure and for his hopes of instituting a department of Semitic studies. 
After Deutsch's return, renewed activity in lecturing and writing aggravated the stomach cancer which was slowly killing him. It was at this time that he wrote his article on Islam in the 'Quarterly' for October 1869 (27.254), which, despite the epigrammatic brilliance of the style and the imaginative glow which were inseparable from his writings, struck many of his readers as less effective than his 'Talmud' essay. Like too many 'sequels' it failed to sustain the reputation which the earlier article had created. The main reason for the falling off from the 'Talmud' essay was thought to be Deutsch's lack of sufficient expertise in Arabic matters, but the real 'fault' of the essay was its relentless exposure of Islam's indebtedness to Judaism, a position that older readers who remembered Carlyle's 'The hero as prophet. Mahomet: Islam' (1840) had difficulty in accepting. From September to November 1869 Deutsch contributed a series of striking articles on the Ecumenical Council to 'The Times'. He wrote with the bitter memories of a Jew, and his retrospect of papal history at once startled and fascinated by its wealth of imagery and its unsparing irony. He championed the unsuccessful efforts of liberal delegates to block the campaign to establish papal infallibility. 
In 1870 Deutsch's health visibly broke down. The dull routine of cataloguing in poorly ventilated rooms, and the close scrutiny of officious and hostile superiors augmented by private study at night, destroyed what little health remained. In this period many of the library staff were bitter and frustrated at their treatment, and after Deutsch's death a polemical pamphlet by Stephan Poles, 'The Actual Condition of the British Museum' (1875), accused museum officials of causing the death of Deutsch, 'slowly murdered by the studied malice, and the petty jealousy of officials' (Miller, 287). Hugh Reginald Haweis (1838-1901), perpetual curate of St James, Marylebone, London, and popular preacher and lecturer, and his wife, Mary, were Deutsch's neighbours; she took him into their home and nursed him until he was strong enough to undertake a last despairing journey to Egypt. 
Deutsch died of stomach cancer at the Prussian Deaconesses' Hospital, Alexandria, on 12 May 1873, and was buried on 13 May in the Jewish cemetery, Alexandria. He had died still young, with the promise of his life unfulfilled. His true place in Hebrew scholarship was to have been decisively established by a great work, never completed, on the 'Talmud', of which the 'Quarterly' article was but the foretaste. Nevertheless, his numerous articles and reviews on Semitic subjects reveal extensive reading and a wide grasp of oriental history, philosophy, and world literature. In whatever he wrote, his vividly poetic nature asserted itself. At the time of his death he was credited with having enlightened gentile attitudes toward Jewish culture. His executor, Emily Anne, Viscountess Strangford, published a representative collection of his work, 'Literary Remains of Emanuel Deutsch, with a Brief Memoir' (1874). 
Although Deutsch did not live to write a work which he hoped would allow the 'Talmud' to enter the general discussion of antiquity in Western intellectual circles, his devotion to Jewish heritage greatly impressed George Eliot. She befriended him in the mid-1860s and encouraged his scholarship. In 1869 she went to Oxford primarily to hear his lecture on the Moabite stone. Deutsch gave her lessons in Hebrew and recommended important Jewish books. Gradually Eliot caught the fire of Deutsch's pre-Zionist vision and, shortly after he died, dedicated her last major novel, 'Daniel Deronda' (1876), to the Jewish quest for a homeland. Her novel is his principal monument. 


@@@@@


doc= 7562


Vere, Sir Aubrey De, second baronet (1788-1846), poet, was born on 28 August 1788, at Curragh Chase, Adare, co. Limerick, the eldest son of Sir Vere Hunt, first baronet (died 1818), and his wife, Eleanor (died 1820), only daughter of William Cecil Pery, Lord Glentworth, bishop of Limerick. He had a private tutor at Ambleside, Westmorland, and then went to Harrow School where he was a contemporary of Byron and Peel. On 12 May 1807 he married Mary (died 1856), the eldest daughter of Stephen Edward Rice of Mount Trenchard, co. Limerick, and the sister of his closest friend. They had three daughters, two of whom died in adolescence, and five sons, including the poet Aubrey Thomas de Vere (1814-1902), and the classical scholar Sir Stephen De Vere (1812-1904). 
De Vere succeeded to the baronetcy in 1818, and was a popular landlord. A loyalist, strongly in favour of Catholic emancipation, however, he failed to be elected when he stood for parliament about 1820. He contributed to 'Harmonica' (1818), and his first major work was 'Julian the Apostate', published in 1822 while he was living in London. Another drama, 'The Duke of Mercia', followed in 1823. 
Nevertheless, De Vere was mainly known as a sonneteer. 'The true basis of power' and the 'Lamentation of Ireland' were noted. He took the name by which he is known, De Vere, by letters patent on 15 March 1832. About this time, he became close to Wordsworth, who called his sonnets, attached to 'Song of Faith' (1842), 'the most perfect of our age' ('Mary Tudor', 1884). The drama 'Mary Tudor' (1847) was written during De Vere's final illness; he died at Curragh Chase on 5 July 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 7563


Deverell, Robert (1760-1841), author and classical scholar, was born in May or June 1760, the second son of Simon Pedley of St Stephen's, Bristol, and his wife, a daughter of Robert Deverell, a merchant of Bristol. He was educated in Bristol in a school run by a Mr Lee, and matriculated in April 1777 at Brasenose College, Oxford, whence he migrated to St John's College, Cambridge, in June of that year. In 1782 he won the college's Latin essay prize, and he held a fellowship from 1784 to 1791. Having been recommended by Nathaniel Ryder, Lord Harrowby, he acted as tutor to the future politician and diarist Sir Robert Heron, who later recalled that Pedley had 'some learning and much ignorance, but being a little mad, his strange ideas taught me to think for myself. We spent two summers together in France, Germany and Holland' (Heron, 291). 
Having been admitted to Lincoln's Inn in June 1784, Pedley was called to the bar (19 April 1788) and practised at 2 Lincoln's Inn Stone Buildings, though his name disappears from the 'Law List' at some point after 1805. He adopted his mother's family name in lieu of his father's by royal licence on 25 June 1793. At the general election of 1802 he was brought in for Saltash by William Beckford, the politician and art connoisseur, for whom his brother John Pedley acted as estate manager in the West Indies. In line with his patron, he generally supported the administration, but occasionally displayed a streak of independence, as exemplified by his vote against the Additional Force Bill promoted by Pitt, the prime minister (8 June 1804). In 1806 he published 'Two Letters... to... William Pitt on the Ancient Aries, or Battering Ram', which suggested a strategy for destroying the French fleet at Boulogne, and advanced a claim 'en passant' that the ancient civilizations had possessed a knowledge of firearms, but had 'concealed all their knowledge under aenigmatical disguises' (p. 15): similar suppositions informed many of his other writings. A despondent footnote adds that after Pitt's death he had laid his scheme before 'a highly distinguished person' (ibid.), but had received no reply after 'many months' (ibid.). His interventions in Commons debate were apparently less arcane, and were made chiefly in support of the slave trade, the continuance of which was decidedly in Beckford's interest: Deverell claimed once to have been as keen a champion of abolition as Wilberforce himself, but to have undergone a very convenient Damascene conversion. On the same subject he published 'A Letter to Samuel Whitbread' (1807) in which he frankly admitted that any defence of the trade rested on 'political expediency'. In the meantime his parliamentary career had come to an end at the dissolution in October 1806. 
Deverell's posthumous repute rested on his other extraordinary publications, which made him a regular subject of enquiry for incredulous correspondents of 'Notes and Queries'. 'Alter et idem, a New Review' (1794) was apparently intended, but not pursued, as a series. It featured poetry, an ingenious scheme for printing script backwards (to be read with the aid of a mirror), as well as plans for steering a hot air balloon, riot prevention, savings banks, and the construction of a single-wheel chaise, only the last of which was plainly intended as a joke. His subsequent works found the sort of esoteric meanings in text that would leave most modern literary scholars standing. 'Andalusia, or, Notes tending to show that the yellow fever of the West Indies, and of Andalusia... was a disease well known to the ancients' (1805) used heavily annotated extracts from the classics to support his main contention -- that the ancients not only knew about yellow fever, but of a cure. He expatiated in 'A Supplement', published the following year, in which he offered supporting evidence in the shape of an interpretation of the hieroglyphic inscriptions on a mummy preserved at Cambridge. 'A new view of the classics and ancient arts; tending to shew their invariable connexion with the sciences' (1806) took Homer's 'Odyssey' as its main text, and discovered in it complex geographical allusions which indicated that its author possessed an intimate knowledge of world geography, including that of Japan and of the interior of Africa. Perhaps his most celebrated work was the six-volume 'Discoveries in hieroglyphics, and other antiquities, in progress of which many compositions are put in a light entirely new' (1813). Herein, with the aid of copious notes, a multitude of classical allusions, and 196 engraved illustrations, he sought to prove that the characters, plots, and events described in several literary classics, including works by Shakespeare (among them 'Hamlet', 'Othello', and 'The Merchant of Venice'), Samuel Butler ('Hudibras'), Milton, and Homer, were nothing more than allusions to the phases of the moon. It was later claimed, doubtfully, that he attempted to have the book withdrawn from sale (Watt, 'Bibl. Brit.'). One correspondent to 'Notes and Queries' denominated it 'one of the most extraordinary works ever published' ('N&Q', 10, 236); another thought that 'the whole affair seems to afford indications of insanity' ('N&Q', 2, 61). Heron, who spoke from personal experience, noted by way of elegy that Deverell 'wrote works which decidedly proved insanity, and his conduct was also, sometimes, such as to admit of no other excuse; yet, he was also the best tutor I could have had; for, with a private education, without companions of any ability, I was in need of his strange and active imagination to excite my reasoning faculties' (Heron, 263-4). 
Deverell certainly appears to have inhabited a strange parallel universe; perhaps unsurprisingly, he never married. He died on 29 November 1841 in New Norfolk Street, London, having directed that his sizeable personal estate be divided among the children of his niece Mary Couthard. A bequest of $100 was paid to the Hon. Mrs Carpenter of Bowness, Westmorland. 


@@@@@


doc= 7564


Devereux, John, Baron Devereux (d. 1393), soldier and royal councillor, of Dinton, Buckinghamshire, was reputedly a younger son of William Devereux of Bodenham, Herefordshire, but his background remains obscure. The foundations of his reputation for military prowess were already laid before 1366 (by when he was certainly a knight), the year he was recruited by the great Breton commander Bertrand du Guesclin to fight on behalf of Enrique da Trastamara in his bid for the throne of Castile. Devereux and his fellow countrymen were, however, ordered to change sides by Edward, the Black Prince, who backed his kinsman by marriage, King Pedro the Cruel. The latter's supporters won a notable victory at Najera in 1367, when Devereux rode in the van of the English contingent. 'Then, of a surety', wrote the Chandos herald, 'was no heart in the world so bold as not to be amazed at the mighty blows they dealt with the great axes they bore, and the swords and daggers' ('Life of the Black Prince', ll. 3286-91). A period of energetic campaigning, during which he served as seneschal of the Limousin (1369-71) and of Rochelle (1372), and was present when Limoges fell to Prince Edward, ended abruptly with his capture by du Guesclin at Chize in 1373. He had been ransomed by 1375, and two years later the prince recompensed him with an annual pension of 200 marks payable for life in recognition of his services overseas. 
The accession of Prince Edward's son, Richard II, allowed Devereux to assume a more political role as a member of the royal council and intimate of the young king's surviving uncles. He became constable of Leeds Castle, Kent, in March 1378, and -- of far greater strategic importance -- captain of Calais (1380), with additional responsibility for the defences of Calais pale and Guines (1381). These appointments brought with them onerous diplomatic duties, involving seven separate missions to treat with the French and the Flemings between then and 1390. There were many rewards, too. The duke of Brittany, under whom he had fought in Poitou, gave him 100 marks a year for life (although payment often fell into arrears), and he was well placed to secure the lease of valuable property confiscated by the government in wartime. Most of the rent of $246 a year which he contracted to pay was remitted after his summons to parliament as Lord Devereux, in September 1384, and his creation as a banneret by King Richard. 
Evidence of Devereux's dramatic rise up the social ladder may be found in his marriage, by 1379, to Margaret (died 1398), daughter of John de Vere, earl of Oxford (died 1360), and Maud, daughter of Bartholomew, Lord Badlesmere (died 1322). A rich widow to boot, she had previously been married to Henry, Lord Beaumont (died 1369), and Sir Nicholas Loveyn (died 1375), who left her in possession of the manor of Penshurst, Kent. Devereux was, moreover, able to purchase outright, in 1385, the castle and lordship of Kilpeck in Herefordshire. Further preferment followed, with his promotion to the stewardship of the royal household, which he held from February 1388 until his death, his appointment as constable of Dover Castle and warden of the Cinque Ports one year later, and his elevation as a knight of the Garter by April 1389. The fall of Sir Simon Burley and other unpopular royal favourites in 1388 not only strengthened his own position, but also brought him Lyonshall in Herefordshire as a share of the spoils. 
Devereux died suddenly at his London inn, Le Coldeherberwe (Coldharbour), on 22 February 1393, while preparing to leave England on another diplomatic mission. He was buried, according to his wishes, at the church of the London Greyfriars. In his will of 1385 he had left large quantities of plate and 2000 marks to find a bride for his son, John, but by 1390 the boy had already married Philippa, granddaughter and coheir of Guy, Lord Brian (died 1390). He died childless in 1396, and was succeeded in his estates by his sister, Joan (1379-1409), wife of Walter Fitzwalter, Lord Fitzwalter (d. 1406) ['see under 'Fitzwalter family (per. c.1200-c.1500)], and then of Hugh, Lord Burnell (died 1420). 


@@@@@


doc= 7565


Devereux, Robert, second earl of Essex (1565-1601), soldier and politician, was born on 10 November 1565. He was the elder son and heir of Walter Devereux, first earl of Essex (1539-1576). Through his mother, Lettice (1543-1634), he was a member of Elizabeth I's extended Boleyn-Carey cousinage ['see 'Dudley, Lettice, countess of Essex and countess of Leicester]. He was presumably named after his godfather, Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, the queen's great favourite. He had two older sisters, Penelope ['see 'Rich, Penelope, Lady Rich (1563-1607)] and Dorothy ('b'. 1564?). His younger brother, Walter, was born in 1569. 
Little is known of Devereux's early childhood. Sir Henry Wotton later claimed that Devereux's father had had a 'cold conceit' of him and preferred his younger son and namesake (Wotton, 8). However, Wotton constitutes a poor source for these early years. His story clearly reflects later assumptions deriving from the notorious dislike which arose between the first earl of Essex and the earl of Leicester by the 1570s. Wotton's 'constant information' is probably only oft-repeated speculation that Essex had harboured doubts about the paternity of his elder son, based upon rumours that Leicester had had an affair with Essex's wife (a story which was widely publicized from the mid-1580s by scurrilous Catholic propaganda such as 'Leicester's Commonwealth'). 
Devereux's childhood companions included a son of Nicholas White, master of the rolls in Ireland, and Gabriel Montgommery, son of the Huguenot leader Count Montgommery, who had been executed in France in 1574. His upbringing was therefore Francophile and strongly protestant from the start. His earliest known teacher was Thomas Ashton, headmaster of Shrewsbury School, fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, and a trusted family servant. Ashton was succeeded as Devereux's 'scolemaster' by his protege Robert Wright, who had been a pupil at Shrewsbury before becoming a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. This appointment, undoubtedly made at Ashton's urging, perhaps signified Essex's intention that his son should also go to Trinity College. 
At the time of his father's death in September 1576, the new earl of Essex was living with his brother and sisters at Chartley, the family seat in Staffordshire. By virtue of succeeding to his title as a minor, Essex became a ward of the crown. Although Essex's siblings went to live under the supervision of the earl and countess of Huntingdon in Leicestershire, the chief responsibility for the young earl himself (as for many other aristocratic minors during the reign of Elizabeth) was taken by William Cecil, Lord Burghley, the lord treasurer and master of the court of wards. According to a report of November 1576, Essex showed great promise: 'he can expresse his mind in Latin & French as well as in Englishe, verie curteus and modest, rather disposed to heare than to aunswer, given greatly to learning, weake & tender, but very comly & bewtifull' (BL, Lansdowne MS 23, fol. 190'r'). He was also, however, a young nobleman whose estate was very heavily encumbered by debts. Earl Walter's efforts to seize territory in Ulster had destroyed the family finances, leaving his heir some $18,000 in debt, much of it owed to the crown. The responsibility for overseeing this estate during the earl's minority, and for reducing as much of the debt as possible, lay with Richard Broughton, a lawyer who had been a servant and trustee of Earl Walter. 
Essex left Chartley in January 1577 and travelled to London, where he stayed briefly at Cecil House. He also spent time at Burghley's Hertfordshire estate of Theobalds, often under the supervision of Lady Burghley or the countess of Oxford, Burghley's elder daughter. Burghley's younger son, Robert Cecil, was undoubtedly one of the 'children' who mixed with Essex during these months. Early in May, Essex went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, accompanied by Robert Wright, who now became his tutor there. Despite Wotton's assertion that Essex came under 'the oversight' of John Whitgift, the future archbishop of Canterbury, at Trinity (Wotton, 8), the mastership of the college had already passed to John Still by the time the earl arrived. Essex's initial arrangements for life at Trinity were overseen by Gervase Babington. Among the many significant scholarly and clerical contacts which Essex made during his time at Cambridge were Gabriel and Richard Harvey, William Whitaker (for whom Essex became his 'verie good lord'; Baker, 2.604), John Overall (a fellow student at Trinity), and Hugh Broughton, brother of his estate manager Richard. 
Essex's studies at Cambridge nourished his propensity towards 'bookishnesse' (Devereux, 'Apologie', sig. A1'v') and made him almost as eager for the company of scholars as for the company of soldiers. Nevertheless he spent a considerable amount of time away from Cambridge. In 1578, for example, the threat of plague ensured that he spent fully half the year at Keyston, a family estate in Huntingdonshire which had been leased to his uncle by marriage, Henry Clifford. In August 1578 he visited Staffordshire and received the stewardship of Tamworth in person. Essex's life was now also increasingly influenced by the earl of Leicester, who secretly married Essex's mother in September 1578. At the new year Essex visited London and the court to watch Elizabeth's reception of Duke Casimir, whose visit was largely stage-managed by Leicester. The oft-repeated, but erroneous, story that Essex met the queen on this occasion and refused to let her kiss him is based upon a conflation of Casimir's behaviour with that of the young earl. Essex also visited Leicester's house in London and stayed at Kenilworth during the summer of 1581, following his graduation as an MA. Essex returned to Trinity for the celebration of the queen's accession day (17 November), before going to live with his maternal grandfather, Sir Francis Knollys, until February 1582. At the end of that month he went to join the earl of Huntingdon, who was based at York as lord president of the council of the north. It was hoped that life in the north would reduce Essex's expenditure, which had mounted rapidly during his time at Cambridge: the two suits of clothes which he bought for the wedding of his sister Penelope to Lord Rich in November 1581, for example, cost more than $40. 
Essex remained in the north with Huntingdon until the end of 1583, when he went to stay with Leicester in London. During the following summer he accompanied Leicester on a grand progress across the midlands, before it was terminated by the sudden death of Leicester's infant son (and Essex's half-brother), Robert Dudley, Lord Denbigh, in mid-July. Essex subsequently travelled to south Wales, where he met and established strong ties with his family's numerous followers and servants in the region. His base over the autumn and winter of 1584-5 was Lamphey in Pembrokeshire, at a house which was usually occupied by his uncle George Devereux. Essex headed back to Chartley in April 1585 and remained there until late in August. During this visit, and perhaps for several months before, it seems that Essex came under pressure from his mother to forsake his life in the country and go to court. Now he finally did so. Travelling to Leicester's seat at Kenilworth, he joined his stepfather for the journey south. Despite his later success as a royal favourite, Essex's arrival at court early in September 1585 apparently attracted little notice. The queen's attention, like that of Leicester and the other leading courtiers, was anxiously focused upon the war in the Netherlands, where an English army was about to be dispatched to aid the Dutch against the forces of Spain. Essex himself later claimed that he found 'small grace and new friends' when he first attended the court (Devereux, 'Apologie', sig. A2'v'). He was also unable to prevent his chief estate of Chartley, which he had so recently left, being chosen as the new prison for Mary, queen of Scots. 
Following Leicester's appointment to command the army going to the Netherlands, Essex was granted permission (presumably by the queen, since he was still a royal ward) to accompany his stepfather to war. Essex sailed with Leicester's entourage from Harwich on 8 December 1585. A month later, when the army was mustered for service, Essex was appointed colonel-general of the cavalry, paralleling Sir John Norris's appointment as colonel-general of the foot. Because Essex himself was undergoing a military apprenticeship, much of the routine administration of the cavalry was carried out by Sir William Russell. Command of the cavalry was not only socially prestigious but also politically significant, for many of the horsemen were provided by Leicester's own extended Dudley following. Although Leicester's nephew Sir Philip Sidney won the high-profile job of governor of Flushing, Essex's command of the cavalry declared his status as Leicester's new political protege and a potential future leader for his supporters. Leicester's backing for his stepson was also signalled in the extravagant celebration of St George's day at Utrecht, where Essex made his public debut as a jouster. Essex loyally supported his stepfather in the bitter feud between Leicester and Sir John Norris which plagued the English army throughout 1586-7, but deeply regretted its occurrence. In his subsequent military career Essex devoted much effort to avoiding a repetition of such internecine quarrels among his own officers. In September 1586 he participated in Leicester's capture of Doesburg and in the famous skirmish at Zutphen, where he and a small body of other horsemen repeatedly charged a much larger Spanish force with almost foolhardy bravery. Essex was later dubbed a knight-banneret by Leicester for his courage in the fight. 
The aftermath of Zutphen also sealed Essex's connection with Sir Philip Sidney, who was mortally wounded in the battle. Sidney had once been intended to marry the earl's sister Penelope and later wrote sonnets about her as the 'Stella' to his 'Astrophel'. Leicester had also once planned to marry Sidney to Essex's other sister, Dorothy. Both matches failed, but the dying Sidney made a last-minute bequest to Essex of one of his two 'best' swords, symbolically transferring to Essex his twin roles as Leicester's right-hand man and knightly champion of England's participation in the defence of international protestantism. The conjunction of Sidney's death and Essex's knighthood -- which released him from wardship and gave him full control of his estates -- cemented the bond between them to a profound degree. Many of Essex's subsequent actions can be seen (and were meant to be seen) as allusions to Sidney and to the myth created about his death, especially the idea that he transcended mortality by the fame which he had earned during his lifetime. Essex clearly sought to win a similarly transcendent knightly renown, which gave added fuel to his martial ambitions. 
Essex returned to England late in October 1586 as a war hero and free from the bonds of wardship. He quickly caught the queen's eye. To Elizabeth, Essex seemed a handsome, intellectual, and intriguing distraction from the agonizing business of consenting to the death of Mary, queen of Scots. Moreover, he was backed by Leicester, who knew better than anyone else how to win the queen's favour. As Lord Henry Howard later observed of Essex's career, 'the greatest enemie to his father was his meane to rise' (Durham University Library, Howard MS 2, fol. 117'r'). Leicester pushed Essex forward not only because he was his stepson and because Zutphen had dashed whatever hopes he may have harboured for Sidney, but also because Essex's advancement would weaken the position of Sir Walter Ralegh. Ralegh had begun to win a hold on the queen's favour in recent years, especially during Leicester's absence in the Netherlands. Leicester believed that Ralegh had tried to take advantage of his absence to undermine his relationship with the queen, and regarded him as a grasping outsider who failed to show sufficient gratitude for the favours which Leicester had shown him. Essex instinctively shared his stepfather's antagonism towards Ralegh, sharpened further by a recognition that he and Ralegh were direct competitors for the queen's favour. Leicester's success in renewing his old rapport with the queen late in 1586 and early in 1587 temporarily stifled Ralegh's hopes and gave Essex a decisive advantage. 
By May 1587 Essex had become established as Elizabeth's constant young companion. As one of his servants boasted, even at night 'my lord is at cardes or one game or another with her, that he commeth not to his owne lodginge tyll the birdes singe in the morninge' (Folger Shakespeare Library, L.a.39). Leicester built upon this success by dealing with Elizabeth to become lord steward on condition that his office as master of the horse, which he had held since the start of the reign, should pass to Essex. The mastership of the horse guaranteed Essex's close attendance upon the queen and boosted his crippled finances by about $1500 per annum. These twin promotions were confirmed (on 18 June) shortly before Leicester returned to the Netherlands, leaving Essex to defend his interests at court. Leicester's trust in Essex pointed the way towards a growing reliance upon his stepson in the future, but it also sparked open rivalry between Essex and Ralegh. Perhaps the most spectacular manifestation of this rivalry was the furious row which developed between Essex and the queen at Northaw, Hertfordshire, at the end of July. Essex blamed Ralegh for the queen's hostility towards one of his sisters and remonstrated with her at length about Ralegh's unworthiness until 'I saw she was resolved to defend him and to crosse me' (Bodl. Oxf., Tanner MS 76, fol. 29'v'). Essex then rode off to join the defence of Sluys, only to be stopped at the coast by Robert Carey, whom the queen had sent after him. Essex apparently suffered no serious consequences for his defiance of the queen. He was back at court within a few days, urging Elizabeth not to blame his stepfather for the fall of Sluys. 
The bitter competition between Essex and Ralegh was cooled only by the final return of Leicester from the Netherlands in December. Leicester's support soon helped Essex to acquire a whole string of new rewards. Early in 1588 or late in 1587 the queen granted Essex the use of York House (paralleling Ralegh's access to Durham House), presumably because it no longer seemed convenient or appropriate for the earl's London base to consist only of a suite of rooms at Leicester House. On 11 April Essex and a group of friends and old comrades from the Netherlands were created honorary MAs of Oxford University, where Leicester was chancellor. On 23 April 1588 Essex was elected a knight of the Garter. In June Elizabeth granted him the lands of Sir Francis Englefield, who had been attainted for treason. Essex was even given special treatment when he was reunited in military service with his stepfather during the crisis of July and August, when the realm faced invasion by Spain's Armada. Although the cavalry commanders had already been named, Elizabeth appointed Essex as overall commander of the horse in Leicester's army because 'she wold not have me discontented' (BL, Harley MS 286, fol. 144'r'). As befitted a man who aspired to prove himself a great captain, Essex brought with him the largest and most lavishly equipped of all the private contingents of soldiers which joined the army. When Elizabeth paid her famous visit to Leicester's troops at Tilbury, Essex attended upon her as both general of the horse and master of the horse. At the end of August, when the emergency had passed and Leicester retired to the country for a rest, Elizabeth asked Essex to move into his stepfather's lodgings at court. 
Leicester's sudden death on 4 September 1588 came as an unexpected blow to Essex. Leicester's grooming of his stepson had been too brief for Essex to extract the full benefit of his stepfather's influence, leaving him burdened with political expectations which he lacked the resources and experience to fulfil. Many of Leicester's former clients apparently looked elsewhere for patronage. The chaotic state of Leicester's finances also left Essex's mother exposed financially, especially as Elizabeth was determined to ensure repayment of the huge debts which the late earl owed to the crown. Ultimately, Essex proved a major beneficiary from the seizure of Leicester's assets. In January 1589 he took over Leicester's lucrative farm of the customs on sweet wines, which became the linchpin of his finances over the next decade, being renewed in 1593 and 1597. Essex also later negotiated leases for Leicester's estate at Wanstead, Essex, and for Leicester House, which was renamed Essex House by 1593. More immediately, Leicester's death triggered a fresh round of competition between Essex and Ralegh over who would dominate the queen's favour. This rivalry was fought out through poetry and even portraiture -- a portrait of Ralegh wearing pearls under a crescent moon set against Nicholas Hilliard's miniature of Essex as the 'Young Man among Roses'. At times the rivalry also came close to being fought out with swords. At Christmas 1588, and again a few days later, Essex and Ralegh apparently came to the very brink of duelling at Richmond, only to be thwarted by the intervention of the queen and the privy council. 
Despite his determination to establish himself in the queen's favour at Ralegh's expense, Essex remained deeply ambivalent about life at court. On the one hand he needed the material rewards which only royal favour could bring. He also aspired to become an arbiter of his country's future, believing that Elizabeth and her aged councillors could not live beyond a few more years. It was in this spirit that Essex and his sister Lady Rich made secret overtures during the second half of 1589 to James VI of Scotland, the queen's likeliest successor. This initiative proved an embarrassing failure when Essex's letters were compromised. Even so, Essex's desire to shape England's future direction remained undiminished. On the other hand Essex often felt uncomfortable at court and increasingly resented the restrictions which pleasing the queen put upon his behaviour. He also despised the sort of calculated smoothness and outright dissimulation of courtly life, of which Leicester had been a master. Instead of the gilded cage of court, Essex pined for the more straightforward life of military service and of virtues demonstrated on the battlefield, where all could see. Military service would not only prove his right to be regarded as the new Sidney but also help to defend his country from foreign enemies -- Spain, the papacy, and the Catholic League of France -- which he regarded as cruel, unprincipled, and genuinely threatening. Characteristically such thinking reflected an almost inseparable mix of altruism and self-aggrandizement. It also encapsulated the belief that shaped Essex's whole career: that deeds upon the battlefield were more important for the safety of the queen and the realm than actions at court, and merited greater reward from the queen than any other possible royal service. Any reverse which he might suffer at court could therefore be made good, and more, by the active display of his martial virtues on campaign. This fundamental misapprehension about the relationship between war and politics, which he sustained in the face of repeated disappointments, later proved to be a consistent political failing. In the early years of his career, however, events seemed to bear out his belief that soldiering was the highest form of royal service, and merited appropriately lofty rewards. 
Essex consistently angled for opportunities to practise his profession of arms. In 1587, even though his desire to abandon court for the siege of Sluys was thwarted, he prepared the way for new possibilities by informing Henri of Navarre (later Henri IV) and the vicomte de Turenne (later duc de Bouillon) that he hoped to join them in fighting for the protestant cause in France. By February 1588 Essex also looked to the sea. He secretly invested in a naval expedition to be led by Sir Francis Drake and clearly planned to sail with the fleet himself. Although this scheming was overtaken by events, Essex's covert dealings with Drake bore fruit in 1589 when Drake and Sir John Norris commanded England's counter-Armada to attack Spain and Portugal. 
Although Elizabeth denied him permission to join this force, Essex secretly left London on the evening of 3 April 1589 and rode hard for Falmouth, where he boarded the queen's ship 'Swiftsure', under the command of his friend Sir Roger Williams. Faced with the queen's fury about Essex's blatant disregard for her prohibition, Drake and Norris denied any knowledge of the earl's actions -- almost certainly a lie. Essex apparently invested several thousand pounds in the voyage and later claimed that he had played a major part in naming the officers in Norris's army. He and Williams also knew precisely where to rendezvous with the fleet when it prepared to land troops in Portugal. Indeed, the fleet rejoiced at Essex's arrival and Norris allowed him to lead the vanguard ashore at Peniche, where Essex and Williams landed in shoulder-high surf to face enemy troops waiting on the beach. Such conspicuous bravery helped to inspire the army and he sought to repeat the effort when Norris's troops found themselves thwarted in their efforts to capture Lisbon. Essex pursued enemy soldiers into the suburbs of the city, challenged the governor to a duel (which was declined), and finally rode up and drove a lance into the city gates as a symbolic act of defiance when the siege could be sustained no longer. He also threw his own belongings out of a carriage in order to carry English wounded back to the fleet. However, such bravado could not disguise the failure of the expedition or delay any longer his return to face the queen. He arrived in Plymouth about 24-5 June and, having sent his brother ahead to test the waters, returned to court on 9 July. 
Essex's defiance of Elizabeth to join the Portugal expedition might have been fatal to his chances of retaining royal favour. Wotton later opined that 'all his hopes had like to bee strangled almost in the very cradle' (Wotton, 3). However, Essex quickly regained his hold on the queen's affections. In addition to Elizabeth's own warm, almost maternal, feelings towards him, and his ability to play upon them, Essex's return to favour was assisted by the support which he enjoyed from many of the queen's most trusted courtiers, such as Burghley, Lord Hunsdon, Sir Francis Knollys, Sir Francis Walsingham, Sir Christopher Hatton, and influential women like the countess of Warwick. These senior courtiers regarded him as a young nobleman whose commitment to virtuous behaviour warranted approbation, albeit mixed with a certain degree of tempering. Essex also had the overwhelming attraction of being an insider -- literally a blood relative of many of them, including Elizabeth herself -- whereas Ralegh was a pushy outsider who threatened to disturb their relations with the queen. Essex was therefore 'mightelie backt by the greatest in opposition to Sir Walter Ralegh, who had offended manie and was maligned of most' (BL, Egerton MS 2026, fol. 32'r'). 
Essex's rapid recovery of favour in mid-1589 effectively betokened victory in his bitter rivalry with Ralegh. Within six weeks of his return from the Portugal expedition, Essex's dominance seemed so obvious that his followers boasted he 'hath chassed Mr Rauly from the coart and hath confined him in to Irland' (LPL, MS 647, fol. 247'r'). In this light, it seemed that military service had indeed paid large dividends. Although he and Ralegh continued to snipe at each other during 1590, Essex felt sufficiently confident of his hold on royal favour to contract a secret marriage with Frances (1567-1632), the widow of Sir Philip Sidney and daughter of Sir Francis Walsingham, the secretary of state. The precise date of this marriage remains uncertain, but it became publicly known in October 1590, when the countess's pregnancy could be hidden no longer. The birth of a son, Robert Devereux, Lord Hereford (later third earl of Essex), in January 1591 indicates that Essex and Lady Sidney had probably become lovers before the death of her father in April 1590. It seems likely that the marriage took place either in the early months of 1590, with the blessing of the dying Walsingham, or during the summer, after the secretary's death and when it had become apparent that Lady Sidney was pregnant. As Essex had expected, Elizabeth was initially furious about his marriage, both because it had been kept secret from her and because it reflected a triumph of Essex's romanticism over political calculation -- Lady Sidney brought him the Sidney name and a stepdaughter (Elizabeth Sidney, later countess of Rutland), but neither the money which he needed nor blue blood. Elizabeth's anger soon cooled, but her lingering disapproval of his choice of wife and the new countess's own apparent wariness of politics meant that Essex lacked the support of having a wife at court. The resultant long periods of separation from his wife also perhaps help to explain Essex's dalliances with other women, including Elizabeth Southwell, a maid of honour (which resulted in the birth of his illegitimate son, Walter Devereux, at the end of 1591), and Elizabeth Stanley, countess of Derby, in 1596-7. Early in 1598 he was also reported as having revived a relationship with 'his fairest B', who was perhaps Elizabeth Brydges, the elder daughter of Giles Brydges, third Lord Chandos. Although sufficiently scandalous to infuriate the queen, it is unclear whether this was a sexual liaison. However, despite such behaviour by Essex at court, his wife apparently remained devoted to him and experienced pregnancies throughout the 1590s: Walter ('bap'. 21 January, 'bur'. 19 Feb 1592), Penelope ('b'. 1593/4, 'bur'. 27 June 1599), Henry ('bap'. 14 April 1595, died 7 May 1596), Frances ('b'. 30 September 1599), later duchess of Somerset, and Dorothy ('b'. 'c'.20 Dec 1600), later Lady Shirley, as well as stillbirths in 1596 and 1598. 
The cooling animosity between Essex and Ralegh was also reflected in the way that they both supported Burghley's unsuccessful attempts in 1591 to shield leading presbyterians from Archbishop Whitgift's drive for ecclesiastical conformity. In the period after Leicester's death Essex had flirted with the idea of setting himself up as the new political champion of puritanism, but Whitgift's success in 1591-2 -- with the backing of Elizabeth -- and his own concern to become involved in events overseas soon swayed him against this option. Although puritans continued to dedicate books to him throughout the 1590s, Essex restricted his support for puritanism after 1591 largely to low-key patronage of individuals such as William Hubbock, Nicholas Bownd, and Stephen Egerton. With the queen's encouragement he began to cultivate Whitgift, who was eager to woo him from unduly open support for the puritan cause and saw him, in the longer term, as a potentially useful ally in his own struggle with Burghley. 
In 1590-91 relations between Essex and his former guardian remained strong. Even Essex's unsuccessful effort to persuade Elizabeth to recall the disgraced William Davison to replace Walsingham as secretary of state -- which cut across Burghley's own plans for his son, Robert Cecil -- failed to disturb the bond between them for long. In the spring of 1591 Essex looked to Burghley and Hatton, the two most senior lay councillors, for support in his bid to command an expeditionary force being sent to Normandy. Essex had tried to secure a similar command when troops were sent to Brittany in the previous year, but his private deal with Sir John Norris had fallen apart in the face of Elizabeth's intransigence. Now Burghley, in particular, had to persuade the queen to let her young favourite leave the court and lead an English army in an important joint operation with the forces of Henri IV. Essex had prepared the ground on the French side through his frequent correspondence with the king, his intimacy with the French ambassador in England, and his lavish hospitality for the visiting vicomte de Turenne in November 1590. However, Essex's appointment was not secured until Burghley convinced Elizabeth that the earl was the best choice to command the expedition. Appropriately, Essex mustered his cavalry for the queen on the day of his departure from London at Burghley's house in Covent Garden. 
Essex's commission as lieutenant-general of the queen's army in Normandy was initially restricted to two months' duration and his instructions required him to heed the advice of hand-picked old advisers like Sir Thomas Leighton and Henry Killigrew. Nevertheless, this first independent command demonstrated that Essex was no longer merely a royal favourite who harboured military pretensions. From the start he was faced with delays and problems which lay beyond his control and was burdened by Elizabeth's unrealistic expectations about how quickly and easily the campaign could be conducted. Essex's army of 4000 men landed at Dieppe on 2 August 1591 but Henri IV did not move to join him, as promised. Instead, Essex and his cavalry were forced to traverse enemy territory on a four-day journey to meet the king near Compiegne on 19 August. Essex and his men feasted, talked, and competed in sports with the king and his entourage for several days. This meeting cemented a lifelong bond between the two men and confirmed Essex's deep Francophilia, but it also infuriated Elizabeth, who suspected that Essex would rather serve a king than a queen and might ignore her commands. Although the earl's willingness to strain the limits of his instructions also reflected the impracticality of her efforts to run the war from a distance, the queen's suspicions proved well-founded. Throughout his career, whenever he was frustrated by her chronic indecisiveness or her failure to heed his advice on military matters, Essex blamed Elizabeth's behaviour on the fact that she was a woman. For her part, Elizabeth resented Essex's absences from court. When he sought to extend his service in Normandy, she 'collecteth his so small desire to see her as shee doth requite him accordingly with crossing him in his most earnest desire' (UCL, Ogden MS 7/41, fol. 4'v'). 
Essex did not rejoin his army and begin offensive operations until early September. Almost immediately he suffered a shattering blow when his younger brother, Walter, was killed in a skirmish near Rouen on 8 September. This tragedy was compounded by a series of stinging letters from Elizabeth, who wrote to vent her frustration at the slow pace of the campaign and her mistrust of Henri and his influence upon the earl. These criticisms hit Essex hard, especially as the army was wilting from the effects of sickness and was only being preserved from disintegration by the force of his personality and subsidies from his own overstretched purse. For a few days he was on the point of complete physical and mental collapse. However, he soon regained a sense of purpose with the arrival of French forces under Marshal Biron and the capture of Gournai. Essex subsequently made two trips back to England early in October and in late November to early December to plead with Elizabeth for permission to continue the campaign and for additional men and resources. Both trips proved successful. In effect Elizabeth was forced to acknowledge that Essex needed freedom of action if he was to campaign effectively -- and hence that her attempts to continue treating him like an errant young favourite, instead of a real general, must end. However, although politically necessary, Essex's absences demoralized the army. His subsequent efforts to galvanize his men by fresh acts of heroism -- despite Elizabeth's strict injunction to stay away from the front lines -- proved unavailing. As the winter set in, it was obvious that the Normandy campaign was an utter failure. 
Essex finally returned to court on 14 January 1592. Although he learned much, his first independent command had been a very painful and costly ordeal. His faith in the political and moral value of military service had also been dented. During his time away the death of Sir Christopher Hatton had thrown open the chancellorship of the University of Oxford. Essex had been mooted by some puritan dons as a potential chancellor after Leicester's death in 1588, but he had rejected the overture in favour of supporting the candidacy of his friend Hatton. On Hatton's death in November 1591 Essex clearly had enough support within the university to be elected as chancellor, especially as his secretary, Thomas Smith, the university orator, was busily canvassing fellows on his behalf. However, Elizabeth intervened to ensure that Thomas Sackville, Lord Buckhurst, was appointed instead, allegedly to punish Essex for his continuing desire to fight in France. Essex was also aggrieved that his efforts had brought him nothing but debts and discomfort, whereas the unsoldierly Sir Robert Cecil had become a privy councillor. He also believed, unfairly, that Burghley had not done enough to support him during the campaign. These grievances, nourished by dismay at his failure to score a military triumph, were the seeds of Essex's increasingly awkward relations with Burghley and Cecil. Essex's efforts to escape being regarded again as merely the queen's favourite now put him on a collision course with the Cecils: he 'resolved to give this satisfaction to the queen, as to desist for a tyme from his cowrse of the warrs and to intend matters of state' (LPL, MS 653, fol. 3'r'). Accordingly he increased his involvement in intelligence gathering, into which Francis Bacon and Thomas Phelippes had introduced him in early 1591. His recruitment of Francis's older brother, Anthony Bacon, to organize a spy network for him in 1592 was both a signal of his intent 'to intend matters of state' and a direct challenge to Burghley, for whom Bacon had previously worked. The harder Essex worked to prove his worth to join the privy council, the more convinced he became that Burghley's influence on Elizabeth was holding him back. On the other hand, he felt sufficiently forgiving towards Ralegh to treat him as a friend and stand as godfather to his son, Damerei, in April 1592. Such generosity helps to explain why even Essex's rivals usually regretted being on bad terms with him. 
Essex was sworn of the privy council on 25 February 1593, just as a new parliament came into session. He immediately threw himself into committee work and the other meetings and paperwork which dominated council business. Having tried to make himself the perfect soldier, he now sought to become the perfect councillor. This conscientiousness reflected his usual mix of altruism and self-advancement: unable to do what he thought was necessary for England's future upon the battlefield, he instead sought to equip himself for influencing matters at the council table -- while boosting his standing with Elizabeth in the process. Essex's goal was clearly to take over Burghley's role as the queen's chief adviser. Indeed Burghley's ill health during 1593 gave his efforts a sense of urgency: 'their chief hour glass [that is, Burghley] hath little sand left in it and doth run out still' ('Salisbury MSS', 4.116). Inevitably Burghley resented the earl's aggressive manner and disliked his efforts to redirect policy towards more wholehearted support for Henri IV in France. Sparks flew between them in June when, at Anthony Bacon's urging, Essex displaced Burghley as employer of the spy Anthony Standen. Tensions peaked again in January 1594 when Essex accused one of the court physicians, Roderigo Lopez, of plotting to murder the queen. Burghley dismissed the idea out of hand and Elizabeth ridiculed Essex for suggesting it. The earl suffered another of his acute crises of confidence, shutting himself in his chamber for two days. However, he was soon able to produce new evidence against Lopez and the doctor was arrested, interrogated, condemned, and ultimately executed. This triumph put Burghley on the back foot and earned Essex much popular acclaim. It also helped to create the conditions for a 'modus vivendi' between Essex and Burghley, in which Sir Robert Cecil -- loyal to his father, desperate to win the still-vacant post of secretary of state, and yet also eager to co-operate with the queen's undisputed favourite -- played the part of a bridge-builder. 
The basis of this accommodation was a rough division of political interests. Essex largely accepted Burghley's dominating influence in domestic politics and patronage and in matters relating to Ireland. He recognized that, after more than thirty years in power, Burghley's hold on the levers of patronage was too well encrusted to be challenged without a struggle and that this could only distract from what he regarded as more pressing events overseas. Essex also believed that Burghley would soon die and calculated that the political weight which he gained by focusing on foreign and military affairs would inevitably enable him to succeed to the lord treasurer's influence when the time came. Essex therefore threw himself into military administration, the appointment of army officers, intelligence gathering, and an ever growing number of foreign correspondences -- areas of often frenetic activity which reflected his conviction that confronting Spain was England's most urgent task and which provided him with a steady supply of the political ammunition which he needed to impress this view upon a reluctant queen. For his part, Burghley was apparently happy to scale back his involvement in European affairs beyond those regions nearest to England, content to be rid of the expense involved and feeling increasingly out of sympathy with constant foreign demands for more English aid. 
Although Essex took over correspondence with Florence (through James Guicciardini) in 1593 and invested much time and money in intelligence gathering from 1592, the full extent of his ambition to become a statesman of truly international significance emerged only in 1595. In that year he took advantage of Thomas Smith's entry into royal service to expand his secretariat from two to four, his 'confident' secretary Edward Reynoldes being joined by three high-powered new men: Henry Wotton, William Temple, and Henry Cuffe. The return to France of Antonio Perez, the former secretary of Philip II of Spain whom Essex had hosted and regularly debriefed over the preceding eighteen months, also gave him the opportunity to win royal approval to station his own semi-diplomatic agent at Venice. Dr Henry Hawkyns served there as Essex's -- and Elizabeth's -- charge d'affaires from December 1595 until March 1598. Essex subsequently employed Sir Thomas Chaloner to perform a similar function in Florence. Although the evidence is thin, it seems that he also employed resident agents in various parts of the Holy Roman empire, including a Monsieur le Douz at Vienna in 1596. As well as sending regular intelligence reports, such men were required to create elaborate dossiers to brief Essex on the intricacies of individual foreign states. Young gentlemen whom he sponsored during their continental tours, such as Francis Davison, were encouraged to do the same. Essex was not only anxious for information to help him better understand European politics but also believed that such work would train men who could administer the more expansive foreign policy which he envisaged himself as presiding over in the future: 'the cheife ende of my employinge yow be rather your inablynge hereafter then your present service' (Hammer, 'Essex and Europe', 374). Essex made similar promises to Robert Naunton, who served as his intermediary with Perez in France between 1596 and 1598. 
Part of the reason for Essex's success in projecting himself upon what he often called 'the stage of Christendom' was the belief abroad -- which his agents diligently fostered -- that he was the obvious choice to succeed Burghley as Elizabeth's dominant councillor and that he was committed to making England play a full part in European affairs. Another reason was that Essex supported the idea of toleration for Catholics in England -- as long as they opposed Spain and Spanish influence over the papacy. Although Essex remained resolutely protestant, even puritan, in his own religious beliefs, he began to position himself as a champion of toleration from at least the time of Standen's return to England in 1593. Despite his bellicosity towards Spanish 'tyranny', many of Essex's friends leaned towards the old religion, as did many of the foreign visitors whom he hosted on the queen's behalf: Perez, for example, was quietly allowed to hold mass in Essex House. By 1595 Essex's reputation was such that the Jesuit Thomas Wright surrendered himself into the earl's protection in June, and poet and Catholic convert Henry Constable was moved to begin corresponding with him from France about toleration. 
Essex also played an increasingly dominant role in military matters, although he never attained the monopoly which he might have wanted. At times of crisis he was dispatched to oversee preparations at the coast, often in tandem with the lord admiral, Charles Howard, Lord Howard of Effingham. Organizing major military operations entailed much paperwork and taxed his stamina to the limit. In March 1596 one of his servants complained that 'he is in continewall labour. I thinke the husbandman endureth not more toyle' (LPL, MS 656, fol. 75'r'). Essex deliberately set out to become the 'great patron of the warrs' (Hatfield House, Cecil MS 62/71), encouraging army officers to regard him as their chief advocate and the key to securing new commands. When new armies were raised or fresh amphibious expeditions were launched, as in 1595, Essex was also able to draw out hundreds of gentlemen volunteers who served as unpaid soldiers and gave English forces an added cutting edge. Essex supplemented his own judgement and experience in military matters with expert advice from Sir Roger Williams (until his death in late 1595) and Sir Francis Vere (until he fell out with Essex in mid-1597), as well as aristocratic friends like Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, and Lord Willoughby. He also received advice on the laws of war from Alberico Gentili and Matthew Sutcliffe. However, Essex's relationship with Norris never recovered from the collapse of their private arrangement concerning the command of troops sent to Brittany in 1590. 
One of Essex's few serious ventures into the field of high-level domestic patronage was his consistent support for Francis Bacon's unsuccessful attempts to secure high legal office between 1593 and 1596. Essex repeatedly sought Burghley's backing for these suits, recognizing the lord treasurer's influence in such matters and believing that a united front would overcome Elizabeth's lingering doubts about Bacon. Burghley ultimately rebuffed Bacon when he sought to become attorney-general in 1593-4, fuelling fresh recriminations with Essex. However, both men agreed to support Bacon's subsequent suit to become solicitor-general -- until the queen declared her refusal to fill the post if their united front was maintained. Elizabeth complained that acceding to their request would make it seem that she was governed by her two councillors and would undermine her princely authority. Burghley promptly withdrew his backing for Bacon. Essex fumed at Burghley's defection and, characteristically, redoubled his own efforts for Bacon because he believed that he was honour-bound to support his friend, despite the faint chance of success. Essex's repeated efforts to urge the queen into appointing Bacon salved his own conscience, but merely delayed the inevitable and underlined Burghley's continuing mastery of court politics. It was equally characteristic of Essex that he compensated Bacon for his failure from his own pocket -- even though he remained chronically short of money -- and continued to believe that he would one day be properly rewarded for his principled conduct, in contrast to what he regarded as the selfish expediency of other courtiers. For her part, the queen was irritated by Essex's deliberate tactic of harping on about Bacon, but was prepared to forgive him much because of the zeal which he showed in her service. 
Although Essex believed that Elizabeth herself would heap riches and responsibility upon him once Burghley died, his actions were also partly conditioned by the belief that he had a secret trump card. During the early 1590s James VI of Scotland became increasingly angry at Elizabeth's blatant interference in his realm, and especially at her support for the troublesome earl of Bothwell in 1593-4. Since this policy was pursued on the queen's orders by Burghley and Cecil, the king regarded them as his enemies. By contrast, Essex's well-known rivalry with Burghley, more cosmopolitan outlook, and concern for events which would follow Elizabeth's death made him the obvious choice to become the champion of James's claim to the English throne. At least as early as June 1593 Anthony Bacon was exploiting his contacts in Scotland to open indirect communication with the king on Essex's behalf. By early 1594 this 'mutuelle intelligence' (BL, Add. MS 4125, fol. 38'r') had clearly expanded to encompass Essex's commitment to support the king as Elizabeth's successor and the king's promise of substantial rewards for Essex in return. This alignment -- orchestrated through third parties like Bacon, David Foulis, and James Hudson -- endured to the end of Essex's life and gradually became an open secret within the British Isles and abroad. 
Although the details of his political manoeuvrings were known to only a few close associates, Essex enjoyed a public profile at home and abroad during the 1590s which was second only to that of the queen. One index of the power of his name -- and of his deliberate cultivation of a reputation for aristocratic munificence -- was the half-dozen or so printed works which were dedicated to him each year after he had established himself as Leicester's successor as royal favourite. Not even Elizabeth herself received as many dedications as Essex during the 1590s. These works included manuals on war and honour, translations of foreign and classical texts, and numerous puritan religious tracts. Among the last were three works by George Gifford, Nicholas Bownd's classic sabbatarian tract 'The Doctrine of the Sabbath' (1595), and John Rainolds's monumental 'De Romanae ecclesiae idolatria' (1596). In at least one instance Essex may also have contributed to a published work. Some contemporaries claimed that he was the real author of the epistle to the reader in Henry Savile's 'The Ende of Nero and Beginninge of Galba' (1591), a landmark translation of key works by the classical Roman historian Tacitus. Even if this claim is erroneous, Essex was certainly an eager student of the new 'politic' history which was being derived from the works of Tacitus and sought to apply its insights to his own political actions. He also had a long and close relationship with the polymathic Savile, whom he helped to become provost of Eton and who in turn provided the earl with expert scholarly advice and perhaps acted as a talent scout for him at Oxford. Thanks to Savile and Thomas Smith and various contacts at Cambridge, such as William Whitaker, Essex had a very high reputation at the universities and was a regular recruiter of promising students and dons. In addition to performing research services or undergoing 'inablynge' overseas, Essex's patronage of university men included employment among his chaplains. More than thirty of his chaplains have been identified, including William Alabaster, John Buckeridge, George Downham, Richard Harris, Samuel Hieron, George Montaigne, Leonell Sharpe, John Spencer, Owen Wood, and Anthony Wotton. By the mid-1590s, thanks to his burgeoning relationship with Archbishop Whitgift, Essex's patronage of clergymen also extended to winning advancement for men who sought to become bishops. Beneficiaries of his support included Richard Fletcher, Anthony Rudd, Thomas Bilson, Gervase Babington, and Richard Vaughan, while his endorsement of Martin Heton and Robert Some proved unsuccessful. In late 1596 Essex also joined Whitgift in backing Richard Bancroft to succeed Fletcher as bishop of London. Given Bancroft's reputation as a notorious anti-puritan crusader, Essex's willingness to see him take control of the key diocese of London reflected his own desire to side with Whitgift against Burghley over this appointment and his belief that Bancroft would keep his promise not to persecute puritans under the earl's protection. It was characteristic of Essex's high political ambitions that he entered into such an arrangement with Whitgift and Bancroft, and testimony to his success that the deal stuck until the time of Essex's own final downfall. 
Essex's grand political designs were based upon the expectation that he would soon simply take over from Burghley and persuade Elizabeth, using his charm and intellect, to commit more resources to war on the continent. Events in 1595 proved these assumptions naive. Although Burghley (as chancellor of the university) presumably approved the grand bestowing of honorary MAs at Cambridge which Essex arranged in February 1595, they clashed repeatedly during the remainder of the year. In May, when news finally broke that Essex was the father of Elizabeth Southwell's son, an attempt was made to capitalize on Elizabeth's fury by pushing for Cecil to become secretary of state. Although the appointment was stopped at the last minute, it demonstrated that Cecil was now a genuine rival to Essex for Burghley's political mantle. In response Essex launched a propaganda campaign later in the year to demonstrate his own credentials to succeed Burghley. This effort included a remarkable display at the accession day tournament at Whitehall in November, where he risked outshining the queen by staging an entertainment (perhaps written for him by Francis Bacon) which dramatized his talents for the crowd. Early in 1596 Essex began to circulate a letter of travel advice for the earl of Rutland which was also designed to highlight his statesmanlike qualities. This proved highly successful and ultimately migrated into print in 1633. Although Essex himself wrote a series of private letters of travel advice to Rutland in late 1595, this document was probably edited for public consumption by his newly enlarged secretariat or by Bacon. 
Essex's campaign to win broad support for his claim to become the queen's next chief minister was both encouraged and complicated by a deepening disagreement over policy. During 1595 his continuing commitment to Henri IV put him increasingly at odds with the queen, who was now determined to withdraw all remaining English troops from France. In Essex's mind the growing antipathy of Elizabeth and Burghley towards the French king was blinding them to the vital necessity of sustaining the war abroad. Only by genuinely pooling resources with its French and Dutch allies, he believed, could England ensure that the Spanish menace was kept at arm's length and, ultimately, defeated. Essex was so upset by the queen's stance that he secretly instructed his friend Sir Henry Unton, who went to France as ambassador in December 1595, to exaggerate the difficulties faced by the French king in order to force Elizabeth to change her mind. However, even this had little impact upon the queen. 
Essex was also dismayed in the middle of 1595 when Elizabeth and the Cecils expressed scepticism about his intelligence reports from Spain, which seemed to show that a new invasion of England was being prepared. Essex's interpretation of the intelligence was actually incorrect, but this became irrelevant after a minor Spanish raid on Cornwall late in July encouraged unanimous support for a pre-emptive strike against Spain. The operation was initiated by Lord Admiral Howard but it expanded dramatically in size when Essex was appointed to share the command early in 1596. Essex poured his resources -- and those of his friends and followers -- into the venture because he not only intended to neutralize the Spanish fleet but also harboured the secret intention to forestall Elizabeth's steady disengagement from the continent by seizing a Spanish port and garrisoning it. Essex spelt out this intention -- which ran directly contrary to the queen's orders -- in a letter which he left behind to be delivered to the council only when the fleet was beyond recall. When Elizabeth decided to cancel the expedition in May, Essex was mortified, especially as preparations had already been delayed during April by a bungled effort to relieve the French garrison at Calais. Essex took the lead in this operation (much to the lord admiral's dismay), but Elizabeth's dithering ensured the port's loss to the Spanish and cast a stain upon the earl's honour. This made him more determined than ever to make the most of any opportunity for action. His attitude towards the queen and her direction of the war was now one of acute frustration: 'I know I shall never do her service butt against her will' (LPL, MS 657, fol. 140'r'). 
Elizabeth ultimately permitted the expedition to proceed and it finally sailed from Plymouth on 3 June 1596. The fleet headed straight for Cadiz. On 21 June it destroyed a Spanish fleet anchored in the bay and landed troops who stormed the city. Essex helped to lead the naval assault before landing in the first boat ashore and leading his troops over the city walls and through the streets. This day's action was the most complete and dramatic English victory of the war against Spain. However, Essex failed to convince the lord admiral that Cadiz should be held in defiance of the queen's instructions. The vast riches which were plundered from the city also made many officers anxious to return home. With great reluctance Essex agreed that Cadiz should be burned and abandoned. The fleet subsequently raided the town of Faro, where the plunder included 178 books from the bishop's library. Essex later donated many of these books to Thomas Bodley's new library at Oxford. Delayed by ensuring the safe return of two captured Spanish warships, Essex did not return to Plymouth until 8 August. By then the queen was already furious about how much of the plunder had been hidden from royal officials. When Burghley and Cecil (newly appointed as secretary of state) launched an investigation, Essex despaired at Elizabeth's lack of gratitude for the victory, especially as he had himself spent so much and taken so little. Ultimately, a political explosion was averted and the earl's conduct on the voyage was vindicated. However, the failure of his plan to garrison Cadiz meant that the expedition had wounded Spanish national pride without inflicting long-term damage. Philip II's determination to avenge the humiliation of Cadiz resulted in the hasty dispatch of a fleet towards England in October. Although this was soon overwhelmed by an autumn storm England was shocked by the unexpected danger and remained in the grip of invasion fever until the end of November. Essex played a key role in the realm's preparations for defence, confirming his new status as the queen's chief military commander. 
Essex's frustration at Cadiz did not mark the end of his efforts to redirect the queen's war policy. Thwarted in his hopes of holding the city, he tried to whip up public support for his plans -- and bolster his own reputation as what Edmund Spenser now called 'great England's glory and the world's wide wonder' ('Prothalamion', 1.146) -- by directing Henry Cuffe to write a 'True relacion' of the victory at Cadiz. Elizabeth prevented this tract from being printed in London, but related documents were circulated in manuscript within England and abroad. Essex also unsuccessfully tried to use his contacts with the Dutch and French, and with the City of London, to press Elizabeth into using the returning army for an assault on Calais. More subtly Essex retained the beard which he had grown on the voyage, which henceforth became a trademark feature of his appearance. The new image -- in effect, the 'face of Cadiz' -- was formalized in portraits painted by Marcus Gheeraerts the younger and Isaac Oliver, and in various later engravings which closely followed the Oliver pattern. These paintings confirm the description of Essex given by a Venetian visitor in late 1596: 'fair-skinned, tall, but wiry', sporting a beard, 'which he used not to wear', and 'right modest, courteous, and humane' ('CSP Venice', '1592-1603', 9.238). 
Although he had finally established himself as the central figure in England's war effort, Essex succumbed to another bout of severe depression during the early months of 1597, alternately seeking to abandon the court and shutting himself in his chamber there for days on end. Despite all his efforts and all he had achieved in 1596, he had still failed to commit Elizabeth to wholehearted war on the continent. His ambition of being seen as the only viable successor to Burghley had also been thoroughly dented by Cecil's appointment as secretary of state. Worse, despite the superficial amity which had reappeared by the end of the year, a growing coalition of councillors and courtiers was now clearly determined to oppose Essex, while he himself was virtually alone. This disparity soon became obvious when Henry Brooke, eighth Lord Cobham, sought to succeed his father as warden of the Cinque Ports. Essex despised Cobham, but his best efforts to support the rival candidacy of Sir Robert Sidney could do no more than delay Cobham's appointment. Although he apparently still considered withdrawing from politics as late as the end of March, Essex could not abandon the path to which he had committed himself: to do so would be a craven submission to despair and a betrayal of honour and of those who counted upon his support. He was also attracted by Elizabeth's offer to appoint him master of the ordnance, especially as the realm's whole military administration was thrown into crisis when Sir Thomas Sherley 'broke credit' on 8 March. Essex was appointed to the post on 18 March, with a remit to tackle the rampant corruption which he had repeatedly claimed was impeding the war effort. In a letter of 4 October 1596, which has been much quoted by modern scholars, Francis Bacon had explictly warned Essex about the political dangers of accepting any military post: 'keep it in substance, but abolish it in shows to the Queen. For her Majesty loveth peace. Next, she loveth not charge. Thirdly, that kind of dependence maketh a suspected greatness... Let that be a sleeping honour awhile, and cure the Queen's mind in that point. (Spedding, 2.43)' Essex's acceptance of the mastership of the ordnance showed that he could not adapt himself to the sort of calculated political manoeuvring which Bacon suggested. Even though he spent fully eight days haggling with Elizabeth over the terms of his patent, his own self-identity as a soldier, the urging of friends such as Lord Willoughby, and the obvious need for drastic action compelled him to accept the office. 
Although his eagerness to be seen as a soldier dismayed Bacon, Essex returned to the political fray with a specific agenda. Dealing with Cecil and Ralegh, he struck a bargain which would allow him to execute his illicit strategy of 1596 with a fresh fleet and army and full royal approval in 1597. The final terms of the arrangement -- which Elizabeth was prevailed upon to implement -- were thrashed out after a dinner at Essex House on 18 April. Essex was assigned the task of neutralizing the continuing threat from Spain and given the chance to put into practice his strategy of seizing and holding a port in Spain. This would not only force the Spanish to pull many of their forces home but also serve as a base for English ships to blockade the Spanish coast, cutting off the vital supply of New World silver and diverting it into Elizabeth's coffers. Ralegh would serve as one of Essex's subordinates on the new expedition and be restored to his old position as captain of the queen's guard. Cecil was to receive the office of chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, while the lord admiral ceded command of the expedition to Essex and received lucrative grants from the queen. Essex gambled that he could achieve sufficient military success abroad to counter -- and overmatch -- the benefits which he was yielding to his rivals at home. 
Essex sought to give himself the best possible chance of succeeding in this gamble. As well as reorganizing the militia to improve its ability to counter a Spanish landing, he readied a fleet and army which were superior to those of the previous year. The expedition sailed from Plymouth on 10 July, but was battered by a storm and driven back to port. Essex was so determined not to abandon the voyage that he pushed his ship almost to breaking point, barely making it back to Falmouth. Despite Essex's fears that she would cancel the operation after this near-disaster, Elizabeth grudgingly agreed to continue. However, adverse winds kept the fleet from sailing and the soldiers began to fall sick in large numbers. Ultimately Essex was forced to disband all but a small part of his army. When the fleet finally departed on 17 August Essex's planned strategy had therefore already been rendered impracticable. It soon became clear that the fleet lacked even the resources necessary for attacking the Spanish fleet at Ferrol, the primary purpose for which Elizabeth approved the expedition. Instead, Essex and his subordinates decided to sail to the Azores and lie in wait for the Spanish silver fleet. Essex himself had dismissed this sort of hit-or-miss enterprise in the previous year as merely 'idle wanderings upon the sea' (BL, Add. MS 74287, fol. 13'v'). Now he was forced to gamble all on the hope of capturing enough Spanish silver to encourage Elizabeth to give him another chance at attacking Spain in the following year. Unfortunately, a purely naval venture placed an overwhelming burden on Essex's very limited experience of command at sea. His shortcomings as an admiral contributed to a showdown with Ralegh at Fayal in September, when partisans of the earl demanded that Ralegh be charged with mutiny for landing troops before Essex arrived to oversee the operation. The fleet also suffered the cruel misfortune of failing to intercept the Spanish silver fleet at Terceira by a mere three hours. The final indignity occurred when Essex's exhausted fleet straggled home at the end of October only to discover that the Spanish fleet -- which had not been drawn from Ferrol to help defend the Azores -- was almost on the point of assaulting Falmouth. Once again England was plunged into an invasion scare and Essex was forced to improvise defensive measures with extreme speed. However, it soon emerged that the same wind which had scattered Essex's returning fleet had also dispersed the Spanish. The alarm was quickly over, but it underlined the utter failure of Essex's Azores or 'Islands' voyage. Many of his followers were ruined by the costs of taking part in the expedition and his military reputation was severely dented. 
Essex's dismay at his failure and at the advantages gained by his rivals who had stayed at home made him acutely sensitive about his personal honour. This sensitivity soon turned to fury when he learned that the lord admiral had been created earl of Nottingham and that the new earl's patent of creation seemed to credit him with the victory at Cadiz. To Essex it appeared that his triumph of 1596 was being stolen from him. He insisted that Elizabeth amend the patent or that Nottingham surrender it. When these demands produced no result Essex withdrew from court by 9 November. Although he initially pleaded ill health, it soon became clear that he would not return to the queen's service until she gave him some form of public reward to salve his wounded pride. Such behaviour reinforced the claims of his rivals that he was a dangerous maverick and undermined the queen's trust in his judgement and commitment to her service. However, in Essex's mind, the terrible political cost of defending his honour actually made it all the more virtuous for him to take this stand. By risking so much, he showed his true commitment to honour and should be rewarded accordingly. Although the lord admiral resigned the lord stewardship in protest at Essex's behaviour, Elizabeth ultimately gave way in this test of wills. After more than a week of argument about the wording of the patent she appointed Essex to the vacant office of earl marshal on 28 December 1597. This post ensured that Essex regained precedence over the lord admiral and made him the queen's chief arbiter of honour. 
By the start of 1598 Essex was still 'a man of great designs' (De Maisse, 7), but his ambitions to bestride the European stage seemed increasingly at odds with his deteriorating position in domestic politics. His ability to sway the queen on matters of importance now appeared highly questionable, and the resolve of his opponents -- including Burghley, Cecil, Nottingham, Cobham, Ralegh, and Buckhurst -- had been strengthened by recent events. More importantly, his commitment to waging aggressive war against Spain in partnership with the French and the Dutch now risked leaving him stranded by the changing tide of European politics. By late 1597 Essex's old comrade in arms, Henri IV of France, was determined to secure peace with Spain. This decision meant the final abandonment of the triple alliance with England and the Dutch, and heightened tensions between the king and his protestant subjects. Both the Dutch and the Huguenots looked to Essex, their chief supporter in England, to lobby Elizabeth to ensure that Henri's action would not endanger their interests. For his part, unlike Elizabeth or Burghley, Essex had lived his entire life under the shadow of Spanish 'tyranny'. He believed that Spain simply could not be trusted to maintain a peace unless it had first been driven into submission by force of arms. Elizabeth's strong interest in following Henri's lead therefore challenged Essex on a number of levels. 
The need to confer with England's French and Dutch allies kept Cecil, the key figure among Essex's rivals, overseas between mid-February and the end of April. Essex even took over Cecil's duties as secretary of state for part of this period. However, he also promised not to take any action which would harm Cecil's interests during his absence. Despite the regularity with which Cecil and others had profited from his own absences abroad and despite urging from Francis Bacon 'to put your sickle into another's harvest' (Spedding, 2.96), Essex refused to breach this arrangement. Instead, he sought to pacify the queen's notorious dislike for his mother -- with very limited success. Cecil's return and the signing of the Franco-Spanish peace at Vervins on 2 May 1598 (OS) effectively removed Essex's room for manoeuvre. Already Essex had been accused of preventing England from making peace. According to William Camden, Burghley had become so infuriated with the earl's stance that on one occasion he had pulled out a psalm book and quoted at him the verse that 'men of blood shall not live out half their days' (Camden, 555). The queen was also incensed that opposition from the Dutch, whom Essex defended, was tying her hands. In response to such criticisms Essex once again sought to influence political debate by appealing over the heads of the queen and his opponents at court to a broader public audience. He wrote an impassioned and lengthy rebuttal of the 'ugly and odious aspersion' that he sought 'to keepe the state of England in continuall warre', defending his own past actions and arguing the terrible dangers of making peace with an enemy which had consistently acted with perfidy and malice (Devereux, 'Apologie', sig. A1'r'). Written in the deniable format of a private letter to Anthony Bacon, this 'Apologie' was secretly disseminated in manuscript form. When the circulation of the document was brought into question, Essex denied all knowledge and blamed its spread on the excessive enthusiasm of his friend Fulke Greville and unnamed servants. Essex's 'Apologie' proved immensely successful and enjoyed very wide circulation, although many of the manuscript copies which survive may actually have been made after his death. An authorized printed edition of the 'Apologie' was published in 1603 and quickly spawned a Dutch translation. 
The increasingly acrimonious debate about future royal policy came to a head at a meeting on 30 June or 1 July 1598 when Elizabeth sought to choose a new lord deputy for Ireland. When the queen suggested that Essex's uncle Sir William Knollys should fill the vacant post Essex sought to prevent the loss of a key ally at court by nominating Cecil's friend Sir George Carew. Angered at Elizabeth's scornful response, Essex turned his back on her. This breach of protocol infuriated Elizabeth and she struck him across the head. He instinctively reached for his sword, only to be held back by the lord admiral. Before leaving the room, Essex told the queen and his dumbfounded colleagues that 'he neither could nor would put up so great an afront and indignity, neither would he have taken it at King Henry the Eighth his hands' (Camden, 556). He may have compounded the disaster -- if the oral tradition reported by the young Edward Hyde (later earl of Clarendon) is accurate -- by rebuking the queen with the comment that 'she was as crooked in her disposition as in her carcass' (Hyde, 192). Although none of the sources for the confrontation is precisely contemporary, it is clear that his explosion arose from frustrations and anger which had been building for several years. In Essex's mind everything which he had done to advance the queen's service had been met with rejection or quibbling while rewards had flowed in profusion to those men who carped at him from the safety of the court and ventured nothing of their own. Unwilling to see the true nature of his own failings, he believed that this injustice ultimately stemmed from the queen, whose female qualities made her unduly sympathetic to the inglorious counsels of his adversaries and unable, or unwilling, to recognize the conspicuous virtue of his actions. 
Essex's angry withdrawal from the court punctured for ever the notion of his indispensability to government which he had cultivated so painfully during the first half of the decade. However, the council could not yet function fully effectively without him. More importantly, despite his outrageous behaviour, Elizabeth was not yet sure how to live without him. Less than a fortnight after Essex had withdrawn to his country estate at Wanstead messengers were sent to sound him out about returning to court. Friends of Essex wrote letters urging him to make his peace with the queen. Most famously the lord keeper, Sir Thomas Egerton, urged him to conquer his false pride and show the obedience owed by all the queen's subjects. Essex, however, rejected the suggestion that he should simply submit, raising dangerous questions about royal power in the process: 'what, cannot princes err? cannot subjects receive wrong? is an earthly power or authority infinite?' (Birch, 2.387). Manuscript copies of this epistolary exchange (many of them redated from 15 and 18 July to 15 and 18 October) were subsequently disseminated among Essex's friends and gradually followed his 'Apologie' into wider circulation. Together these documents formed a kind of political manifesto, which continued to attract interest, and recopying, during the first half of the seventeenth century. 
Such prideful behaviour made it impossible for Essex to share fully in the great redistribution of offices which followed Burghley's death on 4 August 1598. Although chosen as chancellor of Cambridge University in Burghley's place on 25 August, he refused to return to council meetings until Elizabeth gave him a private audience at which he could air his grievances. News of the disaster at Blackwater on 14 August, which seemed to herald the complete loss of Ireland, and of the death of Philip II of Spain a month later, made Essex's participation in council business even more urgent than before. However, although he was willing to tender his advice directly to the queen in writing he would not rejoin his colleagues at the council table until Elizabeth demonstrated to him -- and them -- that she was once again willing to place special trust in him and allow him the kind of latitude she would not permit to any other subject. Essex clearly recognized that the military emergency in Ireland put him in a strong position, for he was not only master of the ordnance, but also the leading patron of army officers and the realm's most famous soldier. This calculation proved correct. Despite the complications caused by the queen's fury about the secret marriage between Henry Wriothesley, earl of Southampton, and Elizabeth Vernon (respectively, Essex's friend and cousin), concerted efforts were made to arrange his return to court by early September. In the end, the breakthrough came when Essex succumbed to a bout of fever, which allowed Elizabeth to put aside her fury and play the role of concerned sovereign. She sent her own physician to treat him and a succession of messengers to gather reports on his progress. By 10 September Essex was sufficiently recovered to attend a council meeting for the first time since the end of June. He met the queen two days later. 
Although it seemed that Essex had again succeeded in bending the queen to his will, the remarkable favour which she had always displayed towards him was now distinctly brittle. Although he expected to be given Burghley's old mastership of the court of wards, the office was never granted to him. The fact that many observers of the court believed that Essex would receive the post made the queen's failure to confer it upon him all the more unsettling. During late October and early November, Essex was able to win more positive comment from the revelation of the so-called Squire plot. This conspiracy allegedly involved separate attempts to kill both Elizabeth and Essex by smearing poison on, respectively, a saddle and a chair. The attempt on Essex's life supposedly occurred during the Azores expedition, while the fleet was near Fayal. Like the Lopez plot of 1594, the sensational charges against Edward Squire excited public outrage against Spain and dealt a severe blow to any prospect of peace talks. The news also gave a fresh boost to popular perceptions of Essex's status as a hero of the war against Spain and as the queen's most loyal lieutenant. However, despite his apparent recovery of royal favour, Essex remained at odds with the queen and most of his conciliar colleagues over the issue of Ireland. Anxious to preserve his own status as the indisputable colossus in English military affairs, he criticized previous campaigns in Ireland and stubbornly rejected the idea that anyone else was suitable for such a command, even his friend Lord Mountjoy. Inevitably this constant belittling of others and boasting of his own capabilities soon put him in the position of having to accept the command in Ireland himself or backing down and allowing another to take the lead in what was to be England's greatest military effort since 1588. As a soldier who still dreamed of winning martial glory and the political rewards which he believed this would bring, Essex could not bear to let the opportunity pass to another. He also recognized that this was also his only chance to recapture the political initiative from his rivals. 
Although it was clear by early November that Essex would go to Ireland, Elizabeth did not confirm his appointment there -- as lord lieutenant, rather than merely lord deputy -- until 30 December. The size of his army and details of his commission remained under debate almost until he left London on 27 March 1599. He arrived in Dublin on 14 April, having almost drowned during his crossing of the Irish Sea. Essex intended a short, sharp campaign. He planned a three-pronged assault to crush the earl of Tyrone's forces in Ulster and ensure his own speedy return to England. However, it was soon clear that neither the resources at hand nor the state of the countryside would permit an immediate attack on Tyrone. Essex and his advisers therefore postponed the Ulster operation until June and instead launched a sweep through Leinster, which began on 9 May. Essex continued this expedition into Munster, capturing the supposedly impregnable Cahir Castle on 30 May and relieving a fort at Askeaton in early June. These operations safeguarded southern Ireland from the rumoured threat of a Spanish landing, but consumed time, money, and supplies. By the time Essex returned to Dublin on 11 July he was exhausted, sick, and disillusioned by the tenacity of Irish resistance. He could envisage victory only by a long and costly war of attrition -- precisely the sort of struggle which he wanted to avoid, given his earlier promises of rapid success and his growing belief that his opponents at home were poisoning the queen against him. Elizabeth needed little prompting to lash out at Essex. Already angry over the vast cost of his expedition, she was further enraged by Essex's profligacy in bestowing knighthoods, demands for more men and supplies, and lack of action against Tyrone. In fact, Essex had concluded that he lacked the numbers to attack Tyrone, even before Sir Conyers Clifford led his troops into a bloody ambush in the Curlew Mountains on 5 August. Believing that he was being stabbed in the back by his enemies at home, Essex's thoughts increasingly focused on leaving Ireland and settling matters at court as quickly as possible. Secret overtures were made to Tyrone through Captain Thomas Lee, while Essex himself even considered shipping his army to Wales and taking the field against his domestic enemies. Ultimately, such open treason proved too large a step to take. Despite his continuing protestations about the impossibility of confronting Tyrone, Essex finally obeyed the queen's command to march north at the end of August. Outnumbered and unable to outflank the enemy, he agreed to Tyrone's request for a parley on 7 September. The two earls met at Bellaclynthe ford, near Drumconragh, and talked privately for half an hour, their horses standing belly-deep in the water. Tyrone later told a Spanish priest that he almost convinced Essex to turn against Elizabeth, but Essex could not reconcile himself to becoming an ally of Spain ('CSP Spain', '1587-1603', 4.685). In the absence of testimony from a third party it is difficult to judge whether Tyrone's claim was merely empty boasting. Nevertheless, the two leaders subsequently agreed a truce and Essex dispersed his army and began medical treatment. However, it was soon apparent that Elizabeth would not accept Essex's actions. Alarmed by the furious tone of her letters, he decided to return to court immediately, despite her recent order to the contrary. 
Trusting in speed rather than numbers Essex sailed for England with only a few companions on 24 September 1599, reaching the court at Nonsuch on the morning of 28 September. Still muddied from the ride, he rushed into the queen's chamber. Famously, he found her incompletely dressed and with her hair in disarray. A more formal meeting occurred about 11 a.m., by which time both were more suitably attired. All seemed to be going well. However, at their third meeting, after lunch, Elizabeth began reproving Essex and ordered him to explain his behaviour to members of the council. This was the last time that Essex and Elizabeth ever saw each other. He was confined to his chamber late that evening. The next afternoon he spent several hours defending himself before his conciliar colleagues, before being sent to York House as a prisoner. While the council began drawing up charges against him, Essex began to collapse mentally and physically. Not only was he drained by his efforts in Ireland, but the sense of mission which had sustained him for so long now deserted him and he began to realize that his career might be ending in abject failure. On 29 November the council excoriated Essex's proceedings in Ireland in Star Chamber and publicly justified his imprisonment, but more serious action was put on hold until it was clear whether his sickness would prove terminal. On 18-19 December and at Christmas it seemed that Essex was on the verge of death, prompting several churches in London to ring their bells or offer special prayers for him -- infuriating both the queen and the council. Essex survived and gradually recovered, but he was only a shadow of the man who had been such a dynamic figure in the mid-1590s. 
In early February 1600 -- in the wake of a new scandal involving the sale of an equestrian portrait of Essex, engraved by Thomas Cockson, which described him as 'Vertue's honor', 'Grace's servant', and, most ominously, 'God's elected' -- it was finally decided that Essex would be tried in Star Chamber on 13 February. However, when the earl sent her a submissive letter Elizabeth cancelled the trial and a long-running effort to frame charges of treason against him was also put aside. On the evening of 20 March he was allowed to return to Essex House, albeit under the oversight of Sir Richard Berkeley. Early in May, a printer's attempt to publish a pirate edition of the 'Apologie' -- which Essex immediately disowned -- attracted further attention to his anomalous status as an uncondemned detainee in his own house. A special hearing was therefore arranged at York House on 5 June, at which Essex was charged with various acts of insubordination during his time in Ireland. The hearing lasted from 9 a.m. until 8 p.m. Those speaking against Essex included Francis Bacon, whose attack on the earl seemed to suggest that he positively relished the task. Although Essex's fortitude in enduring the speeches against him drew general admiration, his detailed rebuttal of the charges angered the commissioners even as it cheered his supporters in the audience. Essex was sequestered from all his offices and ordered to remain under house arrest during the queen's pleasure. Although the sentence brought tears from many in the audience, Elizabeth soon began to loosen the shackles. Essex was allowed to spend time at his wife's country house at Barn Elms and, on 1 July, was relieved of Berkeley's presence. Despite Elizabeth's continuing fury over his prodigality with knighthoods in Ireland and fresh efforts by his enemies on the council during July to find evidence of treason (especially involving John Hayward's dedication to Essex of 'The First Part of the Life and Reign of King Henry the IIII' in February 1599), he was finally granted his liberty on 26 August. 
Essex's release prohibited him from going to court, which meant that his political career was finished -- and that his enemies were determined to prevent him from using his old charm to regain favour with the queen. However, Essex's huge debts meant that he simply could not afford to retire. Unless Elizabeth agreed to renew his lease of the customs on sweet wines in October, he would be ruined. The recent opening of peace talks with Spain also fuelled his fears that his rivals were about to sell out to the enemy. In Essex's eyes, his opponents not only lacked the moral courage to continue the war but even sought a Spanish successor to Elizabeth because they feared that James VI of Scotland would promote Essex to a dominant position in a new Jacobean regime. These fears provoked contradictory responses among Essex's followers and reflected divergent impulses within his own mind. On the one hand, the renewal of the wines lease depended upon favour from the queen and support from key members of the council, which required sincere displays of penitence and humility. This accorded with Essex's belief, which had been strongly evident since his return from Ireland, that he was a wretched sinner who was being chastised and tested by God, to which the only proper response was repentance and self-abasement. On the other hand, Essex also resented the success of his rivals and feared its consequences for England. In this view, Essex could not allow Elizabeth to remain the puppet of men who had apparently proved their traitorous intent by dealing with Spain and by besmirching men of honour and action such as himself and his friends. The diehard Essexians who espoused these views, especially Southampton and Henry Cuffe, had plotted ineffectually to rescue Essex from York House and subsequently encouraged him in covert dealings with Mountjoy (who had succeeded him in Ireland), James VI, and probably also leading figures in France. Such half-hearted conspiracies produced no result, but effectively undermined the efforts of his more moderate supporters to encourage reconciliation and win him an audience with Elizabeth. 
The battle for, and within, Essex's mind was settled when Elizabeth refused to renew his sweet wines lease on 30 October. Essex was ruined and all that remained was desperation. An appeal for help was sent to James VI and preparations began for some kind of action. Essex House became a centre for disaffected aristocrats, unemployed army officers, and noisy puritan preaching. The council's efforts to monitor and control developments at Essex House over the next few months merely heightened fears among Essex's followers that he was at risk from some precipitate action by his enemies. Rumours swirled that Ralegh and Cobham meant to murder him. On Tuesday 3 February 1601 a group of Essex's most ardent partisans met at Drury House -- deliberately removed from Essex House and the earl himself -- to consider how he could pre-empt his enemies and denounce them to the queen: should he attempt to seize control of the court, the Tower, or the City? Chaired by Southampton, the meeting proved inconclusive. When Essex received a summons to appear before the council on Saturday 7 February the result was panic and the adoption of a half-baked plan to appeal for assistance from the City. One group of Essex's gentlemen friends spent the afternoon at the Globe Theatre, where they had paid Shakespeare's company to revive an old play about Richard II to steel themselves for action. On the morning of Sunday 8 February three councillors and the earl of Worcester arrived at Essex House to demand an explanation for his failure to appear on the previous day. Although all four men were well disposed towards him, Essex had them locked up. He then led about 300 men on a march into the City, wearing swords and doublets, but no armour, and carrying few firearms. Essex's companions included the earls of Southampton, Bedford, and Rutland, lords Cromwell, Sandys, and Mounteagle, Sir Charles Danvers, Sir Christopher Blount, and two brothers of the earl of Northumberland. Calling for help from the citizens as they walked, Essex's procession arrived at the house of Sir Thomas Smythe, sheriff of London, about midday. However, Smythe proved evasive and all hope of City support quickly disappeared. Indeed, the lord mayor ordered the gates shut, and troops loyal to enemies of Essex, such as Thomas Cecil, second Lord Burghley, began to surround the demonstrators. By 3 p.m., with fewer than 100 men remaining by his side, Essex headed back to Essex House. Stiff opposition at Ludgate forced him to take to the river and only a hard core managed to reach Essex House, where they were promptly besieged by troops commanded by the lord admiral. Two cannon arrived from the Tower about 9 p.m. and Essex finally decided to surrender. He spent the night as a prisoner in Lambeth Palace before being moved to the Tower in the morning. Scores of his followers were also arrested. 
While Essex contemplated his failure, Captain Thomas Lee tried to force his way into Elizabeth's presence on the evening of 12 February and compel her to summon Essex to an audience. He failed and was swiftly condemned and executed. On the Sunday following Essex's insurrection the preachers of London were required to sermonize against him. The intention was to blacken his public reputation, which remained high. On 19 February Essex and Southampton were tried for treason at Westminster Hall. By then the council had uncovered information about the plotting of the last few months and the meeting at Drury House. The trial generated enormous interest and details are preserved in a mass of manuscript copies of the proceedings. For the prosecution Sir Edward Coke delivered a typically bullying performance, while Francis Bacon again publicly turned the knife in the wound of his old patron. Essex defended himself energetically, but the result was a foregone conclusion and both earls were condemned to death. Nevertheless, the council remained suspicious about Essex's earlier actions in Ireland and following his return, and sent a preacher, Dr Thomas Dove, to urge him to confess. Dove failed but one of Essex's chaplains, Abdias Assheton, succeeded. Assheton's spiritual bludgeoning demolished Essex's sense of heroic failure and encouraged a self-abasement which prompted an outpouring of critical evidence which helped to condemn friends and servants such as Sir Christopher Blount, Gelly Meyrick, and Henry Cuffe. Assheton's efforts also ensured that Essex went to his death with his mind focused upon godly penitence rather than defiance. Essex was beheaded before a small audience in the courtyard of the Tower on 25 February 1601. Characteristically, he sought to die a model death. His pious behaviour during his last hours was recorded in several different accounts of his execution which were widely circulated and copied during the years after his death. He was buried in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula on Tower Green. 
Elizabeth remained extremely sensitive about Essex's memory for the remaining two years of her reign. Men who were too closely associated with his death, such as William Barlow, who had delivered a high-profile sermon against Essex at Paul's Cross in February 1601, were barred from her presence. Elizabeth's death and the succession of James I in March 1603 permitted the public expression of grief over Essex's fate. In addition to his 'Apologie', a variety of ballads and other remembrances of Essex were published in the early years of James's reign. Southampton's prompt release from the Tower, the restoration of the earldom to Essex's son, and early marks of favour towards his sister Lady Rich reflected a rehabilitation of Essex's memory. Sir Francis Bacon felt it necessary to issue a public defence of his actions towards Essex in 1604 and Sir Walter Ralegh was forced to do the same when he himself went to the scaffold in 1618. However, there was no 'Essexian revival' in politics, and pamphlets or plays which explored the causes of Essex's fall attracted immediate action from James's privy council, as Ben Jonson discovered with his 'Sejanus' and Samuel Daniel with his 'Philotas'. Essex's widow helped to ensure that there would be no political grouping of former Essexians by marrying Richard de Burgh, fourth earl of Clanricarde, an Irish nobleman who had been a protege of her late husband and who looked like a younger version of him, in April 1603. Although she survived until February 1632, she spent relatively little time at court. In the 1620s the memory of Essex was used to exemplify militant Elizabethan Hispanophobia and thus implicitly to criticize the policies of James I and Charles I. Essex's image as the champion of aristocratic martial honour and defender of protestantism received a fresh boost in the early 1640s, when his son became a leader of the parliamentarian forces against Charles I. Manuscript copies of Essex's writings also seem to have enjoyed considerable currency during the decades following his death, reflecting both a nostalgia for the Elizabethan era and the continuing appeal of his political stance. 
Writing during the reign of James I, William Camden portrayed Essex as a tragically flawed figure, endowed with great talent and potential, but 'not a man made for the court' (Camden, 624). Sir Henry Wotton and Sir Robert Naunton produced broadly similar portrayals in their accounts of Essex written in the early years of Charles I's reign. In contrast to these retrospective political analyses by men who had known him, writers on the continent traded upon Essex's international reputation to construct fictional dramas about his fall which portray him as a romantic hero and the tragic victim of a plot to deceive the queen. A Dutch play on this theme was perhaps staged in the 1620s, while the anonymous Spanish play 'Dar la vida por su dama' and Gauthier de Costes de La Calprenede's 'Le comte d'Essex' date from the 1630s. La Calprenede's work plays upon the idea that Essex would have been spared if he had not been prevented from sending a ring to Elizabeth. This romantic invention was eschewed in Thomas Corneille's 'Le conte d'Essex' of 1678, but repeated in John Banks's play 'The Unhappy Favourite' (1681) and many other works. 
The modern historiographical image of Essex is still emerging from the caricature to which it was reduced by the nineteenth- and early twentieth-century prejudice against male royal favourites, who were frequently treated as no more than parasitic playboys whose prominence rested solely upon their ability to win and retain the sovereign's affections. Essex was perhaps especially vulnerable to such criticism because of his erratic behaviour during the last two years of his life and because belittling Essex helped to confirm the prevailing rose-tinted views about Elizabeth I and the Cecils. However, a more complex understanding of Essex (and of late Elizabethan politics) began to emerge in the 1950s. New research showed that Essex developed a coherent military strategy for the war against Spain and examined the broader cultural context which helped to shape his career. More recent works have illuminated his role in intelligence gathering and his patronage of university scholars, whose research helped to serve his political needs. Essex even wrote (or at least edited and approved for circulation) a letter to Fulke Greville which explains how such research should be conducted. Essex was also the greatest cultural patron of the 1590s and various studies have explored his involvement with portraiture, music, and printed works. A scholarly edition of Essex's own poetry was published by S. W. May in 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 7566


Devereux, Robert, third earl of Essex (1591-1646), parliamentarian army officer, was born on 11 January 1591 at Walsingham House in Hart Street, London, and baptized there in the chapel on 22 January by Lancelot Andrewes. He was the first-born son of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex and stormy petrel of late Elizabethan politics (1565-1601), and his wife, Frances (1567-1632), daughter of Elizabeth's puritan secretary Sir Francis Walsingham, and widow of Sir Philip Sidney, the protestant poet and military hero. Essex grew up in a profoundly dysfunctional family. His father hardly ever saw him, being either on military campaign against the Spaniards or the Catholic Irish, or on political campaign against his detractors at court. He had five more children with Frances -- although only one son and two daughters survived infancy -- yet he and his countess led largely separate lives and both had lovers. Frances -- who had married both Sidney and Devereux without the queen's knowledge or consent -- was banned from court. Then in 1601 the second earl was beheaded for rebellion and treason. With indecent haste the countess married her lover Richard Burke (or de Burgh), fourth earl of Clanricarde, and decamped for the west of Ireland. Robert was suddenly stripped of his parents, his title, and his wealth. He was sent to Eton College to study under the ascetic protestant humanist Henry Savile. (He subsequently transferred in 1602 with him to Oxford, living with him in the warden's lodge at Merton College.) At twelve he was a penniless, escheated orphan. 
Devereux's fortunes were transformed by the accession of James VI of Scotland to the English throne. James immediately showed that he remembered fondly the loyalty to his reversionary right shown by the second earl of Essex. The young Robert Devereux was invited to bear James's sword before him as he entered London at the end of April 1603 and at his coronation on 25 July. James proceeded to restore him to his titles -- Baron Bourchier, Viscount Hereford, and earl of Essex -- and to his estates and made him a page to Prince Henry. A succession of token honours (such as an Oxford MA 'honoris causa' conferred simultaneously on Robert Cecil's son and heir and on Essex in August 1605) marked him out as a man of promise, and the Howards, earls of Suffolk and Nottingham, insecure in their dominant position at court, were keen to take advantage of this. They persuaded the king to sponsor a marriage between the Devereux and Howard families. On 5 January 1606 Robert, not yet fifteen, was married to Frances Howard (1590-1632), Suffolk's daughter, herself only eight months his elder. Cohabitation at that age was out of the question, and so Robert was sent on a 21-month grand tour (1607-9), albeit one restricted to France and the Netherlands. He returned just before his eighteenth birthday to begin married life. His wife was now a noted beauty, and strong rumours linked her to the amorous attentions of Prince Henry and of the king's new favourite Robert Carr. A severe bout of smallpox, which left Essex badly scarred, was untimely. The relationship of husband and wife quickly became, first from her side and then from his, one of bitter distaste. He felt a sense of duty to his line to have heirs and persisted in seeking a sexual dimension to a loveless match. She lacked his willingness to make the best of a bad job. 
Essex had an equally trying return to court life. In 1610 and 1611 he fell out with Prince Henry and hit him with a tennis racquet after the prince called him the son of a traitor, drawing blood. Then a card game in his chambers at Whitehall led to a brawl and a duel, in which he was not a principal but became involved. In 1612 he fought and wounded William Herbert, earl of Montgomery, during an argument while they were hunting with the king at Woodstock. He was clearly a very insecure young man. After this he took Frances to Chartley, his favourite house in the midlands, in a determined attempt to secure an heir. The countess sulked and refused his attentions. It later became clear that her first attempt to poison him occurred at this time. When they returned to court she all too publicly took up a sexual liaison with Carr, now earl of Somerset. 
A public cuckold with thin skin and a pock-marked face, Essex had lost all prospects at court. With the death of Prince Henry and the inexorable rise of his estranged wife's family Essex faced a bleak future. And it quickly got worse. In 1613 the Howards persuaded the king to establish a commission to grant Frances an annulment of her marriage on the ground of her husband's impotence. Some members of the commission treated with contempt the long-drawn-out process, with dozens of witnesses and a stark statement by Essex himself that: 'he hath found an ability of body to know any other woman, and hath oftentimes felt motions and provocations of the flesh... but that he hath lain by the lady Frances two or three years last past, and hath no motion to know her, and he believes never shall. ('State trials', 2.787)' After the king had appointed additional and compliant judges the inevitable decree was granted to Frances on 25 September 1613. To twist the knife in the wound the judicial commission ordered Essex to return Frances's dowry. And if the humiliation of that -- and the proliferation of salacious manuscript accounts of it all -- was not enough Essex was briefly imprisoned for attempting to fight a duel with Charles Howard, his brother-in-law, after the latter had mocked his honour and his manhood. 
Shortly after this Essex took his seat in the parliament of 1614, and unsurprisingly sided with the earl of Southampton in criticism of the crown over impositions and of royal ministers like Sir Francis Bacon, Sir Thomas Parry, and Bishop Richard Neile for overreaching themselves. One newsletter writer spoke of the king as being 'very angry' with many of the peers: Essex was named second after Southampton (Snow, 'Essex the Rebel', 77). 
Essex then retreated to his estates at Chartley, Staffordshire, and remained there for five years, except for a brief visit to London to observe the trial and conviction of his former wife and her new husband for having murdered Sir Thomas Overbury as a lethal by-product of their plots against him. Otherwise he discharged faithfully his duties as a lord lieutenant of Staffordshire and busied himself with the marriages of his sisters. It is noteworthy that when James passed within a mile or two of Chartley on his return journey from Scotland in 1617 he did not call. Essex did however return to London for the funeral of James's queen, Anne of Denmark, in 1619. While he was there the elector palatine, Frederick V, called for volunteers to assist him to secure the throne of Bohemia. Essex immediately agreed to lead 300 men and raised them easily. 
In every year from 1620 to 1624 Essex served in protestant armies in the Rhineland. His experience was one of stalemate alternating with defeat. Thus he served in 1620 under Sir Horace Vere, when he and his fellows were toyed with by the wily Spinola. A game of cat and mouse lasted until heavy frost, starvation, and demoralization caused the campaign to be abandoned. James now called on him to join his council of war for the recovery of the palatinate, and over a five-week period in January and February 1621 Essex took part in drawing up a plan involving the deployment of 20,000 foot and 5000 horse at a cost of $900,000. This proposal was rejected by the king, but James continued to look for volunteers to assist Frederick, and in each of the four summers from 1621 Essex raised men and took them to join the army of Prince Maurice of Nassau. Every time he returned to England he personally led appeals for volunteers, and on each occasion sufficient men answered the call in quick time. His limited self-esteem was bolstered by this evidence of the prestige of, and trust in, his name. 
Every summer Essex crossed to the Low Countries. Every summer there was frustration and privation, and then each winter he returned home with his sense of the messiness of war further reinforced. In 1621 he spent the second half of the year entrenched around the small town of Rees in Cleves, seeing little action. Neither Prince Maurice of Nassau nor Spinola made any headway. Disease was the only winner. In 1622 he again served as a colonel under Maurice in the same Rhineland stalemate. In 1623 Essex and his men were part of a strong defensive force in Arnheim, the capital of Nassau, anticipating an assault from the imperial general John Tzerklaes, Count Tilly. But Tilly was deflected and the assault never came. Essex had seen no significant action, but had won the respect of his men. In his encomium on Essex published at his death Robert Codrington wrote: 'he first trailed a pike and refused no service in the field which every ordinary gentleman is accustomed to perform. This did much to endear him to his soldiers, and his liberality and humanity did the more advance him' (Codrington, 9). There is a ring of truth to this. It fits in with his demonstrable practice in England when war broke out in 1642. 
In 1624 Essex saw rather more action. James I committed himself to raising four regiments each of 1500 men and commissioned the grumblers in the House of Lords -- the earls of Essex, Oxford, and Southampton -- as colonels of three of them. Once more Essex was the first to raise his men: 'his name still possessed magnetic qualities' (Snow, 'Essex the Rebel', 119). By late August all four regiments were in The Hague, where they joined up with 4000 Dutch troops. Their assignment was the relief of the siege of Breda. Since they were heavily outnumbered by Spinola's men this was to be achieved by harrying the latter's supply lines and picking off convoys. Something, but in truth very little, was gained by these manoeuvres; and disease carried off many of the English, including both Southampton and his son Lord Wriothesley. This time, Essex stayed on over the winter and right through to the final surrender of Breda on 4 June 1625. He thus played no part in the obsequies for James VI and I, who had died on 27 March. He returned, flushed with defeat, to find a new and more hostile atmosphere at court. 
Essex's military apprenticeship had one final humiliation to endure. Charles I and the duke of Buckingham were determined to take the war of honour against the king of Spain into his own heartland. They planned to repeat the great triumph won by Essex's father at Cadiz in 1596. Thirty years on his son was a key player in a repeat performance. The third earl was named as vice-admiral under Sir Edward Cecil, with personal command of a whole squadron and the command of a regiment of foot. It was to be the greatest ever English armada, comprising almost a hundred vessels and some 15,000 fighting men. But it was a disaster. The fleet sailed too close to the shoreline and was spotted, ruining the element of surprise. There were then delays, problems in ensuring all the captains had the same instructions, poor co-ordination (this cost Essex dear), and very inadequate leadership by all those with whom Essex had to work. The Spaniards were able to block the entrance to the harbour and ward off an attempted direct assault and several attempts to take outlying defences. The one success was ruined when Cecil's men got drunk on plundered wine. Savage autumn storms disrupted any further action. The fleet limped home. Only six vessels were lost, but many more were severely damaged. Half the men were dead, booty was small, and the whole sorry expedition cost more than $300,000 (the equivalent of five parliamentary subsidies). Nobody blamed Essex for the catastrophe. But the men he knew to be guilty of failed and incompetent leadership -- the duke of Buckingham and Sir Edward Cecil (grandson of Lord Burghley and therefore a scion of the family that was the second earl's nemesis) -- were exonerated in a conciliar cover-up. Cecil was even rewarded by a peerage, and not just a peerage, but a viscountcy (of Wimbledon). 
Essex's military achievements in the 1620s were therefore modest. From them he learned that outright victory was rarely attainable and the cost in human life was high. It made him a negative and reactive commander, which helps to explain his failings in the civil wars. In addition it reinforced his estrangement from the political establishment. As he accumulated experience he anticipated recognition and promotion. But royal distrust always kept him in a subordinate position. When the king offered the command of an expeditionary force to assist the king of Denmark in 1627 to junior members of the English and then the Scottish peerage and then to a commoner -- Colonel Sir Charles Morgan -- Essex resigned his commission in disgust ('being offended and not without reason' as the Venetian ambassador noted; 'CSP Venice', '1626-8', 62). He had overreacted to slights on his honour before, and did so throughout his life. But at the same time he had received the constant reassurance that his men revered him. Every year he had to recruit new men, and his name caused his regiments to fill immediately. He was a good commander, showing concern and compassion for his men, and they followed him loyally. It was balm to his damaged self-esteem that away from court and from the sneers of courtiers he was recognized as the scion of a great house. 
Whenever parliament was in session in the 1620s Essex was its most assiduous attender. He hardly missed a day, and he hardly ever spoke. As his secretary, Arthur Wilson, put it: 'he had an honest heart, and though nature had not given him eloquence, he had a strong reason that did express him better' (A. Wilson, 'The History of Great Britain being the Life and Reign of King James the First', 1653, 162). He was more comfortable on committees and in small groups drafting reports, and soon became an inveterate member of the grand committees of privileges and of petitions. In every parliament he was a thorn in the royal flesh, stubbornly defending the honour of the house and consistently supporting parliamentary investigation of the ministers upon whom the monarch most relied. In 1621 he led a protest against the Scottish invasion of the English peerage and took a taciturn but relentless part in the Lords investigation of three royal ministers accused of corruption: the lord chancellor, Sir Francis Bacon, Sir Henry Yelverton, and Sir John Bennet. In 1624 he took up a number of privilege cases, including the freedom from arrest during the session of his own chaplain William Hulbocke, and was restrained but unrelenting in the house's investigations of the lord treasurer, Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex. He was present but unobtrusive in 1625, but in 1626, following the fiasco of the Cadiz expedition, he was prominent in defending the rights of peers to be free from arrest even on a direct order from the king, and in the escalating crisis that began with the duke of Buckingham and the earl of Bristol accusing each other of treason and ended in the impeachment of the former. For Essex there was no doubt, as far as the Cadiz fiasco was concerned, that the buck stopped with Buckingham. Although -- unlike the earls of Bristol and Arundel -- he was not arrested for his part in these events, it was at this point that Charles denied him the command of the expeditionary force that was to assist the king of Denmark. This ended his continental soldiering and brought him home in a malcontent mood. In 1627 he was one of those who not only refused the forced loan, but made his refusal public. His name appears at the head of a list of fifteen 'refractory lords' -- ahead of the earls of Warwick, Lincoln, Bolingbroke, and Clare, and Viscount Saye and Sele ('CSP dom.', '1625-6', 485). A proposal for their imprisonment was debated in the privy council, but no action was taken. In spring 1627 he was invited to lead a regiment in the La Rochelle expedition, but declined to do so and retreated rather sulkily to Chartley. 
When Charles's third parliament met in 1628 Essex followed his usual course. He attended almost every day and was appointed to and attended the grand committees of privileges and of petitions; he spoke little but used his taciturn influence in the lobbies. Once again he was ultra-sensitive on matters relating to the honour of individual peers and the privileges of the House of Lords. He played a leading part in the attempted impeachment of Roger Manwaring, a preacher who had published two sermons in which he had defended the king's right to require payment of the forced loan and in which he had castigated the 'refusers' like Essex. Essex was the first to respond to John Pym's demand for a Lords investigation and he (with Bishop John Williams) was deputed to interrogate the printer of Manwaring's two pamphlets. During the great debates that led to the petition of right 'Essex sided with Saye but said little. He did however engage in some significant parliamentary manoeuvres' (Snow, 'Essex the Rebel', 170-71), such as moving to transfer discussion into a committee of the whole house to allow opponents to speak as often as they wished. When parliament was prorogued Essex returned to the country until it reconvened on 20 January 1629. Again he was the most assiduous attender, missing only one day, and he was appointed to the committee that drew up the petition for the redress of grievance. 
By 1629 Essex was seriously malcontent. He resented the slights he had received from the king, he had a visceral dislike of (the now dead) Buckingham, and he had been sickened by the way the king had protected Buckingham and those who fawned upon him. He was ashamed at the incompetence and maladministration that had caused the failure of one attempt after another to further the protestant cause on the continent. He had supported, quietly but resolutely, every attempt of successive parliaments to remonstrate with the king about these matters. He (rightly) discerned that as far as King Charles was concerned he represented a bad smell on the margins of the court. 
Throughout the decade from 1629 Essex remained in the country and concentrated on his estates and on family matters. The death of both his grandmother Lettice Dudley, countess of Leicester, and his mother brought their jointures back to him, more than doubling his annual income, from $3000 to $7000, placing him in the upper middle range of aristocracy. The coalmines at Merevale, Warwickshire, promised further long-term enhancements. In 1633 he travelled to Ireland to view and arrange the management of the Irish estates that had come back to him. He was welcomed into Dublin with a formal progress that exceeded that afforded to the lord deputy, Sir Thomas Wentworth, a few weeks later. It reminded him that his family name still carried a great weight. He leased out Essex House in the Strand to his brother-in-law William Seymour, earl of Hertford, for a large sum that cleared his debts (he retained the use of one wing). 
But Essex also contracted a disastrous second marriage. At the end of the 1629 parliament he sought out Bishop John Williams and consulted him about the morality of remarriage during the lifetime of his first wife. If she had been given a divorce on the grounds of his impotence, and he was not impotent, how would God view the status of that union? Williams declared him free to remarry, and in some haste Essex married, on 11 March 1630, a notable beauty he had met at the home of his sister Frances, countess of Hertford. She was Elizabeth (died 1656), the daughter of Sir William Paulet, a bastard son of the marquess of Winchester. 
For a while all went well. Essex became more cheerful and sociable. He entertained regularly and spent much time with his relatives -- he hunted with Hertford in Wiltshire, and played bowls with his popish half-brother Clanricarde in Kent. He played backgammon and cards with family members. He took on a librarian and began to accumulate a fine library. He became an aficionado of the spa towns. He avoided, mentally as much as physically, the court. He tried to become the model rural aristocrat. But new tragedy lay just round the corner. His second marriage collapsed, less spectacularly but just as cruelly as his first marriage had done. By 1636 he and Elizabeth were living largely separate lives, and she was implicated in an adulterous relationship with Sir William Uvedale, an unctuous courtier and treasurer of the king's chamber, the epitome of all that Essex despised. Rumours of the adultery became significant when the countess became pregnant, and the situation had its farcical side, with Essex's brother, Walter, spending long hours on a rickety ladder peering through bedroom windows. Consulting his calendar Essex announced that if she gave birth before 5 November 1636 he would own the child; if after 5 November, he would disown child and countess. Polite society took sides and placed bets. Once more Essex was the butt of humiliating humour. The baby duly arrived on 5 November itself. Essex bit the bullet, owned the child, and forgave the countess. And then, a month later, the infant, Viscount Hereford, succumbed to plague. Essex retreated into a deeper bitterness and despair. Henceforth 'he shunned women and put aside all hopes of a successful marriage and an heir. He relegated the Countess to a small and inconspicuous place in his life' (Snow, 'Essex the Rebel', 194). He undertook the provincial duties entrusted to him (he was reappointed lord lieutenant of Staffordshire in 1629, and he was appointed a member of the council in the marches at the same time as his mother's death restored to him the family holdings in south Wales). He was conscientious and uncontentious in his discharge of these duties. 
By the late 1630s, then, Essex was a stranger to court, someone the king remembered with distaste, but he had not been a trouble-maker in recent years. And he had more military experience than anyone of his rank in the English peerage. So when Charles decided to use English force to impose his Scottish policies he appointed Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel (an earl marshal who had no experience of war), as lord-general and Essex as his second-in-command. But then the queen prevailed upon the king to give Essex's post to her favourite, Henry Rich, earl of Holland. Essex was demoted to lieutenant-general in command of the horse. Yet again he felt the smart more than the honour. It cannot have been easy, either, for him to have to put all his requests for supplies and money through Sir William Uvedale, treasurer at war and lover of his estranged wife. He carried out his duties scrupulously and effectively, and when the Scottish covenanting lords wrote to him, in an attempt to persuade him to stand down and use his influence to halt the planned invasion of their country, Essex forwarded the letters, unopened, to Charles. Unhappily the king chose to interpret the fact of the approach as evidence of his unsoundness and when honours were lavished on those who had led the king to a humiliating pacification, Essex was passed over. Three men he considered his inferiors received the Garter. The result was a deepening of the mutual ill will. In the second Scottish campaign of 1640 he was replaced as lieutenant-general by Thomas Wentworth, now earl of Strafford. By then Essex had attended every day of the Short Parliament and he had been prominent among the minority of twenty-five peers who had voted against voting supply before a consideration of grievances. 
In summer 1640, for the first time in more than a decade, Essex remained in London, in the quarters he retained in the Strand, and he was almost certainly involved in secret discussions with the covenanters. He let John Pym have a tenement nearby and he was fully involved in the petition of the twelve peers who listed their and the people's grievances and called for a parliament and for a treaty with the Scots. Within a month Charles found himself unable to prevent a Scottish invasion and the occupation of Northumberland. He called a great council to York which Essex attended. He renewed his call for a parliament and a treaty, and he was one of several of the twelve to be appointed to the team of sixteen negotiators Charles sent to treat with the covenanters. 
When the Long Parliament assembled on 3 November 1640 Essex was immediately prominent. As many as twelve members of the Commons owed their selection in significant part to him and could be counted on to amplify his views in the lower house; and he held two (at one time three) proxies as well as his own vote in the Lords. As in the previous six parliaments he was the most assiduous of all attenders. He played an important and restrained part in the prosecution of Strafford (though when Sir Edward Hyde appealed to him that Strafford deserved dismissal and imprisonment for life but not death, Essex replied 'stone-dead hath no fellow'; Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.343), and he put his weight behind the dismantling of the instruments of personal rule and the reconstruction of royal government. He was thus a key figure in seeing the 'Triennial Bill' through the Lords, but he showed precocious alarm at the demands for a reconstruction of the church settlement, clearly fearing the political and social consequences of root and branch reform. Charles may have disliked him, but he recognized both that he carried huge moral and political authority and that he did not look much beyond a change of the personnel of government: as the earl of Clarendon later wrote, 'Essex was rather displeased with the person of the archbishop and some other bishops than indevoted to their function' (ibid., 1.328). He was one of the seven men whom Charles appointed to the privy council on 19 February 1641 (as were his closest friend and brother-in-law, now marquess of Hertford, and other long-term political allies). Essex worked hard to secure the addition of those whom he trusted, and most of those in the second round of appointments were close to him by blood or marriage, most remarkably his Irish Catholic half-brother, Ulick de Burgh (or Burke), fifth earl of Clanricarde (appointed under his English title of earl of St Albans). For a few months down to the summer recess (September-November 1641) he bestrode the political world, notable as one of the 'popular lords' but also as one whose advice the king sullenly followed. His key role was as chair of the committee charged with disbanding the English and Scottish armies. Still, it took Charles too long to offer him office and responsibility. He resisted appointing Essex lord lieutenant of Yorkshire (a key post during the Scottish occupation of the north-east). Too late -- at the end of July 1641 -- Charles appointed him lord chamberlain and on 9 August appointed him commander of all the armed forces south of the Trent in case of an emergency while he was up in Scotland. But whereas Hertford was admitted more and more into the king's confidence Essex was kept at arm's length. In the end, his sense of public duty and slighted honour would count for more than the ties of blood. 
Essex was resigned to childlessness, and the death of his brother, Walter, from plague in July resigned him to the extinction of his title and family name. Perhaps in the years to come this made him less anxious about how his actions might ruin his family. He had nothing left to offer but his life and his honour and he clearly valued the latter more than the former. 
Essex was prominent -- as spokesman for the Lords -- in seeking in August 1641 to delay the king's departure for Scotland, and he also tried to prevent the queen from keeping the prince of Wales (he attempted in vain to place the prince under the protection of a group of protestant lords and chaplains at Richmond Palace). As general he had to deal with a number of scares of plots to assassinate MPs, by strengthening the forces under his personal control in Westminster and Whitehall. He was prominent among the sixteen commissioners who governed England during Charles's absence. On 6 November 1641, as news of the Irish uprising created panic in London, Oliver Cromwell moved an ordinance for Essex to mobilize all the forces of the southern half of England; and in an embryonic version of the militia ordinance Denzil Holles moved on 15 November that all the trained bands be 'put in a posture of defence and... the command [be given] to the earl of Essex' ('The Journal of Sir Simonds D'Ewes', ed. W. H. Coates, 1942, 147). It is not therefore surprising that on the day after his return from Scotland to London the king revoked Essex's commission and stood down the guards which the earl had provided for the houses of parliament. For much of December the houses sought to assert a right to reorganize national defence under generals whom they nominated to the king. Essex's name was always prominent in these proposals. Distrust and distaste reinforced one another. Charles felt betrayed and therefore would not give Essex the honour and trust he craved. But Essex feeling keenly and resenting this lack of trust and recognition constantly rubbed salt into Charles's wounds. They were two thin-skinned men jabbing fingers into one another's flesh. 
When on the morning of 5 January 1642 Essex was told by the countess of Carlisle, from gossip at the queen's table, that Charles intended to seize five members of the Commons whom he intended to put on trial for treason, he tipped off the MPs concerned. Charles, humiliated, withdrew from London and made his way, gradually, to York. Essex refused all commands to join him there, pleading the order of the parliament that he attend to the business of the realm there. In doing so he broke decisively from his brother-in-law and confidant Hertford, who, after a bout of diplomatic illness, made his way to the itinerant king. On 9 April Essex was dismissed from the post of lord chamberlain that he had possessed but barely held. He was the first peer to surrender his royal warrants as lord lieutenant and to accept new ones under the militia ordinance. He was drifting into treason. 
Essex spent the spring and early summer months in the parliamentary administrative arrangements for the expeditionary force raised to put down the Irish uprising. But as the king escalated the political rhetoric and the preparations for war, the houses responded and all their military plans centred on Essex. On 12 July the Commons 'resolved that an army shall be forthwith raised for the safety of the king's person, the defence of both houses of parliament, and of those who have obeyed their orders and commands; and for the preservation of the true religion, the laws, liberties and peace of the kingdom. [And] resolved, that the Earl of Essex be named general thereof. (Snow, 'Essex the Rebel', 307)' He never wavered about accepting this office with its risks and responsibilities. He took it on fearlessly and resolutely. He drew up his will, dispersing his estates among his sisters and their children with generous provision for his servants and for the poor, and, providing himself with a coffin and a winding sheet, he set out to make war in the name of king and parliament against a king ensnared, body and mind, by evil counsellors. Any doubt that he had done the right thing was removed by the discovery that the odious Sir William Uvedale was one of the five commissioners appointed to bring peace proposals from the king to the houses. 
Essex was captain-general of the English parliament's forces for thirty months. In that time he did not win a single battle outright, but he did not lose a pitched battle outright either. He was meticulous in planning his campaigns, technically correct and effective in carrying out military manoeuvres -- forced marches, sieges, battlefield dispositions -- but such caution made him slow, and technical effectiveness also made him predictable. He never took his enemies by surprise. His experience of the Thirty Years' War made him pessimistic about the possibility of knock-out blows, gloomy about the prospects of keeping poorly paid and supplied bodies of men together for a sustained campaign, determined to see the war in defensive terms, and constantly seeking to promote the deadlock out of which he and others could squeeze a negotiated settlement. And he craved absolute power as general over all other commanders and over the peace process. Thus he sought appointment as constable of England, with plenipotentiary powers of war and peace (a post with fourteenth-century precedents). And when he was denied the freedom of action he craved he chafed as much as ever, and was as thin-skinned towards the parliament as he had hitherto been towards the king. 
Essex began his campaign by gathering a remarkable life guard of one hundred men, including many future major-generals and republicans (Charles Fleetwood, Henry Ireton, Thomas Harrison, and Edmund Ludlow) as well as the sons of the lords Bedford, Holland, and Saye and Sele, serving under the motto 'God with us'. He built up a strong commissariat and selected his general officers from those with noble blood and those with strong continental experience. By 9 September he was ready for war, and he took his leave of the houses. As he rode in his coach from the Strand towards Watling Street thousands flocked out to cheer him on: 'no rebel had received such a royal farewell before' (Snow, 'Essex the Rebel', 325). He went to war a hero in September 1642, and from then on it was downhill all the way. 
Essex's troops were mustered at Northampton, and there he raised his standard on 14 September. The king was trying to bring his army up to strength in the upper Severn valley, and Essex set as his first task to take Worcester and cut off the royalist supply lines. His troops lost a skirmish at Powick Bridge (23 September) but succeeded in occupying the town and thus secured control of the river. Essex then wasted three weeks securing control of the hinterland of Worcester, delivering the initiative to the king. As the latter moved south-east in a straight line from Shrewsbury to London, Essex had to force march his troops so as to intercept them. The result was the great drawn battle of Edgehill, near Banbury, on 23 October. Each side thought it was lower on ammunition and morale than the other, and so declined to resume the battle and set off on parallel quick marches towards London. Essex won the race and, reinforced by the London militia, interposed himself between the king and the City at Turnham Green. 
Despite having twice as many men as the king (24,000 : 12,000) Essex's council of war decided to await the king's attack. After a tense stand-off the king retreated to Oxford. The chance for a quick end to the war was lost. 
Essex spent the bitter winter of 1642-3 quartered in and around Windsor. As a result his army melted away with the winter snows. And so more time was spent recruiting back up to strength. He spent most of 1643 seeking to secure complete control of the Thames valley. His strategic purposes were to capture the king or at least to knock out his headquarters at Oxford. With the exception of a march to relieve Gloucester -- which he unwillingly undertook after repeated orders from the houses -- his army was never more than 30 miles from Oxford from the time that he captured Reading on 26 April. In unspectacular fashion he did take control of the surrounding towns, and he did tighten the noose around Oxford, but it seemed little return for all the investment of men and money that parliament put at his disposal. A sharp letter from Pym led to his tendering his resignation on 28 June, but it was not accepted. He was, however, speaking openly of making peace, and that is probably why the houses appointed Sir William Waller (who had had a number of spectacular successes blunted by heavy defeat at Roundway Down) to a semi-autonomous command. Essex reacted with fury to this slight, and called the bluff of Pym and his allies: they backed off their support for his rival. Essex's relief of the siege of Gloucester (8 September) and skilful deployment of troops in a running battle through the suburbs of Newark (20 September) restored his name somewhat. Indeed many historians see this battle as the turning point of the war: as the king's last realistic prospect of victory. Slow, cautious, and unimaginative Essex may have been. But with far deeper pockets and more solid control of a less scattered heartland, parliament was always going to win a long war. 
Essex spent most of the next seven months at Westminster losing a war of attrition to shore up his personal authority and to maintain an army worthy of the name under his command. The simplest struggle was for resources. His army was a national army but as a result it had no regional base, no bloc of counties from which to raise the men and supplies to keep itself going. In the winter months, with no pay coming in and in quarters that were cold, damp, and miserable, most of his army -- all but 2000 of his foot and more than half his cavalry -- drifted away, taking their weapons. Such ammunition as was available was procured by Waller, the earl of Manchester, and other commanders who were actively engaged in the field. At one point, meditating on his inability to protect London if there was a lightning strike, Essex even commissioned one Thomas Taylor to raise a company of archers to help defend the capital. New men were recruited, but were then put into the dispiriting winter quarters. They then just melted away. Essex made a whole series of visits to raise morale to promise more cash and supplies. But it was not until May 1644 that he had put together a fighting force large enough to undertake a campaign. 
Inactivity bred demoralization and prevented all thought of a winter campaign. And in any case Essex was preoccupied with the politics of war. He spent much of October 1643 trying to get the houses to remove Sir William Waller from his command for having refused point blank an order to bring his southern association army to join him on his return from Gloucester. Waller simply refused to accept that he was Essex's subordinate. Essex even threatened to resign. According to a clerk's account of Essex's ultimatum at a conference of the houses: 'the Lord General desired of this House, and the House of Commons, leave to deliver up his commission, and go beyond the seas, in regard of the commission to Sr Wm Waller, which is inconsistent with his, and in regard of the many discouragements he hath received in being General' ('JHL', 1643-4, 246). In the end there was the inevitable uneasy compromise. Waller resigned, but was immediately recommissioned by Essex as commander of the London trained bands, and spent a hectic winter besieging Basing House and Arundel and mopping up pockets of royalist resistance in the south coast counties from Kent to Hampshire. Much of December 1643 was taken up with the court martial of Nathaniel Fiennes for surrendering Bristol long before its defence was impossible (he was convicted and sentenced to death and then reprieved by Essex). Essex's time was wasted with processing the demand from Lord Willoughby of Parham that his commission to command troops in Lincolnshire be upheld in the face of the ordinance placing Lincolnshire in the eastern association and its troops under the command of the earl of Manchester. In January and February Essex fought a losing battle to prevent the creation of the committee of both kingdoms, which would give Westminster politicians (including many of his critics) control of military strategy and the authority to direct scarce resources to the detriment of his honour, authority, and commission (very much in that order). And (at a time when the king was pretending that the meeting of some eighty peers and a hundred members at the Commons at Oxford was the real parliament and the assembly at Westminster a rebellious remnant) Essex was the recipient of a series of peace initiatives from Oxford, which he dutifully handed on unopened to the speakers of the houses. Each letter led to many hours of committees. By late spring Essex was caught up in a thirteen-day stand-off between Lords and Commons over the renewal of the eastern association ordinance and a briefer, blunter, nastier exchange between the houses over the extension of the life of the committee of both kingdoms. He lost both arguments. By now most of the regional commanders -- the Fairfaxes in Yorkshire, Sir William Brereton in the north midlands, Sir Thomas Myddleton in north Wales, Manchester in the eastern counties, above all the Scots -- never thought to ask his advice or tell him their plans. They reported and negotiated directly with the committee of both kingdoms. Waller was directly answerable to him, but that did not stop him appealing over Essex's head or behind his back when he did not feel like co-operating. For a man of Essex's pride and self-importance this was intolerable. But the blunt fact is that he was doing nothing to earn the respect and goodwill of the other generals. 
Not until mid-May did Essex launch his new campaign. Having interrupted a meeting of the Westminster assembly and persuaded it to suspend church reform for a day and to devote itself to prayers for his success, he found it necessary neither to change his will nor to repack his coffin. A campaign that was to end in catastrophe began in hope. He decided to strike at the very heart of the king's territory by an assault on Oxford. Within three weeks he had retaken Reading and Abingdon and had almost encircled the king's headquarters, but, as Essex secured the last of the Cherwell bridges in a fierce fight involving 4000 men, the king, with almost 6000 men, punched his way out of Oxford to the north. Although Essex gave chase the king was in no hurry to fight, and kept slipping away from him. Meanwhile reports reached Essex that Lyme Regis was likely to fall, opening up Dorset and the southern counties to the western royalists. At a crucial and contested council of war on 6 June it was decided that Waller with his light cavalry should harry the king (this led three weeks later to Waller's crushing defeat at Cropredy Bridge), while Essex went to the relief of Lyme and the liberation of the south-west. 
It was not in itself a foolish strategy. This was a brilliantly managed operation, with the army marching along a southerly route, its movements co-ordinated with those of the main part of the navy: as Bulstrode Whitelocke put it, 'the Earl of Warwick with his fleet sailed along the coast as the Lord General marched, and carried his ammunition, and sent ships to keep off the enemy' (Whitelocke, 'Memorials', 88). For eight weeks all was well managed, and Essex relentlessly recaptured garrison towns and fortified manor houses throughout Somerset and Devon, culminating in the relief of Plymouth. This was important of itself, and it also meant that Essex had now trapped the queen in Cornwall. The crushing defeat of the royalist armies at Marston Moor on 2 July paradoxically released the king from thoughts of combining with his northern armies. Now Charles 'had' to prioritize the west. His defeat of Waller freed him to chase Essex and to join up with Hopton's army, which was in Bristol. And the plight of the queen ensured that Charles would focus all his energies on rescuing her. So Essex finished up trapped between the queen and Sir Richard Grenville in Cornwall and the king and Hopton hot on his heels. The tension was showing: he condoned the execution of Irish prisoners at Dorchester, in clear breach of his own articles of war. He had assumed both that Waller would regroup and come to join him and that, as a last resort, he could embark his army on Warwick's ships and sail to safety. But he chased Grenville too far and for too long and he found himself surrounded by vastly superior numbers of royalists at Lostwithiel. On 31 August his cavalry broke through the royalist lines, and the infantry marched through a summer storm to Fowey. But strong winds prevented Warwick from coming inshore to transport them away, and they were faced by surrender or a massacre. Essex sailed away in a fishing boat, leaving Philip Skippon to negotiate surrender articles. 
'It is the greatest blow that ever befell our party,' Essex wrote to Sir Philip Stapilton on 3 September, 'I desire nothing more than to come to the Tryal, such losses as these must not be smothered up' (J. Rushworth, 'Historical Collections', 8 vols., 1721-2, 5.703-4). Although Independent divines were quick to denounce him from London pulpits the houses closed ranks for once as they sought to mitigate the disaster. They ordered the earl of Manchester to join Waller and such troops as Essex could assemble and reassemble and to interpose themselves between the king and London. Essex had lost the moral right to command this joint force, and the houses were not yet ready to fight over the succession, and so on 14 October day-to-day management of the joint army was entrusted to a council of war consisting of the three generals, together with Lord Robartes, Lieutenant-General Oliver Cromwell, Sir Arthur Hesilrige, and two members of the Commons attending the army. This camel of a committee secured a victory at Newbury on 23 October but botched the aftermath. Since Essex and Waller were unable to be in the same room together it was perhaps as well that for more than a fortnight from 15 October Essex was 'hors de combat' with 'excessive flux and vomiting' ('Portland MSS', 1.189) and under medical supervision in Reading. 
In the ensuing months the recriminations between Manchester and Cromwell dominated the political scene, but behind that were two deeper struggles. The first was between those who were willing to seek a negotiated settlement to the civil war, and those determined to impose a settlement in the wake of a complete victory. Essex was for the best peace that could be secured, not least because the willingness of men like Cromwell to promote low-born men within the army made him fear for social order. The second struggle was over how far the English parliamentarians had to honour to the letter the terms of the solemn league and covenant which had tied the English to the vision of the Scots for the erection of a new confessional state drawing heavily on the Scottish model. 
Essex was no rigid presbyterian, and indeed his own preferred system of church governance was probably a lame, Erastian episcopalianism, but he disliked sects and sectarianism, and if presbyterianism would safeguard the virtues of the old Calvinist international he would accept it. All these issues made him detest and suspect Oliver Cromwell, and on 3 December 1644 he called a meeting of all his allies and of the Scottish commissioners in Essex House. The Scots were proposing to denounce Cromwell to the parliament as an 'incendiary' and Essex wanted to know if his friends thought an impeachment on such a charge could succeed. The weathervane lawyers, Bulstrode Whitelocke and John Maynard, thought not, and Essex let the matter drop. But in the months that followed, as Essex and his friends fought the self-denying ordinance all the way, it is clear that they cared almost as much about ensuring that Cromwell was subject to its provisions as that they should be exempt. After four months of procedural foot-dragging they were completely defeated. So desperate was Essex to prevent Fairfax from getting the very powers he had so jealously guarded -- the power to choose the officers of his army -- that on 17 March 1645 he even tried (in vain) to use the proxy of his Irish Catholic half-brother, the earl of Clanricarde, to block Fairfax's nominations. Having clung to his commissions long after he had lost all the parliamentary battles Essex finally resigned them in a dignified statement ('a well phrased and restrained statement [in which] he accepted his eclipse and stepped aside like a gentleman', as his twentieth-century biographer put it; Snow, 'Essex the Rebel', 479). 
The remaining eighteen months of Essex's life were spent in the half-light. Once he had left the army, his record was looked at by many through rose-tinted spectacles. Josiah Ricraft put together, as a best-selling broadside, 'A perfect list of the many victories obtained (through the blessing of God) by the parliaments forces under the command of his excellency, Robert earl of Essex'; and, after his death, early in 1647 Ricraft would be even more specific in highlighting his victories in 'A Survey of England's Champions'. There was little opposition in parliament to the showering of financial rewards on Essex -- most notably an annuity of $10,000 a year out of confiscated royalist land voted to him, without a division in either house. He became a venerable figure in semi-retirement, regularly attending the Lords, but saying little. He remained a figurehead for those who supported the broad peace strategy known as the Newcastle propositions, and he did all he could quietly to impede the military career of Oliver Cromwell. But then at the end of his life he seems to have planned a major comeback. He had asked, in 1642, to be appointed to the old medieval post of constable, guardian of the realm at a time of crisis. In summer 1646, after Charles had surrendered himself to the Scots, Essex began to reassert the claim, affecting the symbols of vice-regal, protectoral rank, attended as he came and went to the Lords by heralds in their tabards. Whether this would have provoked some kind of crisis can never be known -- for at precisely this juncture he died quite suddenly. He suffered a stroke on 10 September 1646 after a strenuous day's stag-hunting in Windsor Forest and died four days later at Essex House. 
Essex was accorded the greatest state funeral of any non-royal personage for many decades. More than 3000 people were marshalled by the officers of the College of Arms for a funeral based on that of Henry, prince of Wales, to whom Essex had been companion in his teenage years: 'almost all the details of the composition of the cortege seem to have been copied copiously from accounts of Henry's funeral' (Adamson, 'Chivalry and political culture', 191). 
So Essex was buried, on 22 October 1646, with the pomp so long denied him in life, and was laid to rest in Westminster Abbey. Richard Vines, an old friend and minister of the parish within which Essex House lay, preached a funeral oration on a text from the second book of 'Samuel', about how Abner had delivered the Israelites from the tyranny of Saul (explicitly, Charles I) and subjected them to the sceptre of David (explicitly, parliament). A month later the new tomb was vandalized and Essex's effigy beheaded by an axe-wielding former royalist soldier. And at the Restoration his refurbished effigy was destroyed on the orders of Charles II. But his corpse was left undisturbed on both occasions, and is still in the abbey, marked by a modest plaque installed by Dean Stanley in mid-Victorian times. 
Essex died without male heirs. The title was extinguished and his property was divided among his sisters and cousins, each fighting like a tiger to get more than their fair share. His life was dominated by the circumstances of his birth: by a desperate concern for the good name put at risk by his father's treason. He was the child of an adulterer (though also of a cuckold), and he twice became an infamous cuckold himself. He was a man of conventional godly piety. He was totally out of sympathy with both the new piety of the court of Charles I and the 'teeming liberty' of zealous men who attached themselves to the movement which he led as a movement of ancient aristocratic virtue. He was a soldier who cared more for honour than for victory, a general who expected to create the conditions for negotiation, not to win outright. He was a devoted but mute parliamentarian, a man who yearned for a king who would take his counsel, but who did nothing to earn the trust that would make that possible. He lacked his father's flamboyance and arrogance, but not his capacity for self-immolation. He was an inverted Midas: all that was golden in his inheritance and circumstance he turned to dust. Only in the false bombast of his funeral was the recognition he craved ever accorded him. His was a life of unfulfilled promise. 


@@@@@


doc= 7567


Devereux, Walter, first Viscount Hereford (c.1489-1558), administrator and nobleman, was the son and heir of John Devereux, second Baron Ferrers of Chartley ('c'.1463/4-1501), and his wife, Cecily (died 1493), heir of the houses of Bourchier and de Bohun and niece of Edward IV. Succeeding his father as third Lord Ferrers in 1501, Walter had, while still under age, married Lady Mary, daughter of Thomas Grey, first marquess of Dorset and great-grandfather of Lady Jane Grey. Having been a ward in the royal household, he was summoned to Henry VIII's first parliament in January 1510 and soon afterwards became steward of several royal manors and joint constable of Warwick Castle. In 1512 he joined his brother-in-law Thomas Grey, second marquess of Dorset, on an Anglo-Spanish expedition intended to recover Aquitaine, and in 1513 was nominated by the king himself to captain the 'Gryt Herry Imperyall', serving also in that year at the battle of Flodden. When in June 1520 King Henry met Francois I of France at the Field of Cloth of Gold and then the recently elected Emperor Charles V at Gravelines, Devereux was present on both occasions. In 1521 he sat with other peers in judgment on Edward Stafford, duke of Buckingham, and two years later served again in France, returning there once more for the campaign of 1544 when the king himself took charge. 
Meanwhile Devereux became increasingly active in the government of Wales and the Welsh marches, location of much of his landed estate. Already a member of the council originally formed to administer the lands of the prince of Wales and then developed into a vehicle of provincial law enforcement, he was appointed to that body as reconstituted by Wolsey in 1525, holding at the same time the office of steward in the Princess Mary's household at Ludlow. Further appointments to offices of profit rapidly followed, culminating in 1545 in that of chamberlain of the recently established court of general surveyors, and punctuated along the way by more stewardships of crown lordships and manors as well as regular service on administrative and judicial commissions in Wales, the marches, and the west midlands. By comparison, Devereux's gains in terms of land were relatively modest. In 1548 his gross annual income from rents amounted to approximately $870, while his heir eventually took possession of a landed estate valued at a mere $400 per annum. 
Even so, in the turbulent politics of the mid-sixteenth century Devereux was manifestly significant. Allied through his first marriage to the family of Grey, he was also linked from 1536 to that of Hastings when his second son, Richard, married Dorothy, daughter of the first earl of Huntingdon. The second earl of Huntingdon and the third marquess of Dorset emerged as prominent supporters of John Dudley, earl of Warwick, when, from October 1549, he carried through his coup against the lord protector, Somerset. In January 1550 Devereux was sworn of the privy council; in February he was created Viscount Hereford. Seasoned in the ways of provincial government, this well-connected marcher lord was a valuable asset in Warwick's stratagems, even though his role in the subsequent progress of the Reformation and other events of Edward VI's reign remains obscure. Briefly imprisoned on Mary Tudor's succession to the throne, he lost not only his place at the centre of affairs, but also many of his offices. Yet, by one of the last grants of her reign, and within two months of the viscount's death, the queen granted stewardships of lands and courts in several shires of Wales to his heir. That heir, again named Walter and again a minor, was the viscount's grandson by his second son, the eldest of his three sons by his first marriage, to Mary Grey, having also predeceased him. Following Mary's death in 1538 Devereux had taken as his second wife Margaret (died 1599), daughter of John Garneys of Kenton in Suffolk, with whom he had a daughter, Katherine, and a fourth son, Edward, father of the fifth Viscount Hereford. Devereux died on 17 September 1558 at his home, Chartley, Staffordshire, and was buried in Stowe church under a monument. 


@@@@@


doc= 7568


Devereux, Walter, first earl of Essex (1539-1576), nobleman and adventurer, was born on 16 September 1539 at Chartley, Staffordshire, the eldest son of Sir Richard Devereux and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of George Hastings, first earl of Huntingdon. Sir Richard, who was created a knight of the Order of the Garter on 20 February 1548, died the same year, in the lifetime of his father, Walter Devereux, first Viscount Hereford. The family was descended from Robert d'Evreux, a companion of William the Conqueror who settled in Herefordshire. Walter Devereux, first Baron Ferrers of Chartley, met his death fighting for Richard III at Bosworth. His son John succeeded as Lord Ferrers, and married Cecily, sister of Henry Bourchier, earl of Essex. The offspring of this marriage, Walter, created Viscount Hereford in 1550, was, on his death in 1558, succeeded by his grandson Walter. Biographical verses written on the life of this Walter Devereux and an elegy on his death collected by J. Payne Collier indicate that he spent his youth on the large family estates at Lamphey in Pembrokeshire. 
On Elizabeth I's accession Walter, Lord Hereford, went up to court, and about 1561 married Lettice (1543-1634) ['see 'Dudley, Lettice], eldest daughter of Sir Francis Knollys; both were in their early twenties. For the next seven years they lived at Chartley Hall in Staffordshire. It was during this period that their eldest child, Penelope Rich, was born. His first call to public service came in 1568 when ordered to keep a body of horse in readiness to prevent any attempt to release Mary, queen of Scots, from Tutbury, then under the charge of the earl of Shrewsbury. John Leslie, the Scottish queen's envoy and historian of Scotland, spread rumours about the young Lord Hereford to poison Queen Elizabeth's mind against him, in particular that Hereford had slandered Leicester, her favourite. Later events would divide Leicester and Hereford but at this time, on 29 September 1569, Hereford protested to William Cecil that he bore no grudge against Leicester. From his letter to the queen on 27 November 1569 it is clear that Hereford had raised troops to aid the suppression of the northern uprising under the earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, and joined the earl of Warwick's army at Leicester where he was appointed 'high marshal of the field'. He was commended for his decisive part in the suppression of the rising. In 1571 he succeeded his cousin Anne Parr, marchioness of Northampton, as Lord Bourchier. On St George's day (23 April) 1572 Hereford was made a knight of the Garter, and on 4 May was created earl of Essex, his Bourchier great-granduncle's title. Such rewards were indicative of his steady and efficient loyalty to the queen and to the reformed religion. 
In 1573 Essex undertook as a partial adventurer to colonize Ulster, then the 'ultima' 'Thule' of Gaeldom, a province known to statesmen as 'the gall and misery of all evil men in Ireland' (Essex to Burghley, 23 June 1574). Previous efforts to settle Ulster had failed. Turlough Luineach O'Neill then held sway over what is now co. Tyrone, the senior O'Neill Gaelic lordship, and in south Derry and north Armagh. He also occasionally controlled the influential vassal chief ('uriath') Turlough mac Henry O'Neill of the Fews in south Armagh, and was sometimes in alliance with Sir Brian mac Phelim O'Neill, ruler of Clandeboye (most of south Antrim). The O'Neills also had formidable support from the mercenaries of Sorley Boy MacDonnell, the brother of James McDonnell, lord of north Antrim, of Rathlin Island, and of Kintyre and the isles in Scotland. 
Confident of success in Ireland, Essex hoped to further his credibility at court and to move to centre stage in political life. By formal agreement with Queen Elizabeth in July 1573 he was to take over Clandeboye, the present co. Antrim, save for the fortress of Carrickfergus and its hinterland. When secured, the territory was to be free of tax for seven years and enjoy free trade with England and all manorial rights, but not to benefit from fines of the crown courts. An army of 1200 men was to be raised jointly by Essex and the queen, and costs of fortifications were to be shared equally between them: 'the Earl shall fortify as occasion shall require before division at the equal charges of her Majesty and the Earl' ('Calendar of the Carew Manuscripts', 1.444). Elizabeth loaned Essex $10,000 on mortgage of his properties in Buckinghamshire and Essex. If the sum was not repaid within three years these pledged properties -- about a third of all his property -- would be forfeited. In sanguine mood Essex reckoned that his Ulster plantation would yield an annual rental of $5000 which would offset any outlay the crown was prepared to make in its support. In 1572 similar arrangements had been granted to Thomas Smith, the natural son of Sir Thomas Smith, to colonize the Ards peninsula between Belfast and Strangford Lough in co. Down. That project had been a failure, but Essex's new scheme was heartily supported. Lord Rich, Sir Peter Carew, William and John Norris of Rycot, William Morgan, Francis Kellaway, Sir Arthur Champernowne, Henry Knollys (Essex's brother-in-law), Michael and John Carey, the sons of Lord Hunsdon, and Henry Sydenham all raised volunteer bands. Essex wanted each adventurer to 'build a small castle with a bawn of stone and intrench a town' (BL, Add. MS 48015, fols. 296-300). He prudently employed officers who had previous Irish experience such as Nicholas and John Malby, Edward Barkeley, Thomas Chatterton, and Francis Drake, captain of the 'Falcon'. Early in July 1573 the queen advised him to avoid bloodshed as far as possible and not to make any hasty enforced changes in religion. 
Essex sailed from Liverpool in good spirits with part of his expedition on 19 July 1573. The small fleet was soon storm-scattered; some ships were blown on to the Isle of Man and others as far south as Cork. Essex landed with difficulty at Carrickfergus where he took command of the garrison and where Hugh O'Neill (later second earl of Tyrone) joined his force. He wintered at Belfast where an earthen fort at Skegoneill, near the present city, is associated with Essex. Thence he issued a proclamation to Turlough Luineach O'Neill to the effect that his sole aim was to rid Ulster of the Scots and that all who helped him to do so would be well received. Sir Brian mac Phelim O'Neill initially made feint submission by sending in supplies of cattle to Carrickfergus, but a few days later withdrew his forces to join Turlough Luineach O'Neill's, and at the same time managed to recover his cattle from Essex. The problem for Essex was to prevent the O'Neills, Turlough and Brian, acting together with their Scottish allies and mercenaries; rather his aim was to have them at each other's throats. One fierce attack was made on Sir Brian MacPhelim at Masereene, near Antrim town, but simultaneously a raid by the Scots on the Ards resulted on 18 October 1573 in the death of Thomas Smith, on whom Essex had relied for support. Essex's difficulties increased as his men began to desert, some to England and some to the pale; he lacked a steady stream of supplies and to compound his ill luck the plague broke out -- twin factors which accounted for the failure of many Elizabethan colonial ventures. Some of his volunteers openly declared their intention of going home so that Essex was left to depend on the support of drafted men, and was forced to plead for further financial aid from the queen who loaned him additional money against further mortgages. 'I will not leave this enterprize as long as I have any foot of land in England unsold', he wrote to the council in March 1574 (TNA: PRO, SP 63/45/7). Contrary to his original plans, Essex now suggested winning the support of Sorley Boy and his Scots to use against the O'Neills. 
The lord deputy, William Fitzwilliam, who had been against the project from the beginning, now declined to help Essex, who promptly sent his secretary, Edward Waterhouse, to report his situation to queen and council. Orders were sent directly to Fitzwilliam to succour Essex in Ulster. A proposal to recall Fitzwilliam and have him replaced by Essex was aborted by the intervention of Leicester, to whom the queen listened. Instead, to satisfy Essex, he was promised the titles of governor of Ulster and earl marshal of Ireland. Early in March 1574 he appealed to Fitzwilliam for help in an excursion against Turlough Luineach O'Neill; he got but a handful of men from the pale. Again, desertions and want of supplies stopped the attempt; instead a truce was negotiated with Turlough before the end of the month. 
The whole enterprise was manifestly failing, and the queen contemplated recalling Essex out of Ireland. Essex foresaw the ruin of his fortunes unless the terms of his contracts could be altered. He first asked the queen for another 700 men while he continued to support 100 himself, and asked her to grant him Island Magee at a nominal rent; alternatively he asked her to take $250 a year in discharge of the $10,000 debt. Elizabeth graciously acceded to his first request. These reinforcements arrived but once more disease, desertions, and famine became rampant in Carrickfergus; old and new soldiers were dying at the rate of fifteen or twenty a day. With heroic fortitude Essex shared in their sufferings and although his forces were weakened they did manage to persuade Sir Brian mac Phelim O'Neill to consider surrendering his territory of Clandeboye to the queen in May 1574. In June 1574, at Fitzwilliam's request, Essex moved south to ask the earl of Desmond to negotiate with the deputy and council in Dublin. In this he was temporarily successful. On his return north Essex mustered what soldiers he could, and with the help of Hugh O'Neill, baron of Dungannon (and second earl of Tyrone 'de jure', 1562), carried out a murderous raid on a Clandeboye O'Neill crannog (a fortified island in a lake) near Banbridge, co. Down. From there he marched through Turlough Luineach O'Neill's lordship from Benburb in co. Tyrone to the River Foyle, burning a bountiful harvest as he went. At Lifford in Tyrconnell he placed a loyalist O'Donnell in charge instead of a dissident one. 
However, this show of strength failed to bring Turlough Luineach to submission. The trail of damage was quickly repaired since in a pastoral economy no towns and few substantial houses existed. Essex could see that only permanent forts garrisoned by paid government troops could effectively bring the province under English control. He also would have liked coastal fortifications to keep the Scots out of Ulster. His frustration at his perceived lack of progress in carrying out his project drove him to desperate measures. In November 1574 he invited MacPhelim to conference and to spend Christmas with him at Belfast, at that time but a cluster of houses around a church and small fort at a ford on the Lagan River. A rich banquet was prepared for the Irish chief, his wife, his brother, and their retainers. At a signal his troops treacherously slaughtered Sir Brian's company, seized the three chief guests, and had them sent to Dublin Castle and there executed, presumably for treachery. Essex boasted that this little execution broke the faction and struck terror into the rest. No justification was given for the atrocity. 
Differences and difficulties with the Dublin administration led to confusion of authority as Essex and Fitzwilliam were frequently at cross purposes. Fitzwilliam regarded Essex and his prospective colonists with suspicion. The Irish enemy made capital on the confusion by claiming they were 'no rebels', but acting in self-defence against predators; that if indeed it was the queen's war, then the lord deputy and not Essex would have been appointed to lead it. When Fitzwilliam had to reduce the forces in Ireland to about 2000 soldiers, Essex's army was threatened with extinction. Hence he resigned. The queen praised his earlier efforts and declared that the enterprise was not to be abandoned. And yet she informed Essex that she was not prepared to continue support for the colonization of Ulster. By June 1575, as part of his evacuation plans, he moved his headquarters from Carrickfergus to Drogheda and there opened negotiations with Turlough Luineach O'Neill. The queen now ordered Essex to retire as soon as he could. By the end of June 1575 he threw up a fort and bridge across the Blackwater, north of Armagh, but in his haste that work was unfinished because his men were continually harassed by followers of Sorley Boy MacDonnell and Turlough Luineach O'Neill. However, he came to terms with Turlough Luineach, who undertook to confine himself to his Tyrone lands and to relinquish claims over his neighbours. Essex then drove the Scots under Sorley Boy out of Clandeboye and handed it over to a minor Irish chieftain, Brian Fertagh O'Neill. 
An essay in frightfulness followed when Essex sent a naval expedition under John Norris and Francis Drake to Rathlin Island where Sorley Boy had sent his own family and those of his chief followers for safety. Robert Bruce's former castle on the island was stormed and 200 defenders killed in a siege that lasted four days (22-6 July 1575). No quarter was given, and some 300 to possibly 400 people, including women and children, were hunted down and slaughtered in the caves where they had taken refuge. Rathlin proved easy to sack but difficult to hold, being a staging post on the way to and from the south Hebrides. Drake and Norris were forced to abandon the island under pressure from Sorley Boy who in retaliation sacked Carrickfergus. 
The massacre of Rathlin Island was the last act in Essex's Ulster tragedy. The whole venture had been a costly failure, the queen having spent over $130,000 in Ireland in the two and a half years to September 1575. In November 1575, once Sir Henry Sidney had returned to Ireland as lord deputy to replace Fitzwilliam, he visited Ulster and found it 'utterly disinhabited'. Modern research would seem to confirm Froude's description of the massacre on Rathlin Island, some aspects of which were questioned by Brewer in letters to 'The Athenaeum' in 1870, particularly that Sorley Boy had witnessed the murder of his children from the mainland, and that Essex and the queen regarded the operation with satisfaction. Contemporary reports would appear to support Froude's views rather than Brewer's. The massacre is long remembered in the catalogue of English outrages and Irish grievances as recorded by the Gaelic annalists. Little had been achieved by Essex in Ulster. At best Turlough Luineach O'Neill was restrained from exercising authority over his neighbours and from bringing in undue forces of Scottish mercenaries, but fears of Scots-Irish intrigues continued until the execution of Mary, queen of Scots, in 1587. 
In October 1575 Essex arrived at his house in Lamphey, Pembrokeshire. The queen had eased his anxieties by writing on 2 September: 'You may think it has been a dear conquest to you, in respect of the great care of mind, toil of body, and intolerable charges you have sustained to the consumption of some good portion of your patrimony, but you have invested yourself with immortal renown. ('Calendar of the Carew Manuscripts', 2.24)' By 29 December 1575 he was at Durham House in London petitioning for compensation from the privy council for the loss of his fortune in Ireland and to pay off his creditors. Negotiations dragged as offers were made and rejected by Essex, and Lord Burghley became irritable. At length, on 9 March 1576 the queen signed a warrant reappointing Essex 'earl marshal of Ireland' and on 9 May confirmed the grant of the Farney in co. Monaghan, about one-fifth of that shire. He then defrayed debts amounting to about $35,473 by selling off land in Staffordshire, Cornwall, Essex, Wiltshire, and Yorkshire. He left Chartley Hall, Staffordshire, in mid-July 1576 and arrived in Dublin on the 23rd where, in the absence of Sir Henry Sidney, he was welcomed by the chancellor, William Gerard, and by Adam Loftus, the archbishop of Dublin. After visiting his lands in Monaghan, Sidney invested him in the office of earl marshal of Ireland. 
By September Essex was ill with dysentery. On 20 September he wrote to the queen that he was on his deathbed and begged her to favour his elder son, Robert. He died in Dublin on 22 September 1576, aged thirty-seven, and was buried in Carmarthen on 26 November. In his will, drawn up on 14 June 1575, Essex left moneys to be expended on fortifying the pale at the discretion of the lord deputy. A funeral sermon (published in London in 1577) was preached by Richard Davies, bishop of St David's, and an epitaph was entered in the Stationers' Company register in 1575/6 which is identical with 'The Death of Devoreux' printed by J. Payne Collier from a manuscript in his possession in his 'Extracts from the Stationers' Company Registers'. Thomas Churchyard published an elegy in his 'Generall Rehearsall of Warres' (1579), which may in fact have been issued separately at the time of the earl's death. 
A rumour that the earl had been poisoned proved groundless, as attested by the post-mortem examination ordered by Sir Henry Sidney. Sidney's report to Walsingham gives a detailed description of Essex's last days, and likewise his secretary, Edward Waterhouse, wrote a sad account, printed in William Camden's 'Annales' (as edited by Thomas Hearne, 1717). A manuscript copy of the latter, erroneously attributed to Thomas Churchyard's hand and once belonging to William Cole, the Cambridge antiquary, is now in the British Library (BL, Add. MS 5845, fols. 337-49). 'Leicester's Commonwealth', an attack on Leicester's character written in 1584, wrongly ascribes to Robert Parsons the allegation that Leicester was responsible for Essex's death, motivated, as he may well have been, by his adulterous relations with Essex's wife. A contemporary ballad, 'Leicester's Ghost', repeats the story, but it was not published until 1641. Certainly Lady Essex did not accompany her husband to Ireland. In 1575 she was at Kenilworth when Leicester entertained the queen there, and on 6 August the countess of Essex received the queen at Chartley Hall in the absence of the earl. We know that Leicester was anxious in March 1576 to have Essex return to Ireland, and there is no proof that the countess intrigued with Leicester in her husband's lifetime. She married Leicester on 21 September 1578. By her second marriage she had a son who died in 1584. After Leicester's death (4 September 1588) she married Sir Christopher Blount in July 1589. He was executed in 1601 for his part in the treason plot of her son Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, and she lived a widow until her death at the age of ninety-four on 25 December 1634. She was buried at the side of her second husband at Warwick. 
All who knew Essex, and especially those who served with him in Ulster, testify to his exceptional courage in sharing all the hardships of the campaign to which his men were subjected. But his Ulster enterprise was ill-conceived and incompetently executed, and its inexorable failure was due as much to his lack of judgement as to the vacillating policy of the queen and the rivalry of William Fitzwilliam. The wanton atrocities committed on the O'Neills and the Scots on Rathlin Island precipitated a further deterioration in Anglo-Gaelic relations. 
Richard Davies, the preacher of his funeral panegyric, said that Essex was learned in history and genealogy and heraldry. According to Waterhouse, Essex's secretary, he sang a hymn of his own composition on his deathbed. A poem attributed to Essex exists in two copies in the British Library, and another in the Bodleian. These verses are printed as 'The Compleynt of a Sinner' in 'The Paradise of Dainty Devices' (1576) above the initials F. K. (Francis Kinwelmersh, friend of the Elizabethan writer and poet George Gascoigne). 


@@@@@


doc= 7569


Devey, George (1820-1886), architect and painter, was born on 23 February 1820 at 34 Ely Place, London, the second of four children of Frederick Nicholls Devey (1786-1862), a solicitor, and his wife, Ann ('b'. 1785), daughter of Durs Egg, a Swiss gunmaker who had emigrated to England. It was probably the artistic interests of his mother's family -- her younger brother was the painter Augustus Egg -- which encouraged Devey's early enthusiasm for painting and sketching. He was educated first at a private school in Stanmore, Middlesex, and then, from 1832 to 1835, at King's College School, London, where he was taught drawing by John Sell Cotman. In 1837 he was articled to the architect Thomas Little in Northumberland Street, London. Little appreciated his skill at draughtsmanship, and employed him in his office after his pupillage had ended. 
Although Devey exhibited designs for buildings under his own name at the Royal Academy on four occasions between 1841 and 1848, he does not appear to have set up in practice by himself until about 1846, after his return from a tour of Germany and Italy. His first office was at 16 Great Marlborough Street, London, where he remained until 1880, when he moved to 123 Bond Street. In 1856 he became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects. His career was established slowly. In 1848 he was introduced to Lord De L'Isle, for whom he restored and extended a group of cottages known as Leicester Square at the entrance to Penshurst Place in Kent. Devey's sensitive handling of these modest tile-hung buildings reveals his close examination of the vernacular architecture of the Kentish Weald, a study unexceptional for an artist at that date but unprecedented for an architect. 
This was the beginning of a busy country house practice, although it was not until 1866 that Devey received his first commission for an entirely new house, the half-timbered Akeley Wood, Buckinghamshire. His main work was remodelling old houses and designing estate buildings. Many were for Liberal politicians, as a result of Devey's friendship with Sir Walter James (later first Baron Northbourne), like Devey an accomplished watercolour painter and skilled horseman. Devey remodelled Betteshanger, James's seat near Deal in Kent, for which he also provided garden designs. The Liberal connection proved most profitable for Devey in an introduction to the Rothschilds, on whose Buckinghamshire estates he worked for many years, beginning with new estate buildings for Sir Anthony de Rothschild at Aston Clinton in 1863. His major documented works for the Rothschilds were the pavilion at Eythrope (1876-9) for Alice de Rothschild and the enlargement for Leopold de Rothschild of Ascott from 1874 onwards, to create what Mary Gladstone called 'a palace-like cottage' (L. Masterson, ed., 'Mary Gladstone: her Diaries and Letters', 1930, 196). 
Although Devey's genius was for modest picturesque buildings, he received many commissions for large houses. Among them are Hall Place, Leigh, Kent (1871-4), for the hosiery manufacturer and Liberal MP Samuel Morley, which at $70,913 was Devey's most expensive building; and Goldings, near Hertford, for the banker Robert Smith, which was the biggest (1871-4). Devey's sensitivity to materials is perhaps shown to better effect in his many extensions and alterations to old houses, most notably his additions to Walmer Castle, Kent, for the second Earl Granville (1872-5) and to Melbury House, Dorset, for the fifth earl of Ilchester (1884-6). His concern for the external harmony of his buildings was not matched by any interest in interior design. 
Devey was a solitary man, who did not encourage publication of his designs; since they were almost exclusively for domestic buildings, and so out of the public eye, few were noticed by his contemporaries. Not until his rediscovery by H. S. Goodhart-Rendel in 1957 -- 'one of three most influential domestic architects in England of the 19th century' -- did Devey's reputation begin to rise (P. Ferriday, ed., 'Victorian Architecture', 1963, 67). And it was not until the publication of Jill Allibone's biography in 1991 that it became clear that Devey was not only a prolific country house architect but also a pioneer of the revived interest in English vernacular models. His cottages at Penshurst were seen and sketched by W. E. Nesfield and Richard Norman Shaw in 1860 and so probably influenced their creation of the 'Old English' style in the late 1860s and 1870s, which had a decisive impact on English domestic architecture. 
Devey never married. Although he fell in love with a clergyman's daughter, Flora Hoskins, and proposed to her twice -- before she married in 1857 and after she was widowed in 1866 -- he was rejected both times, probably because of his heterodox religious beliefs. He was a member of the Theistic church founded by the Revd Charles Voysey, thanks to which Voysey's architect son Charles Francis Annesley Voysey worked in Devey's office for two years. Voysey later recalled that 'When asked by his client to join a house-party, Devey would make the most fascinating catch-penny sketches while dressing for dinner and present them during dessert, charming everyone' (J. Brandon-Jones, 'C. F. A. Voysey: a memoir', 'Architectural Association Journal', 72, 1957, 241-62). 
Devey's practice was wound up after his death. There is a large collection of his drawings in the drawings collection of the Royal Institute of British Architects, together with a substantial number of photographs commissioned by him; he was a pioneer in the use of photography to record buildings, including his own under construction as well as completed. Devey lived with his parents first at Ely Place and subsequently at Ealing. After they died he moved to Elm Park House in Chelsea and then, at some point between 1881 and 1884, to Ashley House in Lavender Hill, Clapham, where he was living at the time of his death. He died of bronchitis on 4 November 1886 at his brother's house, Devonshire House, Pelham Crescent, Hastings (where he had bought a house intended for his retirement), and was buried in the borough council's cemetery at Ore, in Kent. His estate was valued at $32,531, 'a pretty large sum, as times go, for a man to have accumulated by his own exertions in a profession the emoluments of which are not over-liberal' ('The Builder', 25 June 1887, 931). 


@@@@@


doc= 7570


Devis, Arthur (1712-1787), portrait painter, was born on 19 February 1712 in Preston, Lancashire, and baptized there on 22 February, the eldest of the four sons of Anthony Devis ('b'. 'c'.1682, died after 1761), carpenter and town councillor, and his wife, Ellin, 'nee' Rauthmell (died 1727). After his mother's death his father married, in 1728, Anne Blackburne ('bap'. 1695?), with whom he had two sons, the elder of whom was Anthony Devis ['see below']. 
Arthur Devis trained with the sporting and topographical landscape artist Peter Tillemans, whose sale in London in 1733 included nine of Devis's Italianate landscapes with ruins. His earliest documented work is a bird's-eye view, 'Hoghton Tower, Lancashire' (1735, priv. coll.), for which he was paid $6 6's'. Soon thereafter he began to produce portraits in the conversation piece genre. In 1742, when he was described in the Preston guild roll as 'of London, Painter', he married, on 20 July, Elizabeth Faulkner (1723-1788) at St Katharine by the Tower, London. By 1747 the couple had moved to Great Queen Street, where they lived until moving to Brighton in 1783. Of their twenty-two children only six survived, including Ellin Devis (1746-1820), author and a headmistress of a girls' school, and Thomas Anthony Devis (1757-1810) and Arthur William Devis (1762-1822), both painters. 
Devis's speciality, the conversation piece, is described as a painting of one or more full-length figures in small scale, frequently accompanied by family members with their possessions, furnishings, and domestic animals, in compositions set within proprietary interiors or landscapes. Taken up in England during the 1720s by William Hogarth and used by Thomas Gainsborough and George Romney (early in their careers), the genre was popular with numbers of unnamed provincial artists whose works have been attributed wrongly to Devis. The most prolific of the eighteenth-century conversation piece artists, Devis produced more than 300 paintings in the format for members of the established, and largely tory, landed gentry and professional classes. For several years after he moved to London he relied on commissions which drew him back to Lancashire and adjacent counties. Thereafter he travelled less frequently, and attracted sitters to his studio in London where he refined his craft to produce, from 1745 until the early 1760s, his most important works. 
Devis exhibited at the Free Society of Artists between 1761 and 1763, between 1767 and 1770, in 1775, and in 1780, and was elected president of the organization in 1768. He restored paintings for Sir Roger Newdigate in 1762-4 and was hired by the commissioners of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, in 1777 to clean and repair the Painted Hall for $1000. Devis also supplemented his income by producing paintings on glass. He had an apprentice, George Senhouse, from 1752 to 1755, and his pupils included Robert Marris and his sons Arthur William and Thomas Anthony. In 1783, the year in which Devis moved to Brighton, the London auctioneer Barford offered for sale, on 10 and 11 April, 'Pictures belonging to Mr. Devis of Great Queen Street, Portrait Painter and Picture-Cleaner'. 
Untrained in academic study from the live human model, Devis frequently used a small wooden manikin, or lay figure (Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston), and occasionally clothed it in costumes kept to hand. Although the practice made apparent his deficiencies in anatomical rendering, he was valued by his clients for his ability to describe a wealth of information and to place his figures within legible interior spaces or landscapes. His use of layered glazes and his meticulous handling of the brush, the result of a study of seventeenth-century Dutch masters and his own occasional work as a miniature painter, gave his canvases a highly crafted finish which increased their visual appeal. In such compositions as 'William Atherton, Mayor of Preston, and his Wife Lucy' ('c'.1743-4, Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool) and 'Gentleman and Lady at a Harpsichord' (1749, Victoria and Albert Museum, London) he demonstrates a topographer's eye for describing the sheen of satin dresses and waistcoats, and the glowing polish on furnishings and floorboards, and for placing his sitters within the vertical and horizontal planes of an interior. In his landscape conversation pieces he also defined with clarity of detail the natural features of a setting. For example, in 'Sir George and Lady Strickland' (1751, Ferens Art Gallery, Hull) the burdock weeds, tree trunks, and winding river are so distributed as to present the figures within an ordered scheme. Only a few of Devis's compositions represent actual locations, among them the interior in 'Sir Roger Newdigate in his Gothic Library at Arbury, Warwickshire' (1756-8, priv. coll.) and the river scenery in 'Philip Howard of Corby Castle, Cumbria' (1759, priv. coll.). Within his restrained and carefully planned group compositions each figure is spaced at wide intervals, isolated by local detail and defined contours rather than assembling into an integrated pictorial whole. Interpreted as a visual allusion to his patrons' codes of behaviour, his conversation pieces record hierarchies of age, gender, and property. His sitters, such as 'Mr and Mrs Hill' ('c'.1750-51, Yale U. CBA), comport themselves in a range of polite attitudes illustrated in contemporary etiquette manuals. Later in his career Devis attempted to give his figures greater mobility and several of his landscapes allude to the picturesque or summon up wilder aspects of the English countryside. But most of his tableaux remain static owing to their smooth finish, graphic precision, and pervasive reliance on displays of decorum. His work was criticized by those for whom such displays betrayed the sitter's social aspirations. After the Royal Academy's founding in 1768 (the year in which Devis became president of the far less prestigious Free Society of Artists), English artists were no longer marginalized by connoisseurs, and many enjoyed international reputations. In this competitive milieu, Devis's modest reputation suffered a steep decline, not to be reassessed until the 1930s. He has since been recognized as a master of his special craft, that of describing, in small compass, the ideals of a privileged society. 
Arthur Devis died in Brighton on 25 July 1787 and was buried in the churchyard of St Mary's, Paddington, Middlesex. His wife died in London on 15 March 1788. 
Arthur Devis's half-brother 


@@@@@


doc= 7571


Devis, Arthur William (1762-1822), portrait painter, was born in London on 10 August 1762, the nineteenth child of the portrait painter Arthur Devis (1712-1787) and his wife, Elizabeth Faulkner (1723-1788), and the nephew of the landscape painter Anthony Devis (1729-1816/17) ['see under 'Devis, Arthur]. 
Arthur William Devis received his early art education from his father but was enrolled in the Royal Academy Schools at the age of only twelve. Although he exhibited a handful of works at the Free Society and the Royal Academy, little is known of Devis's early career until his father obtained for him the post of draughtsman aboard the 'Antelope', a messenger ship commissioned to sail to China by the East India Company. Devis was to be paid 100 guineas to make maps of the islands in the South China Sea. On the outward journey he was wounded in the chest and jaw when the 'Antelope' stopped off the coast of New Guinea to trade with natives who had paddled out to them. The ship's captain, Henry Wilson, recorded in his log that 'suddenly the people in the boats discharged a flight of arrows at us' (MS log of the 'Antelope', 1 April 1783, BL OIOC, L/Mar/B/570A). Devis was not severely injured but the face wound caused him 'a locked jaw, by which he suffered to the last moment of his life' (undated appeal, 'c'.1822, Biddulph papers). 
The 'Antelope' reached Macau in June 1783. After repairs had been made and sixteen Chinese sailors engaged to supplement the crew, the 'Antelope' began the return journey. In early August the ship ran aground on an uncharted coral reef close to a group of islands now known as Palau, or Belau more locally. All but one of the crew survived and Devis, who evidently had salvaged his drawing materials, recorded the construction of a smaller ship made from the wreck of the 'Antelope'. Captain Wilson described the extraordinary adventures of the crew, in which Devis figured prominently, as they made the acquaintance of the 'Pelew' islanders and assisted them to conquer the neighbouring islands. Devis's studies of the king of Pelew and his wives were used to illustrate George Keate's 'Account of the Pelew Islands', first published in 1788. Several Pelew landscapes and portraits were exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution between 1796 and 1807. 
In their newly constructed ship, the 'Oroolong', named after the small island on which they had landed, the crew returned to Macau and eventually to England, except for Devis, who sailed from there for Calcutta in September 1784. Johann Zoffany and Thomas Hickey were both well-established portrait painters in Calcutta at that time but Devis nevertheless found himself initially in great demand. He received lucrative portrait commissions from the departing governor-general, Warren Hastings, and from the high court judge Sir Robert Chambers and his wife, whose portraits are in the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. His portrait of John Addison, the resident judge at Moorshadabad (Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston), is an excellent example of Devis's early portrait style. Addison's elongated limbs and bold outline are reminiscent of Arthur Devis senior's portraits, which were dependent on the use of the lay figure. Placed in such an exotic setting, and contrasted with the bulk of the elephants behind him and a naturalistic group of Indian servants, the figure emanates a sense of classical poise and elegance. 
Devis was at the centre of a scandal involving a fellow artist, John Alefounder. When in 1785 Alefounder fell ill, Devis sold many of Alefounder's paintings and materials to pay off his friend's immediate creditors. Alefounder publicly accused Devis of acting maliciously and years later, when Alefounder committed suicide in 1794, the rumours resurfaced and followed Devis home. Devis was unable to obtain sufficient patronage as a portrait painter in Calcutta to support himself. While travelling around Madras and Bengal in search of patrons he began collecting material for an ambitious series of subject paintings depicting 'the arts, manufactures, and agriculture of Bengal', which was to be engraved in colour and dedicated to the orientalist Sir William Jones, who was painted by Devis in 1793 (BL). Only four of the engravings were ever published but the thirty paintings provide a unique record of life in rural Bengal, combining loosely painted, delicately coloured landscapes, a naturalistic figure style with occasional touches of classicism, and finely observed still-life elements. These paintings are dispersed among the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, and a number of private collections. 
Devis was back in Calcutta in 1792, when he was commissioned to paint the portrait of Governor-General Cornwallis following his military victory over Tipu Sultan, the 'tiger of Mysore'. Two of Tipu's sons were taken hostage by Cornwallis and Devis painted the elaborate handing-over ceremony in his most ambitious work to date ('Lord Cornwallis Receiving the Sons of Tipu Sultan as Hostages'). At least three versions of the event were completed (all priv. colls.), the largest, measuring over 4 metres in length, has over sixty portraits of officers and Indian dignitaries. 
Despite receiving astronomically high fees, notably $2530 for his portrait of Cornwallis, Devis struggled financially and eventually decided to return to England, setting sail in January 1795. He had recently made what was generally considered to be an unwise marriage to an actress, Mrs Coombes. Instead of returning with him to England, she travelled first to Lisbon, then to Paris, and finally to Verdun, where she died in 1805, shortly after her release from a debtors' prison. 
In the late 1790s Devis struggled to establish himself as an artist in London, relying on portrait commissions from his Indian connections but also exhibiting landscapes, animal paintings, and theatrical subjects. His full-length portrait 'Sir William Pitt Amherst' (Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston), dating from 1803, shows Devis competing in scale, drama, and the bravura handling of paint with Thomas Lawrence's portraits in the grand manner. By 1800, however, he was bankrupt and was saved from prison only through the intervention of John Biddulph, a friend and long-term patron whom Devis had probably met in India. Biddulph bought up many of the paintings seized by Devis's creditors following his bankruptcy. By 1803 Devis owed over $2000 to Biddulph, who was forced to refuse further financial help. Devis contracted still more debts on behalf of a failing dressmaking business owned by his sister and Margaret Lanchester, who was to become his second wife. 
Devis was imprisoned in 1804, gaining his release in November or December the following year to gather material for what would be his most famous work, 'The Death of Nelson' ('c'.1805-7; NMM). A prize of $500 had been offered by the engraver Josiah Boydell in November 1805 for the best representation of the subject and Devis saw this as a major opportunity to clear his debts and establish his reputation as a painter of modern history. He joined the 'Victory' at Spithead in December, and made sketches of Nelson's body (he was present when 'the fatal ball' was removed from his body) as well as portrait studies of all those who had been present, after determining precisely where each one had stood at the moment of Nelson's death. Devis's documentary approach prompted a hostile response from Benjamin West, who complained that the painting was not an 'Epic representation' and that Nelson should not have been pictured 'like a sick man in a Prison Hole' (Farington, 'Diary', 3.150). Following the popular success of the painting (oil sketch exh. by Boydell, 1807; Royal Collection; finished painting exh. British Institution, 1809) and Boydell's engraving, Devis applied for associate status of the Royal Academy. He was summarily rejected for 'irregular living' -- the circumstances of his first marriage, the Alefounder scandal, and his bankruptcy all telling against him. 
From 1807 until his death in 1822 Devis managed to stay ahead of his creditors and resumed his friendship with the Biddulph family. He established a reputation as a painter of child portraits, many of which were engraved. He also produced several history paintings, collaborating with John Augustus Atkinson on 'The Battle of Waterloo' (watercolour and engraving, 'c'.1816-1818; BM), which was engraved by Boydell in 1819. In his later years he painted a number of large-scale group portraits and ambitious single-figure portraits such as his portrait of the actress Eliza O'Neill as 'Belvidera... a Greek Courtesan' (exh. British Institution, 1816; Wolverhampton Art Gallery), which compares favourably with William Beechey's large-scale portraits. 
In his final years Devis received royal patronage. 'The Apotheosis of Princess Charlotte' ('c'.1819; Belgian Royal Collection), complete with swirling drapery and flying cherubs, was painted for the bereaved Prince Leopold, and demonstrates the continuing influence of a Reynoldsian neo-classical influence throughout Devis's career. A mezzotint after the work was published in 1820, as was an engraving after his portrait of Queen Caroline (1820; Ashmolean Museum, Oxford), the wife of George IV. 
Devis died suddenly on 11 February 1822 at his home at Caroline Street, Bedford Square, London, and was buried in the churchyard of St Giles-in-the-Fields. He left his wife, children, and sisters unprovided for. His studio contained numerous unfinished portraits of titled sitters, as well as Indian, religious, and genre subjects and over 4000 fashion plates, for many of which Devis had provided the designs. 
With the majority of his paintings in private collections, many in India and America, Devis's reputation quickly dwindled, resting almost entirely on 'The Death of Nelson', which remained a national icon well into the twentieth century. Since the 1970s several important works have appeared in the salerooms, including works from the Indian Manufactures series, helping to re-establish Devis as one of the more gifted and innovative followers of Reynolds. The Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston, the British Museum, London, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut, have large collections of his work. 


@@@@@


doc= 7572


Vismes, Louis de (1720-1776), diplomatist, was born on 25 September 1720, the third of eight sons of Philippe de Vismes, a Huguenot refugee from Normandy, and Marianne de la Majanes, who married on 26 July 1716. He was educated at Westminster School and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 22 June 1739. After graduating BA (1743) and proceeding MA (1746) he was ordained deacon but does not appear to have gained preferment in the church. In summer 1753 he travelled to Padua with William Nassau de Zuylestein, fourth earl of Rochford, and in 1758 he returned to Italy as tutor to Sir Wyndham Knatchbull-Wyndham (1737-1763). By April 1759 they were in Venice, where the following month they parted company on good terms. De Vismes had been recommended to the British ambassador in Florence, Horace Mann, by William Pitt as 'a Gentleman of much worth' (Ingamells, 295), and in January 1765, when he was in Madrid, he was appointed secretary to his former travelling companion, Rochford, by then ambassador to the Spanish court. He took charge of the embassy when Rochford departed in 1766, and left Madrid in November 1767. 
De Vismes was posted to St Petersburg as secretary in March 1768 and arrived in June; he was headed for the embassy there until the arrival of the new ambassador, Lord Cathcart. Although in December 1769 de Vismes was appointed minister to the imperial diet at Ratisbon, he principally resided at Munich during his four years in the post. He succeeded Sir John Goodricke as envoy-extraordinary at Stockholm, where he arrived on 15 March 1774. He reputedly lived in some poverty and, according to Lady Minto, 'had no secretary, contenting himself with a boy who understood no language but his own, merely to copy for him'. Frederick the Great had a high regard for de Vismes and awarded him the honour of bearing the Prussian eagle as a crest. 
De Vismes, who was unmarried, died in Stockholm on 4 September 1776. 


@@@@@


doc= 7573


Dewar, James (1793-1846), conductor and composer, was born on 26 July 1793 in Edinburgh, the son of Daniel Dewar, a violinist and composer of reels, and his wife, Catharine, 'nee' Ballantyne. His brother John Dewar was a composer. In 1817 he succeeded his teacher, William Penson, as conductor of the band of the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, where he remained until his death. He was also organist at St George's Episcopal Church in the city from 1815 to 1835. He was one of the founders of the Edinburgh Professional Society of Musicians, and conducted their concerts. In 1821 he conducted a four-day orchestral and vocal festival at the Theatre Royal, Glasgow, and from 1826 to 1827 organized a season of subscription concerts in Glasgow. 
Dewar composed several glees, one of which, 'The Goldfinch', was awarded first prize in a competition by Sir George Mackenzie in 1843. He arranged Scottish airs for piano and orchestra, and wrote music for some of the plays based on Sir Walter Scott's novels, including 'Waverley' (1823), and 'The Antiquary' (overture only). In 1826 he published six books of 'Popular National Melodies Adapted for the Pianoforte', and about 1829 edited 'The Border Garland', with poems by Hogg. Dewar died in Edinburgh on 4 January 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 7574


Dewes, Garrat (b. in or before 1533, d. 1591), bookseller and publisher, was the eldest son of Adrian Dewes (died 1551), descended from the ancient lords of Kessel in Guelderland, who during the reign of Henry VIII had moved from the Low Countries to England, where he married Alice Ravenscroft. In his will, Garrat and three other surviving sons are mentioned. Garrat Dewes, who had been apprenticed to London stationer Andrew Hester, was made free of the Stationers' Company on 4 October 1557, when he would have been at least twenty-four years of age. He was taken into the Stationers' Company livery in 1569, served as renter warden in 1572-3 and as under-warden in 1581-2. Between January and September 1568 he received five shipments from Antwerp, each of 20 reams of unbound books, valued at $2. From 1578 to 1587 his bookshop was at the sign of the Swan in Paul's Cross churchyard. His device (McKerrow, nos. 169, 171) was cited by William Camden as a 'most memorable' example of a rebus: 'two in a Garret casting dews at dice' (W. Camden, 'Remaines', 1629, sig. K2'v'). From December 1573 he was one of the 'Assignes of Francis Flower', operating under Flower's lucrative patent as queen's printer for Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, which included the production of Lily's 'Grammar'. 
Dewes married at some date before 1563 Grace Hynde (died 1583) of Cambridgeshire. They had a daughter, Alice, who married William Lathum of Upminster, Essex, and a son, 
Probably about 1589, when he was demoted from the governing court of assistants of the Stationers' Company for his 'Contynuall absence' (Greg and Boswell, 33), Garrat Dewes retired to South Ockendon, Essex, where he purchased the manor of Gaines and adopted the life of a country gentleman. He died on 12 April 1591 and was buried at Upminster church, 'very solemly and decently, with escutcheons of the coat-armour and other accountrements befitting his ancient and noble extraction' ('Autobiography', 1.9). 


@@@@@


doc= 7575


Duwes, Giles (d. 1535), musician and royal tutor, was perhaps of Norman origin; the village of Le Vey on the plain of Caen was then called Wez and Latinized as Vadum. One of the many useful foreigners who served Henry VII, Duwes first appears in the Tudor household accounts about the turn of the sixteenth century as a professional musician. His will mentions a wife named 'Jhone' and four children: Henry, Arthur, Gwylliam, and Margaret. Because he named all but one of these children after his royal pupils, they must have been born later than their royal counterparts and probably following his entrance into royal service. Arthur was old enough by 1515 to enter Henry VIII's household as a professional lute player. Giles had therefore probably entered Henry VII's service by the mid-1490s. As 'Luter unto oure derrest Son the duke of Yorke', Duwes was formally a member of Prince Henry's household by November 1501. In the course of music tuition, he bought lute strings for 'the Quene of Scottes lewte' (Princess Margaret) in July 1502 and 'for My Lady Mares lute' in 1507. From 1502 onwards he drew his regular half-yearly salary of 10's'. as a lute player from the king's privy purse. At the funeral of Henry VII in 1509 he appears in the household roster as one of three 'Mynstrells of the Chambre'. 
Duwes's role as French tutor may have begun informally as a consequence of his music lessons. In his French grammar, 'An Introductorie for to Lerne to Rede, to Pronounce, and to Speke French Trewly' (1533?), he recalls that he had already served the Tudor court 'therty yeres and more' as 'schoolmaster for the French tongue', an observation that seems to date the beginning of his French teaching career to about the turn of the century. He also claims to have taught French to all of Henry VII's children (Arthur, Henry, Margaret, and Mary), as well as to Henry VIII's daughter, Mary, and to Henry Courtenay, the future marquess of Exeter (Duwes, 'Introductorie', 895-6). His career as a French tutor to Prince Arthur probably began in 1500, when the poet Bernard Andre retired, and it ended with Arthur's departure for Wales (November 1501), where the prince died. During the same period, he must have given Princess Margaret French lessons along with her lute instruction. Soon after she left for Scotland in 1503 Duwes, now described as Prince Henry's 'Master to lute French', had begun to teach both French and lute playing to the new heir apparent, and in that capacity he attended the funeral of Queen Elizabeth. From 1507 on (by which time he would have begun teaching French to both Princess Mary and Henry Courtenay), the household account books routinely identify him as 'Master Giles Luter', the unusual title (no other household musician is so described) apparently referring to his dual role as schoolmaster and entertainer. 
From April 1506 a dramatic increase in his salary (from 10's'. to 10 marks half yearly) probably represents Duwes's assumption of the royal librarian's duties, in addition to his tutorial and entertainment responsibilities, on the departure of his predecessor, Quentin Poulet. At the accession of Henry VIII, Duwes's position as keeper of the king's library at Richmond was formalized by a patent on 20 September 1509 at annual salary of $10 'during pleasure', and this patent was then renewed on 24 March 1512 'for life' ('LP Henry VIII', 1(1), 190(27); 1(1), 1123(56)). During his long tenure as keeper of the royal library, Duwes presided over a collection that served both as a working library and as an impressive ornament of the royal estate. In 1521 he composed 'Dialogus inter naturam et filium philosophiae' in the Richmond Library, completing it, he says, on '17 ides July'. An alchemical treatise, it circulated widely both in its original Latin and in a late sixteenth-century English translation. In it, the goddess Natura appears to an earnest, if befuddled, student of philosophy to explain the 'dark riddles, labyrinths, tropes, intricate allegories, metaphors, and shadows' which have nearly discouraged him from the further pursuit of alchemy (BL, Sloane MS 3580B, fol. 186'v'). In February 1535, a few weeks before Duwes's death, two French visitors drew up a list of 143 of the volumes then in the Richmond Library. Though containing a few English works, the inventory suggests that Duwes oversaw a predominately Latin and French-language collection full of chronicles, history, Latin classics, religion, and theology, together with a few volumes of poetry and romance. 
After the accession of Henry VIII, Duwes found that his old pupil seemed eager to bestow favour and wealth upon him. In 1510 the king appointed him keeper of 'le Prince Warderobe' in the city of London, one of the large warehouses used as a storehouse for the royal household, and also increased his salary to 40's'. per month. In 1515 he accepted Duwes's son, Arthur, into his household, initially as a lute player at a monthly salary of 10's'. 4died, later as a lute teacher for Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond. Through the next twenty-five years there followed numerous gifts, lucrative concessions to import Toulouse woad and Gascon wine, and a licence to keep up to $1000 of the customs duties on his imported or exported goods over a five-year period. 
Between 1525 and 1528 Duwes accompanied the Princess Mary as one of her 'gentleman waiters' to the Welsh marches, where he served for the last time in his familiar roles as music teacher and French language tutor. His royal pupil apparently flourished under his supervision, for a French embassy of 1527 reported that she spoke French well, and others remarked upon her mastery of the lute. His 'Introductorie' emerged from this experience as a result of an explicit royal command 'to reduce and to put by writtyng' the methods he had used for over thirty years to teach the language to his royal pupils (Duwes, 'Introductorie', 897). In response, he produced a pioneering work on French language pedagogy in two books, a grammar and a series of model dialogues in French and English. The dialogues provide an illuminating, if perhaps idealized, glimpse of court life in Princess Mary's household. In one, he frames a dialogue on the subject of love between the princess and John ap Morgan, the treasurer of her chamber (whom he playfully styles 'her husband adoptif'); in another, he represents Mary as 'crased' for lack of ap Morgan's company. In still others, her almoner teaches her the meaning of the mass or practises speaking French with her in 'the Park of Tewksbury', which Mary visited in September 1526. In several, Duwes excuses his absences from lessons because of sickness, once explicitly the gout. Duwes often represents himself as a philosophical interlocutor, now expounding St Augustine's ideas on peace, now St Isidore's on the nature of the soul. Throughout, he represents himself as a witty and avuncular schoolmaster on mutually affectionate terms with his pupil. He published his 'Introductorie' in 1533 or 1534, dedicating it of necessity not only to King Henry and the Lady Mary but also to the new queen, Anne Boleyn. At the same time, as a final expression of royal favour, his wife was appointed to Mary's household as one of her gentlewomen. 
By 1534 Duwes's tenure as royal librarian was ending. On 11 March William Tyldysley was granted a patent to establish his right to succeed Duwes in 'the office of Keeper of the King's Library in the manor of Richmond or elsewhere, whenever it shall happen to be vacant' ('LP Henry VIII', 7, no. 419(11)). Duwes made his will on 20 December 1534, apparently expecting impending death. He thus mentions a series of bequests in the form of 'tokens' which he had already wrapped and labelled and to which he had affixed his seal for the 'knoolege' and 'behooff' of his beneficiaries. He also left a large collection of musical instruments -- 'clavicordes, virginalles, recordes, regalles' -- to his sons Arthur and Gwylliam, but specifically reserved his lute and his 'bookes of musyck and frensshe' for his son Arthur alone. A few months later, on 12 April 1535, Duwes died and a second patent was issued to confirm William Tyldysley's actual possession of the now vacant office. He was buried in the London church of St Olave Upwell, and his will was proved on 24 April 1535. A gift of a 'Frountlet' to a 'maistres Colson sometyme maistres giles' recorded among the Princess Mary's privy purse expenses for January 1538 may suggest that his widow married again after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 7576


Paul Dewes (1567-1631), government official, was one of the six clerks of the chancery. Born in London, Paul Dewes was twice married. Among the children of his first marriage, to Sissilia ('c'.1581-1618), daughter of Richard Simonds, barrister, of Coxden, Chardstock, Dorset, were Sir Simonds D'Ewes (1602-1650), diarist and antiquary, and Richard Dewes (died 1643), royalist army officer. Paul Dewes (who lived during the latter part of his life at Stow Hall, Stowlangtoft, Suffolk) died on 14 March 1631. 


@@@@@


doc= 7577


D'Ewes, Sir Simonds, first baronet (1602-1650), diarist and antiquary, was the eldest son of Paul Dewes (1567-1631) ['see under 'Dewes, Garrat], barrister and government official, of Wells Hall, Milden, Suffolk, and his first wife, Sissilia ('c'.1581-1618), daughter and heir of another Middle Temple lawyer, Richard Simonds of Coxden, Chardstock, Dorset. Simonds was born at Coxden on 18 December 1602 and baptized in the open gallery there eleven days later. The London printer Garrat Dewes was his grandfather. From Richard White, vicar of Chardstock, 'the chief thing [he] learnt was the exact spelling and reading of English' ('Autobiography', 1.29-30). He remained with his grandfather at Coxden until early in 1610, when, having fallen dangerously ill, he was brought to Milden, where the air was considered to be better. In 1607 Paul Dewes spent most of his capital to obtain one of the six clerkships in chancery which tied him to London, so that Simonds saw little of his father. He was at Lavenham School in 1611 when both Simonds grandparents died, leaving him Coxden and a large fortune, to be administered by his father during his minority. The D'Ewes title to Wells Hall was incomplete, and a widow with a life interest had them ejected. They returned to Dorset, where Simonds enjoyed three years under a new tutor, a neighbouring clergyman Christopher Malaker of Wambrook. Malaker was an excellent teacher of Latin, but neglected his pupils' spiritual development. Henry Reynolds of St Mary Axe in London next took him on, but Simonds owed his progress in French and Greek to the remarkable ability of Bathshua, his tutor's eldest daughter. Here he also learned 'to write a moderate good English phrase' (ibid., 1.95). Reynolds taught D'Ewes, still only fourteen, to engage in extemporary prayer in the puritan style, but they fell out in 1616, and as his parents had now acquired Stow Hall at Stowlangtoft in Suffolk, he was sent to Bury grammar school. Here in two years under John Dickinson he learned more than from his other teachers in eight, giving him his twin lifelong enthusiasms: learning and research. 
On 21 May 1618 D'Ewes entered St John's College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner under Richard Holdsworth, later professor of theology at Gresham College. The death of his pious and loving mother five weeks later cast a long shadow over his time at Cambridge, making him even more serious than before. Most of his fellows, he alleged, indulged in 'swearing, drinking, rioting & hatred of all vertue and pietie' ('Autobiography', 1.141). He probably exaggerated, for he certainly found soberly congenial friends, and he worked hard, regularly attending lectures and university exercises. In September 1620 his father, always passionate, obstinate, and avaricious, peremptorily ordered him to leave Cambridge and enter the Middle Temple. As by some means his admission there had been arranged at the age of nine, he now found himself 'ancient' to over two hundred others. His father allowed Simonds only $60 from his own $3000 per annum and made him share his chambers in Chancery Lane; when they burnt down the next year the loss was nearly $6000. When Simonds complained of poverty, his father threatened to marry a young heiress and disinherit him, so he sensibly found his father a 'good and ancient widow' (ibid., 1.227) and saw them safely married at St Faith's Church in March 1623. The following June, Simonds was called to the bar and his father raised his allowance to $100 a year, which he regarded as a 'plentiful annuity' (ibid., 1.232). 
Although he had been a conscientious student, D'Ewes had no wish to practise, for he had discovered that 'records, and other exotic monuments of antiquity, were the most ravishing and satisfying part of human knowledge' (Bruce, 'Long Parliament', 81). He therefore devoted himself to the study of historical and legal antiquities. That autumn he began his study of the national archives at the Tower of London, and spent the rest of his days copying and analysing original sources for English history. His stated ambition was to write and publish a definitive history of Britain, but he only appreciated the magnitude of the task as the extent of the evidence available became clear. Sir Robert Cotton befriended and encouraged him, introducing him to Selden, whom D'Ewes (of all people) thought 'a man exceedingly puffed up with the apprehension of his own abilities' ('Autobiography', 1.256). Cotton's example, a great stimulus, led him to concentrate on the history of English legal and political institutions. In 1625 he came upon 'an elaborate journal of the parliament held in the thirty-fifth year of Queen Elizabeth' (ibid., 1.280). His analysis laid the foundation of his great work on the parliamentary history of that reign. At that time he recognized that he must also study numismatics. In 1626 he joined Sir Robert Cotton in establishing the claim of Robert Vere to the earldom of Oxford, against Robert Bertie, Lord Willoughby d'Eresby, who had assumed the title; it was granted to Vere by the House of Lords in the next parliament. 
That August D'Ewes gave up his practice at the bar just as a brilliant career seemed to be opening for him. 'But', he explained high-mindedly: 'when I saw the church of God and the gospel to be almost everywhere ruined abroad, or to be in great peril and danger, and daily feared that things would grow worse at home, I laid by all these aspiring hopes, and I resolved to moderate my desires, and to prepare my way to a better life with the greater serenity of mind and reposedness of spirit, by avoiding these two dangerous rocks of avarice and ambition. ('Autobiography', 1.307)' The real cause was probably the arranged marriage with Anne (1613-1641), daughter and heir of Sir William Clopton, late of Lutons Hall at Melford in Suffolk, who, scarcely fourteen, brought him considerable estates bordering his father's property. She was also a cousin of D'Ewes's religious friend and mentor, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston of Kedington. They were married at St Anne Blackfriars in London on 24 October 1626, and on 6 December D'Ewes was knighted (as an obligation of landholding) at Whitehall. Shortly afterwards he took a house in Islington where he could house his expanding library in the chamber over the hall, add to his collections, and devote himself to his historical and genealogical studies, planning a work called 'Great Britain's strength and weakeness' (Watson, 5). Among his close friends at this period was Sir Albertus Joachimi, the ambassador for the Low Countries, for they shared religious and political interests. Alarmed by threats of large fines passed on those who stayed in London during the vacation against the king's proclamation, D'Ewes moved in 1632 to Bury St Edmunds. There he worked on the muniments of the great abbey, then in the possession of Sir Edmund Bacon of Redgrave. His father died on 14 March 1631, but D'Ewes did not move into Stow Hall until June 1633; now at last he enjoyed at least $1300 a year. Here he fell out with the conformist rector, Richard Damport, who disliked D'Ewes's Presbyterian and anti-Episcopalian views, and his studious habits. Small wonder that D'Ewes toyed with the idea of emigrating to New England, encouraged by letters from his friend John Winthrop. Instead he supported a company of thirty-eight while they settled, mostly in Watertown; he also had an interest in the Providence Island Company. 
From the elaborate record he had kept from his youth of all he read, wrote, and saw, D'Ewes began in 1637 to prepare an autobiographical summary. He had by then completed his compilation of 'The Journals of All the Parliaments during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth', which was published in 1682, edited by his nephew Paul Bowes of the Inner Temple, and dedicated to his son Willoughby. 
Having been pricked as high sheriff of Suffolk in 1639, D'Ewes submitted to the 'unwelcome preferment' (BL, Harley MS 379, fol. 60), which carried the heavy responsibility to levy $8000 upon the county for ship money. He reluctantly paid a penny more than rector Damport's 10's'., and, having quickly become aware of the widespread public resistance, he petitioned the council with evidence from records to prove the illegality of such taxes. Laud, 'that busy little wheel', urged letters to D'Ewes which were 'terrible, and threatening like thunder and lightning' (Bruce, 'Long Parliament', 83), and the council turned him over to the Star Chamber. Hoping that he could better use his knowledge of records to oppose Arminian innovations and illegal taxation under cover of parliamentary privilege, he looked for an opening there. His attitude to ship money and the support of the Barnardistons brought him the Sudbury seat in November 1640, and he took lodgings in Goats Alley, near Palace Yard, London. He entered the Long Parliament as a reformer both in church and state, and from his first appearance sat near the speaker and took the notes which now fill Harley MSS 162-166. Still largely unpublished, they give an invaluably detailed account of those proceedings and the characters and motives of the men who overturned the monarchy. At first members were fascinated by his grasp of sources and precedents, and the commitment he showed by offering a bond for $1000, doubled if necessary, towards paying the army in the north. He was voted onto appropriate committees, including the one to which William Prynne's and Burton's petitions were referred. He often spoke with the puritan faction in the house, but 'his demands upon the homage and patience of the House were excessive... He became a glutton, a very horse-leech in his importunity for highly-seasoned compliments to his erudition, and humble submission to the authority of his quoted records' (ibid., 90). As members tired of his wordy interventions and even began to ridicule him, he began to moderate his views, resolving to follow reason and law rather than passion. A sense of humour would have been a great asset to him. The king, always looking for the support of moderates, offered D'Ewes a baronetcy, which was conferred upon him on 15 July 1641. Any pleasure he took from this was short-lived, for about a fortnight later his beloved wife, still under thirty, died of smallpox while he was in London. From Ixworth Abbey, D'Ewes's stepmother sent her gravely sick daughter-in-law home to Stow Hall, and the journey proved fatal. She was presumably buried in Stowlangtoft church that August, but the register is incomplete. Their five sons all died in infancy, but two of five daughters survived: Cecilia, who married Sir Thomas Darcy but had no children, and Isolda, who never married. A year later D'Ewes married another heiress, Elizabeth (died 1656), daughter of Sir Henry Willoughby, bt, of Risley, Derbyshire. 
When the civil war began D'Ewes joined the parliamentary side and took the solemn league and covenant, albeit with reservations, in 1643. It had already caused comment in the house that his brother Richard was a lieutenant-colonel in the royalist army (mortally wounded during the siege of Reading), and D'Ewes's views were too moderate for him to be entirely trusted. He soon tired of taking notes of parliamentary business, not enjoying the stormy debating sessions which took place during the conflict, and his last notes are dated December 1645. That year he was nominated as co-chairman of the tenth (Blackbourn) division of the Suffolk classical presbytery meeting at Ixworth. On 6 December 1648 D'Ewes was excluded from the house with forty others at Pride's Purge. He never returned, perhaps glad to escape duties which had become distasteful to him, and he moved to Great Russell Street, London, cultivated the acquaintance of Archbishop Ussher, and concentrated on his antiquarian and collecting pursuits, planning more great works. On 7 March 1650 a son, Willoughby (1650-1685), was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, at last giving Simonds the male heir he so much desired. But on 18 April next Simonds died at Great Russell Street, and was carried off to Suffolk on 29 May to be buried in the chancel at Stowlangtoft on 7 June. Here his widow presumably joined him when she died in 1656. It is strange that they have no memorial there, for D'Ewes had provided a window and a brass commemorating D'Ewes forebears in other churches; he sent John Weever illustrations and descriptions for 'Ancient Funerall Monuments' (1631). The infant Willoughby succeeded his father as second baronet and lived quietly on his estates, as, less prosperously, did his son and grandson, and the title became extinct in 1731. 
D'Ewes died without having published anything beyond a few speeches and a dull essay, 'The Primitive Practice for Preserving Truth' (1645). He was concerned that his collections should stay in the family and that scholars should always have access to them, but in 1705 his grandson Simonds, third baronet, disposed of the library for $450 through Humphrey Wanley, agent for Sir Robert Harley, later earl of Oxford; the vendor never knew who the buyer was. D'Ewes's books were swallowed up by Harley's, and were dispersed when the earl's books were sold in the 1740s. The manuscripts, which Wanley called 'a rhapsody of indigested notes' (Watson, 13), now account for about one-twelfth of the Harley MSS in the British Library, accessible chiefly through the Harley catalogues and A. G. Watson's 'Library of Sir Simonds D'Ewes' (1966). At the heart of the collection D'Ewes's 563 original rolls and 7800 charters form two-thirds of Harley's eventual holdings. The miscellaneous collection embraces everything from D'Ewes's school exercises and letters to his family to voluminous transcripts from cartularies, monastic registers, and early wills and records. The public and private muniments which he so energetically extracted constitute valuable source material for the history of English antiquities and law. His planned Anglo-Saxon dictionary (with Francis Junius) and works on Greek and Roman coinage almost came to fruition, but he always had too many projects in hand at once. His Cambridge journal was last seen in 1859, and unfortunately J. E. B. Mayor's transcript has also disappeared. J. H. Marsden's 'College Life in the Time of James the First' (1851) is too loosely based on the original to be an entirely useful substitute. J. O. Halliwell published 'The Autobiography and Correspondence of Sir Simonds D'Ewes during the Reign of James I and Charles I' in 1845: it covers his life to 1636, omitting some parts of D'Ewes's lengthy narrative without loss, and adding a few interesting letters. These memoirs give clear and often lively accounts of the periods they cover, and D'Ewes wrote about his relations with insight and compassion. His personal diaries, some in Latin and some in cipher, extend from January 1622 to April 1624, and from January 1643 to March 1647; only the first has been published. He knew all the great antiquaries, but, unlike such men as Selden, Twysden, Dugdale, and Holdsworth, D'Ewes lacked flair and creativity; he was a copyist and collector, conscientious, industrious, and usually accurate. He was not above disparaging the work of others, sneering at Selden and finding fault with Camden. Thomas Fuller, of the 'Worthies', can have the last word: 'He was bred in Cambridge as appeared by his printed speech (made in the Long Parliament) wherein he indeavoured to prove it more Ancient than Oxford. His Genious addicted him to the study of Antiquity. Preferring Rust before Brightness, and more conforming his mind to the Garbe of the former than [the] mode of the moderne times. (Fuller, 75)' 



@@@@@


doc= 7578


George James De Wilde (1804-1871). George was born in London on 19 January 1804 and was originally intended for an artistic career. However, he soon showed a predilection for writing and, following a temporary post at the Colonial Office, began working for the 'Northampton Mercury' 'c'.1830. He became editor for the paper and a major figure in Northampton society, serving as governor to the local infirmary and helping to found the Northampton Central Art Gallery. In 1825 he married Mary Caroline Butterworth, with whom he had five children; after her death he married, in 1845, Louisa Packer, with whom he had a further two children. He died in the 'Mercury' offices on 16 September 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 7579


Wilde, Samuel De (bap. 1751, d. 1832), portrait painter, was baptized at the Dutch church of Austin Friars, London, on 28 July 1751, the eldest of the two sons of a Dutch woodcarver, also Samuel De Wilde (died 1753), who had settled in England by 1748 when he married De Wilde's mother, Frances Havart, at St James's Church, Westminster, London. On 19 November 1765 De Wilde was apprenticed for seven years to his godfather, Samuel Haworth, a woodcarver in Denmark Street, Soho. However, he soon showed a talent for painting, broke his apprenticeship, and entered the newly formed Royal Academy Schools on 9 November 1769. At the Royal Academy he would have encountered artists such as Johann Zoffany, whose theatrical portraiture later became a major influence. 
We know little of De Wilde's early work: etchings signed P. Paul and mezzotints inscribed S. Paul produced in the 1770s have been attributed to him, but with no real justification. He first exhibited his small portraits at the Society of Artists in 1776 and continued showing there until 1778. From that date onwards he exhibited at the Royal Academy, broadening his 'oeuvre' from 1782 onwards with scenes of 'banditti' and fancy pictures. However, he became best-known for his theatrical portraits, which were exhibited almost every year at the academy from 1792 until 1821. He also sent three paintings to the British Institution in 1812. 
De Wilde's career in theatrical portraiture began with the start of the publication by John Bell (1745-1831) of the second issue of the 'British Theatre' in January 1791. Before this the only painting by De Wilde with a theatrical connection seems to have been 'William Shuttlewood, the Actor, Aged 21' (1788; Yale U. CBA), but this represents an actor in everyday dress. Each number of the 'British Theatre' consisted of a play accompanied by a vignette and a full-length portrait of a leading actor or actress of the day as one of the characters. Bell chose De Wilde as the portraitist and puffed him in his newspaper, 'The Oracle', on 8 April 1791 with the statement: 'Zoffany has hitherto been considered as the most celebrated Painter of small whole lengths, but comparison now gives DE WILDE a place as his superior' (Mayes, 'John Bell', 101). He provided his protege with a studio in the British Library, his bookshop on the Strand, and invited potential subscribers to visit the artist at work. De Wilde was extremely productive, painting no fewer than thirty-six character portraits in 1791 and thirty-three in 1792. These paintings show actors and actresses in costume with props, set against a theatrical backdrop. 'Thomas Blanchard as Ralph in 'The Maid of the Mill'' (engraved 1791; Garrick Club, London) is a good example of the series, inspired by Zoffany's theatrical portraits of the 1760s. In total De Wilde provided ninety-three pictures for the series before Bell ran into financial problems and both employer and employee were evicted from the British Library by George Cawthorn, a rival bookseller. The last number of the 'British Theatre' to bear Bell's imprint was published in August 1795. Only two of De Wilde's plates appeared under Cawthorn's regime and it is likely that these were found in the British Library after the seizure. 
By this date, however, De Wilde's career was established. In 1804 business was thriving to the extent that, despite having a studio at his home in Leicester Square, he began to rent additional rooms from the duke of Bedford at 9 Tavistock Row, Covent Garden. Many actors and actresses came from the nearby Drury Lane and Covent Garden theatres to sit to him there and his theatrical portraits adorned numerous publications, including the 'Monthly Mirror', John Cawthorn's 'Minor British Theatre', and William Oxberry's 'New English Drama'. 'Sarah Harlowe as Beatrice in 'The Anatomist'' (1805; Royal Collection) is typical, representing a single figure against a plain background. These portraits were also published independently as prints and highly sought after by collectors such as Charles Mathews, whose collection now forms the basis of that of the Garrick Club. As well as painting in oil, De Wilde came to specialize in soft pencil or crayon with light washes of watercolour. His usual fee in 1810 and 1811, as noted in his diary, was $2 12's'. 6died for a watercolour drawing while oil paintings varied upwards in price from a few guineas. 
De Wilde's success was clearly wavering by 1810, however, as the diary also records financial loans from friends and he stopped exhibiting at the Royal Academy almost a decade before his death. Some suggest this was due to failing eyesight while others ascribe it to old age and a sense of lack of recognition, particularly as he was never a candidate for election to the Royal Academy (Mayes, 'De Wildes'). 
Samuel De Wilde died on 19 January 1832 and was buried in the burial-ground adjoining Whitefield's Tabernacle in Tottenham Court Road, London. All that is known about his wife is that she was called Eleanor and that they had two children, Louisa Harriet ('b'. 1801) and 


@@@@@


doc= 7580


DeWint, Peter (1784-1849), landscape painter, was born in Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, on 21 January 1784, the son of Henry DeWint (1753-1807), physician, and his wife, Elizabeth Watson ('b'. 1754). The DeWint family was of Dutch origin; Henry DeWint, after studying in Europe and America, set up practice as a doctor in the Potteries district in 1781. Peter DeWint himself was originally destined for a medical career but, having shown an interest in art, persuaded his father to allow him to study painting. Accordingly in 1802 he was sent to London to be apprenticed to John Raphael Smith, the mezzotint engraver and painter, who agreed 'to teach... in the best manner that he can, the said Apprentice in the art of Engraving and Portrait Painting' (indentures, Usher Art Gallery). However, it is clear that DeWint's artistic interests lay in directions other than engraving and portrait painting, for when he was released from his indentures three years early, in 1806, it was on condition that he produced for Smith eighteen paintings 'all of which said several pictures are to be Landscapes' (ibid.). This commitment to landscape painting was a bold move in the light of Joseph Farington's advice that 'Portrait painting undoubtedly offers more certain employ than any other branch [of art]... Landscape painting is not so much encouraged' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1129). Nevertheless, it was as a landscape painter that DeWint was to establish himself as one of the most successful artists of the Romantic period. 
After leaving J. R. Smith in 1806, DeWint moved to Broad Street, Golden Square, London, where he was a neighbour of John Varley, probably the most influential teacher of his time, and well known for his generosity to fellow artists. Varley would have introduced DeWint to the principles of Thomas Girtin's art, encouraged him to work 'en plein air', and taken him to Dr Monro's informal 'academy', where he would have been able to study the paintings of Cozens, Gainsborough, Turner, and Girtin. 
That his landscape work progressed quickly is confirmed by the fact that in 1807 DeWint exhibited three landscapes at the Royal Academy, and went on to exhibit there a further ten times prior to 1828. In 1809 he was admitted as a student in the Royal Academy Schools. However, he concentrated increasingly on painting in watercolour, then considered an inferior medium, and between 1808 and 1809 he exhibited thirteen works at the Associated Artists in Water-Colours, including in 1808 his 'View of Westminster Palace' (V&A). In 1810 he became an associate of the recently formed Society of Painters in Water Colours, and in 1811 a full member. It was at this society, subsequently known as the Old Watercolour Society, that DeWint exhibited over 400 watercolours during the next forty years. 
Although his income until 1809 'was very small' (H. DeWint), DeWint was able the following year to invest sums of $150 and $85 in annuities (documents in the Usher Art Gallery). On 16 June 1810 he married Harriet Hilton ('c'.1790-1866), the sister of his close friend William Hilton, and in the same year all three of them set up home together at 10 Percy Street, London. The Hiltons originated in Lincoln, and henceforth DeWint was to have a close association with that city. In 1827, when Hilton was appointed keeper of the Royal Academy, the DeWints moved to 40 Upper Gower Street, London, where they remained until DeWint's death in 1849. During the last years of his life DeWint suffered from bronchitis, and died at his home from resulting complications on 30 June 1849; he was buried on 7 July in the grounds of the Chapel Royal in the Savoy, Strand, London. In the following year the studio sale of DeWint's work was held at Christies and during the five-day sale from 22 to 28 May 493 lots were sold, raising a total of $2364 7's'. 6died Further sales of DeWint's work, mainly from the family collection, took place at Christies on 2 March 1876, 28 June 1904, and 12 September 1941 (Smith, 152-9). 
DeWint's artistic reputation was well established by the end of the first decade of the nineteenth century. Despite his Dutch ancestry, DeWint was among the most English of English artists, and no one, with the possible exception of Constable, celebrated with more affection, and less affectation, the simple charm of the English countryside -- 'they are common scenes made very uncommon' ('The Examiner', 1827, 325). Although he visited Normandy briefly in 1828, and Wales a few times between 1829 and 1835, his favourite scenes were to be found in the north and east of England, especially the environs of Lincoln. 
Early in his career DeWint produced some large and impressive oil paintings such as 'The Cornfield' (exh. RA, 1815; V&A). However, it is as a watercolour artist that he is best-known. His watercolours can be divided into large, highly wrought exhibition pieces such as 'Lincoln Cathedral' (exh. Old Watercolour Society, 1841; V&A) and his more spontaneous, and generally more admired, sketches such as 'Dock Leaves' ('c'.1812; Usher Art Gallery, Lincoln), of which John Clare wrote: 'nothing would appear so valuable to me as one of those rough sketches taken in the fields that breathe the living freshness of open air and sunshine' (J. W. Tibble and A. Tibble, 'Life of John Clare', 136). Technically DeWint developed, more than his contemporaries, the full potential of the more painterly approach to watercolour painting that emerged in the early years of the nineteenth century, and which distinguished the Romantics from the earlier topographers with their preference for tinted drawings. Ruskin quoted DeWint as saying 'never mind your drawing but take plenty of colour on your brush & lay it on thick' ('Works of John Ruskin', ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1903-42, 1.426). Working with a fairly limited and subdued palette, DeWint laid in broad, wet washes of colour, which he disturbed as little as possible. In addition, DeWint excelled in the field of still-life painting, and also produced a significant body of work for topographical publications, including George Ormerod's 'History of Cheshire' (3 vols., 1819) and Charles Heath's 'Views of London' (1825). 
It is evident from the sales ledgers that his wife kept that DeWint enjoyed extensive patronage from all strata of society including the Heathcotes of Conington Castle, Huntingdonshire, Richard Ellison of Sudbrooke Holme, Lincolnshire, J. M. W. Turner's friend Walter Fawkes, and the Howards of Castle Rising, Norfolk. He also had a large number of pupils, mostly amateurs, many of whom, such as the Heathcotes, were also patrons. His most notable professional pupil was Samuel Austin. 
There are excellent collections of DeWint's work to be found in the Usher Art Gallery, Lincoln; the Victoria and Albert Museum, London (which received a gift from Mrs Tatlock, the artist's daughter, in 1872, and a further bequest in 1921); the Tate collection (which now holds the Henderson bequest of 1879, of twenty-three watercolours, including 'Bridge over a Branch of the Witham'), and the British Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 7581


Dewsbury, William (c.1621-1688), Quaker activist, was born and raised in Allerthorpe, in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Of his father and mother nothing is known, beyond the speculation by Smith that William's father died when he was eight years old. Dewsbury's upbringing, working life, and religious experiences are discussed in his 'Discovery of the Great Enmity of the Serpent' (1655). His first job as a shepherd afforded him the time to think about God, but he clearly felt isolated. When the time came for him to be apprenticed, therefore, he asked his parents to send him to Leeds so that he could move among 'those that feared the living God' ('Discovery', 14). He gave up his apprenticeship (to a clothier) in the early 1640s, when he briefly joined the parliamentary army. Failing to find the spiritual satisfaction he had hoped for, and believing that God was telling him to fight no longer with 'carnall' weapons, Dewsbury subsequently drifted between different churches: the presbyterians in Scotland, the Baptists and Independents in his native England ('Discovery', 17). His first wife, Anne (died 1659), was a relatively prosperous woman with a history of religious dissent; the couple apparently married at a Baptist meeting in the 1640s. At home again in Yorkshire, but anxious and disillusioned, Dewsbury continued to feel that he was unregenerate, and though Quakerism seems to have given him a sense of purpose, his Calvinistic sense of having been 'conceived in sin and brought forth in iniquity' seems never to have fully left him ('Discovery', 12). However, he immediately converted to Quakerism in 1651, and he began his ministry in October 1652. Like William, Anne was converted to the Quaker way by George Fox, who remembered her in his contribution to 'The Faithful Testimony of... William Dewsbery', published in 1689. Anne died in October or November 1659, having given birth to at least three children. 
Dewsbury was fully committed to advancing the Quaker cause throughout England and Scotland, even though this drew him into dangerous situations. Almost every account seems to confirm that Dewsbury had a natural authority and spirited obduracy, qualities that were antithetical to non-Quakers. Before being imprisoned in York in 1654, Dewsbury had provoked, through his 'plaine & powerful' sermons, many people's conversion to Quakerism (Penney, 'First Publishers', 197). Thomas Thompson's view of Dewsbury's ministry -- 'I had never heard nor felt the like before' (Thompson, 17) -- was perhaps the experience of many Quakers, and it was probably his charisma that made him so dangerous to the authorities, who imprisoned him in York (1654, 1660, 1663), Northamptonshire (1654), Exeter (1657), London (1662), and Warwick (1664, 1679). Indeed, in 'The Second Period of Quakerism', William Braithwaite observed that Dewsbury 'may be described as passing his life in prison with brief intervals of freedom' (p. 221). Inevitably, any account of his life is principally a description of incarceration. 
The first charges against Dewsbury show the suspicion in which he was held, with authorities regarding him as an enemy of the social order. In York, accused of 'seducing the people', Dewsbury was criticized for allegedly equating himself with Christ ('The Discovery of the Great Enmity of the Serpent', 7). In Northampton, the import of Dewsbury's prophecies led to a blasphemy trial and fifteen months' imprisonment. Similarly, in Exeter, Dewsbury was accused of being a Jesuit, though the judge recognized the spuriousness of this charge, and tore up the 'mittimus'. In 1661-2 he was barely out of prison (suffering in York and London), and in July 1662 he was taken by the authorities from his home in Durteen, Yorkshire. Dewsbury's early incarcerations, though, were nothing in comparison to his experiences at Warwick. Imprisoned in 1664 for 'praemunire', he was not released until 1672 under the general pardon; during his imprisonment, most probably in 1667, he married a Warwickshire woman called Alice Reads or Meads. When English politics became dominated by fears of a Catholic insurrection from 1678 onwards, Dewsbury was again arrested despite the fact that Titus Oates cleared him of being involved. Dewsbury was probably released under the general pardon of March 1686. 
A few months before his death, Dewsbury visited London, where he delivered a final sermon, later published as 'A Sermon on the Important Doctrine of Regeneration'. The sense of conflict between the godly and the ungodly, couched in Calvinistic language, emerges in this unrepentant address. Dewsbury then returned to Warwickshire weakened by what John Whiting describes as 'his old Distemper he had contracted in Prison' (Whiting, 182). Clearly, Dewsbury had withstood persecution by still looking towards a new millennium: 'a Dreadful terrible Day is at hand' ('The Faithful Testimony', sig. a3'r'). Dewsbury died in Warwick on 17 June 1688, and was buried there the following day: he was aged about sixty-seven. Nothing further is known of his second wife, but William probably predeceased her. He certainly had two children who lived to seniority, one of which was Mary, the wife of John Sam, while Jone ['sic'] Dewsbury was either William's daughter or daughter-in-law. William was not principally a family man, saying: 'live a Married Life as if you were Unmarried' ('Sermon', 12). 

'The Faithful Testimony' includes the words that are perhaps the best testimony to his life's work: 'I never since played the Coward, but joyfully entered Prisons as Palaces' (sig. a3'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 7582


D'Eyncourt, Charles Tennyson- (1784-1861), politician, second son and youngest child of George Tennyson (1750-1835) of Bayons Manor, Lincolnshire, MP for Bletchingley, and his wife, Mary (died 1825), daughter of John Turner of Caistor, was born at Market Rasen on 20 July 1784. He was educated at Louth grammar school and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1805 and proceeded MA in 1818. From a fairly early stage, he suffered, like many of his family, from epilepsy. He married, on 1 January 1808, Frances (Fanny) Mary, only child of the Revd John Hutton. She was an heiress and brought Tennyson financial security. They had eight children, all in difficult births, and sexual abstinence led to frequent separation between the parents. From 1811 the marriage was in difficulties. Moreover, in April 1816 Tennyson began a long-standing liaison with Mary (Polly) Thornhill, daughter of the squire of Stanton near Bakewell. The eight children were given nicknames by their father ('the Stone', 'the Sot', and so on, except for Eustace, Tennyson's favourite, who was expelled from Sandhurst in 1833). 
Tennyson made a promising start to his career as a barrister and entered parliament in 1818 as MP for Great Grimsby. From 1826 until 1831 he represented Bletchingley. He quickly made his mark in the house and seemed likely to have a career in politics on the whig/radical side. He strongly supported Queen Caroline and persuaded the house to pass a 'Landlord and Tenant Bill'; in 1827 he was responsible for a measure prohibiting the setting of spring guns (7 & 8 Geo. IV c.18). Tennyson supported piecemeal parliamentary reform, especially via the redistribution of seats. It was his motion on East Retford which led to the breakup of the tory government. When the whigs took office in 1830 he was, on 30 December, appointed clerk of the ordnance. In May 1831 he was elected as a radical for Stamford, Joseph Parkes being his electoral agent in an intense contest. Lord Thomas Cecil, the other candidate, disparaged his electioneering methods and Tennyson challenged him to a duel, fought at Wormwood Scrubs on 18 June 1831; neither man was injured, both were arrested, but neither was prosecuted. Tennyson joked, 'it is thought a very proper thing that the Clerk of Ordnance should commence the shooting season' (Martin, 144), but the incident led to his ridicule. He retired as clerk in February 1832, ostensibly from ill health. He was sworn of the privy council on 6 February 1832, but the episode ended his official career. 
In 1832 Tennyson became MP for the new borough of Lambeth, representing it until 1852. In 1834 and 1835 he unsuccessfully attempted to shorten the lifespan of parliaments by amending the 'Septennial Act'. He became increasingly radical in political temper. He supported municipal reform and the repeal of the corn laws and of the 'Navigation Acts'. He also, in line with his earlier proposals, supported various of the Chartists' demands. 
In 1835 on the death of his father Tennyson gained further wealth and, in accordance with -- as he stressed -- his father's wishes, changed his surname to Tennyson-D'Eyncourt, the name deriving from the ancient titles of Scarsdale and D'Eyncourt of Sutton, from the holders of which the family was descended by the female line. He tried to revive the barony of D'Eyncourt, but Melbourne, the prime minister, refused what was generally seen as a grotesque request. Tennyson-D'Eyncourt's father left him that (major) part of his estate which derived from purchase and speculation, with the part derived from entail or inheritance going to the elder brother, George Tennyson, a mentally ill alcoholic who was rector of Somersby and father of the poet Alfred Tennyson; the Somersby branch of the family bitterly resented the disposition of the family wealth, blaming Charles Tennyson-D'Eyncourt for it, and complaining at his change of name. 
Tennyson-D'Eyncourt, with his aristocratic patina and antiquarianism, fast became as well as a radical a figure worthy of the wilder fancies of the Young England movement. He at once used his money to plan a new Bayons Manor as a fairy-tale castle, with moat, medieval oratory, and secret passages. His friend Edward Bulwer-Lytton was a frequent visitor. The building became an obsession, 'a monomaniacal pursuit of an elusive past' (Martin, 210), which drove Tennyson-D'Eyncourt almost to madness (and, some thought, into it). This and some of his earlier architectural exploits had some influence on his poetic nephew. He quarrelled with his children, who disliked Bayons, and in the latter part of his life the failure of his once intense political ambition made him bitter. In 1852 he was defeated at Lambeth in the general election, and did not stand again. On 22 June the Lambeth radicals presented him with a testimonial. He was high steward of Louth, a JP, and deputy lord lieutenant of Lincolnshire, but he became something of a recluse, planning further changes at Bayons Manor (the house decayed and was demolished in 1964). He came to be considered something of a bore as well as a snob; he was, in the view of his nephew Alfred Tennyson, 'a considerable humbug' (Martin, 354). 
Tennyson-D'Eyncourt's second son, Edwin Clayton Tennyson-D'Eyncourt (1813-1903), died an admiral. The third son, Louis Charles Tennyson-D'Eyncourt (1814-1896), was a police magistrate in London from 1851 to 1890, and his son, Edmund Charles Tennyson-D'Eyncourt, filled a like position from 1901. Of his three daughters, Julia Frances (died 1879) became a Roman Catholic nun in 1852. 
Tennyson-D'Eyncourt, who was elected FRS in February 1829, and was also FSA, published a number of his speeches and also 'Observations on the Proceedings Against the Queen [Caroline]' (1821) and 'Eustace, an Elegy' (1851), composed in memory of his son (1816-1842) who died of yellow fever in Barbados; it was published, somewhat embarrassingly, shortly after 'In Memoriam'. Tennyson-D'Eyncourt died at 8A Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London (the house of his son-in-law John Hinde Palmer QC), on 21 July 1861. His wife died on 26 January 1878, though Tennyson-D'Eyncourt lived as a bachelor in his latter years. 


@@@@@


doc= 7583


Diamond, Hugh Welch (1808-1886), photographer and asylum superintendent, was born at Goudhurst, Kent, on 23 October 1808, the eldest son of William Batchelor Diamond, a surgeon in the East India Company, and his wife, Jane Welch. Diamond was educated at Norwich grammar school and from 1824 studied medicine at the Royal College of Surgeons. In 1828 he became a student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and was appointed pharmacist to the West Kent Infirmary at Maidstone. He married, on 14 June 1831, Jane Warwick (1810/11-1850), and opened a private practice near Soho Square in London, where he treated the sick during the cholera outbreak of 1832, the year in which he was elected to the board of health. Two years later he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, and in 1846 he was elected fellow of the Medical Society of London. 
Diamond was active in London antiquarian circles, and built up collections with a particular emphasis on ceramics and prints; in 1834 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries where he actively pursued his interest in the printing of images. In 1845 he began meeting with other 'gentleman amateurs' interested in the early art of photography. The group became known as the Calotype Society, later referred to as the Photographic Club. 
The period from 1848 to 1858 was crucial to Diamond's involvement with clinical psychiatry and photography. During the 1840s he became interested in the newly reformed treatment of the insane and in 1842 he began studying mental disease at Bethlem Hospital under Sir George Tuthill. In 1848 he was elected the residential superintendent of the female department of the Surrey County Lunatic Asylum at Springfield, where he remained until 1858. Following the death of his first wife, with whom he had three sons and three daughters, he married on 14 April 1851 Theresa Butler (1820/21-1874). 
During the 1850s Diamond published more than a dozen essays and notes on photography, including a series in 'Notes and Queries' in 1852, 'Photography applied to archaeology and practised in the open air'. His paper delivered to the Photographic Society in 1853, 'The simplicity of the calotype process', popularized the calotype -- the earliest means of obtaining a positive image from a negative one -- among amateur photographers. He also contributed articles on photography to the 'Photographic Journal', published by the newly formed Photographic Society of London, established in 1853, of which he was a founder member. Within this society Diamond emerged as the dominant figure behind the formation of the Photographic Society Club, a dining club that met five times a year to discuss photographic matters. Between 1855 and 1858 Diamond also belonged to the Photographic Exchange Club, an organization that exchanged prints by post between its twenty-two members twice a year. In addition, he participated in discussions on the recording of antiquities by photography, and in 1854 was elected honorary photographer of the Society of Antiquaries. 
It was his portraits of the insane that dominated reviews of Diamond's work throughout the decade, and for which he is best remembered. During the early 1850s he made many photographs of his insane patients using Frederick Scott Archer's collodion process. Archer, inventor of the wet collodion process in photography, communicated the results of his experiments with the collodion process to Diamond in 1850. One of the advantages of the collodion process over the calotype process was its shorter exposure time, which made it easier to photograph human subjects. In 1852 Diamond presented a series, 'The types of insanity', at the first exhibition of photography at the Society of Arts. These portraits were the first systematic use of photography in the history of psychiatry. In a paper read to the Royal Society in 1856, outlining his theories of the use of photography in psychiatry, 'On the application of photography to the physiognomy and mental phenomena of insanity', Diamond argued that photography had three important functions in the treatment of the insane: as a method of recording physiognomies of the mentally ill for study, of treating the mentally ill through the presentation of an accurate self-image, and of documenting the faces of patients to facilitate identification for later readmission and treatment. In 1858 Diamond's photographs of 1852 inspired a major series of essays by John Conolly, professor of medicine at the University of London, 'The physiognomy of insanity', including engravings made from Diamond's photographs. Identified by the noted pictorial photographer H. P. Robinson as the central figure in mid-nineteenth-century photography in Britain, Diamond was credited by his contemporaries with fostering the collection of medical photographs in British medical museums and schools during the nineteenth century. 
Following an incident involving the accidental death of a patient in 1856 Diamond resigned his position at the Surrey County Asylum and moved to Twickenham, where he established a private asylum for female patients. During the late 1850s and 1860s Diamond was active in the Photographic Society, editing its journal from 1859 to 1869, serving as its secretary for this period and later as one of its vice-presidents, but he discontinued his practice of photographing inmates around this time. In 1858 he was elected to two Photographic Society committees, one to form a collection of photographs illustrating the progress of photographic science, the other to investigate the subject of copyright. In 1867 he served on the board of jurors for photography during the Paris Exhibition and in that year was awarded the medal for excellence from the Photographic Society. Diamond acquired a reputation as a genial host and a diverse collector. After his second wife's death he was cared for by his daughter Terasa. For many years he held weekly gatherings of literary, antiquarian, photographic, and artistic friends at his home and until his death he continued to entertain at his home, Twickenham House, where he died on 21 June 1886. He was buried in Twickenham cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 7584


Dibben, Thomas (1677/8-1741), Latin poet and Church of England clergyman, was born in London, the son of Richard Dibben. He was admitted to Westminster School on the foundation in 1692, and elected in 1696 aged eighteen to a scholarship at Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he graduated BA (1699), MA (1703), BD (1710), and DD (1721). On 16 July 1701 he was instituted to the rectory of Great Fontmell, Dorset. He was chaplain to John Robinson, bishop of Bristol and lord privy seal, with whom in 1712 he went to the peace congress of Utrecht. On Robinson's being translated to the see of London in 1714 Dibben was collated to the precentorship of St Paul's Cathedral. He represented the diocese of Bristol in the convocations of 1715 and 1727. 
Dibben published two sermons, one of which was preached at Utrecht before the plenipotentiaries in March 1712 on the anniversary of Queen Anne's accession. He acquired considerable celebrity as a Latin poet. He wrote one of the poems printed at Cambridge on the return of William III from the continent in 1697, and translated Matthew Prior's 'Carmen seculare' for 1700 into Latin verse. Prior later complimented the work of his friend and former schoolfellow, claiming that 'most accurate judges will find the translation exceed the original' (M. Prior, 'Poems', 1733, preface). By this date Dibben was a resident of Poultry Compter in the City of London having, as a result of mental ill health, abandoned his family and fortune. He died there on 5 April 1741. 


@@@@@


doc= 7585


Dibdin, Charles (bap. 1745, d. 1814), actor, composer, and writer, was baptized privately (possibly because he was sickly at birth) on 4 March 1745 at Southampton, and again publicly on 26 March at Holyrood Church, Southampton, where his father, Thomas Dibdin, was parish clerk; his mother's name has been given as Sarah, 'nee' Wesgarth. 
Charles was probably the twelfth of fourteen children, and his father was 'a silversmith, a man of considerable credit' ('Professional Life', 1.15); nothing is known of his mother's family. His father died when he was young and the family moved to Winchester. When he was nine his fine voice won him a position as chorister at Winchester Cathedral under the organist, Peter Fussell. Dibdin's claim that he was educated at Winchester College is not supported by the school records, although he certainly received substantial schooling from some source in that town. James Kent composed anthems for him, and he and Fussell probably provided Dibdin's earliest musical training. At about the age of eleven he applied for the post of organist at Wathum, Hampshire, but was rejected on account of his youth and probably his lack of musical qualifications; however, anthem parts in his earliest notebook suggest that he had a substantial early grounding in music. 
Dibdin next accepted an invitation from his elder brother Thomas (later the father of Thomas Frognall Dibdin) to move to London. There he quickly learned extempore playing at the organ, and he often played the congregation out at St Bride's, Fleet Street. He also entered into a working relationship (unlikely to have been as an apprentice) with the music and instrument seller John Johnson; later he claimed that all he did at Johnson's shop, the Harp and Crown in Cheapside, was to tune harpsichords. Thomas sailed with the 'Hope' in 1757, during the Seven Years' War, and the ship was captured by the French. Charles Dibdin soon discerned a cooling of interest by his brother's friends, and one of them, Richard Berenger, an Irishman, advised him that this was because of his refusal to act as a 'fiddler and a buffoon' while in their company; Berenger advised him to consider the stage as a career. According to Dibdin, at that point he had never been to the theatre or opera: 'I have no power of expression that can give the faintest idea of what I felt when I heard the first crash of an overture. What an immense distinction between this electrical power and the clerical strumming I had been accustomed to in the country! I was music mad; but what astonished me most was that, merely from hearing how the parts were combined and worked together in the band, I completely learnt the secret of composition. ('Professional Life', 1.20)' It is probable that much more was learned from practical experience in the theatres.By December 1760 Dibdin was occasionally performing with the chorus at Covent Garden, and on 18 April 1761 he shared the benefit with other minor players. John Rich, the licensee, believing that Dibdin would ultimately possess a deep bass voice like Richard Leveridge, encouraged him and made introductions. He gained added experience performing at the 'Histrionic Academy' at the theatre in Richmond in the summer of 1762. The next year he published a few songs and 'A Collection of English Songs and Cantatas'. That summer he joined Younger's acting company at Birmingham, sang his own songs at Vauxhall, and acted in other towns. In 1764 his all-sung pastoral 'The Shepherd's Artifice' was accepted by John Beard at Covent Garden for performance as the afterpiece at Dibdin's own benefit on 22 May; besides writing both the words and music, Dibdin sang the main role of Strephon. He returned to Birmingham that summer. Although he did not have the appearance necessary to be a leading man, his singing ability and his wide range of dialects ensured a great success in character roles. 
Beard thrust Dibdin into the role of Ralph in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Maid of the Mill' and his performance, beginning on 31 January 1765, was one of the great successes of the decade; every song was encored, and he even set a fashion for 'Ralph-handkerchiefs'. The opera ran for more than fifty performances. Having had his salary increased by 10's'. on each of three successive Saturdays, Dibdin was soon offered a three-year set of articles at a salary of $3, $4, and $5 per week. 
For the next two years Dibdin spent the summers at Thomas Lowe's new theatre at Richmond and the winter seasons acting at Covent Garden, all the while continuing to compose songs. His next major success came on 21 February 1767, when he created the role of Watty Cockney in Bickerstaff's 'Love in the City', for which he also composed a substantial portion of the score. On 16 May 1767 Dibdin became the first person to play the pianoforte in public in England, when he accompanied Miss Brickler in a song from 'Judith' (written by Bickerstaff and Thomas Arne). That summer, at Richmond, his 'The Village Wedding' was produced on 18 July. In the 1767-8 season he composed two-thirds of the music for Bickerstaff's highly successful 'Lionel and Clarissa'. At about this time he established a sexual relationship with the dancer and actress Harriet Pitt (1748?-1814) ['see under 'Pitt, Ann]; they had two sons, Charles Isaac Mungo Dibdin (1768-1833) and Thomas John Dibdin (1771-1841), and a daughter, Harriet ('b'. 1770), who performed as a dancer under the name Harriet Pitt. 
When Dibdin was dismissed by the new patentee of Covent Garden, George Colman, at the end of the 1767 season, Bickerstaff came to his defence. David Garrick was able to achieve the double coup of hiring both Bickerstaff and Dibdin for his Drury Lane company, as much to deny their talents to his rivals as for his own use. Their opera 'The Padlock' (originally intended for Samuel Foote's Little Theatre in the Haymarket) was a great success. Dibdin not only supplied all the music but, following John Moody's withdrawal, achieved another major success, in the part of the servant Mungo, the first blackface role in British theatre; 'Mungo here, Mungo dere, Mungo ev'ry where', from one of his songs, became a major catchphrase. Dibdin sold the copyright in his music to Bickerstaff, who in 1769 sued two music engravers, Henry Fought and Henry Roberts, for publishing it without his permission. Dibdin had no direct interest in the case, which did not come to court, but the ownership of his work was to become a major concern. 
Dibdin's brother Thomas had been imprisoned for debts and, to assist him before he took up an appointment in India, Charles Dibdin had run up a substantial debt to Garrick which he could not repay, and the relationship between the two deteriorated. As a result, Dibdin secured an agreement with Ranelagh Gardens to compose music for the next two summers at $100 per season; the Dibdin/Bickerstaff 'Ephesian Matron' was first performed on 12 May 1769. Moreover, the Dibdin/Bickerstaff opera 'The Captive' appeared on 21 June at the Haymarket, where Dibdin also sang ballads during the summer. 
In the autumn the Stratford jubilee, honouring the 250th anniversary of the death of Shakespeare, used much music composed specially by Dibdin. Severe ructions with Garrick continued and were appeased only by Dibdin's song 'Let beauty with the sun arise', performed by the musicians beneath the window of Garrick's rooms at the inn at daybreak. Virtually none of the newspapers noticed Dibdin's contributions (or, for that matter, those by Francois-Hippolyte Barthelemon and Theodore Aylward), concentrating instead on the 'Ode' composed by Arne. 
During the 1769-70 season Dibdin continued to perform at Drury Lane. For Ranelagh he composed the music for Bickerstaff's 'The Maid the Mistress' and 'The Recruiting Sergeant', as well as singing the tenor or falsetto roles. In summer 1770 he contributed songs at Sadler's Wells and Marylebone Gardens. The following season Dibdin's dramatic appearances at Drury Lane appear to have been limited to the chorus, although he did compose the music for Garrick's masque 'The Institution of the Garter'. He also composed a number of glees and catches as entr'acte pieces, some of which he performed at his benefit on 1 May, for which his profit was $65 12's'. Among his compositions in summer 1771 was music for 'The Palace of Mirth' at Sadler's Wells, now managed by his friend Tom King. 
In May 1772 potentially one of the greatest partnerships of eighteenth-century opera was broken up when an accusation of sodomy forced Bickerstaff to decamp to France. Dibdin subsequently strove to dissociate himself from Bickerstaff, although even as late as the 1790s there were rumours that Bickerstaff wrote Dibdin's lyrics. Dibdin publicly came to Garrick's defence when William Kenrick published his infamous 'Roscius's Lamentation for the Loss of his Nyky'; he may have feared the accusations against Bickerstaff would be extended to him and so sought to restore his relationship with Garrick. During the 1772-3 season Dibdin continued to take character roles, and he provided the music for James Messink's pantomime 'Harlequin Foundling' (from 26 December). On 1 February his successful comic opera based on Goldoni, 'The Wedding Ring', was produced anonymously. The audience believed that the text was by Bickerstaff and a riot almost erupted, averted only by Dibdin's admission of authorship. Dibdin sang in several benefit performances and that spring and summer provided both text and music for a number of productions at Sadler's Wells, a relationship which continued the following year. His reputation was not all positive, however: '
DIBDIN, alas! we nearly had forgot, 

Perhaps oblivion were the kindest lot; 

How he 'composes', 'tis not fit, we say, 

But grant kind stars that he may never 'play': 

Nor, to enlarge our wish, may never sing; 

MUNGO in this, in that, and ev'ry thing. 
(Nipclose, 53)' In December 1773 he contributed the music to Garrick's extravaganza 'A Christmas Tale'. Although he was earning $6 per week plus extras at Drury Lane, as well as additional moneys from publication of his music and commissions for the public gardens, he continued to borrow against wages. His opera 'The Waterman' had been rejected by Garrick for the 1773-4 season; Foote produced it to great success at the Haymarket in the summer, and Garrick immediately sent his brother George to charge Dibdin with disloyalty. Relations continued to deteriorate throughout the production of 'The Cobbler', and at the beginning of the 1774-5 season Dibdin was found to be in debt to the theatre for about $200. Despite his claims that he would have been affluent had proper payments for his music been made, he was forced to give up his salary -- by then, of $7 per week -- until the debt was paid. Dibdin sold his opera 'The Quaker' for $10 to William Brereton for his benefit (the latter realized $36 15's'. 6died on the night). Brereton then sold the rights for $100 to Garrick, who suppressed the work; it was not produced until 1777, after Garrick had left Drury Lane. 
Dibdin was discharged from Drury Lane at the end of the 1775 season. It is impossible to say whether the break with Garrick was due to Dibdin's treatment of his mistress Harriet Pitt (Garrick was godfather to their second son, Thomas), on account of Dibdin's having become undependable regarding rehearsals, or because of Garrick's jealousy. References to an earlier marriage have not been substantiated, and the relationship with Harriet Pitt was probably considered irregular, as she already had a child out of wedlock before she met Dibdin. At about this time Dibdin transferred his affection to Anne Maria Wylde (1757-1835), of Portsea, possibly a relative of the prompter James Wild, and quickly married her. They had at least one daughter, Anne ('bap'. 1776). 
Dibdin composed a puppet play, 'The Comic Mirror, or, The World as it Wags', which included a satire on Garrick; it opened at the Grand Saloon at the Exeter Change on 24 June 1775 and ran for four months. In February 1776 it was revived at Marylebone Gardens. However, with no steady employment and hounded by creditors, Dibdin extracted a promise from Samuel Arnold to oversee pieces he might send, and fled to France. Dibdin claimed that his first popular sea song, 'Blow High, Blow Low', was composed during the stormy thirteen-hour channel crossing; it was featured in his opera 'The Seraglio', produced at Covent Garden on 14 November 1776. He spent five months in Calais, avoiding the English locals, and then moved to Nancy, where he continued to learn French and to read -- and translate and adapt -- French dramas. While in France he sent pieces back to London, of which the most prophetic concerning his future productions was 'Yo Yeah, or, The Friendly Tars' (Sadler's Wells, 18 August 1777). 'Poor Vulcan', much altered by Arne and Arnold, was a success at Covent Garden on 4 February 1778. 
Forced to return to England in June 1778 by France's involvement in the American War of Independence, Dibdin agreed with the patentee-manager, Thomas Harris, to write three afterpieces for Covent Garden for the 1778-9 season. He also rapidly 'wrote' several plays based on French originals for production at the Haymarket. From 1778 until 1782 he was composer to the Covent Garden theatre at $10 per week, generally producing two pantomimes and a comic opera each year. Dibdin's attempts (1780-81) to publish his songs in monthly anthologies as 'The Monthly Lyrist', later 'The Lyrist, or, Family Concert', proved unsuccessful. Uneasy in his relations with Covent Garden, he began in 1780 to think about joining his elder brother, now a wealthy man, in India; this plan was scuppered when he learned Thomas had died at sea while returning to England. Dibdin returned to Covent Garden and produced three successes -- 'The Islanders', the important pantomime 'Harlequin Freemason' (29 December 1780), and the burletta 'Jupiter and Alcmena' (based on John Dryden's 'Amphitryon', with music by Dibdin and William Shield). Although the last-mentioned was a dramatic success, it was a financial failure, and Dibdin parted company with Covent Garden. 
Philip Astley had already demonstrated the popularity of the equestrian theatre, and, in partnership with a Colonel West and some inexperienced amateurs, Dibdin built a theatre for $15,000 on the Surrey shore, outside the jurisdiction of the lord chamberlain. The Royal Circus and Philharmonic Academy opened in November 1782. It appeared to be successful, but Dibdin claimed he was undermined by Charles Hughes, who managed the equestrian business, and the elder Joseph Grimaldi, who oversaw the pantomimes; however, the collapse of the partnership may have been due as much to Dibdin's excessive ambitions. He provided at least twenty-eight works over the 1782-4 seasons and had hoped to develop the Royal Circus into a major theatre and school for young performers; possibly as many as fifty took up residence, but the theatre's finances could not support their board and lessons. When the Surrey magistrates closed the theatre in 1784, Hughes succeeded in obtaining a licence for himself; Dibdin was unsuccessful in going to law for his share of the moveables, but he continued to supply the Royal Circus with works for many years. Other than the success of 'Liberty Hall', for Drury Lane in the 1784-5 season, Dibdin's only other client at this period was Sadler's Wells. 
Dibdin was approached by a Clerkenwell architect, Jacob Leroux, about building a theatre, the Helicon, near St Pancras; when the project was abandoned Dibdin had lost about $290. He was also bilked by the Dublin theatre manager Richard Daly, who purchased a number of musical works but paid only about a quarter of what had been agreed. Dibdin retired to the country in 1786, managed to sell a few works to the minor theatres, and published the hebdomadal work 'The Devil', which was discontinued after twenty-one numbers. He again decided to leave England for India, and embarked on a fourteen-month tour of the provinces with a one-man show; the tour was documented in a series of letters which were published as 'The musical tour of Mr. Dibdin; in which... previous to his embarkation for India... he finished his career as a public character'. Having sold most of his possessions, including songs such as 'Nothing but Grog', for very little money, Dibdin and his family set sail in the autumn of 1788 but only reached Dunkirk before heavy weather forced the ship back to Torbay. He quarrelled with the captain, and returned to London. 
Once again in danger of arrest by his creditors, Dibdin engaged Fischer's (some sources say Hutchin's) Auction Rooms, King Street, Covent Garden, and from 23 January 1789 staged 'The Whim of the Moment, or, Nature in Little', the first of his many 'table entertainments', for which he composed all the lyrics, music, and introductions, and, three times a week, performed as a solo singer to his own accompaniment. The first night's audience numbered only sixteen, but attendance soon increased. Dibdin moved to King and Chapman's Auction Room on 29 April, and the season was a relative success. 
From the result of his farewell tour Dibdin had realized that his business was to make his audience laugh rather than to lecture them -- and he decided that broad humour and anecdote between songs was the answer. This attitude laid the basis for fifteen years of success in his solo shows. Full entertainments included about thirty songs, or twenty if there was an afterpiece of about ten songs. Dibdin also established a shop for selling his own songs, thereby avoiding losing his copyrights and receiving full value from sales; his songs were extremely popular, and printed and manuscript copies appear in virtually every private English music collection of the late eighteenth century. It was at this point in his career that many of his most popular songs were composed, notably 'Tom Bowling' (1789), 'Poor Jack' (1789), and 'Push the Grog About' (1789) -- all sea songs of patriotic sentiment. 
From the 1789-90 season onwards Dibdin was at the Lyceum Theatre, performing 'The Oddities, or, Dame Nature in a Frolic' from 7 December 1789. He also supplied a number of farces for the Royal Circus and published 'The Bystander, or, Universal Weekly Expositor' from 22 August 1789 to 6 February 1790. He was contacted by Harris concerning presenting his songs as 'A Divertisement' at Covent Garden and agreed, since this established the precedent of requesting permission to use his songs; because he assisted the theatre with scoring and production he was also entitled to a considerable payment. Dibdin's 1790-91 season included another success, 'The Wags, or, The Camp of Pleasure', from 18 October 1790. The next year he moved to the Polygraphic Rooms, where he produced 'Private Theatricals, or, Nature in nubibus' from 31 October 1791. 
For the 1792-3 season Dibdin moved to 411 Strand, opposite Beaufort Buildings, calling the room where he presented his entertainments the Sans Souci Theatre; 'The Quizes, or, A Trip to Elysium' was the first work produced there (from 13 October 1792). An account of a performance of this piece, made by John O'Keeffe in his 'Recollections', described how Dibdin 'ran on sprightly and with nearly a laughing face, like a friend who enters hastily to impart to you some good news' (O'Keeffe, 2.322), and indicates that Dibdin's customized keyboard (which, besides combining a piano with organ stops including a trumpet, also had a number of pedals for adding drums, cymbals, tambourine, and gong) was already in use by that date. Dibdin's mode of singing was probably in the earlier English ballad-opera tradition rather than the increasingly ornate Italian opera style of the 1790s. By this time he was well established enough to refuse free passes for most reviewers and their friends. Dibdin continued to add new works, at the Sans Souci, circulating them in repertory, though he was also active in other areas, publishing the novel 'The Younger Brother' at the beginning of January 1793. In May 1796 he published a further novel, 'Hannah Hewit, or, The Female Crusoe'; Tom, his late brother, was said to be the basis for Captain Higgins. 
Conditions at the Sans Souci Theatre deteriorated, and during summer 1796 Dibdin erected the 500 seat New Sans Souci Theatre in Leicester Place, Leicester Square, paying $6000 in ready money. The building, a large house with the theatre behind, used the side walls of the two adjoining properties, so that only front and back walls plus roof had to be added. 'How Do You Do' (this 'daily paper' was the work of Francis Godolphin Waldron and Dibdin) states: 'When the curtain draws up, the stage presents the interior of an elegant tent, with the front and back parts of it open, so that Mr. DIBDIN appears to stand within it, while the back view presents a perspective of a garden scene, enriched with a temple and a sheet of water. ('How Do You Do', 7, 22 Oct 1796)' 
'The General Election' (from 8 October 1796) was the first entertainment in the theatre, and it was followed by more new short works, including 'Datchet Mead, or, The Fairy Court' (from 20 May 1797), written to commemorate the marriage of Charlotte, princess royal. Publication of his five-volume 'A Complete History of the English Stage' also began during the 1796-7 season. 
At some point during the early 1790s Dibdin had begun to take his table entertainments to a selected area of the provinces during the summer months. The tours could both exploit and enhance the popularity of his songs during the French revolutionary wars, when the public was more sensitive than ever to the sacrifices of the British sailor and soldier, and protective of the national customs Dibdin also celebrated in song. Not only did this provide extra income, but it also allowed him opportunities to compose songs for the next London season, as well as to indulge his hobby of oil painting. He carried on a large correspondence, observing the country, and these letters served as the basis for his two-volume 'Observations of a tour through almost the whole of England, and a considerable part of Scotland, in a series of letters, addressed to a large number of intelligent and respectable friends' (published in parts from 5 November 1800 to 10 April 1802), with engravings from his paintings and drawings by his daughter Anne. He continued to present new entertainments at the New Sans Souci, among them in the 1802-03 season 'Most Votes' (from 9 October), which was unsuccessful and was withdrawn before Christmas; however, Dibdin had the innovatory idea of publishing a book of the lyrics as well as the individual songs. 
Dibdin was approaching his sixtieth year and, intending to retire, completed and published his four volumes of memoirs as 'The Professional Life of Mr. Dibdin'. The title clearly states the intent of the work, and accusations of omitting personal details miss this point; however, the work is often inaccurate, biased, and opinionated. From 1789 onwards each chapter includes the lyrics of the songs from that year's entertainment. 
As a renewal of war with Napoleonic France loomed in 1803, Addington's government finally recognized the value of Dibdin's songs and commissioned him to publish each month a patriotic song suitable for ships, camp, and home. Following the declaration of war against France in May 1803, Dibdin published monthly eight 'British War Songs' (4 June 1803 to 4 January 1804), with accompaniments for piano, small military band, and two flutes or guitars. These songs then formed the backbone of 'Britons Strike Home', which opened on 17 September, adding greatly to patriotic fervour. As a result of his efforts, including abandoning his usual summer tour of the provinces, Dibdin was awarded a pension of $200 by the government. 
Dibdin retired at the end of the 1804-05 season and sold the New Sans Souci Theatre and his music stock to Bland and Weller for $1800 and three years' annuities of $100 for any songs he should compose. Whereas for several years he had produced several new entertainments and dozens of new songs, in 1806 he produced only 'The Passions, in a Series of Ten Songs' and the ballad opera 'The Broken Gold', and in 1807 only the novel 'Henry Hooka', before the new Grenville government revoked his pension. Financial pressure forced him to leave his country home at Cranford, Middlesex, and return to work. He published 'The Musical Mentor, or, St Cecilia at School', and on 1 March 1808, although his voice was well past its best, he returned to his entertainments with 'Professional Volunteers' at the Lyceum. Using his experience as a singing teacher (among his pupils was Rosemund Mountain), he also published several more music pamphlets. He presented 'Rent Day, or, The Yeoman's Friend', from 17 September at the Sans Pareil Theatre (opposite the Adelphi in the Strand) and probably from November 'The Melange' at the Assembly Rooms, Cateaton Street, but also at the Sans Pareil; from 16 January 1809 'Commodore Pennant', a compilation similar to 'The Melange', ran at his Music Rooms, 125 Strand. Dibdin's voice had gone, his songs were not among his finest, and the public were no longer interested; bankruptcy followed. 
On 12 April 1810 a public dinner with music raised $640, of which $80 was paid to Dibdin at once and the rest was invested in annuities. Almost certainly some of the money given to him went to pay for a new six-volume edition of his 'Professional Life', of which only the first and second volumes were published; the new volumes exist in manuscript, and are concerned largely with the loss of his pension. He wrote and composed twelve songs for Charles Dignum's entertainment 'The Eccentric Travellers' and, in 1811, another twelve 'expressly and exclusively' for William Kitchner's 'La Belle Assemblee' magazine. His final play, 'The Round Robin', was produced at the Haymarket on 21 June 1811 but failed after two performances; however, it included his last important sea song, 'A Lass that Loves a Sailor'. 
Dibdin was paralysed by an unknown illness in 1813 and lingered at his home in Arlington Street, Camden Town, London, until 25 July 1814. He was survived by his wife and daughter, as well as by his sons from his relationship with Harriet Pitt. He was buried in St Martin's burial-ground, Camden Town, with a stanza of 'Tom Bowling' inscribed on his gravestone. 
Dibdin was undoubtedly unique in British entertainment in the eighteenth century and was arguably the first singer-songwriter, presenting entertainments consisting of songs without any connecting structures. Had it not been for these table entertainments, he would have been remembered only in theatre footnotes. Refusals to provide personal details for biographers can be ascribed to his reluctance to see someone else making money from his endeavours, especially since he could publish his own version of his life. A full list of plays he wrote and/or composed is impossible, and even Dibdin himself was uncertain of the exact number. 
Dibdin quarrelled with almost every theatre owner and promoter and was gradually excluded from virtually all outlets for major dramatic works; his career through the 1780s was one of a continuous lowering of musical standards. He was one of the first English composers to attempt to receive an adequate -- and copyrighted -- return from his compositions, especially those works for the theatre, and he strongly campaigned against composers being merely salaried employees rather than being treated as part of the creative process. At the start of Dibdin's career, even a great composer such as Thomas Arne might receive only $50 for stage music. Arguments also arose over his understanding that song lyrics and poetry, sung and spoken English, were not the same thing, and that disregarding this greatly lowered the dramatic potential of theatre pieces. His own high concept of his abilities as a composer also led to arguments. That said, his early dramatic works show many highly progressive features, and he could have developed into one of the major English composers rather than the first important popular songwriter. 
Dibdin's solo table entertainments proved the ideal means of combining all his many talents. His songs greatly expanded the scope of the earlier English ballad, and this -- plus the serious, humorous, and dialect songs, introductions, and asides -- laid the basis for much of what was to come later in music-halls and other forms of popular music. A substantial number of his songs are well written and composed, despite the rate at which they were produced. Much of their appeal lies in his statement that 'even in my comic songs, I have warmly inculcated morality; and, that I have brought prominently forward those men whose valour has insured, and will perpetuate the glory of their country' ('Professional Life', 3.42) and in his ability to write simple but memorable melodies. Approximately 100 of his more than 900 songs were sea songs, including important works such as 'Poor Jack', 'Tom Bowling', 'Push the Grog About', 'True Courage' (1798), and 'Every Inch a Sailor' (1789). Many of his sea and army songs concentrate on positive aspects of service rather than the distressing conditions under which men actually served, and much of the popularity of his songs reflected his honest belief in the sailor's and soldier's value to their country. Other songs celebrate the countryside and its pursuits, as well as events and fashions of the day. These songs undoubtedly became an important part of the folk tradition, although they would not have been collected since the composer was known. They generally portray an idealized Britain, especially of the period between 1788 and 1806, and continued to be used two hundred years after Dibdin's time by broadcasters, film-makers, and recording artists seeking to evoke his period. Manuscripts of his songs may be found at the British Library, the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, and at the University of Leeds. 


@@@@@


doc= 7586


Dibdin, Charles Isaac Mungo (1768-1833), theatre manager and writer, was born on 27 October 1768 in Russell Court, near Drury Lane, London, the eldest son of the actor Charles Dibdin (bap. 1745, d. 1814) and the actress Harriet Pitt (1748?-1814) ['see under 'Pitt, Ann]. He was named after his father, his father's writing partner Isaac Bickerstaff, and their famous character Mungo from 'The Padlock' (1767), which the elder Dibdin had played to great acclaim, although this last name seems to have been dropped in childhood. He made his theatrical debut with his brother Thomas John Dibdin walking in the procession for the revival of Garrick's 'The Jubilee' in 1775. By this time his parents had separated, and young Charles and his mother were known by their mother's surname of Pitt. His mother entrusted her sons to her uncle Cecil Pitt, a household goods broker in the City of London. Charles first attended a school in Hackney, but at the age of nine was sent to a harsh boarding-school at Barnard Castle, co. Durham, where he remained for five years without a holiday. He was joined there after a few years by Thomas. 
When he was fourteen Charles Pitt returned to London, where he was apprenticed to a pawnbroker, Mr Cordy, of Snow Hill; after the end of his seven years' apprenticeship he remained there as a shopman. Pitt's tastes were for literature rather than pawnbroking, and in 1792 he published a collection of verse, 'Poetical Attempts: by a Young Man', which was followed by other works. In 1797, with Cordy's support, he left the shop and made his debut as an entertainer at the Royalty Theatre in a one-man show called 'Sans six sous', a pun on his poverty and the name of his estranged father's theatre, the Sans Souci. From then on he was known professionally as Charles Dibdin the younger, although when he married an actress, Mary Bates (1781/2-1816), at St George's, Hanover Square, on 13 June 1797, he was entered in the register as Charles Isaac Pitt. The couple had eleven children, nine of whom reached adulthood, including Mary Anne (1799-1886), a harpist, who became the second wife of the controversialist Lewis Hippolytus Joseph Tonna; Robert William (1805-1887), a clergyman, who was the father of Sir Lewis Tonna Dibdin (1852-1938); and Henry Edward Dibdin (1813-1866). Following his marriage Dibdin successfully sold a pantomime to Philip Astley at the Amphitheatre of the Arts, who contracted Dibdin and his wife for a three-year engagement. They toured with the Astley company to Dublin and Liverpool as well as performing in London. For Astley Dibdin wrote a succession of songs, prologues, epilogues, and one-act musical plays, and in the 1798-9 season he was Astley's assistant manager in Dublin. The dismissal of his wife for sewing during rehearsals may have encouraged him to look for other employment, and in autumn 1799 he and his wife joined a touring equestrian company, managed by William Davis and others, visiting Liverpool, Bristol, and Manchester. Ridicule from the audience at Manchester following his inability to perform a song he had composed two hours before led Dibdin to renounce appearing on stage. 
Dibdin's existence became less precarious when, in 1800, he successfully applied for the post of manager at Sadler's Wells Theatre, London. His choice of performers, who included (he claimed) the young Edmund Kean among the singers, tightrope-walkers, and pugilists, and seasons that introduced new works by himself and others that met the public taste for spectacle and patriotic sentiment, improved the fortunes of Sadler's Wells. In 1802 he and his brother Thomas became shareholders in the theatre. In 1804 Dibdin installed a water tank that enabled him to advertise Sadler's Wells as an aquatic theatre 'with realistic naval battles and Newfoundland dogs rescuing drowning children' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). According to his doorkeeper, Dibdin's reluctance to spend money meant that the tank was refilled with fresh water only every two months. It was also alleged that he would not provide his performers with a green room, and that his wife's jealousy prevented any woman singer who received an encore for a particular song performing that song again. 
Dibdin's management survived the disaster of 15 October 1807, when eighteen people were killed in a stampede to escape a non-existent fire in the theatre. However, the end of the Napoleonic wars also reduced the public's appetite for Dibdin's brand of entertainment. His wife, to whom he expressed devotion -- 'during the nineteen years we were united she never contravened my wishes' ('Memoirs', 118) -- died on 16 August 1816. In 1819 he was confined for debt within the rules of the king's bench. In 1821 he sold his shares in Sadler's Wells, and this may have enabled his release at about this time. He continued to write songs and pantomimes, and was stage director for his former colleague William Davis at the Royal Amphitheatre from 1822 to 1823 and manager of the Surrey Theatre from 1825 to 1826. He also continued to publish poetry, including 'Young Arthur, or, The Child of Mystery: a Metrical Romance' (1819). His 'A History of the London Theatres' was published in 1826. His last farce, 'Nothing Superfluous', was produced at Hull in 1829. In 1830 he completed his memoirs, but they were not published until an abridged version appeared in 1956. He died on 13 January 1833 and may have been buried at St James's Chapel, Pentonville; his last collection of verse, 'The Physiological Mentor, or, Lessons from Nature', intended as a teaching aid for children, was published after his death. The manuscript of an unfinished novel, 'Mattias Meddler', is in the British Library; Southampton Central Library has manuscripts of Dibdin's musical scores. Dibdin's work was never as original as that of his father, and he never enjoyed an association with the major theatres as his brother did, but his reign at Sadler's Wells was for the most part tremendously popular. He was unquestionably an indefatigable showman, deeply obsessed with and devoted to the stage. 


@@@@@


doc= 7587


Dibdin, Henry Edward (1813-1866), musician, the youngest son of Charles Isaac Mungo Dibdin (1768-1833), was born at Sadler's Wells, London, on 8 September 1813, and was taught music by his elder sister, Mary Anne (1799-1886), afterwards Mrs Tonna, who was an excellent harpist, having studied under Neville Challoner and Nicholas Bochsa; she was also the composer of several songs and instrumental pieces. In 1824 she became assistant teacher of the harp at the Royal Academy of Music. Henry Dibdin studied the harp with her and afterwards with Bochsa. He also performed on the viola and organ. His first public appearance took place at Covent Garden Theatre on 3 August 1832, when he played the harp at Paganini's last concert. In 1833 he settled in Edinburgh, where he remained for the rest of his life. He held the honorary post of organist of Trinity Chapel, and occupied himself with private teaching and composition. In 1846 he married Isabella Perkins Palmer, who was born at Southwold, Suffolk, on 19 January 1828, and who later became a good soprano vocalist; she also composed a few hymn tunes. 
In 1843 Dibdin published (in collaboration with J. T. Surenne) a collection of church music, a supplement to which appeared in the following year. His best-known work is the 'Standard Psalm Book' (1852), which had a useful historical preface. In 1865 he compiled another collection, 'The Praise Book'. His remaining published works, about forty in number, consist of songs, piano and harp pieces, and a good many hymn tunes. Dibdin was also a skilled painter and illuminator. His death took place at Edinburgh on 6 May 1866. 
Dibdin's sons, Edward Rimbault Dibdin, born at Edinburgh on 25 August 1853, and James C. Dibdin, born at Edinburgh on 9 December 1856, both became musicians. The former composed a few songs and partsongs; the latter became best known for his 'Annals of the Edinburgh Stage' (1888). 


@@@@@


doc= 7588


Dibdin, Thomas Frognall (1776-1847), bibliographer, was born in Calcutta, India, and baptized there on 31 August 1776, the elder son of Thomas Dibdin ('c'.1731-1780), naval captain and later merchant venturer, and his second wife, Elizabeth Compton (died 'c'.1780). When he was about the age of four both his parents died: his father on his way to England and his mother soon afterwards at Middelburg in the Netherlands. Brought up by his maternal uncle, William Compton, Thomas completed his preparatory studies at Reading, Stockwell, and at a seminary between Isleworth and Brentford. Tutored by Christopher Marlowe, Thomas matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, as a commoner; he passed his examination in 1797, though he did not take his degree until March 1801. He took his degree of MA on 28 April 1825 and was awarded BD and DD degrees on 9 July 1825. As a student he published several anonymous essays in the 'European Magazine' along with some juvenile poetry which appeared in 1797. 
Upon graduation Dibdin chose the law as his profession. He initially studied under Basil Montagu of Lincoln's Inn and then settled in at Gray's Inn, and became a provincial counsel in Worcester. On 8 July 1797, at St George the Martyr, Camden, he married Sophia Humphreys (died 1849), daughter of the late Francis Humphreys, curate of Hampstead, and his wife, Frances. The couple apparently met at Oxford, and had two sons (one died in early childhood and the other also predeceased Dibdin) and two daughters, one of whom married. While in Worcester he wrote various pieces, including two tracts on legal subjects ('Blackstone's Rights of Persons' and the 'Law of the Poor Rate') and some tales (including 'La Belle Marianne', privately printed in 1824), as well as contributions to the short-lived weekly on the arts and antiquities, 'The Quiz'. Following the advice of his old Reading schoolfriend Thomas Pruen, he abandoned his unsuccessful legal career for the church, and was ordained a deacon in December 1804 and priest shortly thereafter in early 1805 by Bishop North of Winchester. 
Dibdin's career as a bibliographer blossomed in 1802 with 'An Introduction to the Knowledge of Rare and Valuable Editions of the Greek and Latin Classics', published in Gloucester, which was well received in contemporary journals and allegedly sold out in six weeks. Although W. A. Jackson considered it 'a paste-pot tabulated compilation from Edward Harwood's 'Views'' (1790), this slim volume of sixty-three pages introduced Dibdin to George John, second Earl Spencer, the possessor of one of the most valuable private libraries in the country. One of the great book collectors, Lord Spencer of Althorp became his patron for life, appointed him at one time his librarian, and obtained church patronage for him. Although he was chief cataloguer of the Althorp library, Dibdin could not read the Greek in the books he described, according to H. R. Luard's harsh assessment. In any event, his catalogue entitled 'Bibliotheca Spenceriana' (4 vols., 1814-15) is replete with errors, yet Seymour De Ricci commented that it was 'the handsomest and most elaborate catalogue of a private library yet issued' (De Ricci, 75). Its principal value lay in Dibdin's careful establishment of the principle of first-hand examination of books, an important advance in the study of bibliography. 
Dibdin's 'Introduction to the... Classics' was reprinted three times, in 1804, 1808, and 1827, each time being greatly enlarged and corrected. Ultimately it contains little of lasting value, but booksellers of his day frequently cited it. Perhaps his most famous book is 'Bibliomania, or, Book-madness, containing some account of the history, symptoms and cure of this fatal disease' (1809); it included biographical sketches of the collectors of his day. It successfully caught the taste of the time among the aristocracy, and the second edition of 1811 had considerable influence in exciting interest in rare books and early editions, which peaked at the duke of Roxburghe sale of May and June 1812. This sale is notable for the fact that a 1471 edition of Giovanni Boccaccio's 'Decameron', printed by Christofer Valdarfer in Venice, sold for the then enormous sum of $2260, paid by the marquess of Blandford. To celebrate its sale Dibdin proposed that the leading bibliophiles dine at St Alban's tavern on 17 June. With Lord Spencer as president and Dibdin as vice-president, this meeting was the beginning of the Roxburghe Club. The club eventually grew to thirty-one members, each expected to produce a reprint of some rare volume of English literature. In certain circles the club became a joke, in part because of the worthless character of some of its early publications -- of which it was said by Luard that 'when they were unique there was already one copy too many in existence' ('DNB') -- but in large measure because of Joseph Haslewood's posthumous satire entitled 'Roxburghe Revels', which appeared in 1837. None the less, Dibdin must be credited with being the originator of the English publishing society. 
Dibdin was further encouraged in his fine printing and bibliographical efforts by the financial success of 'Typographical Antiquities, or, The History of Printing in England, Scotland and Ireland' (1810), which was based upon Joseph Ames's original work of 1749 and William Herbert's extensive revisions of 1785. In 1818, accompanied by artist George Lewis, Dibdin spent nine months in France and Germany visiting various public and private libraries, and eventually published an amusing three-volume account of his travels, full of follies and errors, entitled 'A Bibliographical, Antiquarian and Picturesque Tour' (1821). The volumes were published in the spring of that year at $9 9's'.; the plates alone were supposed to have cost $5000 and became a sought-after collector's item. This work's inaccuracies upset the French, and when M. Theodore Licquet and Georges A. Crapelet translated the entirety into French in 1825, they added numerous footnotes attacking the original. 
In all Dibdin wrote more than forty-six different works including sermons and lectures under at least four different pseudonyms, two of which were Cato Parvus and Mercurius Rusticus. In 1819 he proposed a 'History of the University of Oxford' on subscription; fortunately it was never undertaken, because Dibdin's works had become noted for their substantive and typographic errors. By the 1820s he auctioned his drawings and took, as he said, 'a final leave of bibliography' to pursue his clerical career more seriously; however, he still published 'The Library Companion' in 1824, which was described as 'a splendidly idiosyncratic, lucky dip of a book [which] abounds with errors, but is remarkably entertaining' ('Dibdin: Selections', ed. Neuburg, 129). His modest preferments included the preachership of Archbishop Tenison's chapel in Swallow Street, London, the evening lectureship of Brompton Chapel, preacherships at Quebec and Fitzroy chapels, the vicarage at Exning near Newmarket in Suffolk (1823), the rectory of St Mary's, Bryanston Square, in Marylebone, Middlesex (1824), and from 1831 until his death a royal chaplaincy-in-ordinary. This last position apparently saved him from arrest for debt in 1836. 
Later in life Dibdin contemplated a 'History of Dover' and a 'Bibliographical Tour in Belgium', but although he did some work on them, these never appeared. His two-volume apologia, 'Reminiscences of a Literary Life' (1836), focuses on his professional efforts, and barely mentions his children or his long marriage. The end of his life is well documented in numerous letters to Philip Bliss, registrar of Oxford, which contain a sad picture of continuing pecuniary difficulties, leading to poverty and illness. Dibdin suffered a debilitating stroke in late 1845, and he died on 18 November 1847 at 3 Park Road, Kensington, London. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. Although Lord Spencer had insured his life for $1000, there is some question as to whether Dibdin had in fact borrowed upon it, leaving his widow destitute. Sophia Dibdin died on 21 July 1849. 
Despite an extravagant and inflated style, Dibdin popularized the word 'bibliomania', a term evocative of that era's antiquarian interests; his main contributions seem to have been his zealous enthusiasm in promoting book collecting generally among the aristocracy, as well as putting forth the principle of first-hand examination of books in the compilation of bibliographies. 


@@@@@


doc= 7589


Dibdin, Thomas John (1771-1841), playwright and actor, was born at 5 Peter Street (now Museum Street), Bloomsbury, London, on 21 March 1771, the second of the two illegitimate sons of Charles Dibdin (bap. 1745, d. 1814) and the actress and dancer Harriet Pitt (1748?-1814) ['see under 'Pitt, Ann]. He was brother to Charles Isaac Mungo Dibdin (1768-1833) and the dancer Harriet Pitt ('b'. 1770), and half-brother to the musician George Cecil Pitt ('bap'. 1767, died 1820). 
As the godson of David Garrick, who befriended the family after Charles abandoned his responsibilities, the four-year-old Dibdin walked on as Cupid in Garrick's revival of his Shakespearian pageant 'The Jubilee' (Drury Lane, 1775-6). Mrs Siddons, playing Venus, assisted in securing one of his wings. Dibdin's mother, as Mrs Davenett, resumed acting at Drury Lane in 1788 for two seasons (and afterwards transferred to Covent Garden) to finance his education at St Paul's Cathedral choir school under Robert Hudson, followed by a year-long interlude boarding at an unexacting establishment in Half-Farthing Lane, Wandsworth, then a rigorous three-year classical training at Barnard's Castle, co. Durham. To keep her son off the stage, Harriet entrusted him at the age of fourteen to his well-to-do great-uncle Cecil Pitt, a retired Dalston upholsterer, who apprenticed him in business to William Rawlins. 
Dibdin, however, shared his family's infatuation with the theatre, which stretched back to his maternal grandmother, the Covent Garden actress Ann Pitt (c.1720-1799). At school in co. Durham he had witnessed plays at a local inn, and in young adulthood he benefited from free access by family order to the three patent theatres in London. Through his friendship with John Palmer the Royalty (opened in 1787) became a regular escape hole. When Rawlins discovered and violently destroyed his apprentice's model theatre, Dibdin sought arbitration from John Wilkes, the city chamberlain. Rawlins was admonished and Dibdin agreed to eschew theatricals; but the lure of the stage was irresistible, and two months later he was almost discovered as, unrecognized, he sat adjacent to his master in the Royalty's gallery. 
Determined to abandon his apprenticeship, in July 1789, armed with an introduction from Cockran Booth, the prompter at Covent Garden and part owner of the Margate theatre (where his half-brother Cecil was employed), Dibdin absconded by riverboat. The Margate company being full, he was found a niche in the Dover troupe, managed by Richland, playing at Eastbourne, where, in late summer, under the stage name of T. Merchant to avoid detection, he appeared as Captain Valentine in John O'Keeffe's farce 'The Farmer' and sang 'Poor Jack', a well-known song of his father's. To supplement his income in this profit-sharing company, he painted scenery (including a smokily realistic armada for 'The Critic') and wrote the first of about 2000 songs. Three months afterwards he joined Mrs Baker's extensive Kent circuit at Deal, a salaried engagement which Dibdin reckoned as 'the next grade to a situation in a theatre royal, the grand aim of my ambition' ('Reminiscences', 1.92). At Easter 1790 he transferred to Butler's company and visited Beverley and Harrogate, once performing alongside Mrs Jordan. 
In 1791, at the jointly managed Liverpool and Manchester theatres, Dibdin achieved his goal of a theatre-royal appointment. With only hours' notice, he played Mungo -- 'that most favourite of all my father's favourite characters' ('Reminiscences', 1.111) -- in Isaac Bickerstaff's 'The Padlock' when the Manchester theatre reopened after a fire. Over three years he established himself as a scene-painter and gained valuable experience in stage-management; he also performed a season at Chester. In summer 1792 he played as far north as Banff and Inverness. After his return to Manchester as 'prompter and 'fac-totum'' (ibid., 1.165), his first play, the farce 'Sunshine after Rain', was staged (15 March 1793); it was published pseudonymously in 1795 as 'The Mad Guardian' (with 'Fugitive Pieces' of prose and verse). At Manchester collegiate church, as Thomas Pitt, he married, on 23 May 1793, the actress Ann Hilliar (1774?-1828) (familiarly known as Nancy), whom he had met three years before at Beverley. 
Following joint engagements at Rochdale and Huddersfield, Dibdin and his now pregnant wife journeyed in deep winter 1793-4 to south-west Wales, where, for Henry Masterman's lively company at Haverfordwest and Carmarthen, Dibdin wrote and performed a new song weekly. Early in 1794 their first child, Maria, was born; and 'Comic Songs' (1794), probably Dibdin's first publication, appeared under his Merchant pseudonym. On reading in the newspaper of the staging of 'Rival Loyalties', his recently completed burletta, at Sadler's Wells in May 1794, Dibdin, aspiring to a metropolitan career as a playwright, hurriedly set off for London. Masterman generously kept open his engagement, but Dibdin never returned. His affection for Carmarthen and Haverfordwest audiences, however, inspired the dedication of 'St David's Day' (1800) 'to the memory of their liberality' ('Reminiscences', 1.183). 
The Dibdins were engaged at Sadler's Wells from 1794-5, Thomas to act and write burlettas at 5 guineas a week and Ann as a performer. Now safe in his increasing reputation, Dibdin dropped his disguise and for the first time assumed his father's surname, though against the latter's wishes. In 1796 the Dibdins accepted a good offer from Mrs Baker, giving each of them two clear benefits in each town, to return to the Kent circuit. But Dibdin continued to write occasionally for Sadler's Wells, including 'The British Raft' (1797), which featured the hugely successful anti-French song 'The Snug Little Island' (bought by Longman for 15 guineas, three times what the theatre paid for the entire burletta). Dibdin's opportunity to break into legitimate theatre arrived in July 1798, when his farce 'The Jew and the Doctor' gained such acclaim at Maidstone that it was purchased for performance at Covent Garden. From 19 October 1798 Dibdin appeared on Covent Garden's salary list at $5 weekly, and steadily moved away from acting to concentrate on authorship. (Ann joined on 18 September 1799, at $3, appearing as Aura in 'The Farm House'.) In his first season, beginning with 'The Mouth of the Nile' (acted twenty-seven times), in celebration of Nelson's naval victory, Dibdin made $466 6's'., sufficient to increase his financial support to his mother and grandmother. At the same time his indentures were cancelled when Rawlins, in a spirit of reconciliation, accepted reduced compensation of 50 guineas. 
Dibdin's association with Covent Garden lasted eleven years. A special responsibility was the annual pantomime, regularly occupying six or eight months each year, produced in collaboration with Charles Farley. His outstanding success was 'Harlequin and Mother Goose' (1806) -- said to have grossed $3000 for Covent Garden in the first three weeks -- which reorientated the genre by giving dominance to the clown, played, on Dibdin's personal recommendation, by Jo Grimaldi. In several areas Dibdin was a reliable Covent Garden writer; but there were as many pains as rewards to endure as house author, experiences which later emerged in 'Harlequin Hoax, or, A Pantomime Proposed' (1814). In the aptly titled 'Family Quarrels' (1802), Dibdin despaired of ever satisfying the vocal requirements of the squabbling principals, and during the performance local Jews' offence at the song 'I Courted Miss Levi' caused uproar over several nights. With 'The Cabinet' (1802) -- 'a very productive stock opera' ('Reminiscences', 1.309), though plagued, if less severely, by disputes of precedence among performers and staged in nineteen days from conception -- Dibdin cleared $700. His most successful season, concluding at the Haymarket with the five-act comedy 'Guilty or Not Guilty' (1804), one of several pieces written over the years for George Colman junior, produced a total income of $1515. At the commencement of the 1805-6 season Dibdin negotiated his first salary increase of a pound a week for Ann and himself. 
In parallel with his writing and managing career, Dibdin in 1802 joined his brother Charles in acquiring for $1400 a quarter-share in Sadler's Wells, which by 1805 was making good returns. But theatrical speculation was always uncertain, and their involvement in the Dublin theatre about the same time lost the two brothers nearly $2000. 
On Thomas Harris's retirement in 1809, Dibdin left Covent Garden -- Ann having departed a year earlier -- and bought a cottage at Betchworth, in bosky Surrey, intending to write free from London's temptations. Though he kept the cottage until the 1820s, his notion of semi-retirement yielded in October 1810 to R. W. Elliston's seductive offer of $15 a week as author and manager at the Surrey, where he stayed for two seasons. In October 1812, after deliberating over the seeming drop in professional status, he went to Drury Lane as prompter at $520 per annum, for which he was to write a pantomime and one topical piece on any public or national event. This was not a happy time, since relations with the second proprietor Samuel Whitbread, whose authoritarian style Dibdin abhorred, were often frosty. After Whitbread's death in July 1815 Dibdin was re-engaged at Drury Lane, as joint acting manager with Alexander Rae, an unequal partnership in which Dibdin did most of the work. Although the new management subcommittee as individuals, including Lord Byron, were generally supportive, Dibdin alleged that 'collectively they did not treat me well' ('Reminiscences', 2.57). His assumption in 1816 of the lease of the Surrey Theatre (then with no intention of managing it personally) -- initially not resisted -- caused his dismissal on grounds of conflict of interest, though Drury Lane continued his salary until the following October. 
Dibdin's management of the Surrey began ambitiously but ended in financial ruin. By the opening night on 1 July, when his wife (resuming her theatrical career) spoke a comic address prefacing a programme comprising the melodrama 'Housewarming' and a historical romance, 'Chevy Chase' -- both 'written on the spur of the moment' ('Reminiscences', 2.132) -- Dibdin had spent $4000 in six weeks on interior refurbishment. Although the productions were highly regarded and Dibdin attracted, at various times, first-rate performers, receipts declined long before the first season was out. Serious competition came not just from Astley's but, unanticipated, from a new rival, the Coburg. Even with a solid repertory of 180 stock pieces and opportunities to change programmes nightly, in six years' management (ending prematurely on 19 March 1822) only two seasons were financially viable: 1817-18 and 1818-19, saved, respectively, by the burlesque 'Don Giovanni' (performed over 100 nights and imitated many times in London and elsewhere) and 'The Lily of St Leonard's, or, The Heart of Midlothian' (the first of many adaptations of Scott, the copyright of which, exceptionally as a minor theatre piece, realized 60 guineas). Dibdin's debts amounted to a catastrophic $18,000 and he was made bankrupt. His discharge took place on 21 May 1822. 
At this juncture Dibdin accepted a three-year summer contract as stage-manager at Morris's Haymarket, at $200 with one benefit, while Ann superintended the women's wardrobe for 'a very trifling salary' ('Reminiscences', 2.215). In October he became stage-manager of Drury Lane, again under Elliston, in whose employ as acting manager was the volatile James Winston. Dibdin clashed with both. Against Elliston, who sought ways to remove him, he resorted in February 1824 to a court order to enforce his contract. Even more unhappy was his experience at the Haymarket, where (in contrast to relations with its former proprietor, Colman) Dibdin complained bitterly of 'daily and nightly degradations' endured in Morris's service (ibid., 2.294). Continuing financial difficulties forced him to borrow money from extortioners in the winter of 1823-4 and, after 'Come if you can' (June 1824) failed, Morris refused him his salary. In July he was arrested for debt and languished until Michaelmas in the king's bench prison. For payment on 'The Laplanders', written -- bizarrely -- at Morris's request for a piece for a herd of reindeer (which, in the event, died before the performance could take place), Dibdin was again forced into litigation (23 June 1826). Through debt he also lost his library. Such experiences confirmed him in the view that he had led 'a very chequered, and not a very fortunate life' (ibid., 2.405). 
Having secured the stage-managership of Sadler's Wells, beginning on 4 April 1825 at $400 per annum, Dibdin moved to the spaciousness of Myddelton Square in the nearby New Town and hoped to start afresh. His contract was renewed at intervals and he continued to write burlettas for Sadler's Wells until mid-1828, shortly before Ann Dibdin's premature death on 29 August. He married Catherine Court at St Pancras on 9 April 1829 and at the age of fifty-eight began a new family. 
Overall, however, socially and professionally, the 1830s were even more uncomfortable than the 1820s. Encouraged by Bulwer-Lytton's copyright reform, Dibdin published, under royal patronage and wide theatrical subscription, a collection of 200 songs, the valedictory title of which -- 'Last Lays of the Last of the Three Dibdins' (1833) -- reinforces the sense of his being at the end of a theatrical line. During the reform excitement his new satirical periodical -- 'Tom Dibdin's Penny Trumpet' (October-November 1832) -- foundered after four numbers. While he wrote occasional minor theatre pieces -- the last in 1837 -- his income was extremely small and monetary troubles multiplied. Increasingly desperate applications to the Literary Fund produced grants totalling $175 between 1824 and 1838. In 1834-5 he spent nearly a year, reportedly in a condition of near starvation, in Horsemonger Lane debtors' prison; and in 1838 he wrote despairingly to the fund's managers that 'the situation of my Family and self becomes daily more critically painful' (12 November). 
Ironically, Dibdin's last commission, under the patronage of Lord Minto (representing the Admiralty), was to edit the 'Songs, Naval and National of the Late Charles Dibdin' (1841), the father who had neglected his hero-worshipping son all his life. While preparing the edition Dibdin received a small weekly stipend in acknowledgement of his financial plight. He died from asthma on 16 September 1841 at his home, 22 Trevor Square, Knightsbridge, and was buried on 21 September at St James's, Pentonville, near his mother and grandmother. 
Open, forthright, but companionable in nature, Dibdin cultivated a wide circle of friends, including George Colman junior, Charles Farley, Benjamin Thompson, Douglas Jerrold, Sam Russell, and Thomas Harris (almost a surrogate father). He was 'poet laureate' of the Covent Garden Beefsteak Club. However, most of his closest friends (and his brother) predeceased him and, in the last decade of his life, with the responsibilities of a young family, the shocking consequences of his indigence deprived him of much of his spirit. 
Outside the drama, several early essays and tales of Dibdin's appeared in the 'New Lady's Magazine', the 'Gentleman's and Lady's Pocket Magazine', and 'The Biographic'. He edited briefly the 'Monthly Epitome' in 1798; and his 'Metrical History', an eccentric aide-memoire for schoolchildren of historical events, appeared in 1813. As was the case with many of the period's playwrights, Dibdin's dramatic output was prodigious -- about 250 pieces, excluding songs, prologues, and epilogues (which he had a reputation for turning out at the drop of a hat). He wrote at great speed (though never, he claimed, on Sundays), capturing precisely audience tastes. A facility for word play and puns contributed to his substantial success as a pantomimist. His Scott adaptations -- for which he established a vogue -- were sometimes as spectacular as his pantomimes. About a quarter of his total output was published. Several plays, including popular stock pieces such as 'The Birthday' (1799) and 'Of Age Tomorrow' (1805), along with 'Kenilworth' (1821), were still available in Dicks's series at the end of the century. For Whittingham and Arliss, he compiled 'Dibdin's London Theatre' (26 vols., 1815-18), based on prompt books of the theatres royal with original cast lists derived from materials in John Kemble's library. But perhaps his best achievement is his autobiography (2 vols., 1827), a lively and informative theatrical narrative, which, because it ran none of the risks, was 'preferable to writing a play' ('Reminiscences', 1.7). 
Of the numerous children of Dibdin's first marriage, only two survived into adulthood: Thomas Robert Colman Dibdin (1810-1893), a Post Office clerk, who exhibited landscapes at the Royal Academy (1832-74), and Charles Alexander Dibdin ('b'. 1815). His second marriage produced three more children, the eldest of whom was barely eleven at his death, immediately before and after which the family was forced to seek renewed assistance from the Literary Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 7590


Dicconson, Edward (1670-1752), vicar apostolic of the northern district, was born on 30 November 1670 at Wrightington Hall, near Wigan, Lancashire, being the third son of Hugh Dicconson ('c'.1621-1691) of Wrightington Hall and his wife, Agnes (died 1719), daughter of Roger Kirkby of Kirkby in that county. His family were Jacobites. His eldest brother, William Dicconson, followed James II to St Germain and became tutor to the exiled king's son and treasurer to the exiled queen. His elder brother, Roger, joined the 1715 rising. He was educated in the English College at Douai from 1683, and at the end of his course of philosophy, in 1691, returned to England. Subsequently he resumed his studies at Douai, where he took the oath on 8 March 1699. He took priest's orders, became procurator of the college in 1701, and in 1708-9 was professor of syntax and a senior. In 1709-10 he was professor of poetry and in 1711-12 professor of philosophy. He was made vice-president and professor of theology in 1713-14. He assisted Charles Dodd, alias Hugh Tootell, in the preparation of his 'Church History of England' (3 vols., 1737-42), copying for him most of the records of the Douai College. In 1719 he went to Paris to deal with the college funds invested there but failed in a bid to profit from the Mississippi Bubble. At some point he was awarded the degree of DD. His career involved him in the struggle between the secular clergy, to which he belonged, and the regulars, including the Benedictines, the Franciscans, and the Jesuits, for control of the English mission. The opponents of the secular clergy sought to brand them as Gallicans, lacking in complete respect for papal authority, and as Jansenists, holding heretical views on moral and dogmatic theology. He defended the English College at Douai against the charge of Jansenism by securing the replacement of their accuser as visitor, and himself accepted the papal condemnation of Jansenism by the papal bull 'Unigenitus' of 1713. 
Despite a stammer, which made preaching difficult, and his desire for a continental benefice, Dicconson left the college at Douai to serve the English mission on 30 July 1720, having been invited by Peter Giffard to take the ministerial charge at Chillington, Staffordshire. While there he was Bishop Stonor's principal adviser and vicar-general. Afterwards he was sent to Rome as agent-extraordinary of the secular clergy of England. He failed to secure the replacement of the Jesuit superior of the English College at Rome by a secular, but he did succeed in obtaining a ruling that the Franciscans should observe Innocent XII's decree of 1696 requiring the regulars to seek the approbation of the vicars apostolic before accepting appointments on the English mission. On the death of Bishop Thomas Williams he was nominated vicar apostolic of the northern district of England by Benedict XIV in September 1740, and he was consecrated on 19 March 1741 to the see of Mallus 'in partibus infidelium' by the bishop of Ghent. Proceeding to his vicariate he fixed his residence at a place belonging to his family called Finch Mill (now demolished), in Appley Bridge, Shevington, near Wrightington. Hence he was sometimes jokingly called the Auditor of the Rota (after the head of a Roman ecclesiastical court, 'rota' being the Latin for mill). Together with the other vicars apostolic he obtained from Benedict XIV in 1753 the brief 'Apostolicum ministerium', regulating the English mission along the lines already laid down in 1698 and confirmed by the brief 'Emanavit nuper' of 1748: the regulars were required to secure the approbation of the vicars apostolic before accepting appointments on the English mission. 
Dicconson died at Finch Mill on 5 May 1752, and was buried in the private chapel attached to St Wilfrid's, the parish church of Standish, near Wigan. His monument, inscribed with his full episcopal style and carved with his arms, crozier, and mitre, is unusual, if not unique, in being on the wall of the chancel. Francis Petre was his successor in the northern vicariate. Dicconson's diary, covering ten years at Douai, has been published. His manuscripts include a detailed account of his agency in Rome, together with reports and other documents relating to the state of his vicariate. These papers provide a useful source for the study of the English Catholic church in the eighteenth century. His library is now at Ushaw College, Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 7591


Diceto, Ralph de (d. 1199/1200), chronicler and ecclesiastic, is of unknown origins. His surname has given rise to much discussion; William Stubbs pronounced it 'an artificial name, adopted by its bearer as the Latin name of a place with which he was associated, but which had no proper Latin name of its own' ('Opera historica', ed. Stubbs, 1.xvii), and was inclined to connect it with one of three places named Dissai or Disse in Maine. However, recent scholarship has noted Ralph as occurring in charters under such name forms as Dysci and Dici, which can very plausibly be construed as deriving from Diss. Certainty on the point is not presently to be had, but it is undoubtedly possible that he was a Norfolk man. It would appear that he was born in the 1120s, for his notices of events concerning St Paul's begin in 1136, and 'certainly have the appearance of personal recollections' ('Opera historica', ed. Stubbs, 1.xx). These recollections imply Ralph's presence there from boyhood, and his nomination as archdeacon of Middlesex by Bishop Richard de Belmeis of London (died 1162), as the latter's first episcopal act after his consecration on 28 September 1152, and the bishop's tenacity in adhering to his choice in the face of competition, alike suggest that Ralph himself belonged to the Belmeis family, which prospered in the diocese under its two Bishop Richards. Diceto's most likely place in the pedigree is as son or nephew of Ralph of Langford (died 'c'.1154?), brother of Bishop Richard de Belmeis, and dean of St Paul's in 1152. 
When he was appointed archdeacon in 1152, Diceto was styled 'master'. Twice a student at the Paris schools, Diceto appears to have gone there for the first time in the 1140s. He was back in England in the early 1150s, and was probably present at Henry II's coronation on 19 December 1154, but then seems to have returned to Paris, perhaps to study law. Thereafter evidence for his career is provided both by his own writings and by independent record evidence. By 1164 he had acquired the livings of Aynho, Northamptonshire, and Finchingfield, Essex, and served them both by vicars. In that year he attended the Council of Northampton, and in 1166 was sent as a messenger by the English bishops to Archbishop Thomas Becket, who was then in exile. In the aftermath of Becket's murder, about the end of 1171, he was one of a delegation to the pope, sent to petition for the lifting of the suspension of Gilbert Foliot as bishop of London. He was active as an archdeacon, for instance trying to maintain his own jurisdiction over St Margaret's, Westminster. In 1180 he was elected dean of St Paul's, and early in the following year conducted a detailed survey of the chapter's property. He also enacted a statute of residence for the cathedral, in which he tried to strike a realistic balance between the needs of St Paul's for residentiary clergy, and the ever-increasing tendency for the canons to be pluralists and absentees. In December 1187 he acted alongside Hubert Walter as a papal judge-delegate, while on 3 September 1189 he acted in place of the bishop of London (the see being vacant) at the coronation of Richard I. The latter's visit to St Paul's in 1194, along with the archbishop of Rouen, was but one of the visits by secular and ecclesiastical rulers in the 1180s and 1190s that Diceto recorded, and presumably attended. 
Diceto refers to himself for the last time on 23 May 1199, when he presented William de Ste Mere-Eglise to Archbishop Walter for consecration. The date of his death, like the place of his birth, is problematic. Although his chronicle continues to 1202, and his obit was commemorated at St Paul's on 22 November, it has been persuasively argued that Diceto died on that day not in 1202 but in either 1199 or 1200, and that the section dealing with events after the coronation of King John, on 27 May 1199, is the work of a continuator. Diceto was fittingly remembered at St Paul's as 'the good dean' ('Opera historica', ed. Stubbs, 1.lxxxv). He codified the cathedral's customs and statutes, and built a deanery house and chapel within its cathedral precincts, which he bequeathed to his successors, along with relics (which included the staff of St Martin of Tours and the head of St Eugenius), vestments, ornaments, and books. 
In this last bequest there was a volume of chronicles. Diceto was the author of two major historical narratives, and also of a collection of shorter pieces, his 'opuscula'. Though mainly little more than lists -- bishops of various English dioceses, popes, archbishops of Canterbury, emperors, kings, and the like -- the latter are nevertheless characteristic of an important side of Diceto's intellectual personality, as both historian and ecclesiastic. For he was a methodical and exact compiler of information of all kinds, and had probably been assembling material for years before he began to compose his chronicles. This can also be seen in his survey of the St Paul's manors, with its list of headings under which the inquest was to be made, the precise timetable under which it was carried out, and the remarkably detailed notice of its date, placing it in time by reference to no less than six different chronological systems, ranging from the year 'anno Domini' to Diceto's own deanship. 
But in spite of his concern for the minutiae of history, Diceto was a man of wide vision. His epitome of chronicles, the 'Abbreviationes chronicorum', covers the history of the world from the creation to 1147 in a series of brief annals, and represents the most ambitious attempt at a world history made until then by an Englishman. That it contains some original material towards the end, mostly concerning St Paul's, is arguably less significant than the work's terms of reference. In an extended prologue (in which the influence of Hugh of St Victor is apparent), Diceto explains that the 'Abbreviationes' are divided into three sections, defined as the very ancient (that is, before Christ), the ancient (the Christian era), and the modern -- his own time. He follows this with a list of the important writers on whose work he has drawn, along with notes of the periods covered in their writings, in the process providing evidence for the impressive range of his reading (he was also well read in the classics, elsewhere quoting such authors as Claudian, Lucan, and Sidonius Apollinaris, and making a disparaging reference to the French by way of a neatly adapted line from Virgil's 'Aeneid'). And he also makes an important technical innovation (later imitated by Matthew Paris), in the use of a number of marginal 'signa', pictorial devices employed to indicate the presence in the adjacent text of particular subjects, such as councils, royal unction, disputes between king and church. 
These signs (along with two new ones, including one for dissension between the king and his sons, represented by two hands grasping a crown from either side) are also used in Diceto's more important historical work, the 'Ymagines historiarum'. Starting with the knighting of the future Henry II in 1149, it likewise draws on a wide range of materials, although until 1171, perhaps until 1183, Robert de Torigni is the principal source used. But before, as well as after, 1171 Diceto makes considerable use of documents, as for instance in his account of the Becket dispute, which is largely made up of letters and papal bulls. And he also exploited his personal contacts. Men of the importance of Hubert Walter, William de Longchamp, Walter de Coutances, archbishop of Rouen and justiciar, several of whose letters are quoted verbatim, Richard fitz Nigel, and Richard of Ilchester, who is recorded as asking Diceto for advice in 1166, could provide letters and news. With such sources of information, it is not surprising that Diceto was well informed, not least about events abroad, especially in France, where he often reports on events in Henry II's continental lands. He also followed events in the kingdom of Jerusalem, and sometimes in Constantinople. He made systematic use of Richard I's newsletters. 
The 'Ymagines historiarum' are not just a valuable source for events in the last half of the twelfth century. Diceto was an intellectual historian, seriously interested in problems arising from the deployment of power, which he saw from the perspective of an ecclesiastic who appreciated the benefits of strong and relatively impartial royal government, and could grasp the concept of public authority. He admired Henry II's concern for good order, and his chronicle is an important source for such acts of government as the peacekeeping measures of 1179; he also condemned acts of rebellion and disorder, like the massacres of Jews in 1190. The dean of St Paul's saw nothing incongruous in bishops' being involved in secular government, arguing rather that they made better officials than did laymen. The Becket dispute inevitably put a severe strain on his loyalties, divided as they were not only between the king and the primate, but also, and perhaps more stressfully, between Becket and Diceto's own bishop, Gilbert Foliot, who remained a determined opponent of the archbishop for as long as the latter lived. To some extent, both in the 'Ymagines' and in his abbreviated account of the quarrel, known as the 'Series causae', Diceto used his marginal 'signa' simply to draw attention to the issues at stake; but they also acted as a sort of silent commentary on events, and one that had the positive advantage of enabling him to avoid taking up too clear-cut a position on the rights and wrongs of a painful controversy. If in the end Diceto favours Becket, his remarkably even-handed account nevertheless shows that he appreciated the strength of Henry II's position on the issue of criminous clerks. 
Diceto's judgement was not always faultless; he was taken in by Geoffrey of Monmouth, and in his account of the events of 1189 shows that he regarded the death of Henry II as fulfilling the prophecies of Merlin. But as a historian he deserves the admiration with which he has been regarded, and the use that has been made of his writings, from the thirteenth century onwards. His chronicles were first printed in 1652, in the 'Historiae Anglicanae scriptores X' of Roger Twysden and John Selden, an excellent edition marred only by its failure to reproduce Diceto's 'signa'. This deficiency was remedied in Stubbs's edition of 1876, which has remained the basis for the study of Diceto's work. 


@@@@@


doc= 7592


Dick, Sir Alexander, third baronet (1703-1785), physician, born on 22 October 1703, was the third son of Sir William Cunyngham of Caprington, first baronet (died 1740), and Janet (died 1753), only child and heir of Sir James Dick, first baronet (1643-1728), of Prestonfield, near Edinburgh. The family name was changed to Dick because of the mother's inheritance. Not sharing in the large fortune inherited by his elder brother William, Alexander Cunyngham decided to qualify for a profession. He began the study of medicine at the University of Edinburgh, and afterwards went to Leiden University, where he became a pupil of Boerhaave, and graduated MD on 31 August 1725. His inaugural dissertation, 'De epilepsia', was published the same year. A similar degree was conferred on him two years later by the University of St Andrews. In 1727 he began practising as a physician in Edinburgh, and on 7 November of the same year he became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. Ten years later he travelled on the continent with his friend Allan Ramsay (1713-1784), the painter, son of the well-known Scottish poet, Allan Ramsay (1686-1758). During his travels Cunyngham added to his scientific and cultural acquirements, keeping an extensive journal of his travels, extracts of which appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1853. On his return home he settled in Pembrokeshire, where he earned a reputation as a successful practitioner. Meanwhile he maintained a constant correspondence with Allan Ramsay the elder and other friends in Scotland. Cunyngham married first in 1736 his cousin, Janet, daughter of Alexander Dick, merchant in Edinburgh: with her he had three daughters. He married second in 1762 Mary, daughter of David Butler of Pembrokeshire, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. 
In 1746, on the death of his brother William, husband of the eccentric Anne, Lady Dick (died 1741), Cunyngham succeeded to the baronetcy as Sir Alexander Dick, and moved to the family mansion of Prestonfield, at the foot of Arthur's Seat, near Edinburgh. While no longer needing to work as a physician, he still practised for scientific purposes, and in 1756 was elected president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, an office which he held for seven successive years. He voluntarily resigned in 1763 on the ground 'that it was due to the merits of other gentlemen that there should be some rotation'. Dick continued to devote time to the service of the college; he contributed substantially to the building of the new hall in George Street, and helped to establish the library. His portrait was later placed in the college library as a mark of respect. 
Dick helped to obtain a charter for the Royal Society of Edinburgh and was elected a fellow on 3 November 1783. He also promoted the establishment of a medical school in the Royal Infirmary. When James Mounsey of St Petersburg first brought the seeds of the true rhubarb into Britain, Dick, who probably knew the properties of the plant from his old teacher's nephew, A. K. Boerhaave, gave great care to its cultivation and pharmaceutical preparation. The Society of Arts presented him in 1774 with a gold medal 'for the best specimen of rhubarb'. Dick corresponded with Dr Johnson and James Boswell, who paid a visit to Prestonfield during their celebrated journey to Scotland. Boswell apparently wished to marry Dick's daughter. Dick died at the age of eighty-two, on 10 November 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 7593


Dick, Anne, Lady Dick (d. 1741), eccentric, was the daughter of a Scottish law lord, Sir James Mackenzie, Lord Royston (1671-1744), third son of George Mackenzie, first earl of Cromarty, and his wife, Elizabeth. Neither the date of Anne's birth nor the date of her marriage to William Cunyngham (died 1746) are known. Cunyngham, who adopted the name of Dick, became Sir William Dick of Prestonfield, bt, on the death of his maternal grandfather in 1728. The marriage did not produce any children. Lady Dick's eccentric behaviour, which included walking through the streets of Edinburgh with her maid, both dressed in boys' clothing, made her notorious in the eyes of her contemporaries. She was also known as a writer of coarse lampoons and epigrams in verse, three specimens of which are reprinted in C. Kirkpatrick Sharpe's 'Book of Ballads' (1823). Her verses seem to have earned the disapproval of her friends, who wished her talents could be put to more seemly use. Lady Dick died in 1741. Her husband, who survived her until 1746, was succeeded in his baronetcy by his brother, the physician Sir Alexander Dick. 


@@@@@


doc= 7594


Dick, John (1764-1833), United Secession minister and theological writer, was born on 10 October 1764 in Aberdeen, the son of the Revd Alexander Dick, minister of the associate congregation of the Seceder church there, and his wife, Helen Tolmie, who was regarded as a woman of intellect and piety, and the daughter of a Captain Tolmie of Aberdeen. He was educated at Aberdeen grammar school and King's College, Aberdeen. He was accepted as a student for the ministry by the Secession church, studied under the famed John Brown of Haddington, and in 1785 was licensed as a probationer. In the same year he accepted a call from the congregation of Slateford, near Edinburgh, and was ordained there. On 8 August 1789, at Colinton, Edinburghshire, he married Jane or Jeanie, daughter of the Revd G. Coventry, of Stichill, Roxburghshire, and sister of Andrew Coventry, professor of agriculture in the University of Edinburgh. 
After a successful ministry in Slateford, in 1801 Dick accepted a call to the congregation of Shuttle Street, Glasgow (known as Greyfriars from 1821), and he remained minister there until his death. This congregation was one of the oldest and wealthiest of the Secession congregations. Dick's sermons were regarded as models of clarity, conciseness, and simplicity of style. In 1815, he was awarded the degree of DD by Princeton College, USA. In 1820 he was appointed professor of theology to the Associate Synod of the newly formed United Secession church. At first only students belonging to his own synod attended, but his ability and tact soon ensured that those from the other Secession synod (the General Associate Synod) attended also. 
In 1788 Dick played a prominent part in the attack mounted by several leading figures in the Secession church on the doctrines of the Revd William McGill of Ayr, who was regarded by many as having espoused Socinian views. When the established church failed effectively to prosecute McGill for heresy, Dick published a sermon entitled 'The Conduct and Doom of False Teachers' (1788) and almost certainly was involved in several other contributions to the attack. During the 1790s he joined the debate in the Secession church over adherence to the Westminster confession of faith, especially regarding its doctrine on the relationship of church and state. His sermon, preached at the opening of synod in October 1796, was published as 'Confessions of faith shown to be necessary, and the duty of churches with respect to them explained' (1796), and led to a heated pamphlet war with some of those who were of the 'old light' party in the church and who were opposed to Dick's position. In his sermon, which was argued in a calm and candid spirit, Dick vindicated the use of confessions but supported frequent revision of them and tolerance of minor disagreements. He was also a strong supporter of the foreign missionary movement, then in its infancy. 
Dick's reputation as a theological writer was established in his 'Essay on the Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments' (Edinburgh, 1800). This work, which derived from the dispute in the Secession church over continuing adherence to the Scottish covenants, advocated the doctrine of plenary inspiration; that is, that all parts of scripture, including both words and ideas, were written under the movement, direction, and assistance of the Holy Spirit. Dick accepted, however, varying kinds or degrees of inspiration depending on the subject matter or previous states of minds of the authors. His strong commitment to the principles of plenary inspiration explains his being chosen president of the Glasgow auxiliary of the British and Foreign Bible Society at the height of the 'Apocrypha' controversy, which arose largely over Scottish opposition to the society's preparedness to publish bibles containing the 'Apocrypha' for distribution on the continent. 
Dick's most influential work, published posthumously by his son, Andrew Coventry Dick, was his four-volume 'Lectures on Theology' (1834). This work was reprinted frequently and was also widely used in the Presbyterian churches in the USA. The work commences with fifteen lectures dealing with subjects such as Christian evidences and the doctrine of scripture, before moving on to cover the attributes of God, the Trinity, the divine decrees of creation, providence, and the fall of man and their execution, the covenant of grace, the mediator, the application of redemption, eschatology, and ecclesiology. The section on the mediator is particularly extensive, though it follows the traditional divisions of prophet, priest, and king. The subject of the means of grace receives extended attention, and the ten commandments are considered in the concluding lectures. While Dick held a high position on the doctrine of inspiration, and while as a result his confidence in revelation was absolute and allowed no trust in reason as a guide in religion, outside the area of revelation he was fearless in applying the test of reason to argue for what he termed 'natural theology'. By this he meant 'the knowledge of God which the light of nature teaches, or which is acquired by our unassisted powers, by the exercise of reason, and the suggestions of conscience'. He was careful to limit this, however, to inferring the existence of an invisible creator, and not to innate ideas of God. The leading Reformed theologians in America were well aware of this work and Archibald Alexander, president of Princeton College, rated it as the best systematic theology available in English. 
Dick continued actively in the ministry until his death, which occurred suddenly in Glasgow on 25 January 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 7595


Dick, Robert (1810/11-1866), geologist and botanist, was born, probably in January 1811, at Tullibody in Clackmannanshire, the second of four children of Thomas Dick, customs and excise officer at the Cambus Brewery, Tullibody; nothing is known about his mother. When Robert was ten his father married a Miss Knox, and the family moved to Dams Burn. He had begun his schooling at the Barony School, Tullibody, and after the move attended Menstrie parish school. Dick appears to have suffered under a jealous stepmother. He later wrote of these years: 'All my naturally buoyant, youthful spirits were broken. To this day I feel the effects. I cannot shake them off. It is this that still makes me shrink from the world' (Williamson, 6). It was largely through his stepmother's influence that plans for Dick to attend college were abandoned and, at the age of thirteen, he was apprenticed to a Mr Aikman, baker, of Tullibody. In some ways he was glad -- it was an escape from his stepmother's cruelty. 
Although his working day was long, Dick remained interested in study and read widely, with a particular interest in botany. He spared no expense in obtaining the finest examples of natural science volumes he could obtain. When his library was sold after his death, it consisted of a remarkable 389 volumes, and was sold for $32 12's'. Dick completed his apprenticeship in 1828, and worked for three years as a journeyman baker in Leith, Glasgow, and Greenock. He then went to Thurso in Caithness, where his father was customs supervisor, and opened a baker's business in Wilson's Lane. He continued to study and his interests widened to include geology and natural history in general. He began to create collections of rocks, insects, and plants; through collection and exchange he ultimately accumulated a near perfect British flora. He is credited with rediscovering, around 1834, the 'Hierochloe borealis', or northern holy grass, a plant which had been dropped from British flora. He later contributed an account of this to the Botanical Society of Edinburgh ('Ann. Nat. Hist.', October 1854). 
After Hugh Miller (1802-1856) published 'Old Red Sandstone' in 1841, Dick wrote to him and there followed a regular correspondence between the two. Dick was able to supply Miller with unique information and fine specimens of fossilized fish. Dick's information ultimately led Miller considerably to modify his 'Old Red Sandstone'. He reportedly wrote of Dick, 'He has robbed himself to do me service' ('DNB'). Although Dick himself was never published, this did not prevent him from becoming a recognized authority on the geology and natural history of Caithness. He ably and freely assisted Sir Roderick Murchison and a number of other scientists in their research. In September 1853 he met Charles Peach (1800-1886) and a friendship immediately developed. They would often go for walks together, and in time Peach came to know Dick better than any other; he wrote of his friend that he had a 'cheerful manner', a 'sparkling wit', and a 'frolicsome playfulness' (Williamson, 26). 
Dick's life was one of poverty, illness, pain, and extreme fatigue. He would often walk more than 50 miles between one baking and the next, eating nothing but a few pieces of biscuit. Competition and a loss of flour by shipwreck in Aberdeen harbour in March 1863 practically ruined him, and his last years were passed in great privation. He never married but for many years he employed one Annie Mackay, who served him faithfully until he died. She looked after him and his business, especially when he was away collecting flora and fauna. Although he was often solitary, his contemporary biographer wrote of him, that 'To those who knew him best he was cheerful and social. He had a vein of innocent fun and satire about him, and he often turned his thoughts into rhyme' (Smiles). His lifelong passion was the pursuit of knowledge of nature. Even when later in life he was crippled with rheumatism, he would spend hours hunting for fossils. 'I have nearly killed myself several times with over-exertion', he wrote ('DNB'). 
Dick died on 24 December 1866 at his home in Wilson's Lane, Thurso. His great public funeral was testimony to the growing public recognition of his achievements. It was, however, testimony too to the fact that those in Thurso, where he was buried, had never really been aware of the giant in their midst. Robert Dick had always been misunderstood by the community in which he lived. His manner of dress -- old and outdated -- his introverted nature, and his all-absorbing interest in nature, all contributed to his being seen as a figure of fun. But even though Dick was aware of this he never attempted to set the record straight, for, as he wrote, 'It is surely a strange time we live in when a poor devil cannot gather weeds without being made a nine days' wonder of some and a butt of derision of others' (Williamson, 12). 


@@@@@


doc= 7596


Dick, Sir Robert Henry (bap. 1786, d. 1846), army officer, was baptized on 6 August 1786 at Calcutta, the son of William Dick, assistant surgeon, and his wife, Charlotte McLaren. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (May 1846), when Henry Dundas and Edmund Burke were staying with the duke of Atholl at Dunkeld, while out walking they happened to meet a farmer's daughter, who gave them refreshment. She asked Dundas to help her fiance, the young Dr Dick, who was too poor to marry. Dundas gave him an East India Company assistant surgeoncy. Dick went to India, married, made a large fortune, and then retired and purchased the estate of Tullimet. Robert Dick, his son, entered the army as an ensign in the 75th regiment on 22 November 1800, and was promoted lieutenant into the 62nd on 27 June 1802 and captain into the 78th (Ross-shire buffs) on 17 April 1804. He accompanied the 2nd battalion to Sicily in 1806, and was wounded at the battle of Maida in the same year. In 1807 his battalion formed part of General Mackenzie Fraser's expedition to Egypt, and Dick was wounded again at Rosetta. He was appointed major on 24 April 1808, and exchanged into the 42nd highlanders (the Black Watch) on 14 July in that year. 
In June 1809 Dick landed in Portugal with the 2nd battalion of his regiment. He was then selected to form a light battalion of detachments from several regiments, which he led successfully in many battles and engagements, including Busaco and Fuentes de Onoro. After returning to his regiments he was present at Ciudad Rodrigo as senior major in the 2nd battalion, and commanded the 1st battalion at Salamanca and Burgos. For his services he was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 8 October 1812. He then returned to the 2nd battalion as the senior major and remained with it until the end of the Peninsular War, when he was made CB. 
The 2nd battalion was disbanded in 1814 and Dick accompanied the 1st battalion of the Black Watch to Flanders in 1815. He was present with it as senior major at Quatre Bras, where his commanding officer was killed and Dick was severely wounded in the hip and left shoulder. He nevertheless brought them out of action and was present next day at the battle of Waterloo. 
Dick's commission as lieutenant-colonel of the 42nd was antedated to the day of that great battle, as a reward for his valour. He was promoted colonel on 27 May 1825, and soon after went on half pay and retired to his seat at Tullimet, which he had inherited on his father's death. In 1832 he was made a KCH, on 10 January 1837 was promoted major-general, and in 1838 made a KCB. His wife, Elizabeth Anne Macnabb, died about 1830 leaving a son. Dick applied for re-employment after her death. In December 1838 he was appointed to command the centre division of the Madras army, and as senior general in the presidency he assumed its command-in-chief on the sudden death of Sir S. F. Whittingham in January 1841. This temporary post Dick held until September 1842, when the marquess of Tweeddale was sent as governor and commander-in-chief to Madras. As it was thought undesirable to send Dick back to a divisional command, he was transferred to the Bengal army. He took command of the division on the north-west frontier, but disagreement over an expected mutiny led to his removal by Lord Ellenborough, the governor-general, to the presidency division. He at once sent his resignation to the Horse Guards, but the authorities refused it. His old comrade, Sir Henry Hardinge, went out as governor-general, and the commander-in-chief, Sir Hugh Gough, also a Peninsula veteran, gave him command of the Cawnpore division. 
Dick was summoned by Gough in January 1846 to command the 3rd infantry division of the army in the field against the Sikhs, replacing Major-General Sir John M'Caskill, who had been killed at Mudki. Dick had missed the first two important battles of the First Anglo-Sikh War, but he played a leading part in the third and decisive victory of Sobraon. On the morning of 10 February 1846 Gough determined to attack the strong entrenchments of the Khalsa army, and Dick's division was ordered to head the assault. At 4 a.m. his men advanced to a ravine about 1000 yards from the Sikh entrenchments, and lay down while the British artillery bombarded the enemy. At 9 a.m. Dick led his 1st brigade into the Sikh entrenchments. When it had effected a lodgement he returned to lead his 2nd brigade. While leading it from battery to battery, taking them in flank, Dick was struck down by one of the last shots fired that day, and died at 6 p.m. His funeral the next day at Ferozepore was attended by the whole army, and Gough praised Dick highly in his Sobraon dispatch. 


@@@@@


doc= 7597


Dick, Thomas (1774-1857), writer on science and philosopher, was born on 24 November 1774 in the Hilltown of Dundee, the youngest of three children of Mungo Dick and Margaret Stroak. His father was a handloom weaver of moderate means who served as treasurer for the Bell Street church, meeting-house of Anti-Burgher Seceders. His mother taught him to read the 'Bible' before he entered school. By his own account he was a serious minded boy, given to imaginative, and at times disturbing, musings about the heavens and God. 
Inspired in 1783 by a spectacularly bright meteor, Dick embarked on a lifelong exploration of the heavens. He begged old spectacle lenses from neighbours, built a lens grinding machine and his own telescopes and microscopes, and resisted his parents' attempts to put him to the loom. Childhood attacks of smallpox and measles, together with his natural temperament, rendered him unfit for physical labour. In 1794 he entered the University of Edinburgh, supporting himself by private tutoring and by taking various teaching positions. He did not take the MA degree since it involved extra fees. 
In pursuit of his vocation Dick entered the Theological Hall of the General Associate Synod of the Secession church in 1801. Licensed the same year, he officiated as a probationer before being called to the Viewfield Anti-Burgher congregation of Stirling. Here he was ordained on 30 November 1803. On 26 August 1804 he married Elisabeth Aedie, and soon thereafter became moderator of the Stirling presbytery. In December 1805, however, the presbytery found him guilty of adultery with Betty Ker, his servant. He was deposed and excommunicated. When both his wife's and his servant's babies died soon after birth, he viewed it as God's just punishment for his transgression. 
Seeking to rehabilitate himself, Dick endeavoured to become a Christian philosopher in the tradition of Robert Boyle and others who had consecrated their pursuit of natural knowledge to the greater glory of God. He returned to teaching, becoming in 1807 a parish schoolmaster in Methven. During his ten years here, he formed a rudimentary mechanics' institute. To encourage others in this direction, he penned, in 1814-15, a series of articles for the London 'Monthly Magazine' which advocated the establishment of mechanics' institutes for the middle and lower classes. In 1817 he left Methven for Perth and a post as schoolmaster at Stewart's Free Trades' School. Along with teaching he made astronomical observations in the daytime, invented a new telescope which he termed an aerial reflector, and published articles in literary, religious, and scientific periodicals. 
The success of his 'Christian Philosopher, or, The Connection of Science and Philosophy with Religion' (1823) completed Dick's self-rehabilitation. Defining science as the study of God's revelation in nature, he declared that it had to remain inseparably intertwined with Christianity and that its pursuit was an expression of sincere piety and devout worship of God. Selling his copyright for $120, he retired from teaching in 1827 and had a house built on Fort Hill in Broughty Ferry, which he equipped with a rooftop observatory. His next two works, 'Philosophy of Religion' (1826) and 'Philosophy of a Future State' (1828), focused on theology. On the basis of his first three works Union College awarded him a doctorate of laws in 1832. Later works included 'On the Improvement of Society' (1833), 'Mental Illumination and Moral Improvement of Mankind' (1835), 'Celestial Scenery' (1837), 'Sidereal Heavens' (1840), 'Practical Astronomer' (1845), and three works on science and religion for the Religious Tract Society. Nearly all of these sold well, but Dick unwisely sold to his publishers, for comparatively small sums, the copyrights to all but one of his works. Three of his works were translated into Welsh, and one each into German and Chinese. They proved immensely popular in the United States, where collected editions sold in huge numbers into the 1880s. 
Viewed collectively, Dick's works, filled with devotional utterances and scriptural citations, espoused a God-praising theology of nature. Citing Christ's two great commandments they promulgated an eirenic protestantism -- tinged by evangelicalism -- to counter sectarianism, inhibit secularization, and advance the millennium. More radically, they argued that those who properly pursued science acquired heightened conceptions of God and a deeper understanding of his word and works which made them privileged as interpreters of the 'Bible' and as teachers of God's works in the hereafter. Those who possessed such expertise, Dick argued, deserved to be accorded the same respect and status as the most dignified clergymen. Fervidly espousing the plurality of worlds, Dick's works influenced David Livingstone and Edgar Allan Poe, among many others. 
Throughout his life Dick pursued numerous philanthropic, educational, and scientific interests. He directed the Watt Institute, Dundee's Mechanics' Institute, in 1830-31, and from 1835 to 1836 edited the 'Educational Magazine and Journal of Christian Philanthropy'. Capping his astronomical career was his election to the Royal Astronomical Society in 1853. A Christian pacifist, he wrote forceful articles denouncing slavery and war for American newspapers. 
Dick's first wife died some time before 1830. On 25 July 1830 he married Euphemia Young (died 1840), widow of Alexander Davidson (died 1826) and on 5 September 1841 he married Elizabeth Glegg (died 1874). His finances were severely strained partly as a result of his charitable activities, which included supporting a family of five orphans. In 1846 he applied for a government pension but was turned down. A surgical operation on his chest in 1849 left him weakened. Fortunately, the next year a local subscription fund provided him with $30 per year, and his American admirers collected a further $300 for him. Supported by the Royal Literary Fund from 1850 to 1853, he secured a civil-list pension for $50 per year in 1855. This was continued to his widow after his death at home on 29 July 1857. A 14 foot high obelisk in his memory was erected in 1860 at St Aidan's Church in Broughty Ferry, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 7598


Dick, Sir William, of Braid (d. 1655), merchant and financier, was the only son of John Dick, proprietor in Orkney and an Edinburgh town councillor in 1592-3. Nothing is known of his early life. On 15 June 1603 he married Elizabeth, sister of the wealthy Edinburgh merchant Harry Morison; they had at least seven children: John ('b'. 1604x7), Margaret ('bap'. 1608), Elizabeth ('bap'. 1609), Andrew (later Sir Andrew Dick of Craighouse), Alexander, Lewis ('b'. 1619, died before 1650), and William. By right of his father, on 28 March 1604 Dick became a burgess and guild brother. In 1609 he appeared in the records of Edinburgh council as witness to a case of kidnapping. Two years later he was elected for the first time to the town council, where he sat a further fifteen times, including four occasions as bailie, once as both treasurer and dean of guild, and twice as provost. 
In the space of thirty years Dick rose from a 'junior player' (Brown, 21) in Edinburgh mercantile circles to a position of 'vast wealth', incomparable to that of the rest of the mercantile population of Scotland (Dingwall, 18). By 1637 Dick alone was responsible for 4 per cent of the burgh's tax burden. His extraordinary wealth was founded on a variety of entrepreneurial activities. These included an investment of 150,000 merks in coal and salt works, herring works at Dunbar worth 60,000 merks, and a soap manufactory valued at 30,000 merks. His business interests were so extensive that by the 1630s Dick operated through a number of factors based in London, Paris, and Dieppe. His son Lewis later seems to have acted for his father in Paris, Bordeaux, and Rouen. 
Within Edinburgh, Dick became a proprietor of some significance, renting out five properties with a total annual income of $1122 13's'. 4died Scots in 1635 -- the highest rental in a town where the average was about $80. Dick's own house in Kintore's Close was certainly one of the most expensive rentals in Edinburgh, costing him $500 per annum. His business appears to have been conducted from a forebooth owned by Robert Glen, opposite the custom house at the top of the West Bow. Outside Edinburgh, Dick had interests in Caithness, Aberdeenshire, Moray, North Berwick in Haddingtonshire, Fife, and Orkney, either by directly holding land or through wadsetting. In 1631 he bought Braid in the sheriffdom of Edinburgh from David McCall and John Cant. It cost him $20,000, but by 1642 the estate was valued at $73,000. 
As Dick's fortune increased he became involved in moneylending. When James VI and I visited Scotland in 1617 Dick advanced $15,000 sterling for the king's expenses. He lent James Hamilton, second marquess of Hamilton, funds to facilitate the smooth passage of the king's legislation in the parliament of 1621, and his son and namesake, the third marquess, money for an unsuccessful military campaign in Germany in 1631. In 1624 Dick and a number of other merchants were examined by the Scottish privy council for charging exorbitant rates of interest, but this seems to have been only a temporary setback: his financial services for merchants and landowners alike seem to have placed him at the pinnacle of an increasingly sophisticated system of credit. 
Meanwhile Dick's political stature also grew. During the 1630s he sat on a number of committees affiliated to Edinburgh town council. All these positions relied not only on the personal wealth of the individual in office, but also on his business and accounting skills. In time Dick's political influence extended beyond Edinburgh, involving six appearances on the convention of royal burghs. Although in April 1621 he had refused to attend communion tables where recipients were kneeling, he was not among the capital's leading nonconformists, but in December 1637 he was one of three town councillors who met those opposing royal policy, assuring them of the council's support. When the national covenant was signed in February 1638 Dick replaced the royalist Sir John Hay as provost, and he remained in that office in the critical months through to 1640. He met the king's commissioner, the marquess of Hamilton, but refused to publish the king's proclamation which offered to pardon any 'rebels' who renounced the covenant, and according to Archibald Johnston of Wariston he was responsible for collecting voluntary contributions of money, gold, and silver from Edinburgh inhabitants. In March 1639 Dick lent 20,000 merks to the covenanters, with the political community as a whole acting as surety. In May, July, and August he sat on the commissions which co-ordinated Scotland's military action against Charles I and controlled the agenda for the parliament dissolved by John Stewart, earl of Traquair. He also expended $15,000 sterling on unspecified costs of the parliament, as he did again in 1641, when Charles attended in person. It was perhaps as part of the king's efforts to secure both favour and financial resources that Dick, like the current provost John Smith, was knighted, probably in December 1641. 
If so, Charles was to be disappointed: through the 1640s Dick continued to devote time and money to the covenanter cause. In 1644 he became a member of the committee of estates instituted to continue the work of parliament during its dissolution and served on the committees for money and for army magazines. In July that year he was, along with other Edinburgh town councillors, a commissioner for matters pertaining to the solemn league and covenant, signed in 1643 by the parliaments of Scotland and England. He also had local responsibilities as a commissioner for war in the sheriffdoms of Edinburgh, Haddington, and Linlithgow. The result, claimed Hugo Arnot in his 'History of Edinburgh' (1779), was that having originally 'flattered his vanity' by making Dick provost, the covenanters 'drained him of large sums, till, in the end, he died a beggar' (121-2). His disbursements during 'the late troubles of Church and State' cannot be accurately calculated, but as certainly resulted in Dick's 'irrevocable ruine' (BL, Add. MS 23116, fols. 49-50). The collapse of the Scottish credit system in the 1640s meant that his loan to the covenanters could not be repaid, while his own debts to the town council amounted to 26,000 merks in 1643. By 1647 he was forced to ask that some of those debts be discharged on account of them being 'ane voluntar died for the good of this Cittie' (Wood, 'Edinburgh Records', 1642-55, 120). Although Dick was granted the tack for the collection of the wine excise (shared with Archibald Campbell, first marquess of Argyll) and part of the 'brotherly assistance' from the English parliament (never fully paid), parliament acknowledged in 1648 that some 'sure and solide course' for Dick's reimbursement had to be found, and in May 1649 he complained that he was still disappointed 'of publict payment in Scotland and England' ('APS', vol. 6, pt 2, 45, 360). 
The degree and effect of Dick's financial difficulties at this point is difficult to gauge. He sat on the committee of estates numerous times between 1649 and 1651 and managed to find $10,000 sterling in response to Charles II's arrival in Scotland in 1650. When Oliver Cromwell occupied Edinburgh in October 1652 Dick led the delegation to greet him. However, this is the last year in which he appears in Edinburgh records, and it seems that within a few months he had departed for England to plead his cause in London. His finances were investigated by a committee at Whitehall in 1653, but a mere $1000 sterling was paid out to him by parliament that September. He apparently continued petitioning until he died in December 1655 at his Westminster lodgings. Contrary to popular belief, he was buried in the plot in Greyfriars churchyard, Edinburgh, which he had purchased fifteen years earlier. 
Dick's political prominence and the complexity of his financial dealings ensured that his affairs were not easily wound up. 'The Lamentable Estate and Distressed Case of Sir William Dick' (1657) printed correspondence from the mid-1640s illustrating his contribution to the war effort as well as striking woodcuts of Dick as a notable public figure on whom many people of lesser rank relied. The preface suggests that it was circulated in London; the text indicates that sympathetic presbyterians, along with the Scottish community there, were the intended audience. The pamphlet states that Dick was owed over $64,000, but a petition made by his son in 1661 claimed that the crown alone owed him $160,850 sterling. His testament was registered three times, in March 1681, September 1686, and July 1691. Years after Dick's death his heirs were still struggling to gain repayment. In December 1669 his grandson was given immunity from processes against him on account of Dick's debts. In March 1707 William Dick, ensign, petitioned parliament to reclaim the $36,803 5's'. 9died still owed by the public purse. It was William's assertion that various 'noble and worthy persons' collectively owed his grandfather a further 900,000 merks ('APS', 11, appx, 136-7), which were now irredeemable. 


@@@@@


doc= 7599


Dickens, Charles John Huffam (1812-1870), novelist, was born on 7 February 1812 at 13 Mile End Terrace, Portsea, Portsmouth (since 1903 the Dickens Birthplace Museum), the second child and first son of John Dickens (1785-1851), an assistant clerk in the navy pay office, stationed since 1808 in Portsmouth as an 'outport' worker, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Barrow (1789-1863). 
Dickens's father, John, was the younger son of William Dickens (died 1785) and Elizabeth Ball (died 1824), respectively butler and housekeeper in the Crewe family, who had married in 1781. Old Mrs Dickens was fondly remembered by the Crewe children as 'an inimitable story-teller' (Allen, 12). On 13 June 1809 John married Elizabeth Barrow; her father, Charles Barrow, was a senior official in the navy pay office who shortly afterwards had to flee the country, having been detected embezzling public money. John's genial and convivial personality, his air of gentility, his financial improvidence, and his fondness for grandiloquent phrases are all mirrored in Mr Micawber in 'David Copperfield'. Certain of these traits reappear in the character of Mr Dorrit ('Little Dorrit') where, however, they are presented much less sympathetically. Elizabeth seems to have had, like her husband, a lively and irrepressibly optimistic temperament and aspects of her personality have traditionally been identified in both Mrs Nickleby ('Nicholas Nickleby') and Mrs Micawber. 
The couple's first child, the musically talented Frances Dickens, always known as Fanny, was born in 1810 and was a much loved companion during Dickens's earliest years. In 1837 she married the singer Henry Burnett (1811-1893) and remained very dear to Dickens until her untimely death from consumption in 1848; he commemorated their childhood companionship in his journal 'Household Words' (6 April 1850) with a piece entitled 'A Child's Dream of a Star' ('Reprinted Pieces', 1858). John's and Elizabeth's other children, born after Charles, were: Alfred Allen, who died in infancy in 1814; Letitia Mary (1816-1893), who married the architect, civil engineer, and active sanitary reformer Henry Austin; Harriet, born in 1819, who died in childhood; Frederick William, always known as Fred (1820-1868); Alfred Lamert (1822-1860); and Augustus Newnham (1827-1866). Alfred Lamert was the only one of Dickens's brothers to make a satisfactory career for himself (as a civil engineer); in adult life the marital problems and generally feckless behaviour of both Fred and Augustus created annoyances for Dickens (as did the continued financial irresponsibility of his father) but he seems always to have retained some brotherly affection for them -- even for Augustus, who in 1857 deserted his blind wife and emigrated with another woman to Chicago, living openly with her there as 'Mr and Mrs Dickens'. 
After a two-year spell back in London working in Somerset House (1815-16), John Dickens was posted first, briefly, to Sheerness and then to Chatham, where he settled with his growing family at 2 Ordnance Terrace, a six-roomed house, advertised as 'commanding beautiful views... and fit for the residence of a genteel family' (Allen, 40). His income was rising but so were expenses. Two live-in servants were employed, one of whom, the teenage nursemaid Mary Weller, later gave Robert Langton her reminiscences of Dickens as a child. Dickens recalled his mother teaching him, 'thoroughly well', the alphabet and the rudiments of English and, later, Latin (Forster, 4). He and Fanny attended a nearby dame-school and later (1821?-1822?) he became a promising pupil at a 'classical, mathematical, and commercial school' run by the Revd William Giles, the son of a Baptist minister. By now the family had moved into a slightly smaller house, 18 St Mary's Place, perhaps as a result of John Dickens's increasing financial difficulties. These Chatham years were hugely important for the development of Dickens's imagination. His vivid, astonishingly detailed, memories of everything he experienced there, and of his voracious childhood reading (he was, Mary Weller recalled, 'a terrible boy to read'; Langton, 25), richly fed his later fiction and inspired some of his finest journalistic essays. Being 'a very little and a very sickly boy... subject to attacks of violent spasm' (Forster, 3), he was debarred from sporting activities, though he enjoyed games of make-believe with his friends and getting up magic-lantern shows, also performing (sometimes as duets with Fanny) comic songs and recitations with, according to Mary Weller, ''such' action and 'such' attitudes' (Langton, 26). John Dickens was proud of his children's singing talents which were sometimes publicly exhibited at the Mitre tavern in Rochester. This old city, which adjoins Chatham, with its ruined castle, ancient cathedral, and picturesque High Street, fascinated the young Dickens and was indeed 'the birthplace of his fancy' (Forster, 8). He loved dreamily watching the River Medway with 'the great ships standing out to sea or coming home richly laden' and all the other varied shipping described in the 1863 essay 'Chatham Dockyard' ('The Uncommercial Traveller'). Also, it was the little Rochester playhouse that gave him his earliest thrilling experiences of what became one of the master passions of his life, the theatre, as recalled, along with other aspects of the city, in another 'Uncommercial Traveller' essay, 'Dullborough Town': 'Richard the Third, in a very uncomfortable cloak, had first appeared to me there, and had made my heart leap with terror by backing up against the stage-box in which I was posted, while struggling for life against the virtuous Richmond.' He constantly read and reread the books in his father's little library -- the eighteenth-century essayists, 'Robinson Crusoe', 'The Vicar of Wakefield', 'Don Quixote', the works of Fielding and Smollett, and other novels and stories (most notably 'The Arabian Nights' and 'The Tales of the Genii'). These books made up that 'glorious host' that, as he wrote in the character of the young David when incorporating this real life material into chapter 4 of 'David Copperfield', 'kept alive my fancy' when life turned suddenly very bleak. Indeed, these books became fundamental to his imaginative world, as is clearly attested by the innumerable quotations from, and allusions to, them in all his writings. 
In 1822 John Dickens was recalled to London and the family squeezed itself into a smaller house at 16 Bayham Street in the very lower-middle-class suburb of Camden Town. This was a great shock to the young Dickens, who now began hearing much about his father's increasing financial problems. The abrupt termination of his schooling distressed him greatly. Money was found to send Fanny to the Royal Academy of Music but Dickens was left, as he once told his friend and biographer John Forster, to brood bitterly on 'all [he] had lost in losing Chatham' and to yearn 'to [be] taught something anywhere!' (Forster, 9). But he began also to be fascinated by the great world of London, transferring to it 'all the dreaminess and all the romance with which he had invested Chatham' and deriving intense pleasure from being taken for walks in the city, especially anywhere near the slum area of Seven Dials which invariably inspired him with 'wild visions of prodigies of wickedness, want and beggary!' (ibid., 11). Forster characterizes the boy's response to Seven Dials as 'a profound attraction of repulsion' (ibid.), a phrase that goes very much to the heart of the later Dickens's attitude towards grim, squalid, or horrific subjects. John's financial situation continuing to deteriorate, and a rather desperate attempt of Elizabeth's to establish a school for young ladies having failed utterly, he was committed to the Marshalsea debtors' prison on 20 February 1824 and was soon joined there by Elizabeth and the younger children. Employment had been found for Dickens by a family friend at Warren's blacking factory at Hungerford Stairs just off the Strand. There he pasted labels on blacking bottles for 6's'. a week, lodging first in Little College Street with a Mrs Roylance (on whom he modelled Mrs Pipchin in 'Dombey and Son') and later in Lant Street, Borough, closer to the prison. The deep personal and social outrage, and sense of parental betrayal, that Dickens experienced at the time was a profound grief that he never entirely outgrew, and an intense pity (also intense admiration) for his younger self was to be a mainspring of his fiction from 'Oliver Twist' to 'Little Dorrit'. In the fragmentary autobiography he wrote in the 1840s, and which Forster incorporated into his biography, he wrote: 'No words can express the secret agony of my soul as I sunk into this companionship [of 'common men and boys']... and felt my early hopes of growing up to be a learned and distinguished man, crushed in my breast. The deep remembrance of the sense I had of being utterly neglected and hopeless; of the shame I felt in my position; of the misery it was to my young heart to believe that, day by day, what I had learned, and thought, and delighted in, and raised my fancy and my emulation up by, was passing away from me, never to be brought back any more; cannot be written. (Forster, 26)' John Dickens left the prison on 28 May, having been through the insolvency court, and having also received a legacy from his mother, but his son seems to have remained working at the blacking factory for another nine or ten months (Allen, 103). He was finally taken away when John for some reason quarrelled with the proprietor. Elizabeth tried to arrange for the boy's return, for which Dickens never forgave her. John, however, had retired from the pay office on health grounds and was now receiving an Admiralty pension, and said that his son should go back to school. Dickens then became a day boy at the grandly named Wellington House Classical and Commercial Academy in the Hampstead Road, later depicting it and William Jones, its brutal and ignorant proprietor, in 'David Copperfield' ('Salem House') and 'Our School' ('Reprinted Pieces', 1858). From the day that he entered Jones's school until the day he died he told no one, his wife and his friend Forster alone excepted, about his time in the blacking factory, or about his father's imprisonment. His parents seem likewise to have maintained a total silence on the subject. The first that anyone, the general public or even his own children, knew about these things was when Forster published passages from his unfinished autobiography in the first volume of his 'Life of Charles Dickens' (1876). In March 1827 the Dickens family's finances were again in crisis and Dickens's schooling once more ended suddenly. At fifteen he began work as a solicitor's clerk, a humdrum occupation that he found unappealing, though his experiences at both the firms for which he worked (Charles Molloy of Symond's Inn, and Ellis and Blackmore of Raymond Buildings) provided good material for many passages of legal satire in his later sketches and fiction. During his leisure hours he greatly extended and deepened his knowledge of London, London street life, and London popular entertainments. A fellow clerk, George Lear, later recalled, 'I thought I knew something of the town but after a little talk with Dickens I found I knew nothing. He knew it all from Bow to Brentford' (Kitton, 131). 
By 1828 John Dickens, launched on a new career as a journalist, had established himself as a reporter on his brother-in-law's newly launched paper the 'Mirror of Parliament'. Dickens evidently also decided to try for a career in journalism as being -- potentially, at least -- a good deal more rewarding than drudging on at Ellis and Blackmore's on 15's'. a week (exactly Bob Cratchit's wages in 'A Christmas Carol'). By fierce application, entertainingly recalled in 'David Copperfield', he taught himself Gurney's system of shorthand, and in November 1828 left the lawyers' office to share a box for freelance reporters in Doctors' Commons rented by Thomas Charlton, a distant family connection. It was probably some time during 1829 that he first met a diminutive beauty called Maria Beadnell (1810-1886) and fell headlong in love with her. This passion was to dominate his emotional life for the next four years, causing him much torment, not so much because of the objections that Maria's prosperous banker father no doubt had about entertaining a struggling young freelance reporter as a prospective son-in-law, but because Maria herself seems to have been of a flirtatious disposition, so that Dickens could never be sure of her real feelings towards him. His steely ambition to make a mark in the world in one way or another was given a keener edge by his passionate desire to make her his wife. He sought to improve himself by reading in the British Museum (Shakespeare and the classics, English and Roman history), having applied for a reader's ticket at the first possible moment, just after his eighteenth birthday. Aware that he had a definite histrionic talent, he also considered the idea of a stage career and obtained (spring 1832) an audition at Covent Garden, but in the event a bad cold prevented him from attending and shortly afterwards came an opportunity to develop his journalistic career. During 1830 or 1831 he had begun to get work, perhaps as a supernumerary, on his uncle's paper and then in 1832 he was taken on to the regular staff of a new evening paper, the 'True Sun'. He rapidly acquired a reputation as an outstanding parliamentary reporter and, having inherited to the full his father's love of convivial occasions, pursued at the same time an energetic social life. In April 1833, anticipating a favourite activity of his later years, he organized some elaborate private theatricals at his parents' home in Bentinck Street. Shortly afterwards came the final cruel collapse of all hopes of winning Maria's heart. The intense pain this caused him left a permanent scar on his emotional life, although he was able to present Maria and his ardent youthful love for her in a comic-sentimental light in the Dora episodes of 'David Copperfield'. Many years later he wrote to her that 'the wasted tenderness of those hard years' had bred in him 'a habit of suppression... which I know is no part of my original nature, but which makes me chary of showing my affections, even to my children, except when they are very young' ('Letters', 7.543). 
In December 1833 Dickens's first published literary work appeared in the 'Monthly Magazine'; it was a farcical little story of middle-class manners called 'A Dinner at Poplar Walk' (later retitled as 'Mr Minns and his Cousin'). Over the next year it was followed, in the same periodical (the owner of which, a Captain Holland, could not offer any payment) by several other stories in a similar vein, for the sixth of which Dickens first used the pen-name Boz (derived from his little brother Augustus's mispronunciation of Moses, his Goldsmithian family nickname). Dickens's appointment, in August 1834, to the reporting staff of the leading whig newspaper, the 'Morning Chronicle', at a salary of 5 guineas per week, placed his career on a firm footing and he was soon distinguishing himself not only as a brilliant shorthand writer but also as a most effective and efficient special correspondent, reporting provincial elections and other events, and being exhilarated by the keen competition provided by the 'Times' correspondent. In September he began to contribute a series of 'Street Sketches', illustrative of everyday London life, to the 'Chronicle'. These attracted favourable notice and his offer to write, for extra pay, a similar series, twenty 'Sketches of London', for the newly founded sister paper the 'Evening Chronicle', was welcomed by that paper's editor, George Hogarth. The first, 'Hackney Coach Stands', appeared in January 1835 and the last, 'Our Parish (the Ladies' Societies)', in August 1835. Dickens then began yet another series, twelve 'Scenes and Characters', in 'Bell's Life in London'. The last of these, 'The Streets at Night', appeared in January 1836, to be swiftly followed by a collected two-volume edition, 'Sketches by Boz', published by John Macrone and illustrated by the renowned comic artist George Cruikshank. Dickens probably owed his introduction to Macrone and Cruikshank to William Harrison Ainsworth who had become a close friend, providing Dickens with his first entree into literary circles. The two-volume edition of 'Sketches by Boz', for which Dickens specially wrote two non-comic pieces, 'A Visit to Newgate' and 'The Black Veil', was extremely well received. The sketches were praised for their humour, wit, touches of pathos, and the 'startling fidelity' of their descriptions of London life (Collins, 'Critical Heritage', 30). Meanwhile, he continued with all his routine journalistic work and coped as best he could with his father's recurring financial crises, helped by close friends like his fellow journalist Thomas Beard, who was to remain a lifelong and much loved friend, and the young lawyer Thomas Mitton, who acted as his solicitor for many years. He took lodgings for himself and his fourteen-year-old brother Fred in Furnival's Inn, Holborn. By this time he had become acquainted with George Hogarth's family and had become attracted to the eldest daughter, Catherine (1816-1879), though without the passionate intensity that had characterized his love for Maria Beadnell, and he became engaged to her during the summer of 1835. Catherine was small and pretty like Maria, with blue eyes and brown hair -- also gentle, amiable, and proficient in many of the so-called 'accomplishments' expected of young ladies at this time. 
In February 1836, just after the appearance of the two-volume 'Sketches by Boz', two young booksellers who were moving into publishing, Edward Chapman and William Hall, approached Dickens to write the letterpress for a series of steel-engraved plates by the popular comic artist Robert Seymour depicting the misadventures of a group of cockney sportsmen, to be published in twenty monthly numbers, each containing four plates. They offered Dickens $14 a month for the work, an 'emolument' that was, as he wrote to Catherine, 'too tempting to resist' ('Letters', 1.129). He accepted the commission despite Ainsworth's warning that he would demean himself by participating in such a 'low' form of publication, but stipulated that he should be allowed to widen the scope of the proposed subject 'with a freer range of English scenes and people'. He then, he later recalled, 'thought of Mr Pickwick, and wrote the first number' ('Preface' to the 'Cheap Edition' of 'Pickwick', 1847). This appeared on 31 March 1836 and on 2 April Dickens and Catherine were married at St Luke's, Chelsea. They spent their honeymoon in the Kentish village of Chalk and then set up home in the new and more spacious chambers Dickens had taken in Furnival's Inn where he was already established. On 20 April Seymour committed suicide but the publishers boldly decided to continue the series, despite disappointing initial sales. Seymour was replaced, after the brief trial of R. W. Buss, with a young artist, Hablot Knight Browne (Phiz), who was Dickens's main illustrator for the next twenty-three years. In recognition of the fact that Dickens was now very much the senior partner in the enterprise, the number of plates was halved, the letterpress increased from twenty-eight to thirty-two pages, and his monthly remuneration rose to $21. With the introduction of Sam Weller in the fourth number sales began to increase dramatically and soon 'Pickwick' was the greatest publishing sensation since Byron had woken to find himself famous, as a result of the publication of the first two cantos of 'Childe Harold', in 1812. By the end of its run in November 1837 Dickens's monthly serial had a phenomenal circulation of nearly 40,000 and had earned the publishers $14,000, an appreciable amount of which would have stemmed from the fees paid by advertisers who supplied inserts or took space in the 'Pickwick Advertiser' that eventually occupied twenty-four extra pages each month. The depiction of the benevolent old innocent Mr Pickwick and the streetwise but good-hearted Sam Weller as a sort of latter-day Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, the rich evocation of that pre-railway, pre- 'Reform Bill' England that was so rapidly disappearing, the idyll of Dingley Dell, the sparkling social comedy and hilarious legal satire, the comic and pathetic scenes in the Fleet prison, the astonishing variety of vividly evoked and utterly distinct characters, the bravura wit and, above all, that 'endless fertility in laughter-causing detail' that Walter Bagehot later called 'Mr Dickens's most astonishing peculiarity' (Collins, 'Critical Heritage', 395) -- all these things combined to give 'The Pickwick Papers' a phenomenal popularity that transcended barriers of class, age, and education. Mary Russell Mitford wrote to an Irish friend, 'All the boys and girls talk [Dickens's] fun -- the boys in the street; and yet those who are of the higher taste like it the most.... Lord Denman studies 'Pickwick' on the bench while the jury are deliberating' (ibid., 36). 
Dickens could hardly have anticipated success on this scale or he would probably not have committed himself to so many other projects such as turning one of his sketches into a two-act 'burletta', 'The Strange Gentleman', as a vehicle for the comedian John Pritt Harley. It was successfully produced at the St James's Theatre (9 September 1836) and ran for fifty nights. He also wrote, under the pseudonym Timothy Sparks, an anti-sabbatarian pamphlet, 'Sunday under Three Heads', the precursor of many later attacks on what he saw as blatantly hypocritical and class-biased legislative proposals. By late October he had clearly decided that he would be able to live by his pen and resigned from his 'Morning Chronicle' post. Dickens was, in fact, grotesquely over-committed to publishers who were all eager to sign up the dazzling new literary star. He accepted Richard Bentley's invitation to edit a new monthly magazine, 'Bentley's Miscellany', to begin publication in the new year, being already committed to write two three-volume novels for Bentley, as well as a third novel, 'Gabriel Vardon, the Locksmith of London', for Macrone, and another (as yet unnamed) work of the same length and nature as 'Pickwick' for Chapman and Hall. He had been at work, with J. P. Hullah, on a rather vapid operetta, 'The Village Coquettes', which was produced at the St James's on 6 December but had only a short run, and throughout 1836 he had been publishing more sketches in the 'Morning Chronicle' and elsewhere, including some of his finest work in this genre, such as 'Meditations in Monmouth Street'. These sketches, together with earlier ones still uncollected, were gathered up in the one-volume 'Sketches by Boz: Second Series' published by Macrone on 17 December. This volume ended with an item written specially for it, a Grand Guignol piece called 'The Drunkard's Death'. About this time Dickens first met (probably through Ainsworth) John Forster, a young theatre critic, literary reviewer, and historian, who had moved to London from Newcastle and was already very much in the swim of the metropolitan literary world. Forster became one of Dickens's most intimate friends and his lifelong trusted literary adviser -- even to some extent collaborator, since from October 1837 he read everything that Dickens wrote, either in manuscript or proof -- as well as his chosen biographer. Forster's legal training and expertise made him an invaluable ally in Dickens's many disputes with publishers, the first of which was with Macrone to whom Dickens had sold the copyright of 'Sketches by Boz' as part of a deal to release himself from the promise to write 'Gabriel Vardon'. Macrone sought to profit from the success of 'Pickwick' by proposing to issue both series of the 'Sketches' in twenty monthly parts. Dickens strongly objected and tried through Forster's agency to dissuade Macrone. In the end, Chapman and Hall bought the copyright from Macrone for a substantial sum and themselves issued 'Sketches' in monthly parts from November 1837 to June 1839, with additional Cruikshank plates and with pink covers to distinguish the work from 'Pickwick' in its green monthly covers. At the conclusion of this serialization, the 'Sketches' were published in one volume, described on the title-page as a 'new edition, complete'. 
The first number of 'Bentley's Miscellany', edited by 'Boz' and with illustrations by Cruikshank, came out in January 1837 and in February appeared the first instalment of Dickens's new story, 'Oliver Twist, or, The Parish Boy's Progress', which ran in the journal for twenty-four months (during the first ten of which Dickens was also still writing a monthly 'Pickwick'). 'Oliver Twist' was originally conceived as a satire on the new poor law of 1834 which herded the destitute and the helpless into harshly run union workhouses, and which was perceived by Dickens as a monstrously unjust and inhumane piece of legislation (he was still fiercely attacking it in 'Our Mutual Friend' in 1865). Once the scene shifted to London, however, 'Oliver Twist' developed into a unique and compelling blend of a 'realistic' tale about thieves and prostitutes and a melodrama with strong metaphysical overtones. The pathos of little Oliver (the first of many such child figures in Dickens), the farcical comedy of the Bumbles, the sinister fascination of Fagin, the horror of Nancy's murder, and the powerful evocation of London's dark and labyrinthine criminal underworld, all helped to drive Dickens's popularity to new heights. But there was mounting tension between himself and Bentley because of the latter's constant interference with Dickens's editorial freedom and his quibbles over the extent of Dickens's own contributions. Bentley also irritated Dickens by pressing for the delivery of a new novel (that is, the 'Gabriel Vardon' originally contracted to Macrone, now renamed 'Barnaby Rudge'; Dickens, having bought himself out of the arrangement with Macrone, had now signed a contract for the book with Bentley). Sometimes the relationship temporarily improved, as in November 1837, when Dickens agreed to edit for Bentley the memoirs of the great clown Joey Grimaldi (published with an 'Introductory chapter' and a concluding one by Dickens, and wonderful illustrations by Cruikshank, in February 1838), but at last came a complete rupture and Dickens resigned the editorship of the 'Miscellany' in the January 1839 number. By the summer of 1840 he was fully committed to Chapman and Hall as his sole publishers, having gradually disentangled himself -- with their help, and that of Forster -- from all commitments to Macrone and Bentley, the latter now usually referred to by Dickens in very uncomplimentary terms ('the Vagabond', 'the Burlington Street Brigand', and so on). The promised 'Pickwick'-style work for Chapman and Hall, now carrying the very eighteenth-century style title of 'The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby', had begun its monthly part-issue in March 1838 and was completed in twenty numbers in October 1839. This story, which for thirteen months Dickens wrote alongside 'Oliver Twist', originated in his determination to expose the scandal of unwanted children consigned to remote and brutal Yorkshire schools; accompanied by Browne, he conducted an on-the-spot midwinter investigation just before beginning to write 'Nickleby'. In this rambling, episodic, often wildly funny book, written very much in the mode of the Smollett novels Dickens had devoured as a child, the Yorkshire school setting is soon left behind, and the gallant young hero and his pathetic protege, Smike, wander forth to undergo various adventures, both farcical and melodramatic; they are persecuted by Nicholas's wicked uncle and other villains, who also threaten the virtue of Nicholas's pure young sister Kate, but all is eventually set right by the benevolent Cheeryble brothers, though they cannot save Smike. The story is rich in unforgettable comic characters like the endlessly garrulous Mrs Nickleby and the strolling player Vincent Crummles and his troupe, and in places it resembles 'Sketches by Boz' in its vivid evocation of particular London neighbourhoods. 
Just before Dickens began 'Oliver Twist', he and Catherine had had their first child, Charles Culliford Boz Dickens (1837-1896), in January 1837, and had shortly afterwards moved from their Furnival's Inn chambers to a new house, 48 Doughty Street (now the Charles Dickens Museum); Dickens bought a three-year lease and paid $80 a year in rent. Staying with them was Catherine's younger sister Mary Hogarth, whose sudden death on 7 May, aged only seventeen ('Young, beautiful and Good' according to the epitaph Dickens composed for her headstone in Kensal Green cemetery), was a devastating blow to Dickens -- so great, indeed, that he had to suspend the writing of both 'Pickwick' and 'Oliver Twist' for a month, a unique occurrence in his career. He had lost, he wrote, 'the dearest friend I ever had', one who sympathized 'with all my thoughts and feelings more than any one I knew ever did or will', declaring also, 'I solemnly believe that so perfect a creature never breathed' ('Letters', 1.263, 629, 259). It was the third great emotional crisis of his life, following the blacking factory experience and the Beadnell affair, and one that profoundly influenced him as an artist as well as a man. 
In all other respects Dickens's life, both professional and personal, during the later 1830s became steadily more prosperous. The sales of 'Nickleby' 'were satisfactory -- highly so' (Patten, 98) and Chapman and Hall were happy to fall in with his plans for editing a weekly miscellany to be called 'Master Humphrey's Clock', for which he would receive a weekly salary of $50 as well as a half-share of net profits. He formed close and lasting friendships with many leading figures in the world of the arts, notably the 'eminent tragedian' William Charles Macready (always a particularly loved and honoured friend), the painters Daniel Maclise and Clarkson Stanfield, the lawyer and dramatist Thomas Noon Talfourd, and the poet Walter Savage Landor; he was elected to both the Garrick and the Athenaeum clubs, invited to Lady Blessington's salon, and lionized generally. He also became acquainted with Thomas Carlyle, whom he greatly revered, and who profoundly influenced his thinking on social matters. He once said, 'I would go at all times farther to see Carlyle than any man alive' (Forster, 839). Carlyle's first impression of Dickens was that he was 'a quiet, shrewd-looking, little fellow, who seems to guess pretty well what he is and what others are' ('Letters', 2.141). Maclise painted the twenty-eight-year-old Dickens's portrait as an elegant young writer and the portrait was engraved as the frontispiece to the volume edition of 'Nickleby'. At the end of 1839 the growing Dickens family (Mary, always known as Mamie, was born in 1838, Kate Macready in 1839) moved into a much grander house, 1 Devonshire Terrace, Marylebone, near to Regent's Park. Dickens paid $800 for an eleven-year lease and an annual rent of $160. From 1837 onwards the family spent several weeks each summer at the little Kentish resort of Broadstairs, later described in 'Household Words' as 'Our Watering Place' ('Our English Watering Place' in 'Reprinted Pieces', 1858). Here Dickens would entertain friends but would also continue working, dashing up to London from time to time for business or social occasions. 

'Master Humphrey's Clock' began publication on 4 April 1840. Initial sales were very large but quickly declined when the public realized the 'Clock' was not to be a continuous story. The reclusive old cripple Master Humphrey and his little club of old-fashioned story-tellers did not appeal to the public and even the reintroduction of Mr Pickwick and the Wellers failed to halt the sharp decline in sales. The woodcut illustrations by Cattermole and Browne dropped into the text that were such a feature of the 'Clock' made it an expensive product, so some prompt action was needed. Dickens quickly developed one of an intended series of 'Personal Adventures of Master Humphrey' into a full-length story and this, under the title 'The Old Curiosity Shop', soon took over the entire publication. The story of Little Nell's wanderings about England with her helpless old grandfather, fleeing from Quilp, a grotesquely hideous, anarchic, and sexually predatory dwarf, is the most Romantic and fairy tale-like of Dickens's novels, and it also contains, in the story of Dick Swiveller and the Brasses' little slavey, the Marchioness, some of the greatest humorous passages that Dickens ever wrote. By the end of the story's serialization in the 'Clock' (6 February 1841) the circulation had reached a phenomenal 100,000 copies. Nell's slow decline and eventual (off-stage) beatified death plunged this vast readership into grief and mourning, Lord Jeffrey famously declaring that there had been 'nothing so good as Nell since Cordelia' (Forster, 174). For Dickens himself it reopened an old wound: 'Dear Mary died yesterday, when I think of this sad story' ('Letters', 2.182). The 'Shop' was immediately succeeded in the 'Clock' by the long projected 'Barnaby Rudge', Dickens's first historical novel, dealing with the anti-Catholic Gordon riots of 1780 and written in conscious emulation of Scott. The Wordsworthian influence, evident in some parts of 'The Old Curiosity Shop', is also seen here in the conception of Barnaby which clearly owes something to Wordsworth's Idiot Boy as well as to Davie Gellatley in Scott's 'Waverley'. The completion of 'Barnaby' (27 November 1841) 'worked off the last of the commitments so hastily entered into in the heady days of 1836' (Patten, 118), ending five years of intensive labour which saw Dickens established as far and away the most popular writer in Britain, though he was somewhat bitterly aware that he was still making much more money for his publishers than for himself. The triumphal welcome he received in Edinburgh in June 1841, following an invitation to go there from Lord Jeffrey and other distinguished Scottish admirers, was a striking manifestation of the extraordinary public position this young writer now occupied. The dinner in his honour was, he told Forster, 'the most brilliant affair you can conceive' (Forster, 176). He himself spoke, in the two toasts he proposed, with notable effect and eloquence, as he was so often to do in later life as the star turn at other banquets, meetings, charitable dinners, and so on. Four days later he was given the freedom of the city, after which he and Catherine went on a scenic tour that took them as far north as Glencoe; they returned into England via Abbotsford in order to visit Scott's house. The history of Scott's being forced by financial circumstances in his later years to maintain a prolific output was in Dickens's mind when he now proposed to Chapman and Hall that, after the cessation of the 'Clock' on 27 November ('Barnaby Rudge' had not gripped the reading public in the way that 'The Old Curiosity Shop' had, and the magazine's circulation had fallen to 30,000), he should have a sabbatical year. By continuing to write incessantly he would, he feared, do 'what every other successful man has done' and make himself 'too cheap' ('Letters', 2.365). Wisely submitting to their hugely lucrative author's wishes, Chapman and Hall agreed to pay Dickens $150 a month for fourteen months as an advance on his profits from his next work (to be published in monthly numbers). He was soon being 'haunted by visions of America, night and day' (Forster, 195) and, Catherine's deep reluctance to leave the children having been overborne, resolved that they should make a six-months' tour there, the children to be left under Macready's care. He would keep a notebook on his travels, and Chapman and Hall should publish it on his return. His eager preparations for the trip, excited as he was by communications like Washington Irving's telling him 'it would be such a triumph from one of the States to the other, as was never known in any Nation' ('Letters', 2.383), were briefly interrupted by a painful operation for a fistula. He soon recovered, polished off the last numbers of the 'Clock' (the final number appeared on 4 December), and engaged in a whirl of pre-embarkation social engagements. 
On 4 January Dickens and Catherine embarked on the steamship 'Britannia' which, after a terrifying crossing, reached Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 19 January. Next day Dickens was both feted by the local dignitaries and cheered by crowds in the streets. He and Catherine then re-embarked and landed (on 22 January) at Boston, where they put up at the Tremont House Hotel. Exhilarated by his initial experience of America, Dickens soon began to find, however, that the surging crowds of admirers who intruded themselves on him and Catherine at all hours were both exhausting and frustrating, and the tremendous flood of correspondence that came pouring in on him was simply overwhelming. To help him cope with the situation he hired a young art student, George Washington Putnam, nicknamed 'Q', as his secretary and travelling companion. He had met Putnam when sitting for his portrait to Francis Alexander (he sat also, but this time for a bust, to another local artist, Henry Dexter). In Boston, Dickens carried out the first of those investigative visits to prisons, asylums, and other public institutions that became such a feature of his American journey, and he met many notables, among them the celebrated poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and Cornelius Felton, professor of Greek at Harvard, both of whom became much-loved friends. At a public banquet in his honour (on 1 February) he spoke with passion of having 'dreamed by day and night, for years, of setting foot upon this shore, and breathing this pure air' ('Speeches', ed. Fielding, 19) but also touched briefly on the vexed question of the absence of any international copyright agreement between Britain and America, allowing the wholesale pirating of his own and other British authors' work by American newspapers. He and Catherine went on to New York via Worcester, Massachusetts, Hartford, Connecticut, and New Haven. Speaking at another banquet in his honour in Hartford (on 8 February), he again referred to the international copyright question. In New York he and Catherine stayed at the Carlton House Hotel (from 12 February to 5 March). The whirlwind of celebrity continued to engulf them, its most spectacular manifestation being the great 'Boz ball' at the Park Theatre (on 14 February) which Dickens called 'a most superb affair' (Forster, 215). Shortly afterwards, however, lying ill in his hotel room, he wrote to Jonathan Chapman, mayor of Boston, 'I am sick to death of the life I have been leading here -- worn out in mind and body', and inveighed against the newspapers for attacking him over international copyright 'in such terms of vagabond scurrility as they would denounce no murderer with' ('Letters', 2.76-7). Press attacks on his 'mercenariness' and bad taste in speaking about money matters at gatherings in his honour were indeed often couched in crudely offensive terms. Dickens's romantic dream of America as a pure, free, 'innocent' land, untrammelled by the corrupt institutions and the pernicious snobberies and class hatreds of the Old World, was rapidly turning sour, and he resolved to decline all future invitations of a public nature. He and Catherine went on to Philadelphia, where he encountered Edgar Allan Poe, and where, despite his resolve, he found himself duped into holding a 'levee' at his hotel for 600 people. From there they went to Washington where Dickens saw congress in session and had a very low-key meeting with President John Tyler. During an excursion south to Richmond, Virginia, his increasing disillusionment with America was intensified by the shock and disgust he experienced at seeing slavery at first hand. From Baltimore he wrote to Macready, 'This is not the Republic I came to see. This is not the Republic of my imagination. I infinitely prefer a liberal Monarchy -- even with its sickening accompaniments of Court Circulars... to such a Government as this' ('Letters', 3.156). 
The travellers proceeded by rail, stagecoach, and (disconcertingly unhygienic) canal boat to Pittsburgh, then by steamboat down the Ohio to Cincinnati, thence to Louisville and Cairo (the horrible 'Eden' of 'Martin Chuzzlewit'), and then up the Mississippi (which Dickens thought 'the beastliest river in the world' (Forster, 259) to St Louis. After returning to Cincinnati, Dickens and Catherine headed north via Columbus, Ohio, to Buffalo and Niagara Falls, where they stayed from 26 April to 4 May. The falls impressed Dickens profoundly. He wrote of them, 'It would be hard for a man to stand nearer to God than he does here' and expressed a belief that the spirit of Mary Hogarth had 'been there many times, I doubt not, since her sweet face faded from my earthly sight' (Forster, 270). There followed a four-week tour in Canada, where Dickens felt considerably more at home than in America. He visited Toronto, Kingston, Montreal, and Quebec, and in Montreal took great delight in organizing, and participating in, some elaborate amateur theatricals involving the officers of the local garrison. Catherine also took a part and, Dickens wrote to Forster, acted 'devilish well, I assure you!' (ibid., 276). By now, however, both Dickens and Catherine were desperately homesick. She had proved herself, Dickens told Forster, 'a 'most admirable' traveller in every respect... has always accommodated herself, well and cheerfully, to everything... and proved herself perfectly game' (ibid., 266), but she could now no longer contain her eagerness to see the children again. The travellers returned to New York and, after a final expedition to see a Shaker village in Lebanon and to West Point, happily embarked on 7 June on a sailing packet (they had had enough of steamships), the 'George Washington'. They landed at Liverpool on 29 June and went straight on to London for an ecstatic reunion with the children. Hardly less joyous were Dickens's reunions with his friends Forster, Macready, Maclise, Stanfield, and others but he soon had to buckle down to the writing of his promised American travel book. The furore over international copyright continued, fed by a circular letter Dickens wrote on the topic (on 7 July) which got into American newspapers alongside a forged letter in which he was maliciously represented as branding America a country of gross manners and squalid money-making. There was copious and vehement editorializing about this seemingly clear evidence of Dickens's snobbishness and ingratitude. Against this background he wrote his promised travel book for Chapman and Hall, 'American Notes, for General Circulation' (2 vols.), which appeared on 19 October. In it Dickens praised many of America's public institutions but condemned the national worship of 'smartness' (that is, sharp practice), and attacked particularly the hypocrisy and venality of the American press. He also commented unfavourably on many aspects of American social life, notably the widespread habit of spitting in public, and, predictably, denounced slavery at some length. 'American Notes' sold well but attracted little favourable comment in Britain (Macaulay deemed it 'at once frivolous and dull'; Collins, 'Critical Heritage', 124) and, unsurprisingly, it met with a very hostile reception in the American press. Meanwhile, Dickens, having enjoyed the usual summer sojourn with his family in Broadstairs (now included as a permanent member of the family was his fifteen-year-old sister-in-law Georgina Hogarth), began turning his mind to the twenty-monthly-number novel he was contracted to write for Chapman and Hall. Having an idea, in the event not followed up, that he might open the story on the coast of Cornwall, he made what was evidently an exceedingly jolly expedition to that county together with Forster, Maclise, and Stanfield (from 27 October to 4 November). 

'Martin Chuzzlewit' was published in monthly parts from 31 December 1842 to 30 June 1844. Dickens thought it 'in a hundred points immeasurably the best of my stories' (Forster, 305), and declared that he felt his power more than ever before. And, indeed, this is the great transitional novel that leads from the dazzling farce and comedy of humours, the often powerfully effective melodrama and satirical episodes, the sometimes startling grotesquerie and the picaresque pleasures of the early fiction to the complex, resonant, carefully planned and structured masterpieces of Dickens's later years. He had for the first time a conscious overall design, 'to show, more or less by every person introduced, the number and variety of humours and vices that have their root in selfishness' (ibid., 291), and the superb 'humour' characters of Pecksniff and Mrs Gamp as well as the squalid murderer Jonas Chuzzlewit are all very much a part of this design, though they also transcend it. The early 1840s were a bad time for publishing, however, and sales were disappointing. Even Dickens's decision to send his hero to America in the sixth monthly number and his lively satirizing of American manners and institutions failed to push the circulation much above 20,000. Meanwhile, as a man with a highly active social conscience, and mindful always of that desperate time in his own childhood when he 'lounged about the streets, insufficiently and unsatisfactorily fed' and might so easily, he felt, have become 'for any care that was taken of me, a little robber or a little vagabond' (ibid., 28), Dickens was becoming ever more urgently concerned about the plight of the children of the poor. He was horrified by revelations in a parliamentary commissioners' report about the condition of children employed in mines and factories, and interested himself strongly in the ragged school movement, particularly in persuading the millionaire philanthropist Angela Burdett-Coutts (with whom he had been friendly since 1839) to give financial support to the Field Lane School in the area of London where he had earlier located Fagin's lair in 'Oliver Twist'. Disgusted by the squabbles between Anglicans, Catholics, and nonconformists that bedevilled the debate about public education, he joined the Unitarians, remaining a member for three or four years before returning to Anglicanism. In October 1843 he had the sudden inspiration of writing a Christmas story intended to open its readers' hearts towards those struggling to survive on the lower rungs of the economic ladder and to encourage practical benevolence, but also to warn of the terrible danger to society created by the toleration of widespread ignorance and actual want among the poor. The result, written at white heat, was 'A Christmas Carol: in Prose', published by Chapman and Hall on 19 December as a handsomely bound little volume with four hand-coloured illustrations by John Leech, price 5's'. This 'Ghost Story of Christmas', as it was subtitled, was a sensational success. The story of the archetypal miser Scrooge's conversion to benevolence by supernatural means, and the resulting preservation of the poor crippled child, Tiny Tim ('who did NOT die'), was greeted with almost universal delight (in the February 1844 number of 'Fraser's' Thackeray called it 'a national benefit and to every man or woman who reads it a personal kindness'). But it had been expensive to produce and Dickens's profits from it were very moderate. This so exacerbated the sorry state of his relations with Chapman and Hall (already strained by an unfortunate comment of William Hall's arising from the poor sales of the initial monthly numbers of 'Chuzzlewit') that he determined to break with them completely. He invited his printers, Bradbury and Evans, to become his new publishers and they -- somewhat reluctantly on account of their inexperience as publishers -- agreed. Dickens was further vexed by the highly unsatisfactory outcome of his prosecution of a cheap publishing concern for blatant piracy of the 'Carol' (he had long suffered from gross and widespread exploitation of his work by hack dramatists and gutter publishers). He won his case, but the pirates simply went bankrupt and he was left to pay his own costs. By May 1844 he had agreed with Bradbury and Evans terms by which they were to advance him a total of $3800 in return for a quarter-share in whatever he might write over the next eight years, including a successor to the 'Carol' for Christmas 1844. 
In July 1844 Dickens moved his entire household (a fifth child, Francis Jeffrey, had been born in January) to Genoa, having decided to live abroad for a year, partly as an economy (it was cheaper to live in the splendid Palazzo Peschiere in Genoa than in Devonshire Terrace), partly to escape the increasing demands on his time at home, and partly for the stimulus of new scenes. He made a midwinter dash back to London, via Venice and Milan, to read the 'Carol''s more overtly political successor, 'The Chimes', to Forster and a group of other friends, including Carlyle and Douglas Jerrold. During 1845 Dickens and Catherine travelled to Rome, Naples, and Florence, Georgina joining them in Naples (where they made a hazardous ascent of Vesuvius). In Genoa and elsewhere he became intensely involved in using, either directly or long-distance, the power of mesmeric healing he discovered in himself to alleviate the condition of Mme de la Rue, an Englishwoman who suffered great distress from hallucinations. This strange intimacy with Mme de la Rue caused Catherine considerable uneasiness, not surprisingly. Dickens's response was righteous indignation (eight years later, when he again met the de la Rues abroad, he wrote home to Catherine admonishing her that he thought it would become her now to write Mme de la Rue a friendly letter, which she obediently did). The Dickens family were back in London in July 1845 and Dickens energetically set about organizing a production of Jonson's 'Every Man in his Humour' to be given by a band of his literary and artistic friends, the Amateur Players. This took place on 21 September in a private theatre in Dean Street, Dickens's own virtuoso performance as Captain Bobadil winning many plaudits. He had an understanding with Bradbury and Evans that he might start a new weekly magazine jointly with them and he had canvassed Forster with the idea of one to be called 'The Cricket' (the title was revived a few months later for his third Christmas book, 'The Cricket on the Hearth'). In the event, however, it was Bradbury and Evans's new national newspaper the 'Daily News' that he agreed to edit. Liberal in politics and intended specifically to promote the railway interest, the paper first appeared on 21 January 1846. Even Dickens's phenomenal energy proved unequal to editing a national daily on top of all his other commitments, however, and he resigned on 9 February. But he continued to write for the paper, notably a series of 'Travelling Letters' (21 January - 11 March), describing his recent journey through France and sojourn in Italy, and five letters (23 February - 16 March) powerfully arguing against capital punishment. The 'Travelling Letters' formed the basis of his second travel book, 'Pictures from Italy' (published in May 1846 with four illustrations by Samuel Palmer), notable for its anti-Catholic bias, which was no doubt the reason for the withdrawal of the artist originally commissioned to illustrate it, Clarkson Stanfield. 
In June Dickens once again moved his whole household abroad (a sixth child, Alfred D'Orsay Tennyson, had been born in October 1845). This time he settled in Lausanne, where he quickly formed a congenial circle of Swiss and English friends, finished writing a version of the 'New Testament' intended solely for his children's use and not for publication (it was eventually published in 1934 under the title 'The Life of Our Lord'), and began work on his new novel 'Dombey and Son', published in twenty monthly numbers from 30 September 1846 to 31 March 1848. Though hampered by not being able to walk London's crowded streets (that great 'magic lantern', as he called it, so necessary to his imagination; Forster, 423), and also by having to write his Christmas book for 1846, 'The Battle of Life', he nevertheless made excellent progress with the novel. 'Dombey' 'was to do with Pride what its predecessor had done with selfishness' (ibid., 471) but was far more carefully planned and structured than 'Chuzzlewit' and is now recognized as one of the greatest of all his works. It is the first novel for which a full set of working notes and number-plans survives (in the Forster collection, Victoria and Albert Museum). It is also the first one to have an explicitly contemporary setting. The railway features strongly in the story, which is also much concerned with the fate of women in contemporary middle-class English society. From the start the sales of 'Dombey' were extremely good, outstripping those of 'Chuzzlewit' by 10,000 copies, and it is with this novel that Dickens's financial anxieties ceased and he began to be able to build up a solid prosperity. He moved the family to Paris for the winter of 1846-7, then back to London by March for the launch of the first collected edition of his works, the so-called 'Cheap Edition' (published in weekly, monthly, and volume form), the birth of Sydney Smith Haldiman Dickens (18 April), and more activity by the Amateur Players with the object of raising funds for a pension for Leigh Hunt. Dickens repeated his Bobadil triumph in performances of 'Every Man in his Humour' at Manchester and Liverpool (26, 28 July), and also took energetic leading roles in the various one-act farces played as afterpieces. As the writing of 'Dombey' proceeded Dickens was also devoting tremendous energy to the setting up of a home for homeless women, funded by Miss Burdett-Coutts, and intended for the rehabilitation of women who had fallen into prostitution or petty crime. Urania Cottage (named after Venus Urania) opened at Shepherd's Bush in west London in November 1847 and for the next ten years Dickens was very active in all aspects of its administration, in recruiting suitable inmates and arranging for their training in domestic skills, maintaining discipline, and in arranging for the sending of successful 'graduates' of the home to start new lives in Australia (as does the reclaimed prostitute Martha in 'David Copperfield') or South Africa. After finishing 'Dombey' Dickens once again threw himself into organizing, on behalf of a variety of good causes, many other performances by the Amateur Players (Shakespeare's 'Merry Wives of Windsor' with Dickens as Shallow being now added to the repertory) in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool, Edinburgh, and Glasgow. 
Beneath all the social whirl and charitable activities of Dickens's mid- to late thirties there seems to have lain a growing preoccupation with his earlier years, traces of which may be clearly seen in parts of 'Dombey'. He began (probably during 1847-8) writing his autobiography for posthumous publication but, according to his own later account, destroyed it when his narrative reached the episode of his love for Maria Beadnell since that was, he found, still a source of too much pain to him to allow him to describe it. If he did, in fact, burn the whole manuscript as he claimed, he must have begun the projected autobiography again later since Forster quotes extensively from an (apparently incomplete) manuscript near the beginning of his 'Life of Dickens', a manuscript that he (Forster) presumably subsequently destroyed. Dickens's fifth and last Christmas book, 'The Haunted Man' (1848), is preoccupied with memory and its relationship to the moral life, especially in the dealing with persisting memories of wrongs and sorrows. 
Dickens was evidently beginning to think of his next novel in 'Bildungsroman' terms -- that is, the story of a young man's life from infancy to maturity -- and named his sixth son ('b'. January 1849) after Henry Fielding 'in a kind of homage to the style of work he was now so bent on beginning' (Forster, 524). 'David Copperfield' (published 30 April 1849 - 31 October 1850), follows on naturally from all the foregoing. It is Dickens's first first-person novel (David as narrator calls it 'my written memory') and in it he draws, much more directly than hitherto, on events and people from his own personal life in 'a very complicated interweaving of truth and fiction' (ibid., 497). The misery of the blacking factory days (his notes for writing the number describing little David labouring in Murdstone and Grinby's bottling factory contain the poignant phrase 'What I know so well'), the details of his career as a young journalist, and the raptures of his love for Maria Beadnell are all presented with only the lightest fictional disguise. In depicting the Micawbers and their recurrent crises Dickens draws on the personalities and former financial problems of his parents. Although the novel's initial sales were rather lower than those of 'Dombey', 'Copperfield' received considerable critical acclaim and before long was widely held to be his greatest work. Undoubtedly it became for very many readers, then as now, his best-loved novel, an opinion in which Dickens himself coincided, calling it in a preface to the book of 1867 his 'favourite child'. 
During 1848-9 Dickens wrote frequently and, like all other contributors, anonymously for the distinguished radical weekly 'The Examiner', edited by Forster since 1847. He had earlier written several reviews for the journal but now supplied, besides further reviews, several fiercely polemical pieces on contemporary social issues such as the growth of ritualism in the Anglican church, the temperance movement's campaign, and the Tooting baby farm scandal (on which he wrote no fewer than four scathing articles). On 30 March 1850 appeared the first number of his own long-meditated weekly journal, 'Household Words', which he co-owned with Bradbury and Evans, Wills, and Forster (Dickens owned 50 per cent of the shares, the publishers 25 per cent, Forster 12.5 per cent, and Dickens's sub-editor William Henry Wills another 12.5 per cent). Dickens also received an editorial salary of $500 p.a. and payment for his own contributions. Wills was a highly efficient and resourceful sub-editor and was for the next eighteen years Dickens's trusted right-hand man and confidential man of business. 'Household Words' proclaimed itself at every opening as 'Conducted by Charles Dickens'; all non-fictional contributions, however, including his own, were published anonymously. The journal's weekly twenty-four double-columned, unillustrated pages cost 2died and featured a mix of informative and entertaining articles as well as social and political satire, and serialized fiction. Elizabeth Gaskell and Wilkie Collins were notable contributors in the fiction department and Dickens built up a young staff of regular general contributors such as G. A. Sala, Edmund Yates, and Henry Morley. He himself wrote many of his finest essays for 'Household Words', co-wrote others, and closely monitored all contributions, often revising them extensively, so that the whole journal was stamped with his personality and his views. From the outset the journal was a decided success, achieving in time a stable circulation of 38,500. Particularly popular were the special extra 'Christmas Numbers' (from 1851) which presented multi-authored seasonal stories with a large input from Dickens himself, including each year a different framework for the stories (his own contributions were collected, at first with those of others but later separated out on their own, as 'Christmas Stories'). Late in 1850 Dickens embarked on a project (ultimately unsuccessful) with Bulwer to establish a guild of literature and art to assist impoverished authors and artists. To help raise funds Bulwer wrote a drama, 'Not so Bad as we Seem', which was performed, with Dickens in the leading role, before the queen and Prince Albert (May 1851). 1851 was a difficult year in Dickens's domestic life. Catherine was afflicted by some kind of nervous trouble and Dickens settled her in Malvern with Georgina to try the water cure, visiting her there as often as he could; and there were also two deaths in the family. The first was that of John Dickens, after undergoing an agonizing bladder operation. Dickens was deeply moved by his father's death, and some years later told Forster that the longer he lived, the better man he believed John to have been. The second death was a poignant one, that of his eight-month-old daughter Dora, 'our poor little pet' as he called her ('Letters', 6.355). Dickens sent Forster to fetch Catherine home from Malvern together with a letter seeking to prepare her as gently as possible for being greeted on arrival with news of the baby's death by saying only that little Dora was very seriously ill and that he did not at all expect her to survive ('why should I say I do, to you my dear!'; ibid., 6.353). The letter strangely mingles tender concern for Catherine and strong exhortations to her not to abandon herself to grief. 
Dickens's increasing anxieties, and anger, about the social and political condition of England during the 1850s -- feelings exacerbated by the debacle of the Crimean War -- are evident from a number of fiercely satirical essays that he wrote for 'Household Words', as well as from his intensely anti-aristocratic and anti-monarchical 'Child's History of England' serialized in the journal (25 January 1851 - 10 December 1853). His feelings about public affairs find frequent expression in his letters, for example, when writing to Macready on 4 October 1855: 'what with flunkeyism, toadyism, letting the most contemptible Lords come in for all manner of places... reading the Court Circular for the 'New Testament' -- and bearing such positively awful slaver in the Papers as I saw the other day about a visit of Lord Palmerston's to Woolwich Arsenal -- I do reluctantly believe that the English people are, habitually, consenting parties to the miserable imbecility into which we have fallen, 'and never will help themselves out of it'. ('Letters', 7.715-16)' In his only direct intervention in politics (he always steadily refused the invitations he received to stand for parliament) Dickens joined the newly founded Administrative Reform Association and made a scorchingly scornful anti-government speech at its third meeting, on 27 June 1855. But it is above all in the three great novels of this decade -- 'Bleak House' (published in monthly parts, 1852-3), 'Hard Times' (serialized in 'Household Words', 1854), and 'Little Dorrit' (monthly parts, 1855-7) -- that his outrage and deep concern about the condition of England most powerfully manifest themselves. The satire of 'Bleak House' focuses on the obfuscations and delays of the court of chancery which result in widespread human misery and suffering, but the novel's complicated plot and centripetal organization bring into the picture a great cross-section of contemporary English society, from the aristocratic Dedlocks down to Poor Jo, a London crossings-sweeper, and reveal social injustice, stupidity, muddle, misguided and self-regarding benevolence, charlatanism, and gross irresponsibility pervading all areas of the national life. The court of chancery, 'most pestilent of hoary sinners', serves as the great emblem of this grim state of affairs. Writing at the height of his powers, Dickens adopts a virtuoso form of double narration, and the novel has since the middle of the twentieth century been widely acclaimed as his greatest work. 'Hard Times', set in the northern industrial town of Coketown (usually identified as Preston), is even more urgently topical (the subtitle appended when the book appeared in volume form was 'for these times') and was written, he told Carlyle when asking permission to dedicate the book to him, in the hope that it would 'shake some people in a terrible mistake of these days' ('Letters', 7.367). 'My satire', he told Charles Knight, 'is against those who see figures and averages, and nothing else -- the representatives of the wickedest and most enormous vice of this time' (ibid., 7.492); it is focused on the relentlessly factual, imagination-starving (or warping) educational system favoured by Mr Gradgrind, the embodiment of all that Dickens feared and detested in the theories of political economy and Benthamite utilitarianism. 'Little Dorrit', the saddest of all his novels and also, according to Shaw, 'a more seditious book than 'Das Kapital'' ('Shaw on Dickens', 51), brings together scathing criticism of the country's governing institutions (here represented by the all-powerful and all-pervading 'Circumlocution Office'), a vivid portrayal in the story of Mrs Clennam of the harshly Calvinistic version of Christianity that was so strong in Victorian culture, and a depiction of the public greed and gullibility that produces the frenzy of speculation associated with the activity of the swindling financier Mr Merdle, together with Dickens's deeper personal preoccupations about his childhood sufferings and his father's shaming imprisonment in the Marshalsea. Dickens's attack on the inefficiency and ineptitude of the aristocratic management of the Royal Literary Fund and his repeated but vain attempts, made with Forster and others, to reform it (1854-8) were another manifestation of his fierce exasperation at this time with the state of contemporary public life. 
The later 1850s were also a time of markedly growing tension in Dickens's private life. On the surface things seemed to continue as normal -- or, at any rate, as normal for Dickens. In November 1851 he had moved into an eighteen-roomed, porticoed mansion, Tavistock House, in Tavistock Square, paying $1524 for a 45-year lease. Catherine bore their tenth and last child, Edward Bulwer Lytton Dickens, in the following year, and the tradition of long family summer holidays was continued, but now across the channel in Boulogne rather than at Broadstairs. The Dickenses first visited Boulogne in 1852 and summered there in 1853, 1854, and 1856 (it is described as 'Our French Watering Place' in 'Household Words', 4 November 1854; 'Reprinted Pieces', 1858). But Dickens's growing restlessness was only partly assuaged by such things as his continued zealous labours for Urania Cottage, an autumn (1853) touring holiday in Switzerland and Italy with two younger friends, Wilkie Collins and Augustus Egg, and several rapturously received public readings of the 'Christmas Carol' in various provincial towns and cities for the benefit of local charities. He transferred his whole household to Paris for the winter of 1855-6, and in London busied himself with the organization of amateur performances in the schoolroom at Tavistock House of specially written melodramas by Wilkie Collins: 'The Lighthouse' in June 1855 and 'The Frozen Deep' in January 1857. In the latter play Dickens created a great sensation with his electrifying performance as the brooding hero Richard Wardour who fights his own murderous jealousy, ultimately sacrificing himself to save the life of his successful rival in love. Beneath all this frenetic activity ran an undercurrent of melancholy and gloom seemingly related, at least in part, to a growing dissatisfaction with Catherine. 'Why is it', he wrote to Forster early in 1855, 'that as with poor David [Copperfield], a sense comes always crushing on me now, when I fall into low spirits, as of one happiness I have missed in life, and one friend and companion I have never made?' Later he remarks, 'I find that the skeleton in my domestic closet is becoming a pretty big one' (Forster, 638-9). 
As if responding to a cue, Maria Beadnell, now stout Mrs Henry Winter and unseen by Dickens for at least ten years, chose this moment to get in touch with him again. Her letter affected him very powerfully, releasing a flood of passionate nostalgia for the great love of what he called his 'hobbledehoyhood'. He wrote her a series of ardent letters protesting, 'Believe me, you cannot more tenderly remember our old days and our old friends than I do', and responding to some suggestion from her with 'All that you propose, I accept with my whole heart. Whom can you ever trust if it be not your old lover!' ('Letters', 7.533, 544). When they actually met, however, Dickens, who had arranged matters so that they should be alone together, was immediately and totally disabused of his wildly romantic idea that the Maria of their 'old days', long cherished so fondly in his imagination, was now to be restored to him, and he quickly retreated into the forms of ordinary social acquaintance. Dickens the artist proceeded to make glorious, if somewhat cruel, novelistic capital out of this serio-comic episode by using the hapless Mrs Winter as a model for the character of the hilariously effusive Flora Finching, the hero's old flame in 'Little Dorrit'. For Dickens the man, however, the experience must surely have served to intensify his desolating sense of having always, in his emotional life, missed out on something very major, that now yearned-for 'one friendship and companionship' that he felt he had never made (obviously a friendship with a woman, one that combined a sexual charge with intellectual and temperamental compatibility). 
In March 1856 at a cost of $1700 Dickens purchased the pleasant but modest Georgian country house Gad's Hill Place, near Rochester, for use as a country home. It was a house he had admired on childhood walks with his father and John Dickens had told him he might come to own it one day if he 'were to be very persevering and were to work hard' ('The Uncommercial Traveller', 'Travelling Abroad'). This, his 'little Kentish freehold' as he liked to call it, was the first and only home that Dickens ever owned, and it was one in which he took great delight for the rest of his life. He loved to entertain friends there and was always devising 'improvements' to the property. At the time he acquired it, however, his marriage was well into its last, most intensely unhappy phase. The situation between him and Catherine was evidently becoming more and more strained. In a letter of 1854 to Miss Burdett-Coutts, Dickens had referred to a 'certain indescribable lassitude of character' in his eldest son that, along with 'tenderer and better qualities', Charley inherited from his mother ('Letters', 7.245), and it was about this time that 'an unsettled feeling greatly in excess of what was usual with [him]', which Forster claims to have observed in Dickens since 1852, 'became almost habitual' and he failed to find in his home 'the satisfactions which home should have supplied, and which indeed were essential requirements of his nature' (Forster, 635). 
It needed only some catalyst to precipitate a catastrophe and such a catalyst soon appeared. Professional actresses were needed to replace Dickens's daughters and Georgina Hogarth for some public performances of 'The Frozen Deep' in Manchester in July 1857 (part of the activities organized by Dickens to raise money for the family of the suddenly deceased Douglas Jerrold), and he secured the services of the well-known and highly respected actress Frances Eleanor Ternan ('nee' Jarman), and two of her three daughters, Maria and Ellen Lawless Ternan (1839-1914), who were just beginning in the profession. Ellen, always known as Nelly, was eighteen years old, pretty, fair-haired, and intelligent, and Dickens seems to have fallen headlong in love with her. He began very much to concern himself with her affairs and with the fortunes of the Ternan family generally. That autumn, accompanied by Wilkie Collins, he visited Cumberland and made an excursion to Doncaster, where Nelly and Maria were acting. He smuggled ecstatic but veiled references to Nelly into 'The Lazy Tour of Two Idle Apprentices', the account of their northern tour that he and Collins were jointly writing for serialization in 'Household Words'. He also included, in one instalment of the 'Tour', a bizarre short story about a man who, weary of his feeble, doting wife, literally wills her to death. Meanwhile, he was writing to Forster: 'Poor Catherine and I are not made for each other and there is no help for it... She is exactly what you know, in the way of being amiable and complying; but we are strangely ill-assorted for the bond there is between us. (Forster, 640)' For all her amiability, Catherine would surely have been much disturbed by her husband's sudden intense friendship with a pretty actress who was the same age as their younger daughter, and no doubt Dickens hotly resented this, much as he had earlier resented Catherine's distrust of his peculiar relationship with Mme de la Rue. According to some reports, matters were brought to a head by some jewels intended by Dickens as a present for Nelly being mistakenly delivered to Catherine instead. 
By the following spring Dickens, not content with having moved into a separate bedroom and having had the communicating door between it and his wife's room boarded up, had decided that he must have a legal separation from her and drove the arrangements for this ruthlessly forward. Infuriated by the rumours (no doubt about his relations with Nelly) being spread, apparently by Catherine's mother and her sister Helen, he insisted on their signing a retraction and also took the extraordinary step of publishing a statement about his domestic affairs in 'The Times' (7 June 1858) and in other papers, including his own 'Household Words' (12 June), imprudently asserting the innocence of a certain young lady unspecified. Scandal had been given further food to chew on when it had become known that Georgina Hogarth had chosen to stay with Dickens while Catherine, with only her eldest son for company and an income of $600 per annum, was resettled in a house in north-west London, and it may well have been his sister-in-law's reputation that Dickens was primarily seeking to protect. There then appeared in the English press, copied from the New York 'Tribune' of 16 August 1858, a private letter about the separation written by Dickens to Arthur Smith, manager of his public readings, in which he asserted that Catherine had no real love for her children, nor they for her, and hinted that she suffered from some mental instability. Dickens always strongly protested that this letter had never been intended for publication and referred to it as 'the violated letter', but his continued affectionate friendship for Smith (whom he had commissioned to show the letter 'to anyone who wishes to do him [Dickens] right') suggests that he cannot have been all that sorry that the letter had become public, and may even have connived at this. It was about this time that his attitude to Catherine suddenly changed to one of implacable hostility. She had, he told Miss Burdett-Coutts who was seeking to mediate between him and Catherine, caused him 'unspeakable agony of mind' and he wanted 'to communicate with her no more' ('Letters', 7.632). During the remaining twelve years of his life he wrote to her only three times, each time merely a terse response to a communication from her. 
Before the end of 1859 the pattern of Dickens's domestic and personal life for the remainder of his days was firmly set. Georgina Hogarth, helped by his adoring elder daughter Mary (Mamie), who never married, managed the household at Gad's Hill, to his entire and frequently expressed satisfaction. Georgina devoted herself primarily to the comfort and well-being of her illustrious brother-in-law and secondarily to the welfare of his younger sons, each of whom was early launched into the world, only one of them, Henry, being sent to university (Cambridge). Katey, Dickens's highly spirited and much loved younger daughter, married the artist Charles Collins, brother of Wilkie, in 1860, simply because, according to Gladys Storey, an intimate friend of her later years, she was eager to leave home after her mother's banishment (Katey is quoted as saying 'My father was like a madman when my mother left home.... He did not care a damn what happened to any of us'; Storey, 96). 
Mrs Ternan and her daughters settled in a substantial family house in Houghton Place, north-west London. The lease was, almost certainly, purchased for Nelly by Dickens in the name of her sisters Fanny and Maria in 1859; she took over the lease from them when she came of age the following year and retained it until 1901. She and her mother later lived in a cottage in Slough and then a house in Peckham, the rates in both places being paid by a 'Mr Tringham', generally assumed to have been Dickens. After he had sold the lease of Tavistock House in 1860, Gad's Hill was, as far as the public knew, Dickens's only domestic base. There is evidence, however, that he regularly visited Nelly in Houghton Place, as well as in Slough and Peckham, also that he spent time in France with her during the 1860s, staying in a small house in Condette, near Boulogne, that belonged to his former Boulogne landlord, M. Beaucourt-Mutuel (the lovingly portrayed 'M. Loyal Devasseur' of 'Our French Watering Place', 'Reprinted Pieces', 1858). The precise nature and history of their relationship -- whether, for example, she -- sooner or later -- became his mistress, as most biographers now assume, or whether his passion remained, for whatever reason, unconsummated -- remains a matter of debate. Storey was apparently told by Sir Henry Dickens in 1928 that Nelly had a son with Dickens but that the child died very young (Slater, 379; Storey, 94); no hard evidence for the existence of this ill-fated putative infant has so far come to light. 
One of the non-domestic casualties of Dickens's break with his wife was his friendship with Thackeray. The two men had known each other since 1836, when Thackeray had unsuccessfully proposed himself as a replacement illustrator for 'Pickwick Papers' following Seymour's suicide. They had been on friendly and sociable terms but never intimate, and found themselves on opposing sides in the so-called 'dignity of literature debate' (Dickens in his obituary of Thackeray in 'The Cornhill', February 1864, said he thought his fellow novelist 'too much feigned a want of earnestness' in his profession). After the great success of 'Vanity Fair' (1847-8) Thackeray was seen by many as challenging Dickens's novelistic pre-eminence, even though his sales never remotely approached those of Dickens's books; injudicious admirers on both sides tended to praise one writer at the expense of the other. When Thackeray heard gossip at his club blaming the break-up of Dickens's marriage on an intrigue with Georgina Hogarth, he said 'no such thing -- its with an actress' ('Letters and Private Papers of William Makepeace Thackeray', ed. G. N. Ray, 4 vols., 1945-6, 4.86). This, but not the original rumour, was reported to Dickens, enraging him. This rage no doubt lay behind his energetic championship of one of his 'young men', Edmund Yates, in the celebrated 'Garrick Club affair' of 1858. Thackeray demanded Yates's expulsion from the club for publishing a hostile account of Thackeray's conversational manner which he could have observed only at the Garrick and Yates was duly expelled. Dickens, who had intervened on Yates's behalf, angrily resigned from the club in protest and he and Thackeray ceased to be on speaking terms. There was no reconciliation until they chanced to meet each other at another club, the Athenaeum, late in 1863, just a few weeks before Thackeray's sudden death. 
By 1858 Dickens had many times exploited his considerable histrionic talents in giving enormously successful public readings of the 'Carol' and 'The Cricket on the Hearth' for charity, and he had long been under pressure to accept invitations to read for money. It was doubtless the combination, in the late 1850s, of his extreme restlessness and his need for increased income after buying Gad's Hill that persuaded him to embark on a series of paid weekly readings during the 1858 London season. This was much against advice from Forster, who considered it undignified for a great writer to present himself to the public as a paid performer, even of his own works. The first series of readings began on 29 April and the tremendous warmth of the audiences' response would certainly have reassured Dickens that he had not been at all damaged, in the eyes of his adoring readers, by the recent upheaval in his domestic life. He went on to tour a number of provincial English cities, as well as Edinburgh, Glasgow, Belfast, and Dublin, with a repertory expanded to include items drawn from 'Pickwick' (the Bardell trial), 'Chuzzlewit' (a piece centred on Mrs Gamp), and 'Dombey' ('The Story of Little Dombey'), as well as from various of the 'Christmas Stories' published in 'Household Words'. In Arthur Smith he had an efficient and highly congenial manager, on whom he could rely completely, and he had a full support crew as well. He stood behind a specially designed reading-desk, brilliantly illuminated by gaslights. Each item had been carefully prepared and intensively rehearsed so that he knew the texts by heart, 'performed' them rather than read them, and could introduce spontaneous variations in response to the reaction of a particular audience. 'He does not only 'read' his story; he 'acts' it', wrote one reviewer, 'Each character... is as completely assumed and individualised... as though he was personating it in costume on the stage' (Collins, 'Readings', lix). Everywhere he met with triumphant success and tremendous enthusiasm on the part of his overflowing audiences. The American writer Moncure D. Conway commented that at the end of one of his readings 'it was not mere applause that followed, but a passionate outburst of love for the man' (ibid., xxii). It was striking, and no doubt deeply gratifying, evidence for his belief that his relationship with the British public was a very 'particular' one -- 'personally affectionate and like no other man's' (Forster, 646). 
Other provincial tours followed in the autumn of 1859 and in the autumn and winter of 1861-2 with more items added to the repertory, including a sensational 'Copperfield' reading which became a favourite with both Dickens and his audiences (though the top favourites always remained the Bardell trial from 'Pickwick' and the 'Carol'). Arthur Smith's untimely death in 1861 was a severe blow and Dickens gave only two short seasons of readings in London in 1862 and 1863 (there were also three very well-received 'charity' readings at the British embassy in Paris in January 1863). He had found it a strain to perform while also continuing to write a novel ('Great Expectations') so there were no more readings during the time he was writing 'Our Mutual Friend' (spring 1864 - winter 1865). But in 1866 he contracted with the music publishers and concert promoters Chappell & Co. for a series of thirty readings in London and elsewhere. Chappell undertook all the business side of the performances and paid Dickens a fee of $50 per night (which by 1870 had risen to $80 per night); the firm also appointed a manager for the readings, George Dolby, who became a trusted friend and confidant of his 'Chief' as he called Dickens. Another tour of England and Ireland took place during January-May 1867, preparatory to taking the readings to America. 
When, in 1859, Dickens decided to publish a statement in the press about his personal affairs he expected that Bradbury and Evans would run it in 'Punch', which they also published. He was furious when they, very reasonably, declined to insert 'statements on a domestic and painful subject in the inappropriate columns of a comic miscellany' (Patten, 262). He therefore determined to break with them completely and to return to his old publishers Chapman and Hall. Bradbury and Evans's co-operation was needed, however, for the launch of the elegant 'Library Edition' of Dickens's works (twenty-two volumes published, 1858-9; re-issued with illustrations and eight more volumes, 1861-74). But Dickens forced the dissolution of 'Household Words', owned jointly by himself and Bradbury and Evans, and the last number appeared, despite all the hapless publishers' efforts to prevent the closure, on 28 May 1859. Dickens, meanwhile, had begun publishing, from 30 April, a new weekly periodical with the same format and at the same price as 'Household Words' called 'All the Year Round'. Wills continued as his sub-editor and he and Dickens were the sole proprietors, Dickens owning 75 per cent of the shares as well as the name and goodwill attached to the magazine. While maintaining the tradition of anonymity for all non-fictional contributions, 'All the Year Round' differed from its predecessor in various ways, not least in its greater emphasis on serialized fiction. A new instalment of the current serial stood always first in each weekly number, and Dickens editorially proclaimed 'it is our hope and aim [that the stories so serialized in the journal] may become a part of English literature' ('All the Year Round', 2.95). 
Dickens himself inaugurated the series in spectacularly successful fashion with his second historical novel, 'A Tale of Two Cities' (serialized from 30 April to 26 November 1859), the basic plot of which was inspired by the story of the self-sacrificing lover Richard Wardour (Dickens's role) in 'The Frozen Deep'. In this novel, the second half of which takes place during the French Revolution, Dickens set himself the task, he told Forster, 'of making 'a picturesque story', rising in every chapter with characters true to nature, but whom the story itself should express, more than they should express themselves, by dialogue', glossed by Forster as meaning that Dickens would be relying 'less upon character than upon incident' (Forster, 730, 731). In its tightly organized and highly romantic melodrama and the near-absence of typical 'Dickensian' humour and humorous characters, 'A Tale of Two Cities' certainly stands apart from all his other novels, although -- as in his earlier historical novel -- one of the great set pieces of the book is the anarchic destruction of a prison, an event to which Dickens's imagination responded with powerful ambiguity. Thanks partly to this new Dickens story, and partly to a vigorous advertising campaign organized by Wills, 'All the Year Round' had an initial circulation of 120,000. Wilkie Collins's sensationally popular 'sensation novel' 'The Woman in White' followed 'A Tale of Two Cities' in the serial slot, contributing not a little to the maintenance of the magazine's impressive circulation figures. These eventually settled down to a steady 100,000 with an occasional dip but soaring always (up as far as 300,000) for the special 'extra Christmas Numbers'. Dickens eventually wearied of this latter feature, however, and killed it off after 1867. 
Compared with 'Household Words', 'All the Year Round' features far fewer journalistic pieces by Dickens himself, the 'Uncommercial Traveller' essays (see below) notwithstanding, and it has a much greater focus on topics of foreign interest, notably the struggle for Italian unification, and much less concern for the political and social condition of England than the earlier magazine. Nor could it be quite so topical as 'Household Words' since every issue had to be finalized a fortnight before its due publication date, Dickens having contracted with the New York publishers J. M. Emerson & Co. to send them stereotype plates of every issue in order to ensure its simultaneous appearance on both sides of the Atlantic (an arrangement later somewhat modified). 
On 28 January 1860 Dickens began contributing to his new journal a series of occasional essays in the character of the Uncommercial Traveller. They were discontinued when he began work in earnest on 'Great Expectations' (1 December 1860 - 3 August 1861) and not resumed until 2 May 1863 (carrying on until 24 October 1863). The 'Uncommercial Traveller' essays, which feature some of the finest prose ever written by Dickens, take sometimes a quasi-autobiographical form, with reminiscences of childhood, like 'Nurse's Stories' or 'Dullborough Town' (that is, Rochester), and are sometimes examples of superb investigative reporting, notably of lesser-known aspects of life in London; yet others focus on the process of travel itself, in its many various forms. As for his fictional writing, Dickens had intended his next novel to be published in the old twenty-monthly-number 'green-leaved' format but changed plans when Charles Lever's 'A Day's Ride', which followed 'The Woman in White', failed to hold readers' interest and caused a perceptible drop in the circulation figures. Dickens assured Forster that 'The property of 'All the Year Round'' was 'far too valuable, in every way, to be much endangered' by this development (Forster, 733); nevertheless he was determined to take no risks and so 'struck in' with his new story, 'Great Expectations', the second of his novels to be written wholly in the first person, now replanned as a weekly serial. The circulation figures promptly recovered and in this chance way (at least, as regards its format) there came into being the story that for many critics (and for many 'common readers' too) represents the very highest reach of Dickens's art as a novelist -- even with the revised ending that Bulwer Lytton persuaded him to write in order to avoid too starkly sad a conclusion to this masterfully structured and brilliantly written story of money, class, sex, and obsessive mental states with, for the first time ever in Dickens's major fiction, a protagonist who is unambiguously working-class. The novel was published in three volumes unillustrated, Dickens probably recognizing that Browne's style had not really kept pace with the development of his own novelistic art, as was evidenced by the feebleness of the illustrations Browne supplied for the volume edition of 'A Tale of Two Cities'. 
The gestation of Dickens's last completed novel was 'unusually prolonged and frustrating' (Schlicke, 434). For at least three years before mid-January 1864 when he was at last able to report to Forster that he had actually begun writing, he had been struggling to get started, turning over notions for situations and characters jotted down in a book of memoranda that he had been keeping for some time (ed. Kaplan, published New York Public Library, 1981); many of these notions were used in the novel as it finally took shape. Two family deaths occurred in 1863. The first was that of Dickens's second son, Walter, who died in India, and the second that of his mother. Dickens grieved for his son (but, bleakly, did not communicate with Catherine, who must have been quite as grief-stricken) but it is not difficult to sense a continuing hardness of attitude towards his mother as she sank gradually into increasing senility. He wrote in a grimly comic vein to a woman friend of how 'the impossibility of getting her [his mother] to understand what is the matter, combined with her desire to be got up in sables like a female Hamlet, illumines the dreary scene with a ghastly absurdity that is the chief relief I can find in it. ('Letters', 9.287)' For 'Our Mutual Friend' he reverted to his traditional form of publication in twenty monthly numbers (May 1864 - December 1865) and at first felt 'quite dazed', he told Wilkie Collins, by the return to 'the large canvas and the big brushes' (ibid., 10.346). The illustrator chosen for the work was the orphaned son of an old artist friend, young Marcus Stone, who worked in the sentimental-realist style of 1860s book illustration, quite different from the caricatural style of Cruikshank and Browne. The novel with its panoramic treatment of contemporary society, complex plotting, scathing social satire, and masterly emblematic art recalls both 'Bleak House' and 'Little Dorrit'. It differs from these predecessors in a number of important ways, however. Most notably, both of the love stories at the heart of the book (the earlier novels each have only one main love story) end on a very positive note, neither involving retreat from the city as in the case of Esther and Alan Woodcourt in 'Bleak House', nor yielding themselves up to it as in the case of Little Dorrit and Arthur Clennam in 'Dorrit'. 'Our Mutual Friend' had a mixed reception (the young Henry James's harshly dismissive review in 'The Nation' is notorious) but its stock has risen dramatically in recent years and it is now generally regarded as one of his very greatest works. While writing it Dickens, travelling back from France with Nelly Ternan and her mother, was involved in a serious railway accident at Staplehurst on 9 June 1865, in which ten people died. Dickens himself was unhurt but very badly shaken, not only by the accident itself but also by the experience of working for hours afterwards among the injured and the dying and trying to alleviate their sufferings, mainly by administering brandy to them from the bottle and a half which 'by an extraordinary chance' he happened to have with him (ibid., 11.61). Nelly seems to have been among those who were only slightly injured and presumably she and her mother were got away to London as quickly as possible. She is often referred to as 'the Patient' in Dickens's letters thereafter. 
From the outset of his public readings career Dickens had been contemplating the possibility of an American tour, but he dreaded the long separation from Nelly and then the outbreak of the civil war put the whole idea out of the question. By May 1867, however, the attractions of America as what he had once called 'a golden campaigning ground' ('Letters', 5.396) had become very strong indeed in the face of his ever-increasing expenses; he wrote that he began to feel himself 'drawn to America, as Darnay in 'A Tale of Two Cities' was attracted to the Loadstone Rock, Paris' (Forster, 707). Dickens appointed George Dolby as his tour manager and sent him across the Atlantic on a reconnaissance expedition and, after receiving a favourable report and being feted at a grand farewell banquet, himself left for the States. The tour began in Boston on 2 December 1867 and ended in New York on 20 April 1868, two days before he sailed for home aboard the 'Russia'. Harsh weather, a punishing schedule, and the often enormous American auditoria made the tour a severe ordeal for Dickens who was suffering from 'a truly American catarrh' and exhaustion, as well as from lameness resulting from 'a neuralgic affection of the right foot', aggravated by his insistence on walking long distances in deep snow whenever possible. He seems to have nourished a hope that Nelly might come to America (she had cousins in Newburyport, Massachusetts, and perhaps considered visiting them) but this was soon given up, and he had to content himself with sending her letters via Wills with covering messages such as 'Another letter for my Darling enclosed' ('Letters', 11.528). He did, however, receive most devoted support and tender care from Dolby, and also from his American publisher James T. Fields and Fields's charming wife, Annie. Dickens and Annie clearly shared a strong bond of mutual affection, and she seems to have been sensitive to the pain and trouble that lay beneath his sparkling public persona ('it is wonderful', she wrote in her journal, 'the fun and flow of spirits C.D. has for he is a sad man'; Curry, 44). Despite constant troubles with ticket touts and continued hostility from some sections of Dickens's old enemy, the American press, the tour was a most triumphant success (neither sickness nor exhaustion ever prevented Dickens from turning in a great performance at the reading-desk) and netted him over $19,000, a sum which might have been much greater if he had not in his distrust of American currency insisted on changing his dollars into gold at a 40 per cent discount. 
While in America, Dickens published in the 'Atlantic Monthly' (January-March 1868) a hauntingly strange first-person narrative, 'George Silverman's Explanation', which has yielded rich food for biographical criticism, and in 'Our Young Folks' (January and March-May 1868) 'Holiday Romance', four stories for children purportedly written by children. All these stories also appeared in 'All the Year Round'. Back in England and recuperating from the strenuous tour, he postponed starting a new novel and concentrated on planning a long farewell tour partly in London and partly in the provinces. This began in London on 6 October 1868. Now included in Dickens's repertory was a highly sensational new reading derived from 'Oliver Twist' (the murder of Nancy), the performance of which became almost an obsession with him despite warnings by doctors and friends that it was adversely affecting his health. In fact, by late April 1869 he had become so unwell that his doctors ordered him to abandon the tour. Anxious to compensate Chappells for the loss they had sustained, he prevailed on his doctor to allow him to present a final series of twelve readings in London (January-March 1870). He famously ended the last of these by saying, 'From these garish lights I vanish now for evermore with a heartfelt, grateful, respectful and affectionate farewell' ('Speeches', ed. Fielding, 413). On 9 March he was received in audience by Queen Victoria, who recorded that he 'talked of the division of classes in England which he hoped would get better in time. He felt sure it would come gradually' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', ed. G. E. Buckle, 2nd ser., 1926-8, 2). On 5 April Dickens presided in sparkling form, as he had done many times before, at the annual dinner of the Newsvendors' Benevolent Institution and on 30 April replied to the toast to 'literature' at the Royal Academy banquet, paying an eloquent and heartfelt tribute to his old friend Maclise whose sudden death just a few days before had greatly shaken him. 
In April also there appeared the first instalment of Dickens's new novel, 'The Mystery of Edwin Drood', set mainly in Rochester ('Cloisterham') and planned for publication in eleven monthly instalments, the last one to be a double number. It was to be a murder story, 'the originality of which was to consist in the review of the murderer's career by himself at the close, when its temptations were to be dwelt upon as if, not he the culprit, but some other man were the tempted' (Forster, 808). It was the culmination of Dickens's lifelong fascination with the demeanour and psychology of murderers and he was, his daughter Katey remembered, 'quite as deeply fascinated and absorbed in the study of the criminal Jasper as in the dark and sinister crime that has given the book its title' (''Edwin Drood' and the last days of Charles Dickens', 'Pall Mall Magazine', June 1906, 644). 'Drood' was very favourably received, selling 10,000 more copies than 'Our Mutual Friend' and showing in its descriptive passages, Forster believed, that Dickens's 'imaginative power was at its best' (Forster, 808). The story was to have been illustrated by Katey's husband, Charles Collins, but ill health compelled him to withdraw after designing the monthly-part cover and he was replaced by Luke Fildes. Dickens lived long enough to complete only six numbers of the novel, and soon a whole 'Drood' 'industry' (which still flourishes today) grew up, concerned with providing a plausible solution to the mystery. Dickens was working on 'Drood' in his little Swiss chalet (the gift of his actor friend Charles Fechter) in the garden at Gad's Hill on the morning of 8 June 1870, the day on which he later suffered a stroke from which he died the following day. An alternative oral tradition about how Dickens died is quoted by Claire Tomalin in her 'Invisible Women' (new edn, 1999). According to this account, he suffered his stroke while visiting Nelly in Peckham and was taken, in an unconscious state, by her in a closed cab to Gad's Hill, where she delivered him into Georgina's care. His wish to be buried 'in the small graveyard under Rochester Castle wall' (Forster, 855) was overridden by a national demand that he should rest in Westminster Abbey where he was accordingly buried on 14 June, in the strictly private ceremony that he had so forcefully enjoined in his will. 
Dickens was survived by his repudiated wife for nine years, during which time Catherine preserved, in public at least, a dignified silence about their marital history, though she did when dying ask her younger daughter to give her collection of letters from Dickens to the British Museum, 'that the world may know he loved me once' (Storey, 164). Dickens was also survived by eight of his children. His eldest son, Charley, died leaving seven children in 1896, the same year as Mamie who died unmarried. Katey, who had some success as a painter, exhibiting regularly at the Royal Academy, had one son with her second husband, another artist, Carlo Perugini, but the child died in infancy and Katey herself died in 1929. Francis died childless in America in 1886, after serving for twelve years in Canada with the North-West Mounted Police. Alfred emigrated to Australia, married twice, and in 1910 returned to England to begin a successful career lecturing on his father and his books, dying suddenly in New York in 1912, survived by two daughters from his first marriage (both of whom died unmarried). Sydney, a naval cadet, died at sea in 1872, leaving no children; Henry became a High Court judge and a knight of the realm and died, leaving children, in 1933; and Edward (always known as Plorn), who married and became a member of the parliament of New South Wales, died in Australia childless in 1902. The numerous direct descendants of Dickens alive today all trace their descent from their illustrious ancestor either through Charley's line or through Henry's. 
From a very early period of Dickens's career many of his great comic and/or grotesque characters took on a life of their own in the culture (both high and low) of the English-speaking world and have ever since been recognized and referred to by people who may well have never read a single Dickens novel. This resulted from his extraordinary ability to create, and give unforgettably expressive names to, figures who are highly individualized by their physical appearance, dress, and mannerisms, and who are also powerfully allegorical, being brilliant incarnations of various aspects of perennial human nature. Mr Pickwick and Sam Weller, Oliver Twist asking for more, the Artful Dodger, Fagin, Sikes and the murder of Nancy, the death of Little Nell, Scrooge and Tiny Tim, Mr Pecksniff, Mrs Gamp, Uriah Heep, Mr Micawber hourly expecting something to turn up and Mrs Micawber refusing to desert him -- these are some of the main Dickens characters and scenes that have been, and continue to be, drawn on over and over again by advertisers, illustrators, cartoonists, journalists, politicians, and public speakers generally throughout the English-speaking world to point a moral or adorn a tale, to satirize or to celebrate some contemporary figure or state of affairs. After Shakespeare, Dickens is probably the most quoted writer in English and, indeed, the names of certain characters, Bumble and Scrooge, for instance, have become part of the language itself. The same is true of the adjective 'Dickensian' which, depending on the context, is used to mean one of three things: festive or jolly (a Dickensian Christmas, for example); squalid or antiquated (as in 'a Dickensian slum' or 'to work in positively Dickensian conditions'); characters so idiosyncratic and improbable as to seem to belong in a Dickens novel ('a truly Dickensian waiter'). 
The general concept of Victorian London derives in great measure from Dickens's elaborate, haunting descriptions of labyrinthine courts and alleyways, quaint old buildings, fogs, gaslight, and teeming street life; and tourists still come to the capital from all over the world eager to discover and experience 'Dickens's London'. Nor is such topographical enthusiasm confined to the capital. 'Dickens's England' in general has also always been attractive to tourists, strongly drawn as they are to places closely associated with either his life or his books; an early classic of this kind of tourism was William Hughes's 'A Week's Tramp in Dickens-Land' (1891). Pre-eminent in this respect are the Kentish towns of Broadstairs and Rochester, both of which have for many years held an annual 'Dickens festival', Rochester having the additional advantage of proximity to Gad's Hill Place and to 'the 'Great Expectations' country' of the Kentish marshes. 
At his death Dickens was regarded by the great mass of his contemporaries not simply as a great writer but also as a great and good man, a champion of the poor and downtrodden, who had striven hard throughout his whole career for greater social justice and a better, kinder world. It was this perception of him as much as relish for his literary art that inspired the founding of the international Dickens Fellowship in 1902, intended, according to its stated aims and objects, to 'knit together in a common bond of friendship lovers of the great master of humour and pathos, Charles Dickens', to spread the love of humanity ('the keynote of all his work'), to campaign against those 'social evils' which would most have concerned him, and to help preserve buildings and objects associated with him. This organization still flourishes today and still engages in charitable work, though it now approximates more closely to a conventional literary society. It has over forty autonomous branches throughout the English-speaking world (with, currently, others in France, Holland, and Japan), it elects the majority of the board of trustees governing the Charles Dickens Museum, 48 Doughty Street, London (which it saved from threatened demolition in 1923 and opened to the public two years later), and since 1905 it has published a journal called 'The Dickensian', devoted to the study and discussion of all aspects of Dickens's life, work, and reputation and the monitoring of his public image. 
The perception of Dickens as a great good man underwent a marked change after 1934 when the first revelations about his relationship with Nelly Ternan were published in the 'Daily Express' by the biographer and literary antiquary Thomas Wright (Nelly herself had quietly married six years after Dickens's death, had become the mother of two children, and had died in 1914). The continuing fascination with Dickens's connection with her (every twenty or thirty years a new book about it appears, and it is constantly being excitedly rediscovered by the media) attests to the unique position occupied by Dickens in contemporary Anglo-American culture. Despite his broken marriage and the periodic re-investigations of the Ternan affair, he is still very much an icon of those traditional domestic and social virtues often assumed to have been part of 'Victorian values', his universally recognizable image as a bearded great Victorian having appeared for several years on British $10 notes; and he is forever inextricably associated with Christmas cheer and seasonal charitable feelings. 
For some seventy years following Dickens's death there was a marked gap between his enormous and unfailing popularity with ordinary readers and the attitude towards him of the highly cultured, including members of the academic world. As George Ford showed in his 'Dickens and his Readers' (1955), admirers of George Eliot and Meredith tended to dismiss Dickens as 'vulgar' and lacking in artistic merit, an attitude that persisted into the Bloomsbury-dominated criticism of the 1920s and 1930s. Writing on Dickens in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' (1888), Sir Leslie Stephen commented: 'If literary fame could safely be measured by popularity with the half-educated, Dickens must claim the highest position among English novelists', and Aldous Huxley made Dickens and the death of Little Nell his prime example in his 'Vulgarity in Literature' (1930). Dickens and his art did, however, have a magnificent champion during the early decades of the last century in the bulky shape of G. K. Chesterton, now generally acknowledged to be the greatest Dickens critic of all time, but it was not until the American cultural critic Edmund Wilson, responding to the Ternan revelations and invoking Freudian theory, argued for a much more complex interpretation of Dickens's personality and art in his seminal essay 'Dickens: the two Scrooges' (in 'The Wound and the Bow: Seven Studies in Literature', 1941), that a truly seismic shift began in high-cultural and academic attitudes towards Dickens. Where Chesterton had celebrated above all the comic splendours of the earlier Dickens novels, Wilson directed readers' attention towards the later, 'darker' works. Important studies by George Orwell (in his 'Inside the Whale', 1940) and Humphry House ('The Dickens World', 1941) further encouraged a total and wide-ranging revaluation of Dickens by literary critics and academic professionals, as did the first full-scale scholarly biography by Edgar Johnson (1952), the pioneering textual work of John Butt and Kathleen Tillotson ('Dickens at Work', 1957), and the American literary scholar J. Hillis Miller's hugely influential 'Charles Dickens: the World of his Novels' (1958), a rereading of many of the novels in the light of the phenomenological theory of Georges Poulet. Even F. R. Leavis, who in 1948 had, very magisterially and influentially, excluded all Dickens, apart from 'Hard Times', from 'the great tradition' of the English novel, underwent a conversion and in 'Dickens the Novelist' (1970) joined forces with his wife, Q. D. Leavis, to praise him as one of the greatest writers of all time. From the second half of the twentieth century Dickens has been, and continues to be, the subject of innumerable academic treatises and conferences (including an annual week-long gathering at the 'Dickens Universe' in the University of California at Santa Cruz). A never-ending stream of editions of his novels has poured from the press, alongside books and scholarly articles investigating and variously interpreting all aspects of his life and work, and major scholarly editions of his speeches, letters, and journalism. The Dickens Society of America (founded 1970) publishes the 'Dickens Quarterly', originally the 'Dickens Studies Newsletter'. Once again, the only comparison is with the great proliferation of all branches of Shakespeare studies in recent decades. Meanwhile, Dickens continues to be widely read by non-academic readers, many of them nowadays perhaps turning to his books for the first time as a result of seeing film or television adaptations. 
From the time of 'The Pickwick Papers' onwards, Dickens found his phenomenal popularity being extensively exploited, with complete immunity under the law, by theatrical hack writers such as William Moncrieff and Edward Stirling who produced (often very crude) dramatized versions of his books for the London theatres. Such versions were frequently staged with clumsily inept endings even before Dickens had finished writing his novel. They provided splendid roles for star actors, like W. J. Hammond whose Sam Weller in Moncrieff's 'The Pickwickians' (1837) was hugely popular, or O. Smith who played Scrooge in Stirling's 'A Christmas Carol' (1844), and they generally drew large audiences so were popular with both actors and managers. No fewer than seventeen different adaptations of 'The Cricket on the Hearth' appeared on the London stage within a month of the book's publication (December 1845). Although, as Philip Bolton shows in his 'Dickens Dramatised', the spate of Dickens dramatizations diminished somewhat after the mid-century, Bolton, writing in 1987, is nevertheless able to list some 3000 dramatic adaptations of the novelist's work for stage, screen, and radio, at the same time acknowledging that this must be a very incomplete reckoning. For there has never been a period when Dickens's work has ceased to interest dramatizers and actors. Jennie Lee, a Victorian actress, made a whole career out of playing the title-role in her husband J. P. Burnett's 'Jo, or, Bleak House' (first produced in 1876), and Sir John Martin-Harvey played Sidney Carton for over forty years in a hugely successful adaptation of 'A Tale of Two Cities' called 'The Only Way' (first produced 1899). The music-hall artist Bransby Williams, who was celebrated from 1896 onwards for his impersonations of Dickens characters, lived long enough to perform them on radio and even television. In 1951 Emlyn Williams impersonated Dickens himself in a one-man show based on Dickens's public readings. This proved enormously popular all over the world and he continued to present it until he died nearly forty years later. More recent successes in this line have been Patrick Stewart's one-man performance of 'A Christmas Carol' in London during the 1993-4 Christmas season, and Simon Callow's 'The Mystery of Charles Dickens', scripted by Peter Ackroyd, author of a widely acclaimed biography of Dickens, at the Albery Theatre, London, in 2000-01. Both these productions were indebted to Dickens's public readings style. Stewart actually used a reading-desk similar to that used by Dickens himself, and Callow had earlier performed several of Dickens's reading texts on BBC television before a studio audience. Highly successful also was Miriam Margolyes's one-woman show 'Dickens's Women' (1991, Duke of York's Theatre, London) in which Margolyes introduced and performed a remarkable range of Dickens's female characters. At the other end of the theatrical spectrum from one-man shows, Lionel Bart's 'Oliver!', first produced in 1960, very frequently revived, and brilliantly filmed by Carol Reed in 1968, must be regarded as one of the most successful musicals of all time. The Royal Shakespeare Company's tremendously popular epic production in 1982 of an eight-hour version of 'Nicholas Nickleby', scripted by David Edgar and with thirty-nine people in the cast, was another landmark in the history of Dickens on stage. 
Dickens was a great standby of the early film industry and a profound influence on the legendary Hollywood director D. W. Griffith, as famously discussed in Sergey Eisenstein's 'Dickens, Griffith and the film today' (in 'Film Form: Essays in Film Theory', 1949). A number of silent films were made of Dickens's novels, notably by the British film-maker Thomas Bentley in the second decade of the twentieth century. The arrival of the talkies reproduced the situation created by the nineteenth-century theatre with many cinematic versions of Dickens's novels built around star actors: MGM's 'David Copperfield' (1934), for example, starring W. C. Fields as Micawber, and the same studio's 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1935) starring Ronald Colman as Sydney Carton; Paramount's 'A Christmas Carol' (1935) starring Sir Seymour Hicks as Scrooge; and, in Britain, Renown's 'A Christmas Carol' (1951) starring Alastair Sim as Scrooge and J. Arthur Rank's 'A Tale of Two Cities' (1958) starring Dirk Bogarde as Sydney Carton. Since the Second World War dozens of Dickens films have been made in Britain and America; two, directed by David Lean, stand out as real masterpieces: 'Great Expectations' (1946) and 'Oliver Twist' (1948). The latter is not simply a vehicle for star actors (though it has a superb cast), but a totally successful, highly imaginative translation of Dickens's novel into another medium, as is also the Portuguese director Joao Botelho's striking screen version of 'Hard Times' ('Tempos dificeis, este tempo', 1988), set in contemporary Portugal and filmed in black and white. Compared with the rarity of successful stage or film versions of Dickens's novels, there have been, since the 1940s, scores of very good radio and television serializations of the books, mainly on the BBC, something that should come as no surprise given that the stories were themselves originally conceived of as serials and published in this form. Outstanding among more recent adaptations have been 'Bleak House' (1985), scripted by Arthur Hopcraft, 'Martin Chuzzlewit' (1994), by David Lodge, and 'Our Mutual Friend' (1998), by Sandy Welch. 
There can be few other English writers -- apart, of course, from Shakespeare -- with such widespread influence as Dickens, not only on their successors in the national literature, but also on major foreign writers, and few have been the subject of so many outstanding treatises by foreign critics. Gissing, Shaw, Wells, Conrad, Joyce -- these are among the most distinguished of late nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century writers whose work shows clear signs of Dickens's influence without any of the slavish imitativeness shown by the great tribe of avowedly 'Dickensian' writers like William De Morgan. Gissing also wrote some outstandingly good criticism of Dickens. The most celebrated examples of great foreign writers profoundly influenced by Dickens are Dostoyevsky (in his 'Two Scrooges' essay Edmund Wilson noted the irony that 'The Bloomsbury that talked about Dostoevsky ignored Dostoevsky's master, Dickens') and Franz Kafka. The intense and abiding admiration felt for Dickens by Turgenev and Tolstoy is also well documented. And, as Ada Nisbet amply demonstrated in her Dickens chapter in Lionel Stevenson's 'Victorian Fiction: a Guide to Research' (1964), the presence of Dickens has been clearly traced in writers as various, and from as varied backgrounds, as Hans Christian Andersen, William Faulkner, Proust, Fontane, Benito Galdos, and Strindberg, and a number of communist Chinese authors. The great Japanese novelist Soseki Natsume (1867-1916) is another outstanding example she might have cited. Nisbet also surveys the wealth of foreign (non-English-speaking) critical response to Dickens, with important and substantial studies by critics as distinguished as Hippolyte Taine, Wilhelm Dibelius, Stefan Zweig, and Mario Praz. And today there exists, as has been indicated above, a mighty international academic industry centred on Dickens, demonstrating, in a way that the gasman who accompanied Dickens on his readings tours could hardly have imagined, the truth of his fervent praise of his great 'Chief': 'The more you want out of the Master, the more you will get out of him.' 


@@@@@


doc= 7600


Dickens, Charles Culliford Boz (1837-1896), magazine editor and compiler of guidebooks, was born on 6 January 1837 at 15 Furnival's Inn, London, the eldest of the ten children of Charles John Huffam Dickens (1812-1870), the novelist, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Hogarth (1816-1879). Charley, as he was known, received his string of names as a result of an accident at the baptism -- Culliford was the maiden surname of Dickens's grandmother, but Boz was added by his grandfather John Dickens, who shouted it out after the baby's godfather had said the officially chosen names. 
Charley Dickens's education was sponsored by Angela Burdett-Coutts, with whom his father worked on several philanthropic projects, and who took an interest in his young son. He was sent to King's College School, and from there to Eton College, where his father reported that 'Charley... who has already distinguished himself like a Brick, at Eton -- got a prize -- been declared at the head of his division, and floored all the boys therein' ('Letters', 6.71). But to Burdett-Coutts he confessed some misgivings about the young boy's character: 'all he wants, is a habit of perseverance. With that, he could do any thing. He wants it as a fixed purpose and habit of his nature' (ibid., 6.467). In 1853 Charley Dickens visited Leipzig to learn German, and in 1854, as he vacillated about his career choices, Dickens's reservations again came to the fore. These were expressed in a letter which also perfectly illustrates the particular burden upon Charley as Dickens's eldest son and namesake: 'I think he has less fixed purpose and energy than I could have supposed possible in my son. He is not aspiring, or imaginative in his own behalf... he inherits from his mother... an indescribable lassitude of character -- a very serious thing in a man' (ibid., 7.245). 
In 1855 Charley Dickens returned to England to a post in Barings Bank, but it was not to his taste. During his four years at the bank he became involved in his parents' messy separation, and in 1859 agreed with his father that, as eldest son, he would live with his mother. In 1860, partly financed by Burdett-Coutts, he embarked upon a trip to China, also visiting Hong Kong, Shanghai, and Japan, aiming to set up as a tea merchant. It is likely that Dickens based 'Great Expectations' character Herbert Pocket, in the original manuscript a merchant with interests in China, partially upon his son. 'It is possible too that Herbert's 'conquered languor', despite his usually cheerful spirits and briskness, which Pip feels denotes a lack of natural strength, owes something to Dickens's critical assessment of his own son' (Caldwell, xxvii). 
On 18 August 1861, having returned to England, Charley Dickens established a paper-making company with his future brother-in-law, Frederick Moule Evans. He married Elizabeth Matilda Moule (Bessie) Evans (died 1907) on 19 November 1861, at St Mark's, Regent's Park, London. His father, who had had an unresolvable quarrel with Bessie's father, F. M. Evans, did not attend the wedding, and he also warned his son against entering into a business that had Evans as a major shareholder, and Evans's son as a director. One year later Charley and Bessie Dickens had their first of eight children. 
After seven years the printing partnership failed, and Charley Dickens was made bankrupt. His father gave him a job working on his periodical 'All the Year Round' late in 1868, and in 1869, when W. H. Wills's ill health prevented him from carrying on as sub-editor for the journal, Charley Dickens took over, being installed officially in the post in May 1870. Dickens thought he 'evince[d] considerable aptitude in sub-editing work' ('Letters', 12.378), although he had earlier stated that Charley had 'no literary bent or taste' (ibid., 8.119). By a codicil to his will on 2 June 1870 his father bequeathed to him his share and interest in 'All the Year Round'. Charley argued with Wills about salary and duties, and they agreed in January 1871 to dissolve the partnership, with Charley paying Wills $500 for his interest, leaving Charley Dickens as the sole proprietor and editor of the periodical. Sales of the weekly journal steadily fell during Charley's editorship; he proved unable to attract the same quality of serial novels that his father had commissioned through his literary contacts and influence. The character of the journal also changed, and 'might... be best expressed as a decline from an important literary force to a 'woman's magazine'' (Casey, 91). It remained successful enough, however, for Charley Dickens to continue as editor and proprietor, until he decided to terminate its publication in 1893. In addition to his editorial work Charley Dickens became the chief partner in the printing firm of Dickens and Evans, with whom he had some success as the author of several popular guidebooks. 'Dickens's Dictionary of London' (1879) ran into fourteen editions, and was followed by similar guides to Paris (1882), Oxford (1884), Cambridge (1884), and the Thames (1887), all running into multiple editions. 
Soon after his father's death Charley Dickens had bought the family home, Gad's Hill Place, in Kent, much to the irritation of his aunt Georgina Hogarth and other members of the Dickens family, who had hoped to purchase it for the estate. He found it impossible to let, however, and so was forced to sell it to another party in 1879. He further angered his formidable aunt through a disagreement over the proposed sale and exhibition of the 'Swiss chalet', a small outbuilding of Gad's Hill in which his father had spent his last day. As a result of the argument Georgina had Charley removed as executor of her will, and reduced her legacies to his daughters. 
In 1887 Charley Dickens made a tour of the United States, giving readings from his father's books: 'He was an excellent reader and reciter, and he inherited to the full the gift of the great novelist as an after-dinner orator' ('DNB'). Upon his return to England he left his printing business, and became a reader with Macmillan & Co. He oversaw a new edition of his father's works for the firm (1892-3), and wrote bio-bibliographical introductions for the volumes. Charley Dickens died of heart disease on 20 July 1896 at his home, 43 Fairholme Road, Fulham, London. He was buried three days later in Mortlake cemetery. He was survived by his wife and seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 7601


Dickenson, John (c.1570-1635/6), author and government official, began and ended his career in London but spent much of his adult life in the Low Countries and Germany. Nothing is known of his early life. He probably studied at Cambridge and may be identified with a pensioner at Clare College who matriculated in Easter term 1586. 
In 1591 Dickenson published his first work, 'Deorum concessus' ('The Assembly of the Gods'), a scholastic satire in Latin hexameters. This was followed by three English works, of which the most rewarding is 'Arisbas: Euphues amongst his Slumbers' (1594). Although the title points to John Lyly, the erudite dedication to Sir Edward Dyer and the epistle to the reader tout the work's more substantial Sidneian lineage. The work itself mingles Sir Philip Sidney and dashes of Heliodorus, Apuleius, and Ovid in an Arcadian dreamscape. Interspersed are elegant lyrics which include avant-garde trochaic and classical metres: poetically Dickenson is fluent and up to date. 'Arisbas' manages a compendious breadth of contemporary and classical literary reference, often by avowed digression. 
A similar pastoral dream vision frames Dickenson's 'The Shepheardes Complaint: a Passionate Eclogue, Written in English Hexameters'. The work's date is unknown; it is usually given as 1596, but references to recent publications at the work's start, and allusions to this work in 'Arisbas', suggest 1592-3. Three of its lyrics were reprinted in 'Englands Helicon' (1600). 

'Greene in Conceipt' (1598) is now remembered for its title-page depiction of Robert Greene scribbling in his winding-sheet. The work raises Greene 'from his grave to write the tragique historie of faire 'Valeria' of London' and owes as much again to Geoffrey Chaucer and Boccaccio, managing a calculatedly absurd density of similes, proverbs, and adduced exempla per page. Five more lyrics, one in classical hexameters, enliven the racy exemplary narrative of an old man and his young wife. Other works may be lost -- the author mentions 'some sleight translations of generall novelties' in the epistle to 'Greene in Conceipt'. 
In 1598 Dickenson was hired by the bookseller Adam Islip to translate Louis Leroy's French version of Aristotle's 'Politics' (1568; 1576), complete with Leroy's discursive introduction and massive commentary (based primarily on comparison to Plato and to classical and recent history). Dickenson dedicated the work to Sir Robert Sidney, and allowed his own name to be printed only in the presentation copy, now at Shrewsbury School (in all other copies the dedicatory epistle is signed only 'I.D.', the initials which the self-effacing Dickenson liked all his title-pages to bear). 'Aristotles Politiques, or, Discourses of Government' advertises not only Dickenson's mastery of Latin, Greek, and French (the diplomatic language of the Low Countries), but also his familiarity with political theory and history. Dickenson may have already been employed as a spy in the Low Countries ('Salisbury MSS', 5.254). But Aristotle seems to have been the passport to the next stage of his career. 
As governor of Flushing, Robert Sidney may have been responsible for Dickenson's employment as secretary to George Gilpin, the queen's agent at The Hague. Dickenson later called Gilpin his Maecenas, for the post afforded him time to write his 'Speculum tragicum', printed at Delft in 1601. Dedicated to Gilpin, the 'Speculum' offers Latin prose accounts of the most spectacular downfalls of kings and princes in the previous century, and includes a full account of the last days of the earl of Essex. When Gilpin died on 4 September 1602 Dickenson first wrote to Cecil and then hastened to London to learn his fate. By November, Ralph Winwood had been appointed Gilpin's successor, and Dudley Carleton had spoken to him to secure Dickenson's position. Ever-expanding editions of the 'Speculum' were published in 1602, 1603, 1605, and 1611, adding an epitaph for Gilpin, verses to friends, and a set of 'Parallela tragica' (for instance Xerxes and Tamburlaine, Ariadne and Rosamund). At Leiden in 1606, Elzevier, who had taken over the publication of 'Speculum' in 1602, printed Dickenson's 'Miscellanea ex historiis Anglicanis concinnata', a work of imaginary letters and orations of figures from English history in Latin verse; those between lovers have a marked affinity to Drayton's 'England's Heroical Epistles'. According to an autograph note in a gift copy of the 'Miscellanea' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood 332), a French translation of the 'Speculum' was printed but subsequently called in; it does not appear to have survived. 
After this period Dickenson's literary activities ceased and his political experience started to prove more useful to England. Through correspondence and travel he had acquired a grasp of the complexities of the Low Countries and the Holy Roman empire which few could match. The focus of England's diplomatic efforts was shifting from the now independent Dutch United Provinces (for his efforts the states presented Dickenson with a chain and medal worth $60) to the German protestant states. And in November 1610 Dickenson was appointed to act as the English agent to the princes possessioners of the disputed and strategically important Julich-Cleves territories, Ernest, marquess of Brandenburg and Wolfgang William of Palatinate-Neuberg, arriving in Dusseldorf in mid-December. A long letter to Winwood records his first meeting with the two princes, and the Latin address he prepared for them. Despite his ability to negotiate with them in French and Italian, his 'credence', he admitted to the marquess, was in Latin (Sawyer, 3.243). Many of his letters from these years survive, most notably in the collection of his diplomatic colleague William Trumbull. 
In 1613 Dickenson attended Princess Elizabeth from Arnhem to Cologne, meeting and then corresponding with Robert Sidney, and received the dedication of John Stephens's play 'Cinthias Revenge'. Henry Wotton was sent to The Hague in 1614 to negotiate the Julich-Cleves succession, and, soon discouraged, he asked to be joined by Dickenson, 'who through his long experience in these countries (where men's minds are not very transparent) will be of great use to me'. The treaty of Xanten concluded, Dickenson returned to London at the end of the year, with a covering note from Wotton to Secretary Winwood: 'This bearer is a full dispatch of himself, in whose conversation and erudition we have all taken singular contentment.' Without Dickenson, Wotton admitted, 'I had been very naked' (Smith, 2.53, 67). 
On 28 July 1615 James sent Dickenson on a mission to Poland to persuade Sigismund III to suppress the 'Alloquiorum Osiecensium... libri quinque' of the Jesuit apologist Gaspar Cichocki, with its inflammatory account of James's career and family history. On 20 October Dickenson delivered his customary Latin address to the king; he may have had further instructions to contribute to a Polish-Swedish conference over Pomerania. It is likely that he married some time after his return, for he now settled in London, being sworn a clerk of the privy council extraordinary on 10 May 1618. The first rumblings of the Thirty Years' War disturbed his domestication: with each vain mission to Brussels to protect the Palatinate and preserve peace (Conway and Weston in 1620; Digby in 1621; Weston in 1622) Dickenson went along as secretary. In June 1626, as Christian IV prepared to invade the empire for the second time, Dickenson was readied for a mission to Denmark via the Netherlands; one rumour was that he was taking a million florins, although the trip may have been overtaken by events. On 7 November 1622 he had been granted one of the four ordinary clerkships of the privy council, a post he kept to his death and which allowed time for business ventures with his friend John More, in part directed to paying off the debts of their late master, Secretary Winwood. The letters to the Trumbulls from this period show a warmer, wittier, and happier man than is previously apparent. He had four children, all of whom survived him: Joanna ('b'. 1618); John ('b'. 1622); George; and Elizabeth ('b'. 1627). His wife, Elizabeth, died after giving birth to her namesake, and was buried in the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 1 June 1627. Dickenson was buried beside her on 11 January 1636. The council acted to sort the papers in his study in the Strand; administration of his estate was granted to the surveyor-general, Charles Harbord, on 7 March. 
Learned and analytical, Dickenson is in his literary writings as in his political letters a master of the small details. His polyglot talents sometimes lead to verbosity, and those of his often colourful letters not in Latin are peppered with Latin tags. But his ability to unpick the wording of treaties, where ambiguous syntax and confusions of translation were rife, and his insightful analyses of people and politics, were valued. The veteran French diplomat Jean Hotman feared diverting Dickenson from his studies when the two lodged together in Dusseldorf. Dickenson himself complained about only one kind of diplomatic duty, as he wrote to his colleague Trumbull: 'for what have we to doe with Germane complements and daily drinking?' (BL, Add. MS 72283, fol. 11'r'). His Latinity and circumspection have hindered his reputation as an author: only recently has it become clear that the English author Dickenson was identical with the Latin poet Dickensonus, and 'Aristotles Politiques' has not previously been identified as his. His role in the movement for English verses in classical metres has been largely ignored. In the broad view his literary achievements show a deep talent and facility, and their function as preparation for a career of state service is notable. 


@@@@@


doc= 7602


Dickie, George (bap. 1812, d. 1882), botanist, was baptized at Old Machar, Aberdeen on 23 November 1812, the son of John Dickie, purser in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Isabella Fowler. Born in the house in which he was to spend most of his life, he was educated at the grammar school and Marischal College in Aberdeen, graduating AM from the latter in 1830. He then went on to study medicine at the universities of Aberdeen and Edinburgh, qualifying as MRCS in 1834. His ambition of becoming a naval surgeon having had to be abandoned for domestic reasons, he then reluctantly entered into medical practice locally while devoting every spare moment to his real passion, field botany. 
Already Dickie had explored the local countryside sufficiently to supply a list for the area to H. C. Watson's 'New Botanist's Guide' (1832), and further work led to a slim 'Flora Aberdonensis' (1838) and eventually to the rich store of information on which William Macgillivray was able to draw in 1855 for his pathmaking ecological essay, 'The Natural History of Deeside and Braemar'. A fern found in a local cave was named 'Cystopteris dickieana' in his honour; it was later found in several other parts of Scotland and widely in the Arctic, but its claims to be a separate species were disproved by allozyme study over a century and a half later. Dickie studied and collected extensively lichens and fungi, but it was seaweeds that from 1844 increasingly engaged his attention. These were at that period the subject of intensive investigation in which Dickie played a major part. In later years they would become his exclusive interest, and his expertise was such that collections received from around the world at Kew were regularly referred to him for determination and description. Though primarily a taxonomist, he was nevertheless also deeply interested in plant morphology and physiology. 
In 1839 Dickie's botanical abilities were at last drawn on professionally with his appointment as lecturer in that subject, and the next year in materia medica as well, by King's College, Aberdeen, which conferred an honorary MD on him in 1842. In 1844 he was further appointed college librarian. From that strong foothold he moved in 1849 to the more substantial one of professor of natural history in the newly established Queen's College in Belfast, where his teaching responsibilities extended beyond botany and zoology to geology and physical geography. This Irish interlude was no less productive, considerably increasing knowledge of plant distribution in the northern half of the country and culminating in an excellent little 'Flora of Ulster' (1864), which somewhat belied its name by taking in the botanically interesting area of Sligo and Leitrim as well. Most of the records in this were of his own making. 
From Belfast Dickie returned to Aberdeen in 1860 on the creation of a separate botanical chair in the newly merged university, and that same year his long-delayed 'Botanist's Guide to the Counties of Aberdeen, Banff, and Kincardine' was finally published. That very first teaching session, however, he had the misfortune to develop pneumonia while leading a group of his students in the Cairngorms. This left him with chronic bronchitis and increasing deafness, removing him from active fieldwork and, by 1876, from any further teaching. Dickie was known for his intensely earnest manner and a deep piety, which did not prevent him early accepting Darwin's evolutionary theory. Retiring in 1877, Dickie died in Aberdeen on 15 July 1882, a year after the crowning of his career with election as a fellow of the Royal Society. He was survived by his wife, Agnes Williamson Low. 


@@@@@


doc= 7603


Dickinson, Charles (1792-1842), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born in Cork in August 1792, the youngest son of sixteen children of Charles Dickinson, an Englishman originally from Cumberland, and his wife, whose maiden name was Austen, of an old Cork family. He was a precocious child, and his aptitude for mathematics was already apparent when he was only five or six years old. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1810, under the tutorship of the Revd Dr Meredith. He was elected a scholar in 1813 and took a leading part in the College Historical Society. He graduated BA in 1815, and was awarded the gold medal for distinguished answering at every examination during his undergraduate course. He became MA in 1820, and BD and DD in 1834. In 1817 he stood for a fellowship but was unsuccessful; as he became engaged to be married shortly afterwards and celibacy was a condition of fellowships, he did not compete again. 
In 1818 Dickinson entered holy orders, and became curate of Castleknock, near Dublin. In 1819 he was appointed assistant chaplain of the Magdalen Asylum, Dublin. In April 1820 he married Elizabeth, the daughter of Abraham Russell of Limerick, and sister of his friend and classmate, the late Archdeacon Russell. They had four daughters and at least three sons, including Hercules Henry Dickinson (1827-1905). In the same year he became chaplain of the Magdalen Asylum, but resigned from the post after only a few months. In 1822 he accepted the offer of the chaplaincy of the Female Orphan House, Dublin. In 1832, while he still held this chaplaincy, he was singled out by Richard Whately, the archbishop of Dublin, and was soon appointed one of the archbishop's chaplains, as assistant to Samuel Hinds. In early 1833, on Hinds's retirement, Dickinson became the archbishop's domestic chaplain and secretary. In July 1833 the archbishop collated him to the vicarage of St Anne's, Dublin, which he held with the chaplaincy. He remained a close associate of Whately's until 1840, when he was promoted to the bishopric of Meath. After being consecrated bishop on 27 December in Christ Church, Dublin, he began work but soon fell ill of typhus fever. He died at the palace, Ardbraccan, co. Meath, on 12 July 1842 and was buried in Ardbraccan churchyard on 16 July. An inscription was left to his memory at St Anne's Church, Dublin, and his son-in-law John West published a memoir of his life, 'Remains of Bishop Dickinson, with a Biographical Sketch' (1845), which includes selections from his sermons and tracts, several of which were also published independently. 


@@@@@


doc= 7604


Dickinson, Edmund (1624-1707), physician and alchemist, was born at Appleton, Berkshire, on 26 September 1624, the son of the Revd William Dickinson (died before 1649), rector of Appleton, and his wife, Mary, daughter of Edmund Colepepper. He was educated at Eton College, after which he entered Merton College, Oxford, in 1642, being admitted as one of the Eton postmasters. He became BA on 22 June 1647, and was elected probationer-fellow of Merton. He received the MA on 27 November 1649, after which he applied himself to medicine, and earned the MD on 3 July 1656. Soon after he was made the senior Linacre lecturer in medicine, and about 1663 began to practise medicine from a house in the High Street, Oxford. 
About 1654 Dickinson had become involved with the Experimental Philosophy Club, a group of Oxford virtuosi which included Robert Boyle, Thomas Willis, Seth Ward, Jonathan Goddard, and many others with whom Dickinson continued to associate. His early interests centred on anatomy and physiology, but by the early 1660s he had turned towards chemistry, set up a laboratory, and employed an operator. The Danish polyhistor Olaus Borrichius visited Dickinson's laboratory during June or July 1663. Dickinson was elected an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians in December 1664, but was not formally admitted a fellow until 9 April 1677. He was also elected fellow of the Royal Society on 31 January 1678, but was completely inactive in that body and never formally admitted. 
At Oxford Dickinson became proficient in many languages, including Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic -- languages which occur in all his major publications. These languages were the key to his first book, 'Delphi Phoenicizantes' (1655), a philological and etymological attempt to show that Greek stories of Delphos and Apollo's battle with the Python were derived from Hebrew accounts of Joshua, and that Bacchus and Hercules were based on Moses and Joshua. The volume also contains notions about Noah's arrival in Italy, and the origin of the druids. This work made Dickinson widely known both at home and abroad. Wood ('Ath. Oxon.', 2.90-91) claims that the true author of this work was Henry Jacob, a Mertonian ejected at the 1648 visitation. According to Wood, Jacob left the completed manuscript in a locked book-chest, but his quarters were later given to Dickinson, who took possession of the chest and published the manuscript under his own name. There is no clear evidence for this assertion, and Wood was ill-disposed towards Dickinson, owing to a $70 fine for the renewal of the lease on his family house, the imposition of which he blamed on Dickinson, then (1664) bursar of Merton. 
In 1669 Dickinson married Elizabeth Luddington, who died giving birth to their only child, Elizabeth. She was buried in St Peter's Church, Oxford. Dickinson then married Helena Mole, who died soon after, without issue. Following the death of Thomas Willis in 1675, Dickinson acquired Willis's house in St Martin's Lane in London. Although Dickinson lived in that house until his death, it is not clear when he actually moved to London; various authorities suggest dates between 1675 and 1684, the latter date probably stemming from an erroneous date for Willis's death ('Biographia Britannica', 5.176). 
Among Dickinson's many patients was Henry Bennet, earl of Arlington, lord chamberlain, whom he cured of a serious tumour. Upon his recovery, Bennet recommended Dickinson to Charles II, who about 1677 appointed him physician-in-ordinary and physician to the royal household. The alchemist Johann Joachim Becher claims in the dedication of his 'Tripus hermeticus fatidicus' that in 1680 Dickinson, as a court physician, helped Becher and introduced him to the court. Dickinson managed an alchemical laboratory, built under the royal bedchamber and accessible by a private staircase, where he performed experiments in the company of the king and George Villiers, duke of Buckingham. On the accession of James II in 1685, Dickinson was confirmed in his royal appointments, continuing there until James's deposition in 1688, whereupon he retired from practice. 
Dickinson's long-term interest in transmutational alchemy began in Oxford, where he was visited about 1662 by a French adept known only as Theodore Mundanus. In 1678 or 1679 Mundanus visited Dickinson again and performed two transmutations before him. Dickinson's subsequent enquiries about alchemy addressed to Mundanus (dated London, 31 July 1683) were published in Oxford as 'Epistola ad Mundanum de quintessentia philosophorum' (1686), together with Mundanus's response (dated Paris, 10 October 1684), translated from French into Latin. The French text survives in the British Library (Sloane MS 3629, fols. 202-229'v'). This volume achieved much popularity, appearing in three editions. Dickinson afterwards reiterated to John Evelyn his belief in the philosophers' stone and metallic transmutation. Robert Boyle chose Dickinson as one of the three executors of his chemical and alchemical papers, a task he attempted in 1692 after Boyle's death. 
In his retirement Dickinson wrote his last work, 'Physica vetus et vera', which asserted the literal truth of the six days of creation, and presented a broad system of natural philosophy drawn from the 'Pentateuch' and contemporary corpuscularian theories. This lengthy work, some of which had to be rewritten after parts of the manuscript were accidentally burnt, was published in 1702. After suffering from bladder stones for over twenty years, Dickinson died at his house in St Martin's Lane on 3 April 1707. He was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields, where a large black marble monument with an elaborate inscription was erected on the east wall, following the dictates of his will, made on 11 September 1705. 
Dickinson was survived by his daughter, Elizabeth, then wife of Charles John, Baron Blomberg, and his four grandsons. His youngest grandson, William Nicholas Blomberg (1702?-1750), wrote a rambling biography of Dickinson; and, being in possession of his grandfather's papers, published in 1739 a manuscript by Dickinson on the Grecian games as an appendix to the biography's second edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 7605


Dickinson, James (1659-1741), Quaker preacher, was born in April 1659 at Lowmoor House in the parish of Dean, Cumberland, the son of Matthew Dickinson (died 'c'.1669) and his wife, Jane (died 'c'.1666). Before his parents died -- his mother when he was about seven and his father when he was ten -- they taught him Quaker principles, but for a time he engaged in worldly pursuits before embracing Quakerism in 1678. A dealer in animal skins (and later a glover), he spent much of the rest of his life travelling on behalf of the Friends. He began with his witness to a presbyterian congregation at Tallentire, near Cockermouth, and a Baptist church at nearby Broughton, and after preaching in Westmorland, the Yorkshire dales, Durham, and Northumberland, in 1680-81, he went in 1682 to Ireland, where he travelled with Thomas Wilson. He made his initial foray into Scotland in 1683 and then traversed Westmorland, Lancashire, the West Riding, Cheshire, and Wales, before returning to Ireland by 1685, this time with Thomas Trafford. 
Dickinson made his first trip to southern England in 1686, going from Cornwall and Devon, where he was briefly arrested at Kirton, to Kent, London, Essex, and East Anglia. With Peter Fearon he went to the Netherlands, where they arrived safely after their vessel was chased by a Turkish ship. He journeyed throughout much of the country, engaging in a disputation in the Jewish synagogue at Amsterdam, and went as far as the German city of Emden. He returned again to Ireland, where he met John Burnyeat and was once again accompanied by Wilson. By 1688 he visited south-western England before going to London and York for the yearly meetings. As he criss-crossed England in 1689, he preached in Berkshire, Wiltshire, and Bristol with John Tiffin. In deciding where and when to travel, he followed what he believed to be the Holy Spirit's leading, as in 1690, when he 'had a Concern upon me to visit Friends in 'Scotland'' (Dickinson, 44); on this trip he met Robert Barclay. 
After a journey to the eastern counties in early 1691, Dickinson and Wilson voyaged to Barbados; they left on 9 July and escaped a French fleet 'en route', under cover of fog and darkness. In Barbados they participated in large meetings before sailing to New York, where they arrived on 23 November. On their American peregrination, which extended from Carolina to New England, their pacifist message enjoyed some success because the colonists were apprehensive of war. They sailed from Boston on 17 August 1692, and stopped at Barbados, Antigua, and Nevis, before reaching Britain on 15 April 1693. Dickinson was now engaged to a member of the Quaker meeting at Pardshaw, Cumberland, though they delayed marriage while he continued his itinerant preaching. On another visit to southern England, he had a confrontation at Reading with a follower of the Quaker schismatic John Story. Dickinson then went to Ireland again, where he 'travell'd hard, and had good Service' (Dickinson, 67-8). He married in late 1694, though within weeks he was on his way to London where, following the queen's death, he walked through the streets exhorting the people to repent. 
After further trips through northern and central England, Dickinson returned to America, landing in Virginia on 23 July 1696. While awaiting passage he had written 'A Salutation of Love to the Seed of God' (18 February 1696), urging Friends to remain humble and feel divine power within them. In America he was accused of being a Jesuit, defended mainstream Quakerism against George Keith's disciples, and enjoyed some success witnessing to Welsh immigrants at Haverford. After leaving the colonies on 7 May 1697, he reached Plymouth on 22 June and briefly met with William Penn. During the ensuing years he not only continued to preach throughout much of England but twice returned to Ireland and Scotland (in 1698-9 and 1701). With Wilson he sailed a third time to America, stopping on the way at Dublin and leaving there on 8 December 1713. After trekking up and down the seaboard, they departed on 17 February 1715 and reached Cork on 30 March. By the time Dickinson was back in Cumberland, he reckoned he had travelled 12,000 miles. In the spring of 1717 he apparently played a role in healing the long-standing breach among the Friends at Reading. 
Periodically Dickinson pursued his trade: 'When I was at Liberty I laboured diligently in my outward Business, not only because of the Benefit I received there-from, but that I might be exemplary among my Neighbours' (Dickinson, 162). According to his fellow Friends he made a total of twelve trips to Ireland, the last of which, in 1727, took place during his campaign to persuade Friends in England and Ireland to compile a catalogue of Quaker sufferings; the eventual result was the collection published by Joseph Besse in 1753. Dickinson's wife died in 1726, and in the ensuing years his own health began to fail. About 1740 he and Jane Fearon related their narrow escape from murderers on a visit to Scotland, a tale published as 'A Memorable Instance of Divine Guidance' (1793). Dickinson apparently suffered a stroke in 1740 that paralysed one side of his body and impaired his speech. Following his death at Moorside on 6 May 1741, he was interred on 8 May in the Quaker burial-ground at Eaglesfield, Cumberland. 


@@@@@


doc= 7606


Dickinson, John (1815-1876), writer on India, was the only surviving son of John Dickinson (1782-1869), an eminent paper maker of Nash Mills, Abbots Langley, Hertfordshire -- who with Henry Fourdrinier first patented a process for manufacturing paper of an indefinite length, and so met the increasing demands of the newspaper press -- and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Grover (1789-1874). He was born on 28 December 1815 at Nash House, Apsley, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire. He was educated at Eton College, and afterwards briefly worked in his father's business. He had, however, no taste either for accounts or for mechanical processes. Being in delicate health, he left England in 1839 to travel on the continent, where, with occasional visits to his friends at home, he spent several years studying languages, art, and foreign politics. His sympathies were entirely given to the struggling liberal party on the continent, on whose behalf he wrote desultory essays in periodicals of no great note. He was in Paris during the revolution of 1848, and wrote a series of letters to 'The Times' describing his experiences and analysing the events. 
It was not until 1850 that Dickinson found his vocation as an independent Indian reformer. His uncle Colonel (later General) Thomas Dickinson, of the Bombay Engineers, and his cousin Sebastian Stewart Dickinson encouraged and assisted him in this enterprise. Dickinson criticized the Indian government's apathy in improving communications, thereby inhibiting the growth of commerce, and its excessive zeal under the administration of Lord Dalhousie in expanding British political control at the expense of the princely states. In these areas, he believed, reforms were needed. In 1850 and 1851 a series of letters appeared in 'The Times' on the best means of increasing the produce and promoting the supply to English manufacturing towns of Indian cotton. These were from Dickinson's pen, and were afterwards published as 'Letters on the Cotton and Roads of Western India' (1851). A public works commission was appointed by Lord Dalhousie the next year to inquire into the deficiencies of administration pointed out by Dickinson and his friends. 
On 12 March 1853 a meeting was held in Dickinson's rooms in Charles Street, St James's Square, London, and a society was formed under the name of the India Reform Society. The debate in parliament that year on the renewal of the East India Company's charter gave the society and Dickinson, as its honorary secretary, constant occupation. Already in 1852 the publication of Dickinson's 'India, its Government under a Bureaucracy' -- a small volume of 209 pages -- had produced a marked effect. It was reprinted in 1853 as one of a series of 'India Reform Tracts', and had a very large circulation. The maintenance of good faith and goodwill to the princely states was the substance of all these writings. Public attention was diverted from the subject for a time by the Crimean War, but was roused again in 1857 by the Indian mutiny. Dickinson worked incessantly throughout the two years of the uprising and pacification, and afterwards, when the transfer of the Indian government from the company to the crown was carried into effect. He attempted to moderate public excitement, and to prevent exclusive attention to penal and repressive measures. To this end he organized a series of well-attended public meetings. After 1859 the India Reform Society began to languish, and at a meeting in 1861 John Bright resigned the chairmanship, which he had assumed in 1855; a unanimous vote appointed Dickinson his successor. Dickinson married Alicia Martha Bicknell (died 1875) in 1859 and family affairs occupied more of his time. In 1863 he began to study law and was called to the bar. But he retained his interest in the princely states. The publication in 1864-5 of two pamphlets entitled 'Dhar not Restored' roused in Calcutta a feeling of great indignation against the writer, Dickinson, who was stigmatized as a 'needy adventurer'. 
On the death of his father in 1869 Dickinson inherited a large fortune and was much occupied in the management of his property. By then the India Reform Society had become inactive. Still, despite being in weak health from heart disease, he kept alive to the last his interest in India, corresponding with Holkar, maharaja of Indore, with great regularity. He indignantly repelled the accusation made against Holkar, in the affair of Colonel Durand, namely, that the maharaja had acted equivocally towards the British during the uprising in 1857, when his troops mutinied, attacked the residency, and forced the resident, H. M. Durand, to retreat from Indore. 
In 1872 Dickinson was deeply grieved by the death of his youngest son, and in 1875 felt still more deeply the loss of his wife, whom he did not long survive. On 23 November 1876 he was found dead in his study, at 1 Upper Grosvenor Street, London. From the papers lying on the table it was evident that he had been engaged in writing a reply to Holkar's assailants; this was afterwards completed and published by his friend Major Evans Bell under the title of 'Last Counsels of an Unknown Counsellor' (1877). He was buried at Kings Langley, Hertfordshire. Dickinson was survived by two sons, John Ehret (1860-1896) and Thomas Gordon (1862-1908), and by the elder of his two sisters, Frances Elizabeth Pratt Barlow (1814-1881). 


@@@@@


doc= 7607


Dickinson, Joseph (c.1805-1865), physician and botanist, the son of Joseph Dickinson, was born at Lampleigh, Whitehaven, Cumberland. He graduated MB in 1837 from Trinity College, Dublin, and proceeded MA and MD in 1843; he was granted an 'ad eundem' degree at Cambridge in 1844. Dickinson was appointed physician to the Liverpool Royal Infirmary in 1839, and subsequently also to the Fever Hospital, the Liverpool workhouse, and the South Dispensary. Although ill health forced him to retire he remained as consulting physician until his death. In addition to his clinical appointments Dickinson enjoyed a successful private practice in Liverpool and was renowned for his professional attitude among both his patients and his colleagues. Dickinson lectured on medicine and on botany at the Liverpool school of medicine. His book, 'The Flora of Liverpool', was published in 1851, and a supplement appeared in 1855. In recognition of this work he was elected FRS in 1854. He served as president of the Liverpool Literary and Philosophical Society, and was a fellow of the Linnean Society and of the Royal College of Physicians. He also served as president of the Lancashire and Cheshire branch of the British Medical Association. 
Dickinson was twice married. His first wife died during a visit by the couple to Egypt, when Dickinson was attempting to recover his own health. His second wife outlived him. Dickinson died at Waterloo, near Liverpool, on 21 July 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 7608


Dickinson, William (bap. 1756, d. 1822), antiquary and political manager, was baptized William Dickinson Rastall at St Mary's, Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, on 15 June 1756, the only son of the Revd Dr William Rastall (1724-1788) and his wife, Mary Allgood of Branton, Northumberland. His father, who in 1774 became vicar-general of the chapter of Southwell, Nottinghamshire, suffered from some debilitating physical infirmity, which may be the reason for his son's statement that he 'was induced early in life, by concurrence of circumstances somewhat out of the ordinary course, to embark on a tempestuous ocean' (Dickinson, i). He followed his father to Jesus College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1777 and MA in 1780. He studied law and by 1787/8 was described as 'of Lincoln's Inn'. On 6 December 1787 he married Harriot ('b'. 1767), daughter of John Kenrick, lord of the manor and MP for the pocket borough of Bletchingley, Surrey, with whom he had six surviving children. He became a JP for Nottinghamshire in 1786 and at various dates also for Lincolnshire, Middlesex, Surrey, and Sussex. He published three treatises on the work of a JP in 1815, 1818, and 1822. In 1795 he was bequeathed property in 'the north' by a very distant collateral relation, Mrs Henrietta Dickinson of 'Eastwood Hoo' in Yorkshire, on the condition of his adoption of the Dickinson surname alone; the bequest was subsequently the subject of litigation. He expanded his Nottinghamshire estates by purchases at North Muskham and Sutton-on-Trent, including the mansion called Muskham Grange in 1789, which he subsequently enlarged and embellished. 
Having over a hundred, tenants of his own within the town of Newark, Dickinson was drawn into the bitter political struggles between the ruling 'red' party, mainly tenants of the two largest landlords, the dukes of Newcastle and of Rutland, and the independent opposition 'blue' party, loosely affiliated to the duke of Portland. By 1790 Dickinson was leader of the blues, although he declined to stand as a parliamentary candidate for either of the two Newark seats in that year on the grounds of ill health. As a moderate he accepted 'that if great property united with great rank had a claim to the compliment of 'one' member for the Borough of Newark', then it was only fair 'to prevent the further incroachment on the liberty of the inhabitants' and to oppose the election of a 'second' representative of 'those great families who have of late years represented the town' ('Complete Collection', 40-41). He published two political pamphlets in Newark in 1798 under the guise of 'a Nottinghamshire Magistrate'. F. C. Laird, writing in 1812, believed that Dickinson's 'liberal character and conduct' had 'prevented an overflow of party spirit on more occasions than one' (Laird, 244). 
In 1788-9 Dickinson entered into partnership with a distant cousin, Roger Pocklington, and others as bankers in Newark. However, the partnership was declared bankrupt in 1809. Most of Dickinson's property, including his family home, had to be sold for the benefit of over 3000 creditors; in 1810 he published in his defence a transcript of the proceedings of the commission of bankruptcy. In this he remarked that 'storms wholly unlooked for, and from a quarter in which all appeared perfect sunshine, have overtaken me, in which fame, fortune, health... have been wrecked' (Dickinson, i). 
An additional cause of Dickinson's personal problems was the elopement to Gretna Green in 1807 of his sixteen-year-old daughter Harriot with the nineteen-year-old son of a wealthy Nottingham merchant hosier. The marriage was re-celebrated a month later in Balderton church at Dickinson's instigation 'in order to place the couple in the eyes of the world in a respectable situation' (Nottinghamshire Archives, DD. TB 1/20/3), but his firm's bankruptcy led to protracted legal suits over the marriage settlement. In addition his son-in-law proved a profligate rake, frequently moving around the country to avoid his creditors, and bringing up a family of two legitimate children alongside a second family of nine illegitimate offspring by his housekeeper. 
A portrait by Joseph Wright of Derby, possibly of Dickinson as a young boy, shows a figure with his hand resting on a book of topographical drawings. Dickinson's antiquarian interests formed an escape from his personal problems throughout his life. At the age of thirty-one he published his 'History of the Antiquities of the Town and Church of Southwell' (1787, with later editions to 1819). A companion 'History and Antiquities of the Town of Newark' followed in 1805-6 (also with later editions until 1819). The 1816 edition was prefaced with the apology for the delay in publication as he had been 'overwhelmed with calamities of unusual magnitude' (Dickinson, 'History of Newark', preface). Dickinson died on 13 October 1822 at 10 Cumberland Place, New Road, Middlesex, and was buried ten days later in the family vault in North Muskham church. An obituary appeared in the 'Annual Register'. Because of the complications with his financial affairs his will was not proved in the province of York until 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 7609


Dickinson, William (1746/7?-1823), engraver and printseller, is said to have been born in London; he might possibly have been the son of Joseph and Grace Dickinson, baptized at St Mary, Whitechapel, Stepney, on 6 May 1747. It is not known who taught Dickinson to engrave, but in 1767 he was awarded a premium for mezzotint by the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. His later training was almost certainly given by the painter Robert Edge Pine, at whose house in St Martin's Lane he lodged between 1768 and 1771. His first eight exhibited drawings and prints (1768-73) were after paintings by Pine; his portrait of Sir Joseph Banks (1774) was the first of twenty-two mezzotints after Reynolds. Dickinson produced in all some hundred portraits, judged 'well drawn and finely scraped... their brilliance often enhanced by the use of warm brown inks' (Alexander, 863). 
In 1773 Dickinson began to publish his own prints, and in 1778 he took under his wing the engraver Johann Jacobe, who was on a state-sponsored visit from Vienna to perfect his mezzotint technique. It has been suggested that Reynolds arranged for Jacobe to lodge with Dickinson; Reynolds was a major supplier of work to Dickinson, who published a number of his paintings in mezzotint and in stipple. By 1778 Dickinson had entered into partnership with Thomas Watson (1743-1781), another engraver in stipple and mezzotint. About Christmas they took over the established print shop of Walter Shropshire in fashionable New Bond Street, insuring their joint stock for about $2400 -- a sizeable sum. Their stock of plates was based on modern artists, with Reynolds, Kauffman, Bunbury, Peters, and Gardner featuring prominently. Watson died in 1781 but Dickinson continued to run the business alone. At first he was very successful, and he built up a large and distinguished stock of modern plates. In 1791 he took a new shop at 20 Old Bond Street and was appointed engraver and printseller to the prince of Wales. His bankruptcy in 1793 was presumably attributable principally to the war in Europe rather than to the notoriously unreliable patronage of Prince George, but he was obliged to auction his stock at Christies in 1794, and there was a further sale in 1797. Soon after this he emigrated to France, where he worked as a mezzotint engraver. In Paris he engraved portraits of the king of Saxony in 1811 and of the emperor Napoleon in 1815. He seems to have returned to London after Waterloo and was living at Twickenham from 1817 to 1820, but he is said to have died in Paris in 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 7610


Dickons, Martha Frances Caroline (c.1774-1833), singer, is said to have been born in London about 1774 -- perhaps a few years earlier -- the daughter of William Poole (1737/8-1812). A precocious musician, she sang and played the harpsichord at an Oxford concert in 1785 and studied at Bath with Venanzio Rauzzini, in whose opera 'La vestale' she made her London stage debut at the King's Theatre on 1 May 1787. She was known professionally as Caroline Poole in her early career. In the summer of 1787 she began a series of engagements at Vauxhall, and in Lent 1790 sang in the Covent Garden oratorios, as she was to do almost annually through the 1790s. In the same year she started appearing in the Salomon concerts, for one of which (1792) Haydn wrote an aria for her (now lost). A new departure was her engagement at Covent Garden as an actress and singer at $8 a week; her debut as Ophelia on 9 October 1793 was noted more for her singing in the mad scenes than for her acting, though her Polly in 'The Beggar's Opera', three days later, was said to be delightful. In 1793-5 she appeared in many comic operas and patriotic plays; after an unexplained hiatus she again acted and sang at Covent Garden in 1798-9. In the summers she performed in Edinburgh (1794) and Ireland (1795-6). She retired to marry, on 7 August 1800, a Liverpool merchant, Peter Dickons, but his trading losses led her to resume her professional career in 1807. The marriage ended in separation in 1810. 
As Mrs Dickons she reappeared at Covent Garden on 20 October 1807 in Arne's 'Artaxerxes'. Between then and 1815 she also performed at the Lyceum, in Drury Lane oratorios, and at the Italian Opera (as the Countess in the first London performance of Mozart's 'Le nozze di Figaro', 18 June 1812). A foray to the Theatre Italien in Paris in Peter Winter's 'Il ratto di Proserpina' (7 December 1816) failed. Engagements in Italy in 1816-17, later described in England as successful, remain undocumented. She is said to have been elected to the Istituto Filarmonico at Venice -- a short-lived academy that ended in 1816. If she was the Maria Castiglioni who sang at La Fenice, Venice, in 1816 and 1817, she was demoted in the latter year to secondary parts. She returned to London and reappeared at Covent Garden in Henry Bishop's perversions of Rossini's 'Il barbiere di Siviglia' (13 October 1818) and of 'Le nozze di Figaro' (6 March 1819, again as the Countess). She then retired. She died of cancer at her house in Regent Street on 4 May 1833. Her voice at its best was 'powerful and mellifluous', and she possessed 'a sensible and impressive intonation and a highly polished taste'. 


